[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm10)  [Next](hm12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

### IX

### GUARDIAN GODS

THRUM shows Kane and Kanaloa dwelling at Ala-kahi in Waipio with "some
of the lesser gods such as Maliu, Kaekae, Ouli \[Uli\], and a number of
others," but, unfortunately, does not give his source for the tale. The
mischief maker Maui meets his death while trying to steal bananas from
the gods, an incident which suggests the story of the old woman roasting
bananas on the road to the other world so common to quest stories not
only of Hawaii but of the southern groups. Uli is the principal deity
worshiped by sorcerers. She takes precedence of Haumea in this capacity.
A sorcerer's prayer quoted by Emerson reads:

E Uli e!  
E Uli nana pono,  
E Uli nana hewa,  
E Uli i uka,  
E Uli i kai,  
Eia mai la o (Puhi), he kanaka,  
He ia wawae loloa,  
Ke iho aku la,  
Ke kuukuu aku la,  
Nana ia (Puhi),  
He ia wawae loloa mai ka po‘o a i ka hiu . . .  
O Uli!

"O Uli, look upon the right,  
O Uli, look upon the wrong,  
O Uli, toward the mountains,  
O Uli, toward the sea, here is \[the person cursed\] a man, A fish with
long legs,  
He is descending, He is being let down,  
Look upon the person cursed,  
He is a fish with long legs from head to tail. . . ." <span
id="fr_299"></span>[1](#fn_299)

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Maliu (Accepted) is the name given to a deified
deceased chief, says Andrews. At the opening of the Kumu-uli genealogy
recited by chiefs alone, Maliu is associated as a god with Kane,
Kanaloa, and Kauakahi (First war). Ku-kauakahi is the owl god to whom
bodies are offered to become owls. It seems fairly evident that sorcery
which depended upon the practice of dedicating the dead to become family
protectors, and the preserving and setting them up for worship, was
recognized if not inaugurated by the Kane worship. <span
id="fr_300"></span>[2](#fn_300)

The legend of Pumaia tells how the spirit of a dead man whose bones are
worshiped may force the chief Kuali‘i himself to respect a vow made to a
god.

### LEGEND OF PUMAIA

When Kuali‘i builds the heiau of Kapua‘a to his god Kanenui-(a)k(e)a, he
demands the hogs of Pumaia, a hog raiser at Puko-ula adjoining Waiahao
in Kona district, Oahu, to use for sacrifice. Pumaia keeps back one
favorite pig. which he has vowed shall die a natural death. Kuali‘i
sends messengers to demand this last hog, but Pumaia kills each
messenger until none are left. Finally Kuali‘i catches, binds, and kills
Pumaia and throws his bones into the pit with others. Pumaia's spirit
advises his wife where to find his bones. She and her daughter hide in a
cave at the top of the left-hand peak of the Nu‘uanu pali and worship
his bones until Pumaia as a spirit is stronger than when he was alive.
Food and treasure are stolen from Kuali‘i's men, and the chief has no
peace until he has built three houses, one for the wife and daughter,
one for their possessions, and a third for the bones of Pumaia. The
kahuna then prays over the bones and restores them to life. <span
id="fr_301"></span>[3](#fn_301)

 

The dedication of a corpse to become an owl, mo‘o, shark, or other
animal form or a flame burning in the service of Pele, may be an even
older practice than that of using the dead as fetchers to work for the
prosperity of a family and carry sickness or trouble to their enemies. A
native pupil in the

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

schools of early days says rather dryly that the soul after death had
three abiding places, "in the volcano, in the water, on dry
plains." <span id="fr_302"></span>[4](#fn_302)

Owls (pueo) are among the oldest of these family protectors. In a legend
from Maui, Pueo-nui-akea is an owl god who brings back to life souls who
are wandering on the plains. The owl acts as a special protector in
battle or danger. "The owl who sings of war" (Ka pueo kani kaua) says
the chant. <span id="fr_303"></span>[5](#fn_303) The universal
guardianship of the owl is expressed in the saying attached to it, "A no
lani, a no honua" (Belonging to heaven and earth). The flight of an owl
through the air was carefully watched by the leader of a defeated army
and to the spot where it alighted he would lead his men, "protected by
the wings of the owl." Many stories are told of escapes from imminent
danger due to an owl. A warrior under Kamehameha in the thick of the
battle was about to plunge over a precipice when an owl flew up in his
face and he was able to thrust his spear into the earth and save himself
from the leap. Napaepae of Lahaina, capsized in the Pailolo channel,
swam all night and would have gone under had not an owl flapped its
wings in his face and attracted his attention to land. A man escaping
from the enemy in battle was saved from pursuit by an owl alighting at
his hiding place. All these natural occurrences were interpreted as
direct interventions of the owl as protector in danger.

Emerson thinks that owls were worshiped as a class and not as individual
protectors. This may be generally true, but individual owl protectors
are reported. Those who worshiped owls worshiped them under special
names. At Pu‘u-pueo lived the owl king of Manoa and drove the Menehune
from the valley. A famous Oahu owl story is that of the owl war carried
on in behalf of a man named Kapoi who, having robbed an owl's nest, took
pity on the lamenting parent and returned the eggs. He then took the owl
as his god and built a heiau for its worship. The ruling chief
Kakuhihewa, considering this an act of rebellion, ordered his execution
but at the moment of carrying out the order the air was darkened by
flying owls

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

which had come to his protection. The places on Oahu where the owls made
rendezvous for this battle are known today by the word pueo (owl) in
their names, such as Kala-pueo east of Diamond Head, Kanoni-a-ka-pueo in
Nu‘uanu valley, Pueo-hulu-nui near Moanalua. The scene of the battle at
Waikiki is called Kukaeunahio-ka-pueo (Confused sound of owls rising in
masses). <span id="fr_304"></span>[6](#fn_304)

Next in importance to the shark aumakua and possibly of older arrival in
Hawaii are the mo‘o, reptile forms of the lizard kind but of monstrous
size, believed to inhabit inland fishponds. Says Kamakau:

The mo‘o that guarded these ponds were not the common gecko or skink;
no, indeed! One can guess at their shape from these little creatures but
this is not their real form. They had a terrifying body such as was
often seen in old days; not commonly, but they were often visible when
fires were lighted on altars close to their homes. Once seen, no one
could preserve his skepticism. They lay in the water from two to five
fathoms in length (twelve to thirty feet) and as black in color as the
blackest negro. If given a drink of awa they would turn from side to
side like the keel of a canoe in the water.

\[paragraph continues\] The goddess Kalamainu‘u (Ka-lani-mai-nu‘u,
Kala-mai-mu) is the many-bodied mo‘o aumakua to whom bodies were
dedicated to become mo‘o. Houses called puaniu were erected to her for
deifying the dead.

Kiha-wahine is the most famous of these apotheosized human bodies. She
was a chiefess on Maui and at death she was dedicated to become a mo‘o
and became herself a goddess and was worshiped in the heiaus on Maui and
Hawaii. Her image there, dressed in deep saffron yellow or light yellow
or a patterned tapa cloth, was but a symbol, Kamakau is careful to
explain, of the spirit of the goddess herself, which was known through
her entering into a living person or through visible revelation in "one
of her terrible forms." Kamehameha set up her image in the heiau. In her
name he carried his conquest

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

over the islands. He gave her the prostrating tapu; even those passing
in canoes were obliged to observe this tapu. Ulumaheihei Hoapili of
Maui, who later became an active friend of the missionaries and a leader
in establishing the Christian church, was her keeper (kahu).

Appearances of Kiha-wahine are reported from various places on Maui. The
old fishpond at Haneoo in Hana district is still thought of as her home.
When there is foam on the pond she is at home and fish caught at this
time will be bitter in taste. Modern ideas give her the form of a woman.
A fin-like projection of rock near the center of the pond called Lauoho
(combing) is where she sits to comb her hair. Kiha-wahine is also
reported from the pool of Maulili in Waikomo stream in Koloa, Kauai. In
the story of Puna-ai-koae she is the mo‘o woman who has a combat with
Pele over the possession of the young chief as husband. <span
id="fr_305"></span>[7](#fn_305)

Mokuhinia is another mo‘o aumakua belonging to Maui whose appearances at
various places on West Maui are related by Kamakau, one of these on the
occasion of the death of a chief, and the most spectacular in 1838 when
she showed herself to "hundreds of thousands" of people gathered at the
pond of Mokuhinia. Lani-wahine is a mo‘o goddess of Ukoa pond, Waialua,
on Oahu. She often appears in human form to foretell some terrible
event. Kane-kuaana, once a living person whose body was worshiped to
become a mo‘o, rules the land of Ewa between Halawa and Honouliuli and
brings it prosperity. If fish were scarce her relatives would erect
waihau altars and light fires and the waters would be filled with pearl
oysters and fine fish. Hau-wahine is the mo‘o goddess of the ponds of
Kawainui and Kaelepule in Koolau district on Oahu. She brings abundance
of fish, punishes the owners of the pond if they oppress the poor, and
wards off sickness. Walinu‘u and Wali-manoanoa are many-bodied ancestral
mo‘o for whom pillars were set up in the heiau as memorials and who are
worshiped as female deities upon whom depends

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

the prosperity of the government. Waka (Waha) is another mo‘o goddess
worshiped by female chiefs. She appears in romance as the guardian of
Paliuli (Paliula) on Hawaii and of the young chief Kauakahiali‘i on
Kauai. Mo‘o-inanea (Self-reliant mo‘o) is also represented in romance as
first-born child of Kane-huna-moku in Kuaihelani and head of the mo‘o
family in Kuaihelani before the emigration of the Ku and Hina family to
Hawaii and the shutting up of the hidden island. She is the man-eating
ancestress of Aukelenuiaiku in Kuaihelani. <span
id="fr_306"></span>[8](#fn_306)

The mo‘o deities thus far named are all female aumakua worshiped by
chiefesses. Not all mo‘o are female and not all are friendly. There are
many legends of contests with unfriendly mo‘o. Lani-loa is a mo‘o who
used to kill passers-by below Laie until cut up into the five little
islands seen today off the coast as Malualai, Keauakaluapaaa, Pulemoku,
Mokuaaniwa, and Kihewamoku. <span id="fr_307"></span>[9](#fn_307) The
mo‘o is one of the Pele family's terrible forms. Hi‘iaka's journey to
Kauai to fetch Pele's lover is delayed by many contests with evil mo‘o
gods. Pi‘i-ka-lalau is a mo‘o deity of Kauai who can take the form of a
giant, a pigmy, or a mo‘o and who fights a terrible battle against the
chief Kauakahi on behalf of his friend Keli‘ikoa. <span
id="fr_308"></span>[10](#fn_308) The contest between Pele and the mo‘o
goddess for their human lover has already been mentioned. The mo‘o, in
fact, fights for the family of its keeper. A great mo‘o is guardian of
Paliuli and defends the place from intruders in the Laieikawai story.
The head and tail of the mo‘o guardian of Puna district on Hawaii are
still shown, petrified into rock, one in the pool at Kalapana, the other
in a clear pool called Punalua a half mile distant. Bathers must dive
and touch the rock before attempting to swim there. Respect is felt for
the little mo‘o who sun themselves on dry banks and on the walls of
houses. A person should never crush a lizard's egg lest he fall over a
precipice.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

Mo‘o worship has probably been brought to Hawaii. Mo‘o are gods of the
royal Oropa‘a family of Tahiti. <span id="fr_309"></span>[11](#fn_309) A
legend tells of a chief who is charmed by a mo‘o who later bears him a
son exactly resembling himself. He disowns the boy and has the mother
killed. The boy's descendants are living to this day. <span
id="fr_310"></span>[12](#fn_310) In Tonga gods are regarded as formless
but might become incarnate in certain forms. For example, the god Toufa
might appear as a particular man (his priest), as a shark, or as a
gecko. <span id="fr_311"></span>[13](#fn_311) In New Zealand the lizard
is connected with sorcery. It is placed under a boundary stone to cause
sickness. <span id="fr_312"></span>[14](#fn_312) There are myths of the
killing of monster lizards called ngarara or taniwha. Such monsters in
Samoa are said to inhabit deep chasms or pools in the river. <span
id="fr_313"></span>[15](#fn_313)

Most popular of all family guardians among a fishing people are shark
aumakua. The manner of offering a corpse to become a shark is described
in detail by Kamakau, together with the offerings required to pay the
officiating kahuna and to feed the shark god; the ceremony at the
offering; the appearance of the aumakua god or gods for its reception;
and the gradual transformation of the body until the kahuna is able to
point out to the awe-struck family the actual markings on the body of
the shark singled out for worship, corresponding to the clothing in
which the body of their beloved had been wrapped. Such a shark aumakua
became the family pet. It was fed daily and was believed to drive food
into the net, save the fisherman from death if his canoe capsized, and
in other ways ward off danger. Like all these protecting guardians it
had its evil uses as a fetcher to kill an enemy, but it must be
remembered that this purpose was recognized as evil and that before
Christianity came in and the skepticism of the whites refused to credit
such superstition, the ruling chiefs came down with a heavy hand upon
the practice of sorcery. On the whole the relation of a fisherman's
family to its shark aumakua was a friendly and intimate one and the fact
of the tangible presence of the pet robbed it of horror. There is
scarcely a Hawaiian family of the old type

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

who cannot claim today some such aumakua known by name to the whole
community.

The ancestral shark gods to whom the bodies of the dead are dedicated
are believed to have come from Kahiki and are worshiped as protectors of
the whole district. They appear in other than shark form, as owls, hilu
fish, mo‘o, or human beings, says Malo, and in such form associate with
men or speak to them in vision. The most important of these ancestral
sharks (mano kumupa‘a) named by him are Ku-hai-moana, Kane-huna-moku,
Kau-huhu, Ka-moho-ali‘i, and Kane-i-kokala. Ku-hai-moana (Ku-hei-moana)
is called "the largest and most celebrated of Hawaiian shark gods,"
thirty fathoms long, with a mouth as big as a grass house. He is king
shark of the broad ocean, lives in deep water off Kaula islet, and is
said to be a man-eater and husband of Ka-ahu-pahau, but in some tales
the name is given to a female. Kane-huna-moku is the fish form taken by
the ruler of the hidden island. Kauhuhu is the fierce king shark of Maui
who lives in a cave in Kipahulu and also has a home guarded by mo‘o
deities at the "Eel cave" (Ana-puhi) between Waikolo and Pelekunu on the
windward side of Molokai. Kane-i-kokala is a kindly shark aumakua who
saves people who are shipwrecked and brings them safe to shore. The
kokala fish are sacred to him, and the folk of Kahiki-nui, which is
peopled by his family, says Kamakau, fear to eat these fish or to touch
any food that has come in contact with them or even to cross the smoke
of an oven where they are cooking.

Most celebrated of these ancestral shark gods is Ka-moho-ali‘i, Pele's
many-bodied brother and the shark god to whom all members of the Pele
family offer corpses to become sharks. His home upon a cliff on the
northern edge overlooking the crater is so sacred that even Pele dare
not blow smoke across it, and the mo‘o goddess Kihawahine, when she had
her celebrated tussle with Pele, feared to spew phlegm upon it. <span
id="fr_314"></span>[16](#fn_314) When Ka-moho-ali‘i takes human form, he
appears without his loincloth, a privilege, says Emerson, which marks
the god! <span id="fr_315"></span>[17](#fn_315) In the story of
Laukaieie, he and his shark people are

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

living at Kahoolawe. <span id="fr_316"></span>[18](#fn_316) Kauhi, the
cruel husband of Ka-hala-o-Puna, who kills his wife in his shark form,
is represented as a member of Kamohoali‘i's family. <span
id="fr_317"></span>[19](#fn_317) It seems fair to equate this shark
deity with Ellis's Mo‘oari‘i to whom a heiau formerly stood on "almost
every point of land projecting any distance into the sea" on the island
of Molokai <span id="fr_318"></span>[20](#fn_318) and with Kalakaua's
Moali‘i, "a celebrated sea god of Molokai in shark form" and "principal
shark god of Molokai and Oahu," who is worshiped by the Molokai chief
Kaupe‘epe‘e, and fresh wreaths placed on his huge image on Haupu
overlooking the ocean when an expedition comes or goes by sea. <span
id="fr_319"></span>[21](#fn_319) He may be identical with Kahoali‘i, the
naked god of the Makahiki, to whom the eye of fish or man is dedicated
in a cup of awa and whose possible relation with the Tahitian sorcery
god Ti‘i has already been pointed out. Mrs. Pukui recalls in
corroboration of this identification the lines of a chant in which the
cliff summit above the crater of Kilauea, so sacred to Kamohoali‘i that
smoke from the burning pit never touches it, is ascribed to Kahoali‘i:

Ka mahu a i luna o Wahinekapu,  
Ua kapu aku la is Kahoali‘i.

"The smoke rises above \[the place called\] Sacred-woman,  
The place sacred to Kahoali‘i."

\[paragraph continues\] It is on the whole as savior from sorcery that
the shark aumakua is so universally worshiped in Hawaii. <span
id="fr_320"></span>[22](#fn_320)

Similar shark worship of individual family guardians, sometimes those
inspired by human spirits, is recorded from Tahiti <span
id="fr_321"></span>[23](#fn_321) and illustrated in the story of
Taruia. <span id="fr_322"></span>[24](#fn_322) In Tonga, Seketoa turns
into a shark because his elder brother is jealous of him and tries to
kill him. He is the guardian spirit of a special family. When the priest
summons Seketoa with

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

kava, first appear his attendants in the shape of two small fish, then
appears Seketoa, first in the body of a dog fish, then as a small shark,
and so on, increasing in size until he appears in his full length as
Seketoa. <span id="fr_323"></span>[25](#fn_323) Tui-tofua, who goes away
and turns into a man-eating shark because he is accused of annoying his
father's concubines, finally appears in a company of six sharks who keep
the reef clear for their own people. <span
id="fr_324"></span>[26](#fn_324) In Mangaia a warlike chief is clubbed
to death by the priest for wearing the sacred red flowers in the tapu
region of the gods, and his spirit enters into an eel which has drunk
his blood. Thence it passes into a huge white shark worshiped by a
priestly tribe who make for it an image of rosewood. <span
id="fr_325"></span>[27](#fn_325) In Fiji, a shark guardian carries a man
ashore. A pet hawk, eel, lizard, or fresh water prawn may also become a
guardian of the living. <span id="fr_326"></span>[28](#fn_326) In the
Lau islands, the shark god Mami takes both human and shark form. <span
id="fr_327"></span>[29](#fn_327) In Aurora, a man makes an image of a
shark out of basketwork and when he wants to eat men he gets into the
image; a bird thereupon flies upon the roof as a sign to an old woman
and she breaks a stick; the image then goes into the water. <span
id="fr_328"></span>[30](#fn_328)

The fullest reports come from San Cristoval. Here are reported the
passing of the soul of the dead into the shark as its commonest
incarnation; the transformation of a living person into a shark; and the
"exchange of souls between man and shark," as Fox puts it, in which a
shark becomes a man's familiar and acts for the man. A shark-man's power
passes to his son, who is initiated at birth by the father crooking his
arm like a shark's fin and putting the child under his arm. The child
and his shark receive the same name. The two are so closely associated
that if one dies the other dies. It is said that these are "sharks who
have exchanged souls with living men." It is a process of adoption, and
what injures one injures the other. <span
id="fr_329"></span>[31](#fn_329)

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

Of traditional adventures with shark aumakua, Hawaiians tell many
stories. Kamakau tells of a certain family descended from a shark, a
member of which might be punished for breaking a tapu of the shark god
by being "laid beside the shark in the sea for from two to four days
close to the fin of the shark" and yet be brought up alive from this
unpleasant experience. Unfortunately, the family of whom the story was
told were all dead before Kamakau could secure corroboration of this
remarkable event, but he saw the place where it happened and "my
relatives of my parents' and grandparents' generation say that hundreds
of people have seen them lying in the sea and returning to shore in a
weakened condition after they had lain for as much as five days in the
sea." It is further told (and the story compared with that of Jonah)
that in the days of Kakaalaneo (or Eleio) of Maui, Kukuipahu of Hawaii
was swallowed by a shark and lived inside its body many days and came
ashore at Hana, Maui, with all his hair worn off, whereupon the daughter
of the chief was bestowed upon him as a wife. He is said to have been
saved because he was faithful in his offerings to the gods. <span
id="fr_330"></span>[32](#fn_330)

The following stories are, with a few exceptions, stories recently
collected, many of them never before recorded, and told as actual
occurrences. They could be indefinitely extended from the lips of
intelligent Hawaiians living today.

### AUMAKUA LEGENDS

It is related that a girl of thirteen years of age, living at Waikapuna,
a long sandy beach directly below Naalehu, Kau, dreamed that a lover
appeared to her out of the ocean. Every morning when she told her
parents this dream her father thought she had allowed some one liberties
and wanted to conceal it, so he kept her carefully guarded. The dreams
however continued. After a time the girl gave birth to a shark. Her
parents recognized this as the offspring of an akua mano (shark god)
called Ke-‘lii-kaua-o-Kau, a cousin of Pele, and did not hold the girl
responsible.

The young mother took the baby, wrapped it in green pakaiea

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (a coarse seaweed) and cast it into the sea. The
young shark was always recognizable by its green coat, and became the
aumakua of that particular family. From that time they were careful not
to partake of either shark flesh or pakaiea moss. Swelling of the
abdomen would have followed the breaking of the shark tapu; incurable
sores attacking the mouth, the breaking of the seamoss tapu.

As the shark never ate human flesh, it was a favorite in the
neighborhood. One day a stranger, Kahikina by name, went out fishing and
was attacked by two sharks. When he cried out for help he saw a small
green shark coming toward him with great speed, which quickly attacked
the man-eaters, slashing them with its tail until they fled. It then
slipped under the canoe and carried it safely to the shore. So grateful
was Kahikina that he returned next day with a huge awa root as offering
and he also cleaned from the shark's back the barnacles and pebbles
which had accumulated there. Ever after that the shark and the man
became great friends. The shark would chase schools of fish toward the
shore and all that the man caught he would divide between them.

Opuopele, brother of Kahikina, lived at Paula beach, Kau, and loved to
go fishing. One day he had just thrown a stick of giant powder into
Kawa-nui cove and dived off the cliff to gather the spoils when he found
himself confronted by a shark on one side and a turtle on the other.
Undismayed, he began to talk to the shark, saying, "There is your share,
here is mine," at the same time offering the shark a fish and bagging
one for himself. In this way the shark was pacified, and the old man
returned to the shore with a gunny-sack half-filled with fish. When the
wife was asked about this strange occurrence she answered that the shark
always appeared when her husband went fishing and that he always shared
the catch. She did not claim the shark as an aumakua but there was
probably this deeper significance in the explanation.

 

A policeman in Lahaina was sent to Molokai to deliver some government
money. He went in a whaleboat accompanied by his wife. In the middle of
the channel between the islands of Molokai and Maui a storm came up
which overturned the boat. They

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

tried to cling to its sides but the rough waves drove the boat from
them. The man prayed thus: "If I have any aumakua in this ocean I pray
you to carry me and my wife to the land." The woman saw something red in
the water and the next moment saw that her husband was holding on to the
tail of a shark which had appeared to rescue them. The fish swam through
the rough waves and brought them safe to shore. \[In one such rescue the
shark "fanned the waters" to keep the swimmer from getting chilled, and
gently pushed him along to safety. The idea is that the shark belongs to
the volcano deities and hence has control over heat.\] <span
id="fr_331"></span>[33](#fn_331)

 

A man and his wife live near the sea at Keanae; his sister and her
husband live in the woodland at Kau-palahalaha. Every day the man goes
out fishing, bidding his wife give fish to his sister when she comes
from her upland garden with vegetable food for the family. The man's
wife is stingy and gives her sister-in-law only the tail end of a fish.
This the woman in disgust drops into a calabash. One night both husband
and wife have a dream and, rising, they find a live shark in the
calabash. For many years they keep it in a pool \[which may be seen
today at this place\] and make food offerings to it. Once, during high
water, it is washed down to the sea. It now lives in the hole called
Lua-hi‘u (Hole of the tail) which may be seen near Mrs. Hardy's house
and which extends underground half a mile and comes out near the Keanae
wharf. <span id="fr_332"></span>[34](#fn_332)

 

At the bay of Pukoo on Molokai lived the kahuna Kamalo who had the
terrible Kauhuhu as his shark god. Kamalo's two sons are killed by order
of the chief Kupa for playing upon the sacred temple drum (pahu kaeke)
at the heiau of Iliili-o-pae. Kamalo seeks revenge. With a black pig as
a gift he seeks first the famous seer Lanikaula, then Kaneakama, then
Kahiwakaapu‘u, and finally comes to the cave between Waikolu and
Pelekunu where lives Kauhuhu guarded by Waka and Mo‘o. Kauhuhu comes in
on the eighth wave and listens to his petition. Some months later the
storm called Wai-o-koloa descends upon

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Mapulehu valley, its coming heralded by a
rainbow spanning the valley, and all the inhabitants are swept into the
sea and devoured by sharks. Kamalo's household alone escapes because of
the sacred fence he has built and provisions stored at Kauhuhu's
direction. <span id="fr_333"></span>[35](#fn_333)

 

Na-pua-o-Paula, a pretty girl on Hawaii, arouses the jealousy of a
neighboring family. They give offerings to their shark aumakua to
destroy her and she is carried away by a wave and devoured by a shark.
Her mother goes to a sorcerer. A child is born who resembles the dead
girl and is given her name. The other family are afflicted with
swellings and die miserably. <span id="fr_334"></span>[36](#fn_334)

 

Women were supposed to be visited in dream by aumakua spirits who wished
to have a child by them. The dreams would continue until the birth of
the first child, and to this child the father would give a name (in
dream). Such children were often born in the shape into which the father
could change himself--shark, owl, caterpillar, stone--but they were more
human than godlike in nature. Folktales tell how alliances with lovers
of double nature were avoided. Some of these resemble the famous South
Sea story of Hina and Tuna, the eel from whose head sprung the first
coconut.

### TALES OF ANIMAL LOVERS

Kumu-hea (or Mo‘o), son of the god Ku, lives in the hill Pu‘uenuhe at
Hi‘ilea in Kau district and is the god (aumakua) of the cutworm. He
marries a girl, but comes to her only at night, for by day he is a worm
(or mo‘o). He does not support her. With the advice of her parents she
ties a hemp string to his back and when he leaves her she follows him to
the hill and discovers his true nature. He is angry. Cutworms attack the
crop. The parents appeal to Kane, who cuts up the god; and hence the
small peelua cutworms (or lizards) of today, which Hawaiians fear to
injure. <span id="fr_335"></span>[37](#fn_335)

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

Puhi-nalo is the eel lover of a girl of Waianae on Oahu. Her brothers
discover that he is an eel-man, fight him, and hurl his body against the
cliff, where it is to be seen today. <span
id="fr_336"></span>[38](#fn_336)

 

Puhi and Loli (Eel and Sea-cucumber) turn into handsome men and court
two girls. Their father watches the two men turn into fish again,
catches them in a net, cooks them, and serves them up to the two girls.
The girls vomit, one a tiny eel and the other a sea-cucumber, which the
father burns to ashes. These are the children they would have had by the
two lovers. <span id="fr_337"></span>[39](#fn_337)

 

Animal forms associated with the many-bodied Pele family are the mo‘o,
the brindled dog, the oopu fish. A brown-haired woman (ehu) belongs to
the Pele family and may be Pele herself or one of her spirit followers
in human form. Brindled dogs are called ilio mo‘o to this day. The
fresh-water oopu fish (*Eleotris fusca*) looks something like a mo‘o and
hence should not be eaten by any family who have a mo‘o aumakua. Molokai
and West Maui people fear to eat it. The okuhekuhe or owau variety of
the goby fish (oopu) is one of the forms of the god Kane-lau-apua,
according to Emerson. In Tahiti, goby fish are thought to be possessed
by the spirits of premature births. <span
id="fr_338"></span>[40](#fn_338) The following stories are told of the
double nature of the goby fish. Many similar tales teach a wholesome
respect for those potential favorites of deity whose gods resent cruelty
or greed in their treatment.

### STORIES OF OFFENDED AUMAKUA

A man of Molokai catches a dish of oopu of the o-kuhekuhe or o-wau
variety. He bundles the fish up in ti leaves and lays them on the fire
to broil. A voice speaks from the bundle and he flees in fright. <span
id="fr_339"></span>[41](#fn_339)

 

Ka-hinano (Pandanus blossom) catches a dish of goby fish, cleans and
salts them, then goes after material for mat weaving.

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

\[paragraph continues\] A brown-haired woman comes to the house, calls
to the fish, and replaces them alive in the creek. <span
id="fr_340"></span>[42](#fn_340)

 

(*a*) Pae is the name of a brindled dog that used to come from the
Koolau hills on Oahu to the villages at the sea. The chief's servants
one day catch the dog and are carrying her away to bake for a feast when
a brown-haired (ehu) woman appears and calls the dog to her. The tying
strings drop off, and woman and dog disappear in a pool. <span
id="fr_341"></span>[43](#fn_341)

 

(*b*) A spirit dog of kindly nature named Pae lives on Hawaii. She is
once playing about in her dog body when an old couple catch and fatten
her for a feast. A brindled dog comes to her aid at the last moment.
They kill the old people and make their way to Oahu, where they live in
the Nuuanu valley and Pae becomes "the dog of Koolau." <span
id="fr_342"></span>[44](#fn_342)

 

A turtle kupua named Ka-wai-malino is picked up and brought home by an
old couple. The children play with it and poke out an eye. The mother
has a dream in which a beautiful woman with one eye inflamed begs her to
take the turtle back to its home in the Wailuku river in Hilo,
Hawaii. <span id="fr_343"></span>[45](#fn_343)

 

Manoanoa, a woman of Molokai, eats squid eagerly. Once when she has cut
up a squid and placed the tentacles on a tree to dry she hears a voice
say, "Eat the tentacles but spare the head!" and the squid jumps into
the spring and disappears. <span id="fr_344"></span>[46](#fn_344)

 

Puni-he‘e (Squid lover) has an inordinate fondness for squid. A neighbor
warns him to beware lest the gods be angry. One day the squid comes to
life in the pot and hangs itself over the door, and Puni-he‘e flees in
terror. <span id="fr_345"></span>[47](#fn_345)

 

Kumu-hana, a bird hunter, recklessly slaughters the plover (kolea) even
when he does not need them to eat. His neighbor, who worships the plover
god Kumu-kahi and has been made ill

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

by contact with the smoke from Kumu-hana's oven, warns him against this
sacrilege. Kumu-hana disregards the warning and is overwhelmed by a
flock of plover, who enter his house and peck and scratch him to death.
The place where he lived is called Ai-a-kolea to this day. <span
id="fr_346"></span>[48](#fn_346)

 

Kilauname, a cultivator of Kau district, lives at a place called
Waha-mo‘o (Mo‘o's mouth) between Naalehu and Waiohinu. Here he and his
friend Mauna-kele-awa plant potatoes. When caterpillars attack the
vines, instead of gathering them carefully into baskets and carrying
them away as his friend does, he recklessly kills them. In revenge
caterpillars overrun his vines and the man himself and eat him up
alive. <span id="fr_347"></span>[49](#fn_347)

 

In Fiji a man named Kowika, a Soso of the fisher class from Mbau,
ventures to the cave where Ratu-mai-Mbulu (Lord of Hades) is fed and
shoots the god when he appears in snake form. As a result, until he does
penance he is haunted by snakes. Snakes flow from the bamboo where he
drinks and his sleeping mat is alive with them. <span
id="fr_348"></span>[50](#fn_348)

 

Hawaiians delight to tell tales of the travels, wars, and ad-ventures of
famous shark gods, those friendly to man pitted against the man-eaters.
Turner, hearing similar tales of shark wars in Samoa, was himself
disposed to interpret them symbolically of human contests, but found
that the natives took them literally, as they do, no doubt, in
Hawaii. <span id="fr_349"></span>[51](#fn_349)

The famous shark goddess Kaahu-pahau and her brother (or son) Ka-hi‘u-ka
(The smiting tail), who lived in a cave at the entrance to Pearl Harbor
and guarded Oahu waters against man-eating sharks, were reputed to have
been born of human parentage, she as a girl with light hair, and to have
changed into sharks. They were friendly to man and were fed as pets by
the Ewa people whose district they guarded, and their backs scraped
clean of barnacles by their keepers. When the new dry dock collapsed at
Pearl Harbor about 1914 the supposition was that the shark guardians of
the basin were

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

still active. Miss Green writes: "Today a floating dock is employed.
Engineers say that there seem to be tremors of the earth at this point
which prevent any structure from resting upon the bottom, but Hawaiians
believe that ‘The Smiting Tail' still guards the blue lagoon at Pearl
harbor." Kaahupahau is called by Kamakau the sister of the sharks
Kanehuna-moku and Ka-moho-ali‘i and wife of Ku-hai-moana, father of
Ku-pi‘opi‘o. The story that she is herself killed in the shark war
against man-eaters is repudiated by Oahu Hawaiians, as also the
accusation made by Kamakau that it was she herself who devoured the
chiefess Papio because she was saucy to the keeper who reproached her
for going swimming at the lagoon wearing the ilima wreaths which were
sacred to the shark goddess. Kaahu-pahau was no man-eater.

### STORY OF MIKOLOLOU'S ESCAPE

The shark Ke-ali‘i-kaua-o-Kau (The war chief of Kau) is born at Ninole,
Kau, where his last keeper died in 1878. With four companions he travels
about the islands waging war against man-eaters. The man-eater Mikololou
joins the party, is caught in the net of Kaahu-pahau at Pu‘uloa and
dragged up on the beach, and escapes death only by his tongue being
swallowed by a dog, which then jumps into the sea and the tongue becomes
Mikololou again. "Mikololou lived by his tongue" (I ola o Mikololou i ka
alelo) is the saying, to imply that there is a way of escape out of
every difficulty.

### ROMANCE OF "THE LITTLE BROWN SHARK OF PU'ULOA"

Ka-ehu-iki-mano-o-Pu‘uloa (The little brown shark of Pearl harbor) is
born at Panau in Puna, Hawaii, and named after the red hair of the shark
goddess Kaahu-pahau. For ten days his father Kapukapu feeds him on awa
and his mother Holei on her milk. He is then put into the sea while his
parents return to the uplands. He puts out to sea and pays a visit to
each of the king sharks of Hawaii in turn, all of whom he wins by his
deference. Ke-pani-la of Hilo, Kane-ilehia of Kau, Kua of Kona, Manokini
of Kohala, Kupu-lena of Hamakua join him on his projected tour to Kaula
and thence to Kahiki and return. The

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

fierce king shark of Maui, who assumes a threatening attitude, is slain
by the little shark entering his wide-opened mouth and devouring his
inwards. Ka-moho-ali‘i, overgrown with sea moss, meets them kindly and
consents to adopt the little red-haired shark. An elaborate ceremony
takes place which gives Ka-ehu power to change into a hundred forms. The
party visit Molokai and Oahu, where the adventure with Mikololou takes
place and Kaahu-pahau gives them a token which will pass them safely by
Ku-hai-moana, king shark of Kauai and Ni‘ihau. After a round of the
South Sea islands, of which the Marquesas, Tahiti, and the Dutch Indies
are mentioned, and a bath in the Yellow river of Kahiki \[can this be an
allusion to the Chinese river of death?\] they return home and, as they
arrive off Waikiki, encounter the man-eater Pehu on the watch for
"crabs" and lure him inshore, where the natives put him to death.
Arrived at Puna, the young hero is welcomed by his upland parents with
appropriate feasting. <span id="fr_350"></span>[52](#fn_350)

 

Many local legends are told of shark-men, always to be known by the mark
of a shark's mouth upon the back, who can change form from man to shark
and who for a long time go undetected until it is noticed that an
apparently disinterested warning to swimmers is always followed by a
fatal attack by a man-eating shark. Thus Kawelo (Kawelo-mahamahaia) of
Kauai; Pau-walu of Wailua, Maui; Nenewe of Waipio on Hawaii; Kaai-po‘o
of Kapaahu in Puna, Hawaii; another unnamed at Kawai-uhu in Kaalualu,
Ka-u district, of Hawaii; Mano-niho-kahi at Laie, Oahu; <span
id="fr_351"></span>[53](#fn_351) Kamaikaahui of Maui.

### LEGENDS OF SHARK-MEN

Kamaikaahui lives at Muolea in Hana district of Maui. He was born in the
form of a rat, then became a bunch of bananas, then a man with a shark's
mouth at his back, over which he always wears a cloth to conceal the
mark. He is a man on land and a shark in the sea. He farms by the
highway and when

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

eople pass, going down to the sea, he warns them against sharks. Then he
runs ahead of them by a back way and devours them. At last he is
suspected. Seeing people on the shore ready to attack him, he leaves his
clothes at a place called Kau-halahala and swims to Waipahu in Waikele
on Oahu and becomes ruling chief of Ewa district, where he terrorizes
the country until slain by Palila. <span
id="fr_352"></span>[54](#fn_352)

 

Kawelo is a shark-man living on Kauai in the region of Mana. He has a
shark mouth on his back, a tail and appendages on the lower part of his
body. He can take the form, besides that of a shark, of a worm, a moth,
a caterpillar, a butterfly, and thus escape an enemy. Two rocks shaped
like grass houses, one under water in the Wailua river, the other a
little below the cave of Mamaaku-a-Lono, represent his two houses as a
shark and as a man. As a shark-man he lived between Kealia and Wailua
and would eat up the children who ventured to swim out between those two
places. Finally he was discovered and a long line of men formed who
stoned him to death. He is identified with the famous chief
Kawelomahamahaia (Kawelo with fins like a fish), grandfather of Kawelo
and descended from Mano-kalani-po, who was believed to become a shark
god (akua mano) at death. <span id="fr_353"></span>[55](#fn_353)

 

Pau-walu (Eight dead) lives at Wailua, Maui. He warns men as they go to
the sea that eight will be dead before they return and a shark always
kills eight of them as predicted. He is therefore suspected as a
shark-man. Akeake the strong is born beside the stream Hau-ola and while
yet a little boy starts about Maui fighting champions. After overcoming
Lohelohe, he, with his companion Pakolea, spends the night at a friend's
house named Ohia and learns about Pauwalu. The shark-man scoffs at so
little an antagonist, but Akeake easily binds him, exposes the shark's
mouth on his back, and casts him into the fire. <span
id="fr_354"></span>[56](#fn_354)

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

Nenewe lives on Hawaii "beside the large basin at the bottom of the
waterfall on the west side of Waipio valley." As men go to the sea to
bathe at Muli-wai he warns them of the shark that may eat them and, as
one man is always lost at such times, the people begin to suspect him.
They catch him, pull off the cape which he always wears, and expose the
shark's mouth on his back. <span id="fr_355"></span>[57](#fn_355)

 

Nanaue is the shark-man of Waipio in the time of Umi, child of
Ka-moho-ali‘i and Kalei. His maternal grandfather feeds him meat, hoping
to make a warrior of him, and he develops a taste for human flesh. When
detected at Waipio he turns into a shark and swims to Hana, where he
marries the sister of a petty chief. At Molokai he lives at Poniu-o-Hua.
When he is at last discovered the young demigod Unauna is employed to
put him to death and the marks of the struggle are to be seen on the
Kainalu hillslope and on a grooved rock called Pu‘u-mano about which the
ropes were wound which held the net with which he was caught. The shark
god punishes the desecration of a bamboo grove on this occasion by
taking away the cutting qualities of the bamboo from this particular
grove of bamboo unto this day. <span id="fr_356"></span>[58](#fn_356)

 

Mano-niho-kahi (Shark with one tooth) lives near the water hole in
Malae-kahana between Laie and Kahuku. When he sees a woman going to the
sea to gather fish or limu he warns her against sharks, then comes
himself and kills her. The chief lines up all the men and detects the
shark-man by the mark of the shark's mouth on his back when the tapa
garment which he wears is dragged off. <span
id="fr_357"></span>[59](#fn_357)

 

A similar story collected in Pukapuka runs as follows:

A man-eater, an atua-pule, lives in a hole. When two or more go by to
fish he stays inside; when only one, he comes outside and kills him and
drags him into his hole to eat. Two men steal

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

upon him, entice him outside while they hide, and attack him together.
He almost drags them in, but (in one version) a woman calls out to them
to "brace the foot" or (in another version) to "lift it high" and they
are able to save themselves. The atua slips away to the sea and goes to
Samoa, leaving Pukapuka in peace. <span id="fr_358"></span>[60](#fn_358)

 

Among the Rarotongans a child whose father is Moe-tarauri, an ancestor
of Iro, bears on his back a birthmark in the form of a centipede which
is seen to writhe when the child is angry. <span
id="fr_359"></span>[61](#fn_359)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_299"></span>[122:1](hm11.htm#fr_299) *HHS Papers* 2: 20-21.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[123:2](hm11.htm#fr_300) Thrum, *More Tales*,
259-260; For. Pol. Race 1: 184; Kalakaua, 50.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[123:3](hm11.htm#fr_301) For. Col. 4: 470-477.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[124:4](hm11.htm#fr_302) For. Col. 5: 572-577.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[124:5](hm11.htm#fr_303) *Ibid*. 6: 300.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[125:6](hm11.htm#fr_304) Kamakau, *Ke Au Okoa*,
May 5, 1870; Westervelt, *Honolulu*, 131-137; Thrum, *Tales*, 200-201;
*HAA* 1909, 45-46.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[126:7](hm11.htm#fr_305) Kamakau, *Ke Au Okoa*,
April 28, May 5, 1870; Malo, 114, 155; Kepelino, 18; *HAA* 1907, 92;
Westervelt, *Gods and Ghosts*, 152-162; Thrum, *More Tales*, 185-196.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[127:8](hm11.htm#fr_306) Kamakau, *loc. cit.*;
Malo, *loc. cit.*; Haleole; Westervelt, *Gods and Ghosts*, 116, 122;
*HAA* 1916, 143; Dickey, *HHS Reports* 25: 26-28; For. Col. 4: 38-43.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[127:9](hm11.htm#fr_307) Rice, 112.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[127:10](hm11.htm#fr_308) *HHS Reports* 25:
27-28.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[128:11](hm11.htm#fr_309) Henry, 383.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[128:12](hm11.htm#fr_310) *Ibid*. 622-623.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[128:13](hm11.htm#fr_311) Gifford, *Bul*. 61:
288.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[128:14](hm11.htm#fr_312) Handy, *Bul*. 34:
180.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[128:15](hm11.htm#fr_313) *JPS* 2: 211-215.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[129:16](hm11.htm#fr_314) Westervelt, *Gods and
Ghosts*, 157.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[129:17](hm11.htm#fr_315) *HHS Papers* 2: 10.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[130:18](hm11.htm#fr_316) Westervelt, *Gods and
Ghosts*, 44-46.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[130:19](hm11.htm#fr_317) *Ibid*., 85.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[130:20](hm11.htm#fr_318) Tour, 67.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[130:21](hm11.htm#fr_319) 49, 77.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[130:22](hm11.htm#fr_320) Kamakau, *Ke Au
Okoa*, April 7-21, May 5, 1870; Thrum, *More Tales*, 288-292; J.
Emerson, *HHS Papers* 2: 8-12.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[130:23](hm11.htm#fr_321) Henry, 389-390.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[130:24](hm11.htm#fr_322) *Ibid*., 624,
630-631.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[131:25](hm11.htm#fr_323) Gifford, *Bul.* 8:
83-84; Collocott, *Bul.* 46: 56-58; *JPS* 24: 116-117.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[131:26](hm11.htm#fr_324) Gifford, *Bul.* 8:
77-82.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[131:27](hm11.htm#fr_325) Gill, 29-30, 288.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[131:28](hm11.htm#fr_326) Thomson, 115-116.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[131:29](hm11.htm#fr_327) Hocart, 211-212.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[131:30](hm11.htm#fr_328) Codrington, 407-408.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[131:31](hm11.htm#fr_329) Fox, 110-111,
115-116, 132-133; Codrington, 259.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[132:32](hm11.htm#fr_330) For. Col. 5: 660.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[134:33](hm11.htm#fr_331) Given to Miss Green
by Mrs. Annie Aiona, 1923.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[134:34](hm11.htm#fr_332) Given by Mrs. Hardy
of Keanae, East Maui, 1930.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[135:35](hm11.htm#fr_333) Thrum, *Tales*,
186-192; Westervelt, *Honolulu*, 193.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[135:36](hm11.htm#fr_334) Green and Pukui,
154-157.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[135:37](hm11.htm#fr_335) Green, 43; J.
Emerson, *HHS Papers* 2: 12; Rice, 110.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[136:38](hm11.htm#fr_336) McAllister, *Bul.*
104: 117-119.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[136:39](hm11.htm#fr_337) Green and Pukui,
170-173.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[136:40](hm11.htm#fr_338) Henry, 390.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[136:41](hm11.htm#fr_339) Green and Pukui,
176-177; N. Emerson, *Pele*, 194 note c.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[137:42](hm11.htm#fr_340) Green, 111-112.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[137:43](hm11.htm#fr_341) *Ibid*., 48-49.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[137:44](hm11.htm#fr_342) Green and Pukui, 178.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[137:45](hm11.htm#fr_343) Pukui MS.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[137:46](hm11.htm#fr_344) Green and Pukui, 175.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[137:47](hm11.htm#fr_345) Green, 46-47.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[138:48](hm11.htm#fr_346) Green, 108-110.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[138:49](hm11.htm#fr_347) *Ibid*., 44-45.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[138:50](hm11.htm#fr_348) Thomson, 114-115.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[138:51](hm11.htm#fr_349) 214.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[140:52](hm11.htm#fr_350) Thrum, *More Tales*,
293-308; Green, 102-107.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[140:53](hm11.htm#fr_351) J. Emerson, *AA* 19:
508-510; Dickey, *HHS Reports* 25: 29.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[141:54](hm11.htm#fr_352) For. Col. 5: 140-144,
372-374.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[141:55](hm11.htm#fr_353) Dickey, *HHS Reports*
25: 33; N. Emerson, "Hula," 79 note f; Westervelt, *Honolulu*, 173.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[141:56](hm11.htm#fr_354) Pukui MS.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[142:57](hm11.htm#fr_355) J. Emerson, *AA* 19
(1917): 509.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[142:58](hm11.htm#fr_356) Thrum, Tales,
255-268; Westervelt, *Gods and Ghosts*, 59-65.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[142:59](hm11.htm#fr_357) Rice, 111; J.
Emerson, *AA* 19: 510.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[143:60](hm11.htm#fr_358) Beaglehole MS.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[143:61](hm11.htm#fr_359) *JPS* 25: 146.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. The Soul After Death](hm12)
