[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm14)  [Next](hm16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

### XIII

### PELE LEGENDS

LOCAL legends abound of the swift retribution visited by Pele upon those
who dare to offend her. Presumption and boasting bring immediate
punishment. Rivals in love serve as explanatory theme for lava-rock
formations. The popular chiefly sport of sled (holua) racing is worked
into a number of legends in which a mere mortal dares competition with
Pele. Kapapala, after competing successfully with Pele's pretty sisters,
ventures to challenge Pele herself upon the waves of the volcano and is
consumed. <span id="fr_470"></span>[1](#fn_470) Papa-lauahi is about to
win a race to which Pele has challenged him when, looking back over his
shoulder, he sees the goddess in her fire form at his back and is
overwhelmed in a flood of lava. <span id="fr_471"></span>[2](#fn_471)
The most famous of these competition legends is that of Kahawali,
localized along a comparatively fresh lava stream running down to the
sea from above Kapoho in the district of Puna. Lava rocks are said to
mark the fate of members of Kahawali's family and of his favorite pig.
The famous tree-molds (Papa-lau-ahi) above Kapoho are introduced as a
group of hula pupils caught in the trail of Pele's wrath. For stories of
destructive lava flows within historic times in which Pele is believed
to have shown her wrath or her favor, see the historic account of the
destruction of Keoua's army <span id="fr_472"></span>[3](#fn_472) and of
Kamehameha's fishponds. <span id="fr_473"></span>[4](#fn_473)

### LEGEND OF THE BOASTER

(*a*) A man with an eel body named Kani-lolou, who lived upon this group
of islands before Pele's arrival, visits Kahiki-lani-nui-akea and boasts
of the superior beauty of his own land. On his return he finds Kauai,
Maui, and Hawaii overwhelmed with lava

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

from mountain to sea. It is after this man that eels are called
Puhi-kani-lolou.

(*b*) A man from Puna visits Kauai and boasts of the superior beauty of
his own land. The prophet Kane-akalau foresees its ruin and upon the
man's return to Puna he finds it overwhelmed with lava. <span
id="fr_474"></span>[5](#fn_474)

### LEGEND OF PAULA

Paula is a beautiful girl who lives in Ka-u district on Hawaii between
Naalehu and Honoapu. Pele's lover once finds her with two companions
engaged in her favorite sport of kimo (jack-stones) and lingers to play
with her. Pele came along looking for her lover, and there at the point
called Ka-lae-o-kimo the two may be seen turned to stone just as Pele
found them. The other two were also buried in lava, but only the pebbles
they tossed are now visible. <span id="fr_475"></span>[6](#fn_475)

### LEGEND OF KAHAWALI

The handsome young chief Kahawali lives near Kapoho in Puna district on
Hawaii in the days of Kahoukapu the chief. He has a wife and two
children named Paupoulu and Kaohe, a mother living at Kuki‘i, and a
sister Koae at Kula. His father and another sister named
Kane-wahine-keaho live on Oahu. Kahawali is an expert in the hula dance
and in riding the holua. At the time of the Lono festival, when the hula
pupils have gathered for a public appearance, a sled race is arranged
with his friend Ahua. Pele in the guise of an old woman offers to
compete with him. Angry at the chief's rebuff, she pursues him down the
hill in fire form. He flees first to the hill Pu‘ukea, then hastens to
bid goodby to his wife and children, pauses to say farewell to his
favorite pig Aloi-pua‘a, and has just time to greet his sister at Kula
before escaping to the sea in a canoe which his brother has opportunely
brought to land. <span id="fr_476"></span>[7](#fn_476)

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

### STORY OF THE STINGY GIRL

Pele appears to two girls of Ka-u roasting breadfruit and asks for food
and drink. One gives kindly, the other excuses herself on the ground
that the food is dedicated to Laka. A flood of fire comes and destroys
the home of the stingy girl, but the generous one has been warned and
has set up the necessary protection. <span
id="fr_477"></span>[8](#fn_477)

 

Many heiaus to the goddess Pele were erected in old days, especially
beside lava streams and at the edge of the crater, and the bodies of the
dead are still offered to the goddess in the belief that their spirits
will live again with Pele in a beautiful home beneath the burning pit
which is the goddess's material body, and go forth as her messengers in
bodies of flame to avenge any infringement of her tapus and to work her
will in the land. Only those connected with the Pele family by being
born with a human body from one of the Pele spirits, or a direct
descendant of one of these, or one outside the family who has been
adopted and given a name (in dream) by Pele herself, have a right to
such a burial. Ancestral gods of the Pele family, called kumu-pa‘a
(descended from the source), such as Haumea, Kane-hekili, Ka-hoali‘i,
Kane-wawahi-lani, Kauila-nui-makeha-i-ka-lani, No-kolo-i-lani,
Kamoho-alii, Polo, Hi‘iaka, Na-maka-o-kaha‘i, may bring their direct
descendants into the Pele family. These are kumupa‘a who may be
worshiped as aumakua. They do not belong among the supreme gods and
their kahunas are not in the line of the old priesthood of Hikapoloa.
The worship of Pele was not taught in the schools of the priesthood nor
was her body deified. Pele's descendants alone worship her. Only actual
relatives invoke her and become her keepers. Pele names are given to
children born into her family, but such names belong to that individual
alone and cannot be passed on to another, even to an own child. One such
Pele name, given to an older sister of Mrs. Pukui, is
Kukuena-i-ke-ahi-ho‘omau-honua (Kukuena in the fire which fertilizes the
earth). Here "Kukuena" is the name of a sister of Pele who acts as guide

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

to travelers <span id="fr_478"></span>[9](#fn_478) and the word
"ho‘omau" means literally to dampen or render moist, in allusion to the
cool home beneath the volcano to which Pele admits those of her family
on earth whose bodies are offered to her at death. An old Kona resident
tells the following story:

In old days a man's mother said she was to go to Pele in the volcano.
The son took her by the old road around through Kau called Ka-ala-Pele
(The Pele road), not by the new road, and left her at a distance along
the way and said, "If your god is a true god she will come and take
you." As he left he looked back and the fire had flowed out and taken
the body. He went back and there was no body to be seen. Napela was the
son's name and he lived in Pahala, Kau, in 1881. <span
id="fr_479"></span>[10](#fn_479)

The struggle between rival schools of sorcery set up by the Pele
worshipers is perhaps worked into the legends which show Hi‘iaka
fighting the evil mo‘o, who are primarily spirits of the damp woodlands
and ponds of water; or the legend of Pele's sister Na-maka-o-kaha‘i, who
may have been originally a water spirit in spite of the fiery nature of
her various trans-formation forms as the story is told today; or in the
strife between Pele and the woman of the mountain top, Poliahu, for the
fertile land of Hawaii; or in her fight with the amorous hog-man,
Kamapua‘a, whose gods are the storm signs inimical to fire. The legend
of Puna-ai-koae and the demon wife carries the same implication. Of the
three recorded versions, the Kamakau version is told to explain the
origin of certain fishing customs and leaves the denouement incomplete.
The Thrum and Westervelt versions, evidently from an identical source,
stress the rivalry between the fire goddess and the water mo‘o, whose
images are set up in the heiau, one representing Haumea in her human
form as Wali-nu‘u, the other the goddess Kalamainu‘u.

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

### STORY OF PUNAAIKOAE

(*a*) *Kamakau version*. The mo‘o woman Kalamainu‘u lives in a cave at
Makaleha in Laie, Waialua district, on Oahu. Going forth one day in
search of a husband she finds the young Kauai chief Puna-ai-koae (Puna
tropic-bird eater) surfing on the waves of Ka-lehua-weha, lures him to
her own board and carries him away to Kaena point, where they land and,
ascending the Waianae mountains to Pu‘u-ka-pele, descend to the stream
of Wailea on the west side of which her cave is still to be seen today.
After several months of love making and feasting Puna longs again for
surf riding and his wife fetches a board from the corner of the cave but
warns him against speaking to anyone while he is away. On his way to the
sea two relatives of the mo‘o woman, Hinalea and Aikilolo, hail him and
warn him of his wife's true nature. They tell him that the board he
carries is in reality her mo‘o tongue and that unless he can escape he
must ultimately perish. He returns secretly to the cave and spies upon
his wife in her mo‘o form. Because of her nature as a spirit she knows
what has happened and prepares to eat him, but since he shows no fear
when she shows him her terrible forms, she forgives him and goes forth
to slay his informants. They evade her for a time by creeping into a
crack of the sea floor. Kuao and Ahilea tell her how to set a trap to
catch them. Thus the basket trap for catching hinalea fish came to be
invented, and Kalamainu‘u is still an aumakua for catching hinalea fish
in that vicinity. <span id="fr_480"></span>[11](#fn_480)

(*b*) *Emerson and Westervelt versions*. Puna is surfing at Waimanalo,
Waikiki, when he encounters the mo‘o-woman and is lured by her to
Molokai and hidden away in her cave home. Her brother Hinale warns him
as he is going to join the surfers, and he peeps in and sees his wife
feeding on spiders and their webs. He pacifies her wrath and watches his
chance to escape to the pit of Pele and put himself under the protection
of his former wife's (Walinu‘u's) family. He pretends to thirst after
the ice-cold waters of Poliahu and gives his wife a gourd to fill which
he has secretly punched with holes. During her absence he makes

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

his escape. Kiha-wahine summons the mo‘o gods and fills the pit of Pele
with their phlegm, but the place sacred to Ka-moho-ali‘i is unharmed and
the mo‘o gods are many of them consumed with fire and Kiha-wahine is
obliged to escape to the pond called Loko-aka (Shadow pond). Ounauna is
the fellow who shows her how to make the fish basket to trap
Hinale. <span id="fr_481"></span>[12](#fn_481)

 

The story of the escape from a cannibal wife is widespread throughout
Polynesia, often connected with the trick of sending the monster on a
fruitless errand (generally after water) in order to gain time for
escape. The widespread motives of death by feeding with hot stones or by
drawing up to a height on a rope and then cutting the rope, common in
southern Polynesia (and throughout Africa), are not found in Hawaii, nor
are the tricks, also well known, of substituting a dummy for the body or
providing a speaking substitute. These are no doubt later
embellishments. On the other hand, there is little doubt that the
characteristically Polynesian motive of the woman who has a back which
opens and devours all the fish while her family sleep was once a part of
Hawaiian stories of a demon wife. <span id="fr_482"></span>[13](#fn_482)

*Maori*. (a) Ruru-teina is on his way home with his wife when he goes to
fetch fire and is seized by a reptile-woman named Ngarara-hu-ora. The
rat people tell him that she is not a woman; then, to escape her
revenge, they run, one into a stone, the other into the gable of the
house. While the demon tries to get at them, Ruru runs away and with the
help of his brother succeeds in burning the reptile-woman in a house
prepared for the purpose and returns home to his wife. <span
id="fr_483"></span>[14](#fn_483)

(*b*) Te-ruahine-mata-maori is a witch who recites incantations for the
yam crop. Paowa goes to her house (presumably to learn the
incantations). To escape her he sends her for water and by incantations
dries up the streams. He burns her house and flees; she pursues swimming
and he kills her by pretending

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

to feed her and pouring hot stones down her throat. From her armpits he
recovers "sacred red garments." <span id="fr_484"></span>[15](#fn_484)

(*c*) Kurangai-tuku catches Hatupatu while he is out after birds. To
escape her he sends her for food "at the sixth range" of hills and, when
she pursues, takes refuge in a rock and she finally falls into a boiling
hot spring and dies. <span id="fr_485"></span>[16](#fn_485)

\(d\) Houmea is the wife of Uta, whom she leaves to starve while she
swallows his whole catch and pretends that fairies have taken it. She
swallows her children, but they carry, one a carved staff, the other a
barbed spear, and at their father's incantation come out alive. To
escape her Uta sends her for water, dries up the springs by incantations
so that she may have far to go, and escapes with the boys in the canoe,
after directing the various parts of the establishment to answer for him
when she calls. She pursues, is fed with fish, and finally with a hot
stone which causes her death. The name Houmea is today applied to evil
women, adulteresses, and thieves who dwell among men. Tu-tawake is her
child, with whom come evil and daring. <span
id="fr_486"></span>[17](#fn_486)

(*e*) Tu who dwells in Reiapanga is taken for a husband by a monster
woman who comes swimming up to his canoe and is taken on board. He tries
to escape but is brought back. Finally his sons come to find him and
they succeed in burning her in the house. <span
id="fr_487"></span>[18](#fn_487)

(*f*) Titipa by a trick makes off with Tautini's canoe. Tautini goes to
Titipa's settlement and sends Titipa's wives after water, then dries up
the springs and makes off with his canoe. <span
id="fr_488"></span>[19](#fn_488)

(*g*) Rate sends Poua-haa-kai for water. By means of incantations he
causes the water to recede, then kills Poua by feeding him red-hot
stones. <span id="fr_489"></span>[20](#fn_489)

 

*Tahiti*. (a) Ro‘o-nui, husband of Haumea, leaves her to return to the
lower world (Po). Haumea is angry and turns cannibal. When their son
Tuture-i-te-a‘u-tama (Tuture the child

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

swum for) eats cooked food, she eats her food raw. To escape her, Tuture
sends her to fill water gourds in which he has bored holes, and himself
sails away in the ship which he has built at the base of the mountain
Viriviri-i-te-rai on the northeast coast of Tahiti. Haumea follows
swimming. He kills her by pouring red-hot stones down her throat under
pretence of food. Her body comes ashore at Haavai and she lives again as
Nona-nihoniho-roa (Nona of the long teeth). <span
id="fr_490"></span>[21](#fn_490)

(*b*) Hono-ura in jest sends his brother for a drink and pierces the
water gourd. Three girls laugh at him and he is angry. <span
id="fr_491"></span>[22](#fn_491)

 

*Marquesas*. (*a*) Huuti boasts that he will send his arrow into the ear
of the mo‘o woman at Otua named Te-mo‘o-nieve. She conceals the arrow
and when he comes to fell a tree for a canoe claims him for her husband.
He objects to her food and, pretending to go away to prepare some for
himself, returns to his companions and makes fun of her. She discovers
his treachery and, throwing his companions into a sleep, brings him back
to her cave. When he awakes he is terrified. As a beautiful woman she
accompanies him home and bears him three boys and a girl before he
dies. <span id="fr_492"></span>[23](#fn_492)

(*b*) Tuapuu is a demon wife who opens up her back and devours the whole
catch of fish. The children discover this and give her eels to eat which
kill her. . . . They flee but she comes to life and pursues. They climb
a rock, the daughter lets down her hair for the mother to climb up, and
when she is almost up they cut the girl's hair and the mother is
killed. <span id="fr_493"></span>[24](#fn_493)

 

*Rotuma*. A man has a demon wife. He flees from her. She follows,
overhears his talk with his first wife arranging a fishing expedition,
and carries him away herself in place of the first wife, having roused
him at midnight by crowing like a cock. <span
id="fr_494"></span>[25](#fn_494)

 

*Malay*. A baboon carries a girl away to his home in the tree

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

and she has a child. She sends the baboon to fill a bamboo with water
and pierces a hole in the bottom, then runs away. <span
id="fr_495"></span>[26](#fn_495)

 

Three other folktales of demon wife or husband have been collected in
Hawaii, most of them from the island of Maui, where an excellent story
of a pursuing head was early set down by a student at the Lahainaluna
school.

### STORY OF THE DEMON HEAD

Mahikoa and his brother-in-law Pilikana go up to a place in the woods
above Kaana-pali on Maui called Wahikuli to cut battens for a house. The
wood catches from the fire they have kindled for warmth in the cave
where they sleep. Pilikana awakes and tries to waken his brother-in-law,
but Mahikoa is burned up to his head before he awakes. Pilikana flees,
the head (po‘o) pursues, calling out to him to wait and they will go
home together. He runs toward the sea, where a prophet stands ready to
help him, and as he falls exhausted the prophet spears the blazing head
with splits of bamboo.

The spirit of the husband seeks his wife Keiki-wai-uli, but she, warned
by the kahuna, refuses to go out to him or to send the children out.
When the spirit enters the house, she slips out with the children and
the house is burned to the ground with the demon spirit shut
inside. <span id="fr_496"></span>[27](#fn_496)

### STORY OF THE DEMON WIFE

(*a*) *Wahiako version*. Waiolola lives with his wife Kukui-ula at the
place where the auto road to Kipahulu now ends. When his wife dies, he
buries her by the front door and builds a small structure above her
grave, where he goes to mourn for her. One night of the full moon a
figure like his wife rises and asks that one of the children be sent to
her. He sends the youngest and she devours the child and asks for
another. He sends her the oldest and, taking the only remaining child in
his arms, he flees, calling upon his sister Manini in chant as he goes.
If he can reach the kahuna at the heiau called House-of-Lono (which
stands today

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

a heap of ruins seaward of the road that turns down to Hamoa bay) he
will be safe. His sister goes out and fights the spirit and he falls
upon the threshold of the heiau with the child and is protected by the
priest. The Kaupo end of Kipahulu is named Kukui-ula after this demon
wife. <span id="fr_497"></span>[28](#fn_497)

(*b*) *Kekela version*. A man of Kipahulu loses his wife after she has
born him five children. Instead of putting her body into a cave
(lua-pao) he places her in front of the house. Some years later at night
a voice calls to him from without to send out one of the children. He
does so and she devours it. This happens each night until he has but one
child left. A kahuna from Kauai gives him a couple of dogs to set upon
the demon after persuading it into the house. The demon flees, he burns
his wife's body, and the spirit never troubles him again. <span
id="fr_498"></span>[29](#fn_498)

### STORY OF FISHING WITH EYES

(*a*) *Maui version*. Kokole the husband and Kokole the wife live at the
beach near Kipahulu, Maui. The wife sends her husband to the uplands
after kukui nuts to string for torch fishing. Each time that she goes
after fish she returns unsuccessful and complains that she is "robbed of
her fish by the owner of the sea." A seer warns Kokole that his wife is
not what she seems. He spies upon her and sees her throw out her eyes as
bait. He catches the eyes and threatens to destroy them. She devours one
of the children, he flees to the kahuna with the other, and the woman
and her eyes are thrown into the fire. <span
id="fr_499"></span>[30](#fn_499)

(*b*) *Oahu version*. At Na-maka-lele (Flying eyes) live Keawe and his
wife Keana-haki. He plants in the hills and fishes at the sea. After the
sixth child is born the woman's nature changes and she undertakes the
business of fishing. Sending out her eyes as bait she makes a big catch,
all of which she devours except a single fish with which she returns
complaining of ill luck. Warned by a kahuna, Keawe follows and detects
her. He catches her eyes and wraps them up in a small bundle and takes
them

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

home with the load of fish. The sixth child sees where he puts the eyes,
answers the mother's inquiries, and she can see again. <span
id="fr_500"></span>[31](#fn_500)

*Samoa*. Lauti, jealous of Sina, steals her soul, places it in a basket,
and gives it to her elders to keep for her. In the morning Sina is found
dead. Her brother overhears Lauti's chant to her elders when she asks
for the basket, imitates it and, having thus secured the basket,
restores Sina to life. He finds Lauti fishing with her eyes, catches the
eyes and puts to death the demon. <span id="fr_501"></span>[32](#fn_501)

*Maori*. Hatupatu finds an ogress using her lips as a spear to cast at
birds. He throws his dart at the same bird she has thus speared, and
when he goes to recover it, finds it stuck in her lips. He is handsome
and she forgives him and takes him as her husband. <span
id="fr_502"></span>[33](#fn_502)

 

The Hawaiian Kalamainu‘u legend has a close variant in the Tahitian
story of the cannibal woman Nona, grandmother by her daughter Hina of
Hema, father of Kaha‘i, and of Pu‘a (Puna) who is the Maori Punga,
ancestor of the eel family and their kin in the sea. As such it is
associated with the Aikanaka-Hina cycle localized in the same district
on the island of Maui from which most of the demon-wife folktale
versions have been drawn. On the other hand it is connected with the
Oahu story of how Haumea in the person of Walinu‘u (Papa) lived with
Makea (Wakea) up Kalihi valley on Oahu and saved him from death by
entering into a tree. Puna is identified with Wali-nu‘u's lover, and the
two kupua women, Kalamainu‘u and Haumea, are shown as rivals in love.
They fight with their kupua bodies, fire and water, but their human
bodies also enter into the scrap, as, according to Thrum, their images
are represented in the heiau, Walinu‘u with a broken nose and
Kalamainu‘u with blinded eyes. The wrappings of yellow tapa seem to
indicate that they belong to the Kane worship.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_470"></span>[190:1](hm15.htm#fr_470) Westervelt,
*Volcanoes*, 33-34.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[190:2](hm15.htm#fr_471) *Ibid*., 29-30.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[190:3](hm15.htm#fr_472) Ellis, Tour, 186-187;
For. Pol. Race 2: 324-326; Kamakau, *Kuokoa*, April 27, 1867;
Westervelt, *Volcanoes*, 146-151.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[190:4](hm15.htm#fr_473) *Ibid*., 146-151;
Kamakau, *Kuokoa*, July 13, 20, 1867.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[191:5](hm15.htm#fr_474) Remy-Brigham, 36;
Westervelt, *Volcanoes*, 31-32; For. Col. 5: 534.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[191:6](hm15.htm#fr_475) Green, 55.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[191:7](hm15.htm#fr_476) *Ibid*., 3-9. See also
Ellis, *Tour*, 219-223; Marcuse, 125-128; Thrum, *Tales* (from Ellis),
39-42; Kalakaua, 501-507; Westervelt, *Volcanoes*, 37-44.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[192:8](hm15.htm#fr_477) Green and
[Pukui](errata.htm#0), 166-167; related also in North Kona.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[193:9](hm15.htm#fr_478) N. Emerson, *Pele*,
221 note *k*.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[193:10](hm15.htm#fr_479) Given by Daniel
Ho‘olapa. See also Ellis, *Tour*, 183-187, 228-231, 262-263; Kamakau,
*Ke Au Okoa*, March 31, 1870; Kalakaua, 139-140; Green and Beckwith,
*AA* 28: 185-186; For. Col. 5: 572-575; Westervelt, *Volcanoes*, 63.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[194:11](hm15.htm#fr_480) *Ke Au Okoa*, January
6, 1870.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[195:12](hm15.htm#fr_481) Thrum, *More Tales*,
185-196; Westervelt, *Gods and Ghosts*, 152-162.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[195:13](hm15.htm#fr_482) Compare Dixon, 62,
69.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[195:14](hm15.htm#fr_483) White 2: 26-30.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[196:15](hm15.htm#fr_484) White 2: 55-59.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[196:16](hm15.htm#fr_485) Taylor, 154-157;
Grey, 116-118.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[196:17](hm15.htm#fr_486) White 2: 167-172.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[196:18](hm15.htm#fr_487) *JPS* 5: 195-200;
6:97-106; 29: 136-138. The story is known also by the Moriori in the
Chatham islands and in Manihiki.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[196:19](hm15.htm#fr_488) White 2: 158-160.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[196:20](hm15.htm#fr_489) *Ibid*. 3: 3-4.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[197:21](hm15.htm#fr_490) Leverd, *JPS* 21:
1-3; cf. Henry, 554.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[197:22](hm15.htm#fr_491) *Ibid*., 526.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[197:23](hm15.htm#fr_492) Handy, *Bul.* 69:
21-25.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[197:24](hm15.htm#fr_493) *Ibid*. 37-45.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[197:25](hm15.htm#fr_494) Romilly, *Letters*,
139-146.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[198:26](hm15.htm#fr_495) *RASSB* 46: 65-71.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[198:27](hm15.htm#fr_496) For. Col. 5: 528-533;
Thrum, *More Tales*, 242-247.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[199:28](hm15.htm#fr_497) Told by Sheriff
Wahiako, June 11, 1930.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[199:29](hm15.htm#fr_498) MS. by Rachel Kekela.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[199:30](hm15.htm#fr_499) MS. by Joseph
Kaiwaaea of Kipahulu, 1930.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[200:31](hm15.htm#fr_500) McAllister, *Bul.*
104: 94-95.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[200:32](hm15.htm#fr_501) Krämer 1: 136-139.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[200:33](hm15.htm#fr_502) Grey, 116-118.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. Kamapua‘a](hm16)
