[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm19)  [Next](hm21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

### XVIII

### WAHIELOA-LAKA CYCLE

THE story of Wahieloa (Wahieroa), son of Kaha‘i (Tawhaki) duplicates
that of Hema, and the story of his famous son Laka (Rata) corresponds
with the journey made by Kaha‘i to restore his father or his father's
bones to his native land. In the Pele legend Wahieloa (Wahialoa,
Wahioloa) is named as one of the husbands of Pele while she is living
with her parents at Hapakuela, "a place unknown." Laka and Menehune are
their children. The husband is "snatched away" by Pele-kumu-lani and
Pele migrates to Hawaii in search of him. <span
id="fr_654"></span>[1](#fn_654) Wahieloa's wife Hina-hawea may be the
Hina-kawea drawn out of the sea by Wakea. Her other name, Koolau (north
Kahiki), corresponds with South Sea versions, where she is a chiefess of
North Tahiti.

### LEGEND OF WAHIELOA

Wahieloa is son of Kaha‘i and Hina-ulu-ohia, born at Wailau, Ninole, in
Ka-u district on the island of Hawaii. He lives as chief in Kipahulu at
Kalaikoi and has by his wife Hina-hawea, daughter of Hina-howana, a son
Laka. Wahieloa sails to the home of the child's grandmother on Hawaii
after the birth gift (Alakoi-ula-a-Kane), lands at Punalu‘u, Ka-u, and
is seized and sacrificed. His bones are guarded in the cave of Kaualehu
(at Koloa <span id="fr_655"></span>[2](#fn_655)) by Old-woman-Kaikapu.
His son brings back his bones to Maui and deposits them in Papa-ulu-ana
at Alae, Kaumakani, Kipahulu. <span id="fr_656"></span>[3](#fn_656)

 

*Maori*. Wahie-roa (Long piece of firewood) is so named from a great log
of wood which his father Tawhaki has brought into

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

camp where his wife is living with her people. His mother is called
Hine-nui-a-to-kawa <span id="fr_657"></span>[4](#fn_657) or
Maikuku-makaha <span id="fr_658"></span>[5](#fn_658) or
Hapai-nui-a-maunga. <span id="fr_659"></span>[6](#fn_659) His wife is
Matoka-rau-tawhiri, <span id="fr_660"></span>[7](#fn_660) Kura, <span
id="fr_661"></span>[8](#fn_661) Hawea, <span
id="fr_662"></span>[9](#fn_662) or Hine-tu-a-haka. <span
id="fr_663"></span>[10](#fn_663) He is killed by alien people across the
sea led by Matuku. The story varies. Matoka-rau-tawhiri has a pregnancy
craving for parson birds (tui) and Wahieroa traps them in the preserves
of Matuku and is caught and killed. Or he goes to war with Pou-a-hao-kai
and Matuku and is killed. <span id="fr_664"></span>[11](#fn_664) Or he
is attacked and murdered by Matuku and Whiti, and his wife taken
prisoner. <span id="fr_665"></span>[12](#fn_665) Or a party of travelers
led by Whakarau arrive at Whiti-a-naunau, home of Wahieroa, wearing bird
plumes which they say come from Pariroa on the seacoast belonging to
Pou-haa-kai, Matuku-tangotango, and Hina-komahi, daughter of
Tu-rongo-nui. These people go naked and are wild and roving in habit.
The chief Manu-korihi leads an expedition of a thousand men to Pari-roa
after feathers, a four months' journey from Whiti-kau in Whiti-roa. The
expedition is successful, but Wahieroa is slain. <span
id="fr_666"></span>[13](#fn_666)

 

*Tahiti*. Vahieroa is son of Tafa‘i and his wife Hina and is born at his
father's home in the Ta-pahi hills of Mahina in North Tahiti. He weds
Maemae-a-rohi, sister of the ruling chief Tumu-nui. King Tu-i-hiti of
Hiti-au-revareva \[said to be Pitcairn island\] takes to wife
Hau-vana‘a, daughter of Tumu-nui, the ruling chief of North Tahiti. She
at first has rejected him, but when he prepares to leave her, love
awakens and she insists upon accompanying him. They sail in the boat
Are-mata-ro-roa. He invokes monsters who guard the way to let him pass
but to attack Tumu-nui should he attempt to follow. When therefore that
chief sails in the boat Matie-roa and the canoe Matie-poto in an attempt
to recover his daughter, the entire party are swallowed up by the great
clam. His younger brother Iore-roa (Big rat) and his brother-in-law
Vahie-roa go to seek him and

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

are swallowed in their turn. The younger rat brothers are also lost.
Vahieroa's wife Maemae-a-rohi, sister to Tumu-nui, who has been left as
regent, rears her son Rata and herself sails with Tumu-nui's wife,
leaving her son as regent in her place, and on her return is drawn in by
the clam just as her son arrives to rescue her and restore the bones of
the other voyagers. <span id="fr_667"></span>[14](#fn_667)

 

*Tuamotus*. (*a*) Vahieroa weds Matamata-taua or Tahiti To‘erau (North
Tahiti) and on the night of their son Rata's birth the parents go
fishing and are snatched away by the demon bird of Puna king of
Hiti-marama, "an island north of Pitcairn and Elizabeth but long since
swallowed in the sea." The bird Matatata‘ota‘o bites off the chief's
head and swallows it whole. The wife is placed head downward as a food
holder in the house of Puna's wife Te-vahine-hua-rei. <span
id="fr_668"></span>[15](#fn_668)

(*b*) Vahi-vero is the son of Kui, a demigod of Hawaiki, and a goblin
woman named Rima-roa. Kui plants food trees and vegetables and is also a
great fisherman. The goblin woman Rima-roa robs his garden; he lies in
wait and seizes her and she bears him the son Vahi-vero. Vahi-vero
visits a pool from which the beautiful Tahiti-tokerau daily emerges. Kui
teaches him how to lie in wait and seize her and never let her go until
she pronounces his name. Having mastered her, he finds that Puna, king
of Vavau, is his rival. He goes by way of the pool to the place where
Puna guards the girl in a house with round ends, and brings her back
with him, leaving her sister Huarehu in her place. Tahiti-tokerau bears
to him the boy Rata. Puna comes in shark form to avenge himself, kills
Vahi-vero and takes his wife back and makes of her eyes lights for her
sister to do sennit work by and of her feet supports for the sister's
work basket <span id="fr_669"></span>[16](#fn_669)

 

Compare the legend of Mamo and Rigorigo from the same locality, where
eyes are plucked out and used as lamps and the body as a post to support
the house. <span id="fr_670"></span>[17](#fn_670)

*Rarotonga*. Vaieroa is the son of Taaki and Ina-uru-o-runga and they
live in Avaiki. Vaieroa's wife Tairiiri-tokerau has a

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

pregnancy longing for eels and the eels Pupu and Kavei are, in spite of
their sister's warning, caught, cooked, and eaten, hence a rash comes on
the child and as the parents seek a kind of sea-weed to cure it they are
swept out to sea and Vaieroa is swallowed by the sons of Puna (octopus,
clam, etc.) and the mother's eyes are scooped out and given to
Te-vaine-uarei on Motu-ta‘ota‘o. <span id="fr_671"></span>[18](#fn_671)

 

*Aitutaki*. Vaiaroa and Tairi-tokerau, parents of Nganaoa, are lost in
the land of moonlight, Iti-te-marama, and Nganaoa joins Rata's sailing
expedition to that land under promise to slay all the monsters that
endanger them on the way. The parents are found braiding sennit inside a
monster whale that has swallowed them whole. <span
id="fr_672"></span>[19](#fn_672)

 

*Marquesas*. Vehie-oa has by his first wife four sons and two daughters.
He lives with Tahi‘i-tokoau (North Tahiti). His plants are stolen and he
is spirited away by Tui-vae-mona. Tahi‘i-tokoau goes down to Hawaiki to
live with Teiki-o-te-po whose wife is Vehie-oa's sister. At the advice
of the two old wives, each day of her journey to Hawaiki she gives a
pig, until on the tenth day she reaches the place. She has left tokens
along the way, a broken leaf, spittle, and tears, and her husband
follows her with birds, a cock, and a drum with which to summon the day
to the realm of night. He sends the birds ahead, the cock crows five
times, the drum sounds, and it is day. <span
id="fr_673"></span>[20](#fn_673)

 

*Samoa*. Fafieloa is the son of Tafa‘i and his second wife
Hine-piripiri. Tula is his wife and Lata their son. <span
id="fr_674"></span>[21](#fn_674)

 

The story of Laka, son of Wahieloa, is told today in Hana district and
the sites are pointed out of his canoe shed, Ku-ohalau, his tree-cutting
in the forest, with the rock table where he "greased the mouths" of the
forest deities who helped him build the canoe, and the place where he
launched his canoe,

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

together with the rocks into which his two sisters were transformed who
swam after him.

### LEGEND OF LAKA

(*a*) Laka is the son of Wahieloa and Hina-hawea (Koolau-kahili or
-kahiki) and is brought up by his grandmother Hina-howana in Kipahulu
district on the island of Maui. As the time of his birth approaches, his
father sails after a birth gift for his son and, landing at Punalu‘u in
Ka-u district on Hawaii, is killed and his bones are thrown into the
cave of Kaualehu guarded by old woman Kaikapu (or at the cave Makili and
Makula at the cliff of Kupinai). When the boys jeer at Laka because he
is fatherless he determines to seek his father's bones.

The tree cut down one day for the canoe, he finds restored to its place
the next morning. Instructed by his grandmother, he first hides and
seizes the leaders of the little gods of the forest who are doing the
mischief, Moku-hali‘i and Kupaaike‘e who are his relatives, then
"greases the mouths of the gods" with offerings, and the gods complete
the two canoes for him in a single night. In the morning after the night
of Kane he finds them standing outside his door ready to be lashed
together and launched.

Four skilful men accompany him, father Prop (makua Poupou) to hold open
the mouth of the cave, father Stretch (makua Kiko‘o) to reach inside,
father Torch (makua Kalama) to light the cave, and father Seeker (makua
Imi) to hunt for the bones. Arrived at Punalu‘u they bribe the old woman
to open the door by offering her a dish of soup. She tastes it and slams
shut the cave door, declaring it is not salt enough. Father Reach now
puts out his hand and tries the salt of various seas until the old woman
is suited with that of Puna. No sooner is the door opened to take in the
bowl of soup than father Prop holds it open, father Torch lights it up,
father Seeker finds where the bones are lying, and father Reach
stretches in an arm and brings them outside. They kill old Kaikapu and
return to Maui, landing at Kaumakani. The bones, together with the
canoes and the bodies of his companions, Laka deposits in the cave at
Papauluana, whose entrance no man has found to this day. <span
id="fr_675"></span>[22](#fn_675)

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

(*b*) Laka was born in Hilo, at Haili, on Hawaii. His mother was
Koolau-kahili(kahiki?). He rules over Koolaupoko on Oahu, dies at
Kualoa, and his body is brought back to Maui by his son Luanu‘u, child
of Hikawailena from Waimea (the shark aumakua Haiwahine) and laid in Iao
valley. <span id="fr_676"></span>[23](#fn_676)

 

\[paragraph continues\] Kamakau quotes his chant, elaborating upon the
searching party:

Searched for by father Searcher,  
Lighted by father Torch,  
Dug for by father Digger,  
Uprooted by father Striker,  
Propped up by father Post,  
Reached after by father Reach,  
Danced for by father Dancer,  
Laka found them. . . . <span id="fr_677"></span>[24](#fn_677)

Old woman Kaikapu (Tapu sea) appears in several other Hawaiian stories.
In the story of Kaumailiula her role is similar to that in this story.
She lives in the land of Olopana and burns Kaumailiula and his brothers
with fire because they arrive during a tapu period of whose rules they
are ignorant. In the story of Aukelenuiaiku she is the old blind
relative whose sight is restored by Aukele and who guides him to the
water of life, and is represented as sister of his mo‘o ancestress
Ka-mo‘oinanea and of his god Lono-i-kouali‘i (-ikuali‘i?). Her local
legend resembles the Tahitian story of the cannibal grandmother of Pu‘a
(Puna) and Hema.

Old Woman Kaikapu lives in a cave in Ninole, Kau district, on Hawaii.
She is a cannibal and uses her pretty granddaughter Ninole to decoy
travelers to her cave, whereupon she will take them out one by one and
kill and devour them raw. She eats her own grandson, Ninole's brother,
before she discovers who he is. <span id="fr_678"></span>[25](#fn_678)

The Laka legend is widespread in the south Pacific.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

*Maori*. (*a*) Rata is the son (or grandson) of Wahieroa by Kura (or
Matoka-rau-tawhiri or some other). He teaches the art of cutting and
polishing greenstone with the whetstone. His wife is Tonga-rau-tawhiri
and their son is Tu-whaka-raro. Rata asks after his father and learns
that he has been killed by Natuku-Takotako and his bones (or eyeballs)
carried away "where the sun comes up." His mother sends him out to find
a tree suit-able for a canoe and gives him stone axes which he must
"sharpen on the back of his ancestress" who is the daughter of
Whetstone. The tree he fells returns to its place. He hides and catches
the little people of Roro-tini, Pona-ua, and Haku-turi, who take the
forms of the birds and insects of the forest. These spirits teach him to
place an asplenium fern over the cut stump. The next day a canoe appears
outside his door.

Ceremonies are performed for its successful launching. It is named
Pu-niu (or nui), Aniu-wara, Ni- (or Ri-)waru, Tiurangi, Aniwaniwa, or
Pakawai. Rata first slays some monster like the leader of the rat
people, Kiore-roa, <span id="fr_679"></span>[26](#fn_679) or the
swallowing monster Pouahaokai, <span id="fr_680"></span>[27](#fn_680) or
he first slays Matuku, then Whiti. <span
id="fr_681"></span>[28](#fn_681) Rata goes overseas to Matuku's (or
Whiti's) land, persuades a friendly guard to give a false call, and when
Matuku comes up out of his cave before the season to bless the crops he
nooses or snares him (as Maui snares the sun). <span
id="fr_682"></span>[29](#fn_682)

(*b*) *Best version*. Rata is son of Wahieroa and Hine-tuahoanga. He
learns from his mother that his father died at Pariroa south of
Tawhiti-roa, slain by Pou-haokai and Matuku-tangotango while
accompanying a party after bird plumes. The tree he cuts down for his
canoe is found erect in the morning and he is told to cover the stump
with a special kind of fern and then convey the ferns so used to the
priest Whakaiho-rangi, his ancestor, who utters building incantations.
It is his "elders," the supernatural folk of whom the forest is full,
who have done the mischief. The same priest teaches charms to insure the
canoe Ani-waru against sharks, points out his route, and predicts
success

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

from the signs given him by the gods. He is accompanied by Apakura as
"controlling expert of the various supernatural beings despatched by him
as a protection." The party first slay the people of Pouhaokai while
they are scattered about looking for food. Baskets full of the slain are
brought to Matuku as food, Apakura impersonating Pouhaokai. The house is
then set on fire and when Matuku tries to escape his neck is caught in
snares. His bones are made into spear points for spearing birds. <span
id="fr_683"></span>[30](#fn_683)

 

*Tahiti*. Rata is son of Vahieroa and Maemae-a-rohi, sister of the
ruling chief of  North Tahiti, Tumu-nui. He is born after Tumu-nui and
his four rat brothers Iore-roa, Iore-poto, Iore-mumu, Iore-vava, and his
brother-in-law Vahieroa, father of Rata, have all been swallowed by a
giant clam while voyaging to Tu-i-hiti, whose chief had made Tumu-nui's
daughter his wife. Rata grows into a giant and at a boar hunt loses
self-control and knocks men about fatally. His mother upbraids him and
when she sets forth to seek her lost husband, refuses to let Rata
accompany her.

Rata must have a canoe in order to follow her. He fells a sacred tree in
the grove of Ihu-ata. The little people of Tuoi replace it until Rata
hides and seizes Tuoi and the artisan Fefera, releasing them only when
they promise him the canoe. He brings them a great offering of food and
the next day it is completed and brought down to the beach, where a
baptism ceremony has to be performed before the canoe is successfully
floated. It is named Va‘a-i-ama (-i-a, or -i-ura).

Strong warriors, Matua-fa‘auu, Matua-a-aro, Te-iri-poto, Te-iri-roa,
accompany him, and slay all the monsters enumerated in the voyages of
Tumu-nui and the others lost in seeking him. First they slay the great
clam, recover the bones of the dead, and also Rata's living mother, just
fallen into the monster's mouth on her return voyage from
Hiti-au-revareva, the home of Tumu-nui's son-in-law. Afterward they slay
the demon bird Matutu-taotao and extract the skull of a relative from
its maw who speaks "in an audible voice" calling upon them to rescue his
wife from king Puna in Hiti-marama. Rata escapes a fire

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

trap at king Puna's place and slays Puna (as in the Tuamotuan version)
and recovers the woman. <span id="fr_684"></span>[31](#fn_684)

 

The four Tuamotuan versions of the Laka story are so similar that they
must have come from a single source and probably by way of Tahiti, since
the locale of Laka's home is laid in North Tahiti. The land of
Hiti-marama, sometimes spoken of as a land swallowed up in the sea, is
in one version called Aihi and identified with Makatea or Saunders
island, seventy miles east of Tahiti. The story of the competition for
Puna's wife is in the Tuamotus worked into the Matutu story with a
consequent inconsistency in the causation. In Seurat's version the canoe
builders are crabs and insects and a crab is the guardian on the way.
From each of the monsters Rata recovers a part of his father's body and
eventually restores him to life. His mother is in the power of an eel,
as in the Tuna story.

*Tuamotus*. Rata is the son of Vahieroa (Vahivero in Seurat) and his
wife Tahiti-to‘erau (or Matamata-taua, or Tairiri-tokerau) in North
Tahiti. He is brought up by his maternal grandmother Ui-ura (Kuhi,
\[K\]ui, Ine-uru-o-runga, Tiau-tara-iti). When the boys taunt him
because his clay boat is left behind in the race (or because he
outdistances them with his toy boat), he learns from her that his
parents have been seized by Matutu, demon bird of Puna, and his father's
head bitten off and swallowed and his mother used as a food holder for
Puna's wife (or daughter) Te-vahine-huarei (or father killed and mother
taken to sacrifice on the altar). He sharpens an axe "on the back of his
grandmother" and fells a tree for a canoe. The tree returns to its
place. He hides and surprises To-a-hiti (Too-hiti-mataroa) and Ta-va‘a,
the leading artisans among the canoe-building spirits of the forest,
makes them a handsome present of food, and the next morning a complete
war canoe stands at his door. Puna has a number of sea gods whom he
sends to keep back the voyagers. Guided by Ta-va‘a, Rata spears them one
by one (with his spear Taipu-ari‘i): a giant bivalve, a shoal of
monsters, a great billfish, a cavalla fish, and

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

a ghost-possessed rock (or branching coral which forms Fakarava today).
He slays the demon bird Matutu-ta‘ota‘o (Matu‘u). At Puna's home he is
received with pretended friendship, escapes an attempt to kill him in
his sleep, and plays tricks on Puna's men by betting his empty crab
baskets for their full ones, then filling his own from theirs. He slays
Puna by first slaying the warriors of Matutu who guard Puna, hooking the
rooster who wakens him in the morning, and tying Puna in his sleep to
the rock Papa-‘ari‘ari. He frees his mother (in Kororo-po) and secures
the daughter of Puna (Tie-maofe or Te-vahine-huarei). <span
id="fr_685"></span>[32](#fn_685)

 

*Rarotonga*. Rata lives in the island of Avaiki. Vaieroa is his father,
son of Taaki, son of Ema; Tairiri-tokerau is his mother. He is brought
up by his grandmother Ine-uru-o-runga (or Tiau-tara-iti) until the gods
reveal to him that soon after his birth his parents were swept out to
sea and destroyed by the sons of Puna (octopus, clam, etc.). He sharpens
his axe by burying it overnight in the sand and when the little gods
re-place the tree felled for a canoe, he makes an offering to the gods
Atonga and Tonga-iti-matarau and they complete for him the canoe O-tutai
and tell him of his parents' fate. A crew of ten men is selected for the
voyage, each an expert in some art essential to managing the canoe. When
Nganaoa the kite flyer asks to join the party, he is refused. Twice
taken in as a floating gourd and thrown out again he is finally accepted
upon the promise to kill all the monsters on the way. This he achieves
by entering their bodies in gourd form and stabbing their vitals; but
for him all in the canoe would have been lost. At Great Fiji where
Tukai-ta-manu is chief and Ina-ara-maunga his wife, he outriddles the
riddling priest and hence the saying,

"It was said by the young priest Kairu-mauanoke  
'Do not tempt voyagers lest you be outwitted.'"

\[paragraph continues\] He voyages to Motu-ta‘ota‘o and kills
Te-vaine-uarei who has his mother's eyeballs.

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

Thence he voyages to many lands, remaining for a time at Vai-a-kura in
the west of Tumu-te-varovaro. Returning to Avaiki, he attacks Kuporo and
there his canoe is lifted and lodged in the treetops and he himself is
slain by a great warrior named Vaea, but some say he escaped. <span
id="fr_686"></span>[33](#fn_686)

 

*Marquesas*. Ata is the son of Vehie-oa and Tahi‘i-tokoau. He is brought
up by Tua-hoana and her sister, who find him sleeping in the cave where
his parents left him when they went after crabs in Vae-tea and were
carried away in the boat of Puna-iino which had come seeking victims for
sacrifice. Ata plays with the Hana-ui children and although they give
him green fire sticks to use and green breadfruit, his sticks alone
strike fire and his breadfruit has the best meat; although he fishes in
the sand with a thorn and the other children have fine hooks to cast
into the sea, yet he catches all the fish and they catch none. The boys
abuse him but the old women teach him how to wield a stick and throw
stones. The boys taunt him about his parents and he learns the truth
from his grandmothers. The temanu tree he fells for a canoe is erect the
next morning. He thinks it may be a god and hides to see. Hope-ou-toi
and Motuhaiki are discovered. He brings food offerings and they make the
boat for him. He goes to the land of Puna-iino, takes seven men as a
sacrifice, and bakes them in the oven in a feast of vengeance at
Hana-ui. Kau-tia, daughter of Puna, he takes for a wife. Koomahu carries
her away. He returns weeping to Hana-ui and his companions go to the
home of Koomahu and bring back the wife while Koomahu is away seeking
his sister; when Koomahu returns he finds all gone. <span
id="fr_687"></span>[34](#fn_687)

 

*Aitutaki*. Rata lives in a far land called Kupolu (Ukupolu). In search
of adventure he finds a heron attacked by a serpent. The tree he is
cutting for a canoe for a voyage to the "land of moonlight" returns to
its place until he rescues the bird by killing the snake \[a foreign
interpolation\], then grateful seabirds deposit the completed canoe at
his door. Nganaoa, refused passage, follows in an empty gourd and is
taken into the canoe on

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

condition that he kill all the monsters they meet on the way. These are
a giant clam, an octopus, and a whale. Inside this last, Nganaoa finds
his lost parents Tairi-tokerau and Vaiaroa sitting plaiting sennit. He
builds a fire inside the whale \[foreign interpolation\] and leaves it
to die. <span id="fr_688"></span>[35](#fn_688)

 

*Mangaia*. Una the moon is invoked in a canoe-making song to use the
wonderful axe with which Lata felled forests:

"Slash away, Una,  
With the wonderful axe from another land,  
That which enabled Lata to fell the forest." <span
id="fr_689"></span>[36](#fn_689)

 

*Vaitupu* (*Ellice islands*). Rata is the child of Mafieloa and
Tavini-tokelau, born when she eats an eel to satisfy a pregnancy
craving. A tidal wave carries everyone away, but the child is saved. He
finds a house, clothing, and adz, and adapts each to his use. A Sinota
monster repeatedly erects the puka tree Rata has cut down for a canoe,
until he has defeated it in wrestling. The monster Ulu-poko-fatu begs to
come aboard, and accompanies and protects him from danger. <span
id="fr_690"></span>[37](#fn_690)

 

*Pukapuka*. Lata of Samoa goes to pick out a log for a canoe and selects
the favorite tree of a rival magician named Hinata. The two wrestle but
find they are of equal strength. Hinata's chant restores his tree as
before, but Lata has put another trunk into its body and has the log he
wants. He selects for a crew "Head of stone," "Flat head," "Hole
digger," etc., and voyages to see the world. As dangers approach, each
man uses his special power and gets rid of the danger. Finally Lata
dives into a giant clam, digs at the roots, the shell opens, and out he
swims and divides the flesh among the islands, but forgets Pukapuka,
which gets the unedible root. The voyagers come to the Witi people and
win in competition with them, due to the special powers of Lata's
companions. One of the tricks is that of a crab-digging competition,
which Lata's man wins by putting the Witi man to sleep with stories and
taking the crabs from the

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

other's full basket into his own, then making holes in the other's
basket and pretending that the crabs have escaped. <span
id="fr_691"></span>[38](#fn_691)

 

*Samoa*. Lata is a canoe builder who comes from Fiji, "visited Upolo and
built two large canoes at Fangaloa," but dies before the deckhouse is
completed. He builds a double canoe at Tafagafaga on the island of Tau
off Manu‘a and sails to Savai‘i, where a southwestern district is called
Lata after his name. Two hills on this island are called "the double
canoe of Lata." From Savai‘i he sails to Tonga and dies there and from
him the Tongans learn to make the one-sided deckhouse after the Manu‘a
pattern, called fale fa‘amanu‘a. "Steersmen in the canoe of Lata" (Seu i
le va‘a o Lata) is a title still heard in Samoa in Turner's day. <span
id="fr_692"></span>[39](#fn_692)

 

*Tonga*. Lasa (Laka) prepares to make a trip to Fiji. Haelefeke replaces
the tree he has felled for a canoe, until on the fourth day Lasa hides
and catches Haele, who then helps to build the canoe and advises his
taking on board anyone whom he sees beckoning to him. Three helpful
beings are taken on board in this way, a great eater, a thief, and
finally Haelefeke himself. With their Help the tests set by the demon of
Fiji are successfully met, namely, an eating test, a catching test when
fruit is shaken from a tree, a test as to which will first fill a basket
of crabs. The thief waits until the contestant of Fiji has filled his
basket, then puts him to sleep with a charm and empties it into his
own. <span id="fr_693"></span>[40](#fn_693)

 

*Santa Cruz*. Santa Cruz people say that Lata made men and animals. They
equate him with Qat.

 

The Laka story follows a fairly uniform type pattern, most consistently
developed in the Tuamotu versions. Maori versions are without the
trickster elements of the eastern islands.

\(A\) Discovery of his father's fate (A1) through taunts of

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

jealous companions, (A2) through discovery of superior strength which
has disastrous consequences upon his companions.

\(B\) Canoe building halted by spirits who replace the tree he has
felled.

\(C\) Dangers encountered on the voyage overcome through (C1) a
companion voyager, (C2) companions with special skills.

\(D\) Swallowing monster slain, (D1) parent rescued from the monster or
(D2) from a cave.

\(E\) Competitive tasks won: (E1) filling baskets, (E2) riddling, (E3)
escaping a fire trap.

\(F\) Monster in a distant land tricked and slain: (F1) by noosing, (F2)
after a false call, (F3) after setting fire to the house, (F4) by
freezing.

\(G\) Woman sought: (G1) stolen mother rescued, (G2) wife or daughter of
enemy taken, (G3) both woman and mother recovered, (G4) woman slain.

The motive of the tree that resists felling occurs regularly in the Laka
story. In the form of the reërected tree it appears in the Kana story in
Hawaii; <span id="fr_694"></span>[41](#fn_694) in New Zealand, in a
folktale of the Rata type in which two children who seek to build a
canoe to rescue their father from an ogress find the tree restored at
the command of Tane; <span id="fr_695"></span>[42](#fn_695) in the
Marquesas, in the story of Taheta and his son Vaka-uhi, who, neglected
by his father because of the death of his mother in childbirth, attempts
to build a canoe in which to leave the land, and finds it each morning
reset by the grandmothers, because they fear the death of their
grandchild on the expedition, but upon his making offerings they build
the canoe in a single night; <span id="fr_696"></span>[43](#fn_696) in
Samoa, in a fable of Toa in the form of a handsome tree replaced by his
friend Pale, who has concealed himself from woodcutters in the shape of
a bent stick, <span id="fr_697"></span>[44](#fn_697) and in the story of
two chiefs of Upolo who cut down a tree in Raka's forest, which Raka
restores with an incantation; <span id="fr_698"></span>[45](#fn_698) in
Dobu, of a

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

mango tree which, when felled, returns to its place each night; <span
id="fr_699"></span>[46](#fn_699) in Mota of the Banks islands, in a
trickster tale of Qat, who fells a tree for a canoe, which Marawa the
spider re-sets until Qat hides a chip; <span
id="fr_700"></span>[47](#fn_700) among the Dyak in the story of
Pulang-gana in which a clearing is restored as before until the proper
offerings are made and incantations repeated. <span
id="fr_701"></span>[48](#fn_701)

In other instances the tree resists felling except with a special
instrument. In Hawaii, the legend of the Kalaipahoa tree which can be
cut with a stone adz alone belongs to this type, <span
id="fr_702"></span>[49](#fn_702) and the story of Maui told on Kauai,
where a spear of lehua wood and a special ritual are required. <span
id="fr_703"></span>[50](#fn_703) In the Ono-kura legend of Mangaia a
demon living at the taproot of an ironwood tree destroys those who cut
it down and restores the tree to position. Ono-kura kills the demon with
his ironwood spade Rua-i-para, removes the roots, and forms weapons out
of the hard wood. <span id="fr_704"></span>[51](#fn_704) In the
Marquesas, the great tree Anianiteani cannot be felled by the avenger of
Apekura's son until a special axe is secured. <span
id="fr_705"></span>[52](#fn_705) In Tahiti, Tafa‘i can cut the sinews of
the great fish with a special axe alone. <span
id="fr_706"></span>[53](#fn_706) In a Maori story, Te-Peri's brother is
buried at the foot of a tree which resists felling until cut with the
axe Tia. <span id="fr_707"></span>[54](#fn_707)

Among Hawaiians, the felling of a hardwood tree for a canoe is an
occasion of great spiritual excitement as the feller feels himself drawn
into close relationship with spirits of the forest whose anger he fears
and whom he placates with propitiatory offerings and prayers. Special
rituals attend the cutting and shaping of a canoe and its bringing down
from the forest, or the cutting of the tree for the building of a new
heiau. In Tahiti, "When canoes were hewed out in the mountain, Tifai
(Mender) was invoked and there would come a wind, the men would lie
inside the canoe with the ropes hanging

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

outside, and the canoe would go down the mountainside of its own accord.
When they came to low ground, the men got out of the canoes, picked up
the ropes and sang, and the canoe was light to draw and was taken to the
builders' marae to be completed." <span id="fr_708"></span>[55](#fn_708)
Even today in Hawaii the canoe makers assure us that the difficult
course of the canoe to the sea is achieved with such ease as could not
be possible by human hands alone.

The Aikanaka-Laka legend emphasizes throughout this dependence of man
upon the cooperation of spirit forces which control the material world
whose resources he would utilize for his own needs. The cycle revolves
about two major themes in Polynesian story, the winning or losing of a
supernatural wife, and the voyage of adventure or revenge. These are
developed by means of a multitude of details in which the supernatural
forces of the mother's family are assembled in behalf of her child,
either through direct endowment, instruction in magic incantations, or
cooperation in the quest. The gods of a family, its aumakua, are thought
of as restricted within a limited locality. A wife from a foreign land
may control, through family descent, supernatural forces superior in
power to her husband's but unable to exercise control within his
territory. Competition against alien and inimical forces is necessarily
set up by contestants who venture outside the area protected by their
own gods. Death on an expedition to a foreign land or on a fishing trip
into unknown waters is no natural occurrence but due to the malignity of
evil powers. It must be avenged upon these powers in order to uphold the
family honor. Even the preservation of an ancestor's bones from ignoble
uses becomes a sacred obligation. Who is able to carry out such a
revenge but one whom the ancestral gods have endowed beyond his fellows;
specifically, one descended from divine parentage beyond the limits of
the household into which he is born? The superiority of divine aid over
brute force--the necessity therefore of propitiating the gods--is hence
emphasized throughout the cycle. The characteristic Polynesian turn to
this world-wide

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

theme is that of the necessity imposed upon the gods to acknowledge the
family claim and to succor and support their offspring. It is through
the idea of the kumu-pa‘a, the "fixed foundation," that such an
obligation becomes inherent. In the course of popular development and in
groups where the idea of family inheritance has been perhaps less firmly
established than in Hawaii, the religious background gives way to
interest in trickery and native wit over dullard achievement or to a
realistic scene of human revenge, and the devices for achieving a
supernatural wife multiply down the line; but on the whole the legend
throughout the whole area unfolds a family history of divine parentage
through marriage with a goddess, and the rise of an avenger equipped
against the mysterious forces of a supernatural world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_654"></span>[259:1](hm20.htm#fr_654) Westervelt,
*Volcanoes*, 7; Thrum, *Tales*, 36; For. Col. 5: 524.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[259:2](hm20.htm#fr_655) Malo, 323.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[259:3](hm20.htm#fr_656) *HAA* 1932, 109. See
also Kamakau, *Ke Au Okoa*, October 28, 1869; Malo, 323; Thrum, *Tales*,
111.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[260:4](hm20.htm#fr_657) White 1: 124.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[260:5](hm20.htm#fr_658) *Ibid*. 90, 130.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[260:6](hm20.htm#fr_659) *Ibid*. 67.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[260:7](hm20.htm#fr_660) *Ibid*. 68; Wohlers,
19-20.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[260:8](hm20.htm#fr_661) Grey, 67.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[260:9](hm20.htm#fr_662) White 1: 77, but the
name is doubtful.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[260:10](hm20.htm#fr_663) *Ibid*. 75.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[260:11](hm20.htm#fr_664) *Ibid*. 68-69, 90.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[260:12](hm20.htm#fr_665) *Ibid*. 78; *JPS* 7:
39.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[260:13](hm20.htm#fr_666) Best, *JPS* 31: 2-8.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[261:14](hm20.htm#fr_667) Henry, 468-476.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[261:15](hm20.htm#fr_668) *Ibid*., 495-496.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[261:16](hm20.htm#fr_669) Anaa, *Bul.* 148:
96-111.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[261:17](hm20.htm#fr_670) Stimson MS.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[262:18](hm20.htm#fr_671) Savage, *JPS* 19:
143, 145-146.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[262:19](hm20.htm#fr_672) Gill, 145-146.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[262:20](hm20.htm#fr_673) Von den Steinen, *ZE*
65: 38-41.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[262:21](hm20.htm#fr_674) Krämer 1: 456.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[263:22](hm20.htm#fr_675) Thrum, *Tales*,
111-114; MS. by Jonah Kaiwaaea, Kipahulu, 1930.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[264:23](hm20.htm#fr_676) Malo, 323; For. Pol.
Race 1: 191.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[264:24](hm20.htm#fr_677) *Ke Au Okoa*, October
28, 1869.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[264:25](hm20.htm#fr_678) Given by Mrs. Pukui.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[265:26](hm20.htm#fr_679) White 1: 71; Wohlers,
21.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[265:27](hm20.htm#fr_680) White 3: 3.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[265:28](hm20.htm#fr_681) *Ibid*. 1: 79;
Taylor.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[265:29](hm20.htm#fr_682) White 1: 68-80,
90-94; Grey, 67-72; Taylor, 255-257; Wohlers, 20-22.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[266:30](hm20.htm#fr_683) *JPS* 31:8-13.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[267:31](hm20.htm#fr_684) Henry, 468-495.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[268:32](hm20.htm#fr_685) Henry, 495-512;
Leverd, *JPS* 19: 176-194; Seurat (from Hao and Amanu islands), 20:
481-485; Stimson, *Bul.* 148: 117-147.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[269:33](hm20.htm#fr_686) Savage, *JPS* 19:
142-168.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[269:34](hm20.htm#fr_687) Von den Steinen, *ZE*
1933, 39, 41-44.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[270:35](hm20.htm#fr_688) Gill, 142-148.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[270:36](hm20.htm#fr_689) *Ibid*., 149.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[270:37](hm20.htm#fr_690) Kennedy, 210-216.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[271:38](hm20.htm#fr_691) Beaglehole MS.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[271:39](hm20.htm#fr_692) Turner, 264; Krämer
1: 455-457.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[271:40](hm20.htm#fr_693) Collocott, *Bul.* 46:
15-16.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[272:41](hm20.htm#fr_694) Rice, 96-98.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[272:42](hm20.htm#fr_695) *JPS* 6: 99-100.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[272:43](hm20.htm#fr_696) Von den Steinen, *ZE*
65: 343-344.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[272:44](hm20.htm#fr_697) Turner, 219-220.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[272:45](hm20.htm#fr_698) *JPS* 4: 100;
Stuebel, 148.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[273:46](hm20.htm#fr_699) Fortune, 264.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[273:47](hm20.htm#fr_700) Codrington, 158-159;
and see Dixon, 325 note 14.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[273:48](hm20.htm#fr_701) Gomes, 309-315.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[273:49](hm20.htm#fr_702) Westervelt, *Gods and
Ghosts*, 113.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[273:50](hm20.htm#fr_703) Dickey, *HHS Reports*
25: 16-17.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[273:51](hm20.htm#fr_704) Gill, 81-87; Henry,
533-534.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[273:52](hm20.htm#fr_705) Handy, *Bul.* 69:
67-70.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[273:53](hm20.htm#fr_706) Henry, 440-442.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[273:54](hm20.htm#fr_707) *JPS* I: 224.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[274:55](hm20.htm#fr_708) Henry, 379-380.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX. Haumea](hm21)
