[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm24)  [Next](hm26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

### XXIII

### MU AND MENEHUNE PEOPLE

LUA-NU'U (Second Nu‘u, or cycle of time), called also Kane-hoa-lani,
Lalo-kona, Pua-Nawao, Ku-ma-menehune, Ku-hooia, Ku-iiki, is placed as
the twelfth name from Nu‘u on the Kumuhonua genealogical line. Laka
(Kupulupulu) and Pili are his sons. Maui, Kanaloa and Kaneapua,
Waha-nui, and Makali‘i are the mythical names belonging to his period.
The names Pua-Nawao and Ku-ma-menehune refer to him as ancestor of the
Nawao and Menehune people. Ho-oia is an epithet applied to one who
confirms the truth (oiai‘o), i-ike to one who is keen-witted (ike). The
name of Lalo-kona and the wife's of Honua-po-ilalo are said to be
derived from his migration "to a remote country called Honua-ilalo to
the south." The name Kane-hoa-lani, Malo equates with Kane-wahi-lani and
calls him a god who rules the heavens. <span
id="fr_799"></span>[1](#fn_799) It is the name given to the phallic
stones called "stones of Kane" set up at the place of family worship,
where prayer and sacrifice are offered to an ancestral deity for help in
time of need. A legend is told of Lua-nu‘u to explain why the highest
peak rising cone-shaped from the ridge back of Kualoa on the north side
of Oahu has the name of Kane-hoa-lani and the two lower peaks those of
Ku-pulupulu and Pili-lua-nu‘u.

The god Kane orders Lua-nu‘u to perform a sacrifice, and as he finds no
suitable place for this offering in the mountains of Kahiki-ku where he
is then living, he is told to travel eastward until he finds "a
sharp-pointed hill projecting precipitately into the ocean." He sails in
his canoe with "his son Ku-pulupulu and his servant Pili" to the ridge
back of Kualoa on Oahu and here performs the sacrifice. <span
id="fr_800"></span>[2](#fn_800)

On the Kumuhonua genealogy Lua-nu‘u becomes the father

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

by a slave wife of the Nawao (The wild people), a Mu race living on
bananas in the forest (ka-lahui-mu-ai-maia-a-laau-haeleele), and
described by Fornander as "a people of large size, wild, \[who\] did not
associate with kanakas (men). . . . Hunting people (lahui alualu
holoholona). . . numerous in former times, but now . . .
disappeared." <span id="fr_801"></span>[3](#fn_801) The Nawao are
ancestors of the Mu (silent) and Wa (shouting) people listed as Namu and
Nawa among the aumakua, <span id="fr_802"></span>[4](#fn_802) and all
three are invoked as Ku-a-mu, Ku-a-wa, Ku-a-wao by those who go to the
upland forest for tree felling and by the multitude at the ohia-ku
procession when bringing down a tree for the god of a newly dedicated
heiau. Any man who comes into the path of such a procession may be
seized for sacrifice. <span id="fr_803"></span>[5](#fn_803) A sorcerer's
invocation to such an aumakua runs:

O Ku-a-mu, go thou to \[name of victim\],  
Enter him, head and tail,  
Let him become your bread and meat,  
Return not again until he is devoured of worms. <span
id="fr_804"></span>[6](#fn_804)

By his chiefess wife Mee-haku-lani (Mee heavenly lord) or Mee-hiwa
(-black), Lua-nu‘u becomes the father of the Menehune people, "a
numerous and powerful race from whom the present race of Hawaiians is
descended." The older branch of the Menehune are descended from
Aholoholo, a wanderer, the younger branch from a son called
Ka-imi-puku-ku or Kinilau-a-Mano (Many descendants of Mano). There are
twelve "sons" in all of whom Luanu‘u becomes ancestor (equated by
Fornander with the twelve sons of Toho \[Toko\] in Marquesan
legends <span id="fr_805"></span>[7](#fn_805) from two of whom, Atea and
Tane, the Marquesans count descent). From one of these twelve descends
Hawaii-loa the navigator.

It is evident that we have here to do, in the legend of Luanu‘u and his
forest-dwelling, banana-eating progeny, with that period of early
settlement noted in the chant of Kumulipo as directly following the dawn
of day (ao) and the appearance

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

of Kane, Ki‘i, and Kanaloa, when the ancestors dwelt in the uplands on
the edge of the damp forests favorable to the planting of bananas, which
were their principal food--the period expressed in the names "Vast
expanse of forest" (Moanaliha-i-ka-waokele) and "Dwelling in cold
uplands of the first chiefs of the dim past"
(Ku-polo-liili-ali‘i-mua-o-lo‘i-po). During this period and under
Lua-nu‘u, according to Fornander, the use of incision was
introduced, <span id="fr_806"></span>[8](#fn_806) and from such a
reference to the rite as occurs in the Palila legend it is at least
possible to infer that incision began during this time to distinguish
the Kane people from the "wild" and was regarded as a necessary step to
becoming a marriageable member of the ancestral stock. Ku-pulupulu, the
son of Lua-nu‘u, is Kolo-i-ke-ao or Laka on the Kumuhonua genealogy and
the name itself refers to the wild fern growth of those damp forests of
which Laka is patron. The word pili is a term applied to an indirect
relation, a sort of hanger-on. The Kumuhonua genealogy descends from
Pili to Papa, the Kumuuli from Laka to Wakea, husband of Papa.

On the side of mythology, Stokes thinks that Wakea's infidelity to Papa
in the affair of Ho‘ohoku is a misplaced episode belonging to Tiki in
the south islands and should be related of Ki‘i, who appears twelve
generations down the line on the Wakea genealogy as father of Ulu and
Nana-ulu from whom descend the high chiefs of the Hawaiian group. It is
in fact likely that the whole Kumuhonua line down to Wakea is a mere
threefold duplication of the Wakea line down to Ki‘i. Kolo-i-ka-po and
Kolo-i-ke-ao, born to Kumuhonua's wife after the two were driven out of
their home by Kane's bird, duplicate Haloa the taro plant and Haloa the
son, born from the unfortunate affair of Wakea with Ho‘ohoku, from
which, however, sprung the line of ruling chiefs. If Kumu-honua as the
fallen chief who brought death into the world is the equivalent of
Wakea, then the "death" for which he was responsible is not natural
death, which to a Hawaiian could occur only in extreme old age when a
man "withered up and flattened out like a lauhala mat," as they express
it, but to

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

premature death as a punishment for transgression against a law of the
aumakua. Wakea's sin was not one of incest, but of breaking the tapu
upon intercourse with women during the tapu of the god. This it was that
caused Kane's anger and drove the race down to death. This may be the
explanation of the "excellent laws" made by Kumuhonua, alluded to by
Kamakau, which were the cause of his being driven out of the land. They
were laws of Kane and as such any infringement was punishable by death.

Stories of the Mu and Menehune forest livers, who are placed by
genealogists among the early generations of Kumuhonua's offspring, also
include a legend of migration, but generally not pictured as compulsory,
away from their home on this group to some mysterious other world of the
gods. Besides this tradition of migration there have gathered a number
of traditions about these Mu and Menehune people, most of them from
Kauai and Oahu, all of which represent the two (or three) groups as
former inhabitants of the islands, sometimes as aborigines but more
often as introduced from abroad and living in upland forests. The
Menehune are called "human" as distinguished from the "wild" Nawao
people, most of whom they are said to have exterminated. To the
Menehune, or sometimes to the Mu, is ascribed the building of old
heiaus, fishponds, and other stonework found about the island. The
legend of the Kauai chief Ola is connected with these people, and that
of the Oahu chief Ka-hanai-o-ke-akua, the ward of Kane and Kanaloa at
Waolani.

It is hazardous to attempt to untangle from these legends the actual
interweaving of fancy and fact which has gone to their shaping. The
"wao" is that part of the mountainside inhabited by spirits alone and it
is tempting to regard the Mu and Wa of the Nawao family as nature
spirits represented in the silent and noisy living creatures who dwell
there, like the rat and the gecko (mo‘o) who play so important a part in
Hawaiian aumakua legends. But these aumakua creatures had their human
offspring as well from whom Hawaiian families count descent, and it is
possible that certain short, stocky family types of very primitive
culture were referred to such ancestry. Hawaiian families count the
Menehune as

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

their ancestral spirits and helpers, and these little people play the
part of benevolent godparents to their descendants. On the other hand,
Hawaiians speak of eepa spirits who are tricky rather than helpful to
mankind. A family story told in Kau district on Hawaii illustrates the
benevolent activities of the Menehune spirits and many examples occur in
old legends like those of Laka, Hainakolo, and Kawelo.

### STORY OF KEAHIALOA

Ke-ahi-aloa (Eternal fire) is adopted by an older sister of her mother
and taken to Kauai, where she is neglected, until finally she is taken
in by an aged couple who find her nibbling raw potatoes in their garden
patch and pity her starving condition. When she arrives at marriageable
age her parents in Kau are made aware of her aunt's neglect and the
father goes to seek his child, encouraged by a propitious dream in the
form of his guardian shark who assures him of protection. Meanwhile the
land agent of the district has chanced to see the beautiful girl and
fallen in love with her. The night before the marriage mysterious sounds
are heard. The Menehune people, her family gods, are preparing a
sumptuous marriage feast. Her father arrives in time to give his
blessing, and she decrees that never again shall an older sister be
allowed to adopt a niece, but only a younger sister, and this rule is
observed in the family to this day. <span
id="fr_807"></span>[9](#fn_807)

### LEGEND OF THE MU PEOPLE

(*a*) *Rice* (*Kauai*) *version*. After the deluge there were left three
peoples who made their home on Kauai, the Mu (Rena-mu), the Wa
(Ke-na-wa), and the Menehune. Kualu-nui-kini-akua (Kualu of the little
gods) and his son Kualu-nui-pauku-mokumoku (Kualu of the broken rope)
are chiefs of the Mu people in Kahiki. They travel from Ka-paia-ha‘a
(New Zealand) to Ka-ma-wae-lua-lani (Kauai) and there Ola is born. The
Menehune are then summoned back from Ka-paia-ha‘a to serve Ola. They
live for some time at Lumahai, then at Wainiha, then at Lanihuli, then
they migrate in order to preserve the

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

purity of the race, because the people are found to be inter-marrying
with the "Hawaiians." <span id="fr_808"></span>[10](#fn_808)

 

(*b*) *Kanehunamoku* (*Oahu*) *version*. The Mu are banana-eating people
of Kuaihelani, one of the divisions of the floating land of
Kane-huna-moku. They are sent for to Kauai to help Ola with his
building. A few of them divide from the Menehune at Pele-i-holani on
Kauai and travel over the ridges to a rocky gulch called Laau in the
mountains of Wainiha where they live with their wives and find water in
abundance and till the soil of the uplands. They are dwarf people,
banana planters and hairy, with round stomachs as distinguished from the
Menehune, who are smooth people with distended stomachs. After the work
is completed for their chief Ola, all return to the floating land of
Kueihelani and never return, but two Mu are left asleep under banana
leaves. <span id="fr_809"></span>[11](#fn_809)

 

(*c*) *Green version*. When Paao comes to Hawaii he first visits Kahiki
and brings thence the Manahune-nuku-mu-ai-maia (Bug-mouthed Menehune
banana eaters), so called because of their small mouths, and they land
in Puna. <span id="fr_810"></span>[12](#fn_810)

 

(*d*) *Lydgate version*. The Mu-ai-maia (Banana-eating people) are
aborigines of Kauai, already there when "the first people" come to the
island. They are a short stocky race with bushy hair, beards, and
eyebrows, active runners, and with a guttural way of talking different
from the Hawaiian. They know nothing of cooking food and live on wild
plants. They live at Laau at the headwaters of the Wainiha where the
wild bananas still grow which were their food. Campers must be on their
guard lest these little people steal up and make off with food that is
cooking by piercing it with sharp sticks. Hawaiians still fear to camp
on the small plateau above the valley where the Mu made their home,
believing it to be still haunted by their spirits. <span
id="fr_811"></span>[13](#fn_811)

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

### LEGEND OF THE MENEHUNE PEOPLE

(*a*) *Rice* (*Kauai*) *version*. Menehune are a pygmy people "about two
feet in height." Their food is a pudding of the starch plant (haupia),
squash (pala-ai) made from a wild plant in the forest, sweet-potato
pudding (koele-palau), and cooked taro leaves (luau). They live in
caves. Their trails along the Kauai cliffs can still be seen and the
hollows where they planted.

The sports in which they indulge are top spinning (olo-hu), quoits
(maika), shooting arrows (ke‘a-pua), hide-the-thimble (puhenehene), foot
races, sled races, hand wrestling (uma or kulakulai), and diving off a
cliff. Kahunas, soothsayers, astrologers belong to the company of the
chief. "Story-tellers, fun-makers, minstrels, and musicians" furnish him
amusement. The nose-flute and the ti-leaf trumpet, the ukeke stringed
instrument, and the shark-skin drum are their accompaniments.

The Menehune migrate under their chief Maoli-ku-laiakea with Hema to New
Zealand, hence the name Maori for the New Zealanders, and Raiatea for a
place there. They are accompanied by the chief Aliikiola and his wife
Lepoa. They return to Kauai to serve Ola as expert builders and
craftsmen when he becomes ruling chief in Waimea, and increase in such
numbers that the grown men can form two rows from Makaweli to Wailua.
Papa-enaena is the guard who lays out the work required by the chiefs. A
"bow-legged, deep-voiced" Menehune named Weli is sheriff for the chief
and planted the breadfruit trees on the plain of Lumahai. A Menehune
named Maliu once lingered in a Hawaiian house and was missed from work,
but escaped punishment because he was able to report the discovery of a
new spring of fresh water.

After living some time in the Lanihuli valley the Menehune are commanded
to migrate because they are being troubled by thieving and the men are
taking wives among the Hawaiians and destroying the purity of the race.
Not a single expert craftsman is allowed to remain behind. Along the
route they traveled, offerings of leaves are still made to certain rocks
which mark the petrified body of one or another of their number who was
so changed because of disobedience or folly, and who is still supposed
to have control over the weather. <span id="fr_812"></span>[14](#fn_812)

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

(*b*) *Fornander* (*Oahu*) *version*. Mewa-lani (Lewa-lani, Heavenly
space) has two sons, Lonohoonewa, father of Paumakua, and Kahano-a-Newa,
Paumakua's uncle. Kahano introduces the Menehune people from Kahiki and
establishes them on Oahu as laborers at Kailua in Koolau, and at Pauoa
and Puowaina in Kona as servants for his mistress Kahihi-ku-o-ka-lani
(identified by Fornander with Kahihi-o-ka-lani, wife of Nanakaoka and
mother of Kapawa \[or Hele-ipawa\]). He "stretched out his hands to the
farthest bounds of Kahiki and on them came the Menehune people to Oahu,"
and "when the sun vanished and the earth became dark Kahano brought the
sun back again. . . ." Ku-leo-nui (Ku loud voice) is their leader "whose
voice was heard all over the island" summoning them to work. <span
id="fr_813"></span>[15](#fn_813)

 

(*c*) *Migration* (*Oahu*) *legend*. (1). Waha-nui, ruling chief of
Honua-ilalo, oppresses the Menehune, and their god Kane sends Kanaloa
and Kaneapua to lead them away from Kapakapaua-a-Kane, the place where
Kumuhonua's sons Laka and Pili have taken refuge, to the
Aina-momona-a-Kane (Fat land of Kane), or Ka-one-lauena-a-Kane, or
Ka-aina-i-ka-houpo-a-Kane, the original continent which once connected
all the island groups before it was overwhelmed and broken up by
inundation. The four Ku days are to be kept as a memorial of this
deliverance. <span id="fr_814"></span>[16](#fn_814)

(2). The Menehune have a heiau at Kukaoo. The "owl god" at Pu‘u-pueo
(Owl hill) summons the owls of Kauai and drives the Menehune out of the
valley (or Kuali‘i the great chief of Oahu is their persecutor). <span
id="fr_815"></span>[17](#fn_815)

### OLA LEGEND

\(a\) Rice version. Ola is the son of Kualu-nui-pauku-mokumoku (a chief
of the Mu people) and the chiefess Kuhapu-ola from Pe‘ape‘a on the
Waimea side above Hanapepe, whom the chief meets clandestinely. His name
Ola is given when he is recognized by his father and thus "saved from
death" (ola) for

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

breaking the chief's tapu. He succeeds his father in the rule over the
Waimea district. Desiring to bring water to the taro patches of the
Waimea flats, he is advised by his kahuna Pi to proclaim a tapu and
summon the Menehune people to his aid. Each brings a stone and the
watercourse (Kiki-a-Ola) is laid in a single night. These people also
build the heiau of Hauola named "after the famous city of refuge of his
father at Kekaha." They camp on the flats above called Kanaloa-huluhulu,
plant taro (which is still growing on the cliffs of Kalalau), and build
a big oven (Kapuahi-a-Ola) between Kalalau and Waimea. They also make a
road of sticks (Kiki papa a Ola) through the swamps of Alakai to the
height above Wainiha. <span id="fr_816"></span>[18](#fn_816)

 

(*b*) *Knudsen version*. The chief priest of Ola's father's time is a
powerful and designing man who causes any nominee from the chief's party
to be assassinated. Ola is therefore brought up in retirement as if
under the displeasure of his father and only at the age of twenty-four
when he is able to defend himself by warlike skill is he publicly
elected for the succession. The chief priest recognizes the youth as he
appears before the people and hurls at him the sacred javelin, but Ola
wards it off and the priest takes his own life. It is because of this
event that the heiau at Waiawa on Kauai is called Hau-ola (Stricken with
a spear). <span id="fr_817"></span>[19](#fn_817)

 

(*c*) *Thrum version*. Pi is the chief of Waimea who gets the Menehune
to construct for him a dam across the Waimea river and a watercourse
leading from it to a place above Kiki-a-ola. The Menehune are brought
from the mountains of Pu‘u-ka-pele and the sound ("hum") of their voices
gives rise to the saying, "Wawa ka Menehune i Pu‘u-ka-pele ma Kauai,
puoho ka manu o ka loko o Kawainui ma Koolauloa, Oahu" (The noise of the
Menehune at Pu‘ukapele on Kauai startles the birds on the fish-pond of
Kawainui at Koolauloa, Oahu). <span id="fr_818"></span>[20](#fn_818) It
is Ola who builds the three-stepped heiau called Ahu-loulu at the foot
of Pu‘u-ka-pele crater cone on Kauai. <span
id="fr_819"></span>[21](#fn_819)

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

(*d*) *Kanehunamoku version*. Kiki-a-ola is the chief of Waimea.
Hulukuamauna the priest hears from Kane that only through Kanehunamoku
and his people can the dam and water-course of Waimea be constructed.
The chief seems to be the sacrifice to be offered at its completion. The
services of the little people are requested. Kanehunamoku receives from
Kane a branch of red fruit as a token of the god's consent and grants
the request. The Waimea chief also asks for the sacred chiefess
Namaka-o-ka-hai for his wife, but this request is refused. After the
completion of the work, Namaka and Kanehunamoku depart with the Menehune
and the Mu from Laau to the floating land of Kueihelani and never
return. <span id="fr_820"></span>[22](#fn_820)

 

A curious resemblance between some of the incidents in these Kauai
stories and episodes in the legend of Umi on Hawaii may be merely
fortuitous or may point to interchange of legends between the two
islands. The story of the birth of Umi, although more fully elaborated,
resembles that of Ola.

### UMI STORY

On a journey into the country, Liloa finds a beautiful woman at her
bathing pool and makes her his wife. He gives her his loincloth,
whale-tooth necklace, and war club as tokens for the child. Umi becomes
a nuisance to his supposed father because he gives away food lavishly,
and his mother sends him to Liloa wearing the tokens. The chief makes
him a favorite and eventually Umi usurps the place of the legitimate
heir. <span id="fr_821"></span>[23](#fn_821)

### OLA STORY

Ola's father has an affair with a chiefess from Pe‘ape‘a on the Waimea
side above Hanapepe and leaves his malo and whale-tooth necklace for the
child who is to be born. The child grows up mischievous and the mother
sends him to the father living in Waimea. She follows with the tokens,
tossing and catching nuts as she walks, according to the kahuna's
instructions, and since none falls she is successful in freeing her
child, whom she finds

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

bound and about to be sacrificed for breaking the chief's tapu, and
later she secures his succession to the ruling power. <span
id="fr_822"></span>[24](#fn_822)

\[paragraph continues\] An incident in Rice's story of the "Bird-man of
Wainiha" who handles invaders at a narrow pass resembles the account of
how Nau held back Umi when he came to invade Hilo.

### UMI STORY

Seeing the water muddied as it flows into the sea, Nau goes up into the
hills to investigate. There he hides at the defile and thrusts each man
with his spear until Pi‘imaiwa‘a leaps down from above and kills
him. <span id="fr_823"></span>[25](#fn_823)

### WAINIHA STORY

Lahi and his uncle Kane-alohi live in the Wainiha valley and go up to
Kilohana to catch uwa‘u birds for food, a kind of bird that seeks its
nest in the cliffs by day, blinded by the light. Their first enemy is a
"giant" whom they lure into a hole and kill. Their next is the chief
with "four hundred" soldiers who objects to the depredations among the
birds. They sit on a rock eating birds and watch the rippling of the
water below for men approaching \[hence a popular proverb\]. The boy
hides at the pass and throws all four hundred men over the cliff. The
chief comes last and, recognizing Lahi as his own son, invites him to
the village. He prepares a trap, but this the boy discovers and, burning
down the house with his treacherous father and followers within, takes
over the rule of the land. <span id="fr_824"></span>[26](#fn_824)

### LEGEND OF THE TRAPPED WIFE

(*a)* *Lydgate version*. A band of banana eaters settle above the
Wainiha Valley. A bird catcher from the village below becomes friendly
with them and marries a pretty banana eater. Their beautiful daughter is
sought as wife by the chief from her father's village, but is too wild
to consent to leave her old home. The chief organizes a boar hunt. At
Ipu-wai-nui he bids his followers

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

approach silently as he hears the sound of tapa beating. Her father, who
desires the match, conceals the chief in the house, rolled up in a mat.
When the girl enters she is caught by both father and lover, bound, and
conveyed to the sea in a litter (manele). She becomes the chief's wife
and mother of a beautiful daughter. <span
id="fr_825"></span>[27](#fn_825)

 

(*b*) *Rice version*. In a cave below a waterfall at Holua-manu in the
mountains above Makaweli lives a mo‘o. A child of the family is fretful
and is told to "Go to the mo‘o and live with her." She obeys, the mo‘o
treats her kindly and the girl is happy. The family however wish to
recover her and succeed in trapping her in a net. She is carried to
Waimea where she becomes gradually reconciled, grows into a beautiful
woman, and marries the ruling chief. <span
id="fr_826"></span>[28](#fn_826)

### OAHU CANOE LEGENDS

(*a*) Kahanai-o-ke-akua (Adopted by the gods) is brought from a foreign
land and reared by the gods Kane and Kanaloa who live at Waolani heiau,
Kahanai lives at the heiau of Kaheiki built by the Menehune and presided
over by the kahuna who founded the priesthood called Mo‘o-kahuna.

Kahanai wants canoes to visit his former home. Both Mu and Menehune set
to work to furnish them. The Menehune get the work done first, hence the
Na-mu-na-wa leave their canoes in the ditch, where they long remain. On
his return, both classes of little people welcome him with shouts, the
eepa in the uplands, the Menehune at the shore to lift the travelers
from the canoe and later to prepare them houses. When the fish tree
Makalei is brought to Oahu the little people shout so loud that the tree
falls where it stands and cannot be brought up to Waolani. Hence the
Menehune and eepa people (Na-mu-na-wa) are banished from Waolani. <span
id="fr_827"></span>[29](#fn_827)

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

(*b*) Kakae's wife wants a canoe to go in search of her brother and
Kakae sends Ke-kupua to find a suitable koa tree for the purpose. Since
Kakae is a descendant of the Menehune, the little people set to work to
make the canoe, but day breaks before they can get it dragged down to
the shore and it is left in the ditch at Kaalaa near Wai-ka-halulu where
it goes by the name of Ka-wa‘a-kekupua (The canoe of the kupua). <span
id="fr_828"></span>[30](#fn_828)

The Kahanai story may be compared with a similar situation in a Samoan
boat-building legend:

Mata-iteite comes seeking a husband and finally finds one to her liking.
She begs to have a boat built and asks Tagaloa to send her boat
builders. They work in the woods and are to be fed daily without being
seen. One day the women, when they bring them food, slip in upon them
secretly and they fly back to heaven. They are naked and have no axes
but work with their teeth. <span id="fr_829"></span>[31](#fn_829)

Heiau said to be "built by the Menehune" are to be found among the
oldest temple structures on each island. On Molokai they built a heiau
on the cliff at Waikolu valley near Kalaupapa which no one has been able
to reach either from above or below, and the Luakini heiau of Pakui
between Ualapue and Manawai, said to be dedicated to Hina. On Maui the
Pihana heiau at Wailuku was built by the Menehune "in a single night"
from stones brought from Paukukalo beach. Hale-o-kane and Pu‘u-kini are
other Maui heiaus built by the Menehune. <span
id="fr_830"></span>[32](#fn_830) It is said that in constructing a heiau
it was the custom for a chief over a large district to line up all the
men under him and pass the stones from hand to hand until all was in
place, much like our own barn raisings in pioneer life. The time element
is important in these Menehune structures, especially as the workers
themselves become purely mythical beings and night is the time of their
activity. Raffles reports a similar tradition from Java where, he says,

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "The temples themselves were conceived to have
been the work of a divinity, and to have been constructed in one
night." <span id="fr_831"></span>[33](#fn_831) In Tonga a space between
what was once two islands is filled in and trees are planted "in a
single night." <span id="fr_832"></span>[34](#fn_832)

A Menehune class is known in other groups, especially in Tahiti, where
the first migration from "Havai‘i" (Ra‘iatea) which settled Tahiti was
composed of commoners alone and hence the island was known as
Tahiti-manahune. Those manahune who remained agriculturists later formed
the lowest social class of plebeians and were used for sacrifice. The
warriors became chiefs and their families intermarried with the royal
family of Opoa in Ra‘iatea. Archaeological remains preserve the records
of these changes in population. Two types of marae exist: the inland
belonging to an earlier culture and represented on Necker island and
occasionally on Hawaii by the platform structure; the later, the walled
marae, common on coastal Tahiti and introduced there from Ra‘iatea "by
the lath or 13th century" and from Tahiti into Hawaii between 1100 and
1400 when the great migrations took place which introduced the culture
that prevailed in the Hawaiian group at the time of its discovery by
Cook. <span id="fr_833"></span>[35](#fn_833) In the western Tuamotus the
"Manahune" are known as ancient people of Tahiti, and former adversaries
of the Tuamotuans, say the eastern Tuamotuans. They are sometimes spoken
of as giants, as at Tatakoto and Vahitahi, but in Tatakoto as friendly
giants. <span id="fr_834"></span>[36](#fn_834) In Rarotonga, among the
clans of Tangiia's people over whom he makes Iro chief are the Mana-une,
said to be found also in Mangaia and "known traditionally to the
Maoris." <span id="fr_835"></span>[37](#fn_835)

Stories of spirit races who have relations with human beings are
reported from Polynesian groups. In New Zealand the Patu-paierehe (or
-paiarehe) are a wild race of spirits who inhabit the mountains. When
Maui fished up the south island of New Zealand he left Kui in charge.
The Tutumai-ao people from the other side of the ocean annihilated his

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

people. The Turehu, a fairy-like people, came over the ocean and
annihilated the Tutu-mai-ao people. The descendants of Maui now came to
the island and lived among the Turehu and after ten generations
exterminated them and today they are the Patu-pai-a-rehe (wild men)
dwelling in the mountains. <span id="fr_836"></span>[38](#fn_836) They
have reddish skin, hair with a golden tinge called uru-kehu (Hawaiian
ehu), eyes black or blue. Pipi, wife of Ira the son of Uenuku, is famed
as an urukehu. <span id="fr_837"></span>[39](#fn_837) Albinos are
considered the offspring of Maori women with fairy lovers. The
Patu-paiarehe may be seen in the early morning. They are full-sized,
dress in white, are not tattooed, and nurse children in their
arms. <span id="fr_838"></span>[40](#fn_838) They are a very numerous
people, merry, cheerful, singing like crickets. They work at night and
cease working when the sun rises. Their skin is light like that of a
European. They do not bend down the reeds when they walk. Their canoe is
a stem of flax. From them Kahukura learns to make netting for fish
nets. <span id="fr_839"></span>[41](#fn_839) They are a peaceful folk
and have guardianship of the sacred places (wahi tapu). They use wooden
and bone flutes called putorino and koauau. Their path is in the
drifting clouds and the low-lying banks of cloud. <span
id="fr_840"></span>[42](#fn_840) Of the double rainbow, male and female,
the upper, which is male, is called Turehu. <span
id="fr_841"></span>[43](#fn_841)

Moorea in the Tahitian group is the island of "fairy folk" with golden
hair. <span id="fr_842"></span>[44](#fn_842) The little lizard called
mo‘opuapua, which lives on flowers, is the shadow form of these spirits
among the flowers. <span id="fr_843"></span>[45](#fn_843)

In Mangaia, "fairies" of the underworld associated with Miru come
through special apertures from Avaiki to take part in a dance performed
in honor of Miru's son Tautiti. They bathe at sunset in the stream
Aupara in the northern part of the island or in the stream Vaipau or
Vaikaute in the southern, and dress their hair on the height above. When
they dance upon the fresh-cut banana leaves prepared for them at one end
of the dance floor the leaves are not disturbed.

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

\[paragraph continues\] When the morning star arises they return to
Avaiki. They are associated with the worship of Tane. The Tapairu or
"peerless ones" are the four daughters of Miru, sisters of Tautiti. Four
male fairies also appear. In the sky are other fairies of whom Ina is
the most famous. Ngaru learned from the fairies of the underworld the
art of ball playing which he taught in Mangaia. <span
id="fr_844"></span>[46](#fn_844)

In Fiji, spirit people, invisible save to worshipers, pygmies with
"fuzzy mops of hair" like themselves of former days in miniature, live
in the woods and caves on wild bananas and kava. Akin to them are the
Luve-ni-wai, who are "water spirits." Young people of Fiji formed a sect
who were supposed to become votaries of these spirits and learn song and
dance from them. At their dance places a votary would sweep the place
with fans and hang garlands in hope of a vision. Miscarriages of women
of rank were supposed to become such spirits. They were friendly folk
skilled in conjuring. Maui was regarded as one of these little
people. <span id="fr_845"></span>[47](#fn_845)

Two classes of spirits are described on San Cristoval, distinct but
sometimes confused with each other. The Kakamora are said to be from six
inches to three or four feet in height, from fair to dark, go naked with
long straight hair to their knees, are strong as three or four men, and
fond of dancing and singing. They do not use cooked food. They have a
ruler, male or female. They are described as harmless but tricky, or as
malicious and dangerous, and are differently named all along the coast.
The Masi are strong and stupid, easily tricked, but otherwise like
people. Their descendants are skilled craftsmen and canoe makers and
carvers in stone. Their work may be left unfinished because the
craftsmen are called away by some trivial matter. The stories strongly
resemble Hawaiian Menehune traditions. <span
id="fr_846"></span>[48](#fn_846)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_799"></span>[321:1](hm25.htm#fr_799) 114.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[321:2](hm25.htm#fr_800) For. Pol. Race 1:
97-99.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[322:3](hm25.htm#fr_801) Col. 6: 271.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[322:4](hm25.htm#fr_802) *Ibid*. 54.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[322:5](hm25.htm#fr_803) Malo, 219, 238 note
20; *HAA* 1910, 61; For. Col. 6: 12-15.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[322:6](hm25.htm#fr_804) Emerson, *HHS Papers*
2: 21.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[322:7](hm25.htm#fr_805) Pol. Race 1:53-56.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[323:8](hm25.htm#fr_806) Col. 6: 270.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[325:9](hm25.htm#fr_807) Green, 71-79.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[326:10](hm25.htm#fr_808) 34, 39-41.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[326:11](hm25.htm#fr_809) *HAA* 1916, 144-147.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[326:12](hm25.htm#fr_810) 121.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[326:13](hm25.htm#fr_811) *HHS Reports* 29:
25-27; *HAA* 1913, 125-127.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[327:14](hm25.htm#fr_812) 34-44.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[328:15](hm25.htm#fr_813) Pol. Race 2: 23.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[328:16](hm25.htm#fr_814) *Ibid*. 1: 99 note
from Kamakau; Bastian, *Heilige Sage*, 126-127.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[328:17](hm25.htm#fr_815) Westervelt, Honolulu,
131-132.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[329:18](hm25.htm#fr_816) 44-46.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[329:19](hm25.htm#fr_817) Thrum, *More Tales*,
94-97.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[329:20](hm25.htm#fr_818) *Tales*, 110-111.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[329:21](hm25.htm#fr_819) *HAA* 1907, 40,
63-64.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[330:22](hm25.htm#fr_820) *HAA* 1916, 144-147.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[330:23](hm25.htm#fr_821) For. Col. 4: 178-185.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[331:24](hm25.htm#fr_822) Rice, 44-45.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[331:25](hm25.htm#fr_823) For. Col. 4: 224-225.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[331:26](hm25.htm#fr_824) Rice, 47-48.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[332:27](hm25.htm#fr_825) *HHS Reports* 29
(1920): 25-27; *HAA* 1913, 125-137.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[332:28](hm25.htm#fr_826) 91.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[332:29](hm25.htm#fr_827) Westervelt, Honolulu,
5-6; *Gods and Ghosts*, 90-91, 141-142, 144-145, 150; Thrum, *HAA* 1907,
56; Stokes, *HHS Reports* 33: 43-44.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[333:30](hm25.htm#fr_828) Thrum, *Tales*,
114-116.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[333:31](hm25.htm#fr_829) Stuebel, 63-64.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[333:32](hm25.htm#fr_830) Thrum, *HAA* 1909,
40, 46; 1892, 122; 1907, 56; 1929, 86; *Tales*, 116-117; Dickey, *HHS
Reports* 25: 25; Westervelt, *Honolulu*, 131.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[334:33](hm25.htm#fr_831) 2: 7.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[334:34](hm25.htm#fr_832) Gifford, *Bul.* 8:
70; McKern, *Bul.* 60: 76.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[334:35](hm25.htm#fr_833) Henry, 196, 229, 439;
Emory, *Bul.* 53: 121.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[334:36](hm25.htm#fr_834) Stimson MS. *Chant of
Rua*.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[334:37](hm25.htm#fr_835) Smith, *JPS* 28: 194.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[335:38](hm25.htm#fr_836) White 3: 188-189.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[335:39](hm25.htm#fr_837) *JPS* 27: 18.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[335:40](hm25.htm#fr_838) Taylor, 153-154.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[335:41](hm25.htm#fr_839) Grey, 178-183.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[335:42](hm25.htm#fr_840) *JPS* 30: 96-102,
142-151.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[335:43](hm25.htm#fr_841) *Ibid*. 28: 28, and
compare Smith, *MPS* 3: 175-176, 182-193.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[335:44](hm25.htm#fr_842) Christian, 45.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[335:45](hm25.htm#fr_843) Henry, 383.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[336:46](hm25.htm#fr_844) Gill, 256-264.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[336:47](hm25.htm#fr_845) Brewster, 88,
222-224.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[336:48](hm25.htm#fr_846) Fox, 138-154, 293,
345-346.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIV. Runners, Man-Eaters, Dog-Men](hm26)
