[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm25)  [Next](hm27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

### XXIV

### RUNNERS, MAN-EATERS, DOG-MEN

A-LANI-MENEHUNE, younger son of Lua-nu‘u, K had two sons, the older of
whom, called Aholoholo (Runner), is said to have been "renowned for his
swiftness." Legends tell of famous runners (kukini) employed by chiefs
to act as messengers and especially to bring fresh fish from distant
fishponds. Trained thieves too were employed to steal from an enemy, and
for them swiftness of foot was an essential qualification. Chiefs looked
doubtfully upon the first horses introduced upon the islands; their
runners were swift of foot and could easily run down goats on the
mountain. There is a well-attested incident told of a native Hawaiian in
early days who staked his own speed on the race course against the
competing horse and won the race. The names of famous runners and their
deeds have passed into legend and sometimes into myth.

Ulua-nui, a famous runner of Oahu, could carry a fish from Kaele-pulu
pond in Kailua around by way of Waialua and bring it in at Waikiki alive
and wriggling. <span id="fr_847"></span>[1](#fn_847) Makoa (or Makoko),
the swift runner of Kau, when Kamehameha had his awa preparing (at
Kailua), was sent to Hilo to fetch mullet from the pond of Waiakea
adjoining Puna, a journey which today would take a man four days, and
returned with the fish still quivering. <span
id="fr_848"></span>[2](#fn_848) A similar story is told of Kane-a-ka-ehu
in the same period, who used to run back and forth between Kailua and
Hilo by a steep and precipitous trail, starting when the preparations
began for the feast and returning by the time the meal was cooked and
ready. Other famous runners mentioned in the stories are Ka-leo-nui,
sent by Kakuihewa to intercept Lono-i-ka-makahiki's kahuna on his way
from Hawaii to help his master, who circled the island twice without
finding the kahuna; <span id="fr_849"></span>[3](#fn_849)
Ka-ehu-iki-a-wakea, the

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

best runner of Aikanaka on Kauai; <span id="fr_850"></span>[4](#fn_850)
Kalamea, the swift runner of Maui in Lono-a-pi‘i's service who could go
around Maui in a day; <span id="fr_851"></span>[5](#fn_851) Pakui,
special attendant of Haumea at Kailua, who could circle Oahu six times
in a day (see Pupuhuluana); Ku-hele-moana and Keakea-lani, the swift
runners of Kakuhihewa, who could compass Oahu twelve times in a
day; <span id="fr_852"></span>[6](#fn_852) Kama (or Kane) -a-ka-mikioi
and Kama (or Kane) -aka-ulu-ohia, sons of Halulu of Ni‘ihau, so fleet of
foot that they could make ten circuits of Kauai in a day, and run on
land or ocean, from earth to sky. <span id="fr_853"></span>[7](#fn_853)

Dwarfs (kupa-li‘i) are mentioned in traditions of early migrations as
"noted for their swiftness as runners." <span
id="fr_854"></span>[8](#fn_854) It was said of the Menehune, to indicate
their stature, that they were "below the knees of Naipualehu," a Kauai
dwarf about three feet in height. <span id="fr_855"></span>[9](#fn_855)
Kamakau says of the forefathers that "they often speak of the land of
the dwarfs (ka aina o ke kupali‘i), a land of people so small that it
would take ten of them to equal one ordinary man." One of these little
men was brought to Punalu‘u in Kau district on Hawaii and lived above
Kopu and Moaula and was called an ili (which is the name given to a
small "parcel" of land) and a pilikua (back-clinger), and Wahanui
brought some to Kauai. <span id="fr_856"></span>[10](#fn_856)

### LEGENDS OF FAMOUS RUNNERS

Keli‘i-malolo is born at Hana and noted as the fastest runner of Maui in
the time of Kahekili. He joins a canoe trip to Kapakai in Kohala,
Hawaii, and after a little run of about ninety miles to Kaawaloa and
back finds the canoes not yet covered or the baggage removed. His
friends challenge the truth of his story, contending that it would take
two days to go and return from such a distance. His account of the
places along the way however tallies with the facts, and at the end of
the run he has been careful to leave two joints of sugar cane set up as
proof of his story. <span id="fr_857"></span>[11](#fn_857)

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

Kao-hele, noted runner of Molokai, is pursued in vain by Kahekili's men
when they come to make war on Molokai. They station relays, but he
outdistances them all, hence the saying, "Combine the speed to catch
Kaohele" (E ku‘i ka mama i loaa o Kaohele). At one time chiefs and
people are crowded at a famous cliff for the sport of leaping into the
bathing pool below, and Kaohele, finding himself headed for this cliff
and closely pursued, leaps across to the opposite bank, a distance of
thirty-six feet. <span id="fr_858"></span>[12](#fn_858) Kao-hele is
runner and protector for four chiefs who live at the heiau of Kahokukano
on Molokai and have a fishpond mountainward. He is killed by a
slingstone in a battle with men from Hawaii but his chiefs escape. <span
id="fr_859"></span>[13](#fn_859)

Manini-holo-kuaua (named by Rice as head fisherman of the Menehune at
Haena on Kauai) <span id="fr_860"></span>[14](#fn_860) is known as a
noted thief of Molokai, so strong he can carry away a whole canoe on his
back and so swift he can escape all pursuit. His mo‘o grandmother,
Kalama-ula, lives in a cave in the uplands which opens and shuts at
command, and it is his custom to run with his booty to this cave and
hide it away there. When Ke-lii-malolo, the fleet runner of Oahu, comes
to Molokai on a visit and in contempt of warnings leaves his canoe
unguarded while he goes in for a bath, Manini lays claim to it and
carries it away with all it contains to his cave in the uplands, into
which he disappears before its owner can overtake him. Ke-li‘i-malolo
engages the help of the two supernatural sons of Halulu, Kama-aka-mikioi
and Kama-aka-ulu-ohia, and sails with them to Molokai. Manini, in
con-tempt of his grandmother's warning, seizes their canoe also, but is
overtaken by one of the men, who overhears his command and orders the
cave to shut just as he is entering so that he is caught and crushed
within its jaws. Within the cave are found innumerable
possessions. <span id="fr_861"></span>[15](#fn_861)

 

At the time of the discovery of the Polynesian islands, cannibalism was
practised by Maori, Rarotongans, Paumotuans, and Marquesans. It was
introduced late among the Tongans from Fiji and, although rare, was
practised on Tongatapu

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

more than in other Tongan islands. <span
id="fr_862"></span>[16](#fn_862) In Rarotonga cannibalism began as a
means of revenge after a war; it was against the law of the ali‘i to
practise it in time of peace. <span id="fr_863"></span>[17](#fn_863)
Among the Maori the story is told of Uenuku who practised cannibalism in
revenge for the death of his children. <span
id="fr_864"></span>[18](#fn_864) Among one tribe it was said to have
been introduced by Kai. <span id="fr_865"></span>[19](#fn_865) Churchill
finds the practice noted by Friederici among the Sissano of eating the
bodies of dead relatives. <span id="fr_866"></span>[20](#fn_866)
Brewster describes the Fiji method of preparing a cannibal feast. <span
id="fr_867"></span>[21](#fn_867)

Despite the fact that man-eating is ascribed to legendary figures and
that a class called olohe are sometimes spoken of as cannibals, there is
no proof that cannibalism was ever practised in the Hawaiian group.
Man-slaying however was common and the lua or bone-breaking art was
practised by highwaymen. In North Tahiti, whence early Hawaiian
migrations seem to have come, Mei-hiti is spoken of in chants as a
famous place for man-slayers. <span id="fr_868"></span>[22](#fn_868) The
most celebrated of Hawaiian man-eating legends, the story of Ai-kanaka
of Oahu, corresponds closely with one recorded from Tahiti, as follows:

*Ellis version*. Cannibals lived on the island of Tepuaemanu between
Eimeo and Huahine. Men who went near the island were found to be
missing. At length the man-eater's wife discovered that her own brother
Tebuoroo was to be killed and eaten. She exposed her husband's habit and
two men lay in wait for him and stoned him to death. <span
id="fr_869"></span>[23](#fn_869)

In Wahiawa on Oahu, near the place called Kukaniloko, once sacred to the
birth of chiefs, is a narrow ridge of land forming a curving pathway
between two steep gulches along which men used to travel to reach the
mountain timber. At this defile, tradition says, the last cannibals of
Oahu took their stand and seized upon victims for their cannibal feasts.
Aikanaka (Man-eater) was the name of their chief, called in

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

legend Ka-lo-aikanaka, Ke-ali‘i-ai-kanaka (The chief who eats men),
Kokoa, or merely Kalo. The band lived beyond the defile at a place
called Hale-manu (House of birds) or Hale-mano. There the foundation of
a heiau used to be pointed out, and the large flat rock called the
ipukai (platter) where their victims were laid, and the hollow where the
oven was dug in which such victims were baked. The story is
circumstantially related as follows:

(*a*) Ka-lo-aikanaka (Lo the man-eater) is chief of a band of strangers
who land first on Kauai and are given lands near the foot of the
mountain back of Waimea. Darker than the Hawaiians, with a different
speech and no tapu laws, they have religious feasts at which human flesh
is eaten. The chief himself is tattooed with figures of birds, sharks,
and other fishes. Ka-lo's daughter is very beautiful with hair to her
ankles, bright eyes, sparkling teeth, set off by pearl necklaces and
anklets. Married to a Kauai chief, she is put to death for breaking the
tapu. The band retaliate by a cannibal feast and are obliged to flee to
Oahu. Landing first at Kawailoa and then going on to Waialua, they
proceed upland and establish themselves eight miles east of Haleiwa in
the mountains of Haupu. The chief's servant Kaanokaewa(or -keewe), also
called Lotu, builds his house across the pass at a place called Kanewai,
and pushes travelers over the cliff. Lotu's wife Kaholehua sees even her
own brothers sacrificed to satisfy the chief's hunger when other victims
fail, until the youngest, named Napopo, escapes to Kauai, learns the art
of wrestling, and in a final struggle with Lotu falls with him over the
cliff and both are killed together. The chief is then obliged to sail
with his people to other lands.

(*b*) Westervelt version (dated 1848). The man-eater lives at Hele-mano.
Ke-ali‘i-ai-kanaka is described as "either a foreigner or a Hawaiian."
Little by little his band of warriors are killed in forays until he
alone remains. Hoa-hanau, the brother of one of his victims, learns
boxing and wrestling in Waialua, covers his body with oil, and in a
struggle to the death, hurls the cannibal chief over the edge of the
gulch. <span id="fr_870"></span>[24](#fn_870)

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

Connected with a somewhat similar Aikanaka legend is the stone called
Oahu-nui which is said to have the shape of the island of Oahu and which
lies in the gulch between Ewa and Waialua. Those who would go "entirely
around Oahu" used to visit this stone.

Lo-Aikanaka is the name given to a family of South Sea chiefs who are
driven from the plains of Mokuleia into the hills to a place called
Hele-mano, where they are received by the chief Oahu-nui east of that
locality and the two chiefs exchange courtesies. Oahu-nui develops a
passion for human flesh and finally the two chubby sons of his sister
Kilikiliula, wife of Lehua-nui, are sacrificed to his appetite during
the absence of their father. Warned by a vision, the father returns,
puts to death the chief and his sister, and abandons the place with his
men. A curse hangs over the place. The headless body of Oahu-nui became
petrified where it lay; his sister also turned to stone where she fell
on the opposite hillside, and all who had partaken of the feast were
turned to stone. None has ever dared to live there since. <span
id="fr_871"></span>[25](#fn_871)

In romantic fiction Ai-kanaka is represented as the ruling chief on Oahu
in the time of Halemano. He lives at Ulukou at Waikiki. Hearing of the
beauty of Halemano's wife, he summons her to him and when she refuses to
come he sends men to kill Halemano and the two are obliged to hide in
the uplands of Wahiawa until they can escape to another island. <span
id="fr_872"></span>[26](#fn_872) Dibble says that with
Ka-hanu-nui-a-lewa-lani, who came from foreign lands to Oahu by way of
Kauai, came also his younger brother Kawelo-ai-kanaka, both sons of Neva
and both man-eaters, together with the followers who came with
them. <span id="fr_873"></span>[27](#fn_873) It would be interesting to
know whether this Kawelo bears any relation to the legendary Ai-kanaka
who is dispossessed by his relative of a younger branch from Oahu in the
Kauai legend of Kawelo, or whether he may be connected with Lono-ka-ehu
and his man-eating dog Ku-ilio-loa, or whether the followers who came
with the "two sons of Neva"

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

have anything to do with the Menehune whom Ka-hano brought from Kahiki
to serve the chiefess (or chief Kahanai) on Oahu.

Among the peoples said to have appeared during the fifth period of the
Kumulipo, when the hog-man was building up his family line, are the dog
people: "Hanau ka Huelo Maewe, he (p)aewe kona" (Born were the wagging
tails; they had no fixed line of descent), says the chant. This seems to
mean that they intermarried without regard to class distinction and
hence built up no inherited chief class. The reference is to the Ha‘a
people, according to David Malo Kupihea, the hairless olohe people first
discovered on Maui on the plains in Kula called Oma‘oma‘o. He says, "In
the story of Alapai-nui on Hawaii it is said that messengers to Maui
landed on the Hana side and found these Ha‘a people and were afraid, so
they went on to Oahu and Kauai. Both on Kauai and on Maui 'dogs' were
taken out to fight Alapai-nui and they were still there in Kahekili's
time. Some were in his army. They lived in the sand hills and they had
mystical power of the demigods (kupua) in the form of big war dogs.
These dog people still appear on Maui in the procession of spirits known
as 'Marchers of the night.' They look like other human beings but have
tails like a dog."

A Hawaiian will not touch a dog of the hairless variety; it represents
an olohe. About Pearl harbor on Ewa beach, supposed to be the place at
which "human beings" first landed on Oahu, many caves of the olohe
(ka-lua-olohe) are to be seen. In Honolulu there used to be a pit called
Hole-of-the-olohe near where Palm drive enters King street into which an
olohe disappeared who was being pursued. These olohe were human beings;
they were "born in the day." <span id="fr_874"></span>[28](#fn_874)

Olohe, or Ha‘a people, were hence a well-recognized class in old days,
skilled in wrestling and bone-breaking (lua) and with hairless bodies.
It is said that they used to pull out their hair and smear their bodies
with oil in order to give no hold to an antagonist. Legend represents
them as professional robbers or even with man-eating habits, who used to
station

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

themselves at a narrow pass along the highway and kill and rob
travelers. Many such robber stations are pointed out to-day. Makua, one
of the most western valleys in Waianae, is a traditional haunt on Oahu.
Here Makaioulu met two robber women who were professional
bone-breakers. <span id="fr_875"></span>[29](#fn_875) Similar olohe
legends occur on Maui and Hawaii.

### LEGENDS OF OLOHE

Kapakohana, after killing the kupua Kalae-hina who has terrorized the
island of Maui, goes on to Oahu to challenge the hairless cannibal
(olohe) of Hanakapiai. Finding himself unable to overcome the olohe in
wrestling, he pretends friendship and gathers men to burn him while
asleep in his grass house. The olohe overhears the plot and, making a
hole in the top of the house, crawls into a tree, then begins eating the
men until he comes to Kapakohana, who grapples with him and eventually
kills him and sets up his bones to hang gourds upon. <span
id="fr_876"></span>[30](#fn_876)

Kapuaeuhi, an olohe of Ola‘a, uses his two strong daughters to decoy
travelers to his cave, where he has a stone, or, as most say, a beam,
which he causes to fall and kill the traveler as he enters. Finally two
cousins of a plundered man are successful in setting upon and killing
the daughters, then the old man himself, whom they leave in the cave.
Some say that he lies there yet, but since the death of the olohe no one
has been able to raise the stone (or beam). <span
id="fr_877"></span>[31](#fn_877)

On the shore road toward Ka-u district just out of Kalapana is a spot
where the lava rock is contorted as if by a great struggle. A famous
robber used to live in a cave above this road with his two daughters. He
hides himself along the road and the daughters watch from the cave. If
many people are coming together along the road they signal "High tide!"
but when a single traveler comes along they give the sign for "Low
tide!" and the olohe drops a great tree upon the man, thus disabling
him, and then kills and robs him. <span id="fr_878"></span>[32](#fn_878)

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

Uma, a dwarf skilled in the art of bone breaking, lives at Puehuehu in
Kohala in the days of Kamehameha the first. On a journey through the
country, which is at that time infested by robbers, he repels every
attack by his swiftness and skill. <span
id="fr_879"></span>[33](#fn_879)

Similar conditions seem to have prevailed among the Maori.

Moko is a robber chief who establishes himself in a cave beside the
highway traveled by those who trade up and down the coast. Finally he
kills the brother of the chief Tu-te-wai-mate and the chief goes with a
body of men to avenge the dead, but Moko takes advantage of his
chivalrous warning to give an unexpected thrust which kills the
avenger. <span id="fr_880"></span>[34](#fn_880)

Among dog-men represented as overthrowing the chief of a district and
terrorizing the country, the most famous is the cannibal dog-man Kaupe
who overthrew the government of Ka-hanai-a-ke-akua (Reared by the gods)
and ruled the land from Nu‘uanu to the sea.

Kaupe lives at Lihue on Oahu. He never attacks a high chief but eats
some of the people both of Oahu and Maui. At last he crosses over to
Hawaii and brings back a chief's son to sacrifice in the heiau at Lihue.
The father follows to Oahu and consults Kahilona, the great kahuna at
the heiau of Kaheiki just below the hill called today Pacific Heights,
which was built by the Menehune and which becomes under Kahilona the
center for the mo‘o-kahuna class of priests; that is, for kilokilo who
read the signs of earth and sky and sea. This kahuna teaches the chief
from Hawaii the prayer to recover his son, which runs

"O Ku,! O Lono! O Kanaloa!  
By the power of the gods, by the strength of this prayer,  
Save us two, save us two!"

\[paragraph continues\] The prayer unfastens the boy's fetters and
father and son flee and hide under a rock at Moanalua while Kaupe goes
on to look for them on Hawaii. The father learns the prayer for killing
an enemy, and overcomes Kaupe on Hawaii. <span
id="fr_881"></span>[35](#fn_881)

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

The story resembles one told locally of the heiau of Wahaula in Puna
district on Hawaii.

The smoke from the altar at Waha-ula is regarded as the shadow cast by
the god of the heiau and hence to cross through the smoke is sacrilege.
A young chief, forgetful of the tapu, allows himself to be touched by
the smoke and is accordingly seized and sacrificed and his bones thrown
into the bone pit. His spirit comes in dream to his father, who is the
high chief of Ka-u, and the father sets out at once to recover his son's
bones. After first encountering and killing the olohe who slays
travelers along the sea road out of Kalapana, he arrives at the heiau.
As the spirits dance at night, he recognizes and seizes the spirit of
his son, who points out to him where the bones are to be found. Some say
that the father restores his son to life, others that he merely gives
the bones a proper burial. <span id="fr_882"></span>[36](#fn_882)

As a ghost god resting in the clouds stretched over the mountaintops of
the Koolau range on Oahu, Kaupe's spirit body is today confused with
legends of a dog-like creature called Poki, spotted or brindled in color
and very long in body, who guards a certain section outside Honolulu,
although he may appear at other places. Some say it is the spirit of the
old chief Boki who in 1829 filled two ships for the sandalwood trade and
sailed away and never came back, but the legend is doubtless much older.
Travelers report having seen the creature and having made a long detour
to avoid it. It sometimes appears as a form in the clouds, either
resting or in motion. A foreigner reports seeing, as he was entering
Moanalua valley from Honolulu just as the moon was rising, "a shapeless
white form," a mist "convulsed with movement," which passed over the
treetops from the Koolau range, preceded as it came by "the wailing of
dogs" and followed as it passed by "a deathlike stillness."

Both the shape-shifting hog-man Kamapua‘a and the dog-man Ku-ilio-loa,
together with the spirit forms of Kaupe and Poki, are in some way
connected with those signs in the sky called oila which the Hawaiians
worshiped, believing that the

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

animal shapes in such clouds could be used to foretell the movements of
chiefs descended from their kupua ancestors because denoting the
presence of their aumakua protectors in the heavens. <span
id="fr_883"></span>[37](#fn_883)

Kamakau says of the dog-man Ku-ilio-loa (Ku long dog) that lono-ka-ehu
came to Oahu from Kahiki with his "great dog" Ku-ilio-loa to seek his
brother. He pierced the hill Kane-hoa-lani at Kualoa, cleft Kahuku and
Kahipa apart, and broke Ka-pali-ho‘oku‘i at Kailua. He found his brother
in the heiau at Palaa near Kuone at Waialua and took him back to
Kahiki. <span id="fr_884"></span>[38](#fn_884) The heiau named is the
ancient heiau Kapukapu-akea said to have been built by Menehune out of
kauila wood. The heiau of Lono-a-ke-ahu (Lono-ka-ehu?) at Keehu is said
to have "worked with" that of Kapukapu-akea and at Kane-ilio at the
lighthouse point stood the heiau of Ku-ilio-loa. <span
id="fr_885"></span>[39](#fn_885)

Ku-long-dog is described as a dog with a human body and supernatural
power, "a great soldier and famous warrior," who terrorizes Kahiki. His
wives betray him to Kamapua‘a and the hog-man conquers him by stuffing
his own supernatural plant bodies between the gaping jaws of the dog and
"eating his inwards"; that is, by performing the common folktale trick
of allowing himself to be swallowed by a monster and then cutting his
way out. The contest follows directly that with Lono-ka-eho, elsewhere
described as the dog's master. <span id="fr_886"></span>[40](#fn_886) In
the Ka-ulu legend the fight with Lono-ka-eho (The stone god) is
similarly followed by an attack upon a "dangerous kupua" of Kualoa who
waylays and kills travelers at the narrow pass about Kaoio point. Ka-ulu
lifts the kupua and dashes him down, breaking his body into bits, one of
which forms the rock islet Mokoli‘i just off Kualoa. <span
id="fr_887"></span>[41](#fn_887) The kupua is evidently not a "rat" as
the story says, but the "great dog" of Lono, and the islet Mokoli‘i
(Little mo‘o), by adding elided sounds and transposing, becomes
Mok(u)-ilio (Dog island), the part played by the kupua as a waylayer of
travelers

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

classing him unquestionably with the dog-men or olohe of other stories.

Ku-ilio-loa passes into legend as "the man-eating dog of Hina" whom
travelers fear, in the Waha-nui legend, <span
id="fr_888"></span>[42](#fn_888) and in that of Ka-ulu as the monster
whom Ka-ulu tears into bits with his hands; hence dogs are small
today. <span id="fr_889"></span>[43](#fn_889) Although these encounters
take place on an ocean voyage it may be significant that Kane and
Kanaloa, whom Waha-nui voyages to "tread upon," are represented in
Hawaiian tradition as gods dwelling at Waolani on Oahu, the same island
upon which is localized the Lono-ka-ehu legend.

Ku-ilio-loa, as "the great dog of Hina," is also connected with the Pele
cycle of romances. The foster parents of Ke-ahi-wela (Hot fire) send
Ku-ilio-loa in the shape of a dog to the Rolling island to save the girl
from the wrath of her older sister, and he loses both ears and tail in
the fight and goes to live on Kauai. <span
id="fr_890"></span>[44](#fn_890) Na-maka-o-kaha‘i, the analogous figure
in the Aukelenuiaiku legend to the chiefess of the Rolling island, has a
guardian dog Moela who is reduced to ashes when he touches Aukele. <span
id="fr_891"></span>[45](#fn_891) In the Laieikawai romance, Aiwohikupua,
a chief of Kauai, brings his kupua dog Kalahumoku to fight against the
mo‘o guardian of Paliuli named Kiha-nui-lulu-moku, and the dog runs home
stripped, like Ahi-wela's pet, of both ears and tail <span
id="fr_892"></span>[46](#fn_892) Finally, Ku-ili(o)-loa, "a girl of
fire," is the fifth child born to Kane-huna-moku and his wife in
Kuaihelani. <span id="fr_893"></span>[47](#fn_893)

A somewhat similar story to that of Ku-ilio-loa is told in Tonga among
the adventures of Muni-of-the-torn-eye. Muni comes to Fiji and finds the
people harassed by a being "part man and part god," and wrestles with
him in the cave where he lives until both fall dead. In another version
a man-eating dog lives in a cave and terrorizes the people into giving
up a man daily. The king's daughter is about to be sacrificed when Muni
appears, takes her place, and slays the monster, this last evidently a
foreign turn to the story. <span id="fr_894"></span>[48](#fn_894) See
also Caillot's

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

version where Maui kills the great cannibal dog of Fiji. <span
id="fr_895"></span>[49](#fn_895) In Samoa one of Maui-ti‘iti‘i's feats
is the slaying of a big red dog. <span id="fr_896"></span>[50](#fn_896)

The Maori are said to know two varieties of native dogs, one, generally
regarded as sacred, with soft white hair and traced to the Pomeranian
breed found on the shores of the Baltic, the other larger with coarse
short hair and very strong, of Asiatic pariah breed. <span
id="fr_897"></span>[51](#fn_897) The legendary dog Moho-rangi is left to
guard the steep rock island of Whanga-o-kino when Tara-whata made it
sacred for his reptiles. Ponui-o-hine goes with her father to help
kindle fire in order to remove the tapu on this island but forgets to
veil her eyes and is hence turned to stone. Women today fear to go near
this island and strangers veil their eyes lest they see the dog
Moho-rangi. <span id="fr_898"></span>[52](#fn_898)

In a Dobu story a monster dog acts as the savior of the land by slaying
an ogre and his wife who have devastated the country. A woman digs the
dog out of a heap of rubbish and the inhabitants return and give him a
wife to tame him down. He is believed still to roam the country. <span
id="fr_899"></span>[53](#fn_899)

Another famous dog kupua of Hawaiian story is Puapualenalena
(Pupualenalena), a great thief and runner of Waipio valley who can take
the shape of a yellow dog and thus provide his master with all possible
good things. He is finally engaged to steal for the chief the famous
conch shell called Kiha-pu (or puana) which has been stolen from its
place in a heiau on Oahu by the spirits of the valley. The place is
still shown along the road leading down into Waipio where the spirit
(eepa) beings lived who disturbed the chief's repose with their eerie
sounding of the sacred conch, and a shell called Kiha-pu has been handed
down by Kamehameha kings and is now preserved in the Bishop Museum, a
small piece broken from it serving to motivate an incident which has
since been incorporated into the legend. <span
id="fr_900"></span>[54](#fn_900)

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

(*a*) *Westervelt version*. Kapuni is brought up in the heiau of
Pakaalana in Waipio. Two "gods," Kaakau and Kaohu-walu, look down into
the valley and see him practising the art of leaping and they cut off a
part of his body to make him lighter, teach him to fly, and take him
with them overseas to Kauai. There they hear the sound of the Kiha-pu at
Waolani: "The voice of Kiha-pu calls Kauai," is the saying. Flying
across from Kauai to Oahu, Kapuni waits until the guards are asleep,
then flies into the heiau and steals the Kiha-pu and hides it under the
waves until he can reach the heiau on Hawaii where live the eepa beings
to whom it is entrusted. The bones of Kapuni are worshiped as a god at
Kaawaloa.

Kiha-lulu-moku has set a tapu, which is broken by the continual blowing
of the conch by the gods on the plateau above. In the meantime the
dog-man Puapualenalena has joined a new master who is a great awa
drinker, and is sent to steal awa from the chief's tapu crop. The dog is
traced and the chief agrees to pardon both man and master if the dog is
cunning enough to steal the conch Kiha-pu from its new owners. <span
id="fr_901"></span>[55](#fn_901)

 

(*b*) *Fornander version*. The dog Pupualenalena is a clever thief
living at Puako on Hawaii. When his new master goes fishing he finds the
dog eating the fish as fast as he pulls them up. The master promises him
pardon if he will bring him awa from the chief Hakau's tapu crop. This
the dog achieves, until he is followed and both master and dog brought
before the chief. Hakau promises them their lives if the dog will bring
him the Pu-ana (trumpet) which the spirits living above Waipio blow
every night, disturbing the chief's sleep. <span
id="fr_902"></span>[56](#fn_902)

 

(*c*) *Kalakaua version*. The Kiha-pu is owned by Kiha-lulu-moku in
Waipio valley and if properly blown can control the hosts of the gods.
Its sound is like weird music and if blown during battle it repeats the
cries and groans of conflict. It was Lono (as god of sound) who gave it
this power by blowing into it.

The Kiha-pu is stolen by a band of spirit beings under their

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

leader Ika (Iku) and carried away to Waimea on Kauai and thence to Oahu
to a place in the neighborhood of Waolani. A rival places a magic mark
upon the shell in the shape of a cross (pe‘a) which takes away its power
of sound. A kahuna tells Ika that the shell will not sound again except
on Hawaii. On the way thither the shell is chipped by the waves and the
sign lost. Above Waolani the spirit band blow the shell once more and
Kiha engages the dog Puapualenalena to steal it back from Ika. <span
id="fr_903"></span>[57](#fn_903)

 

(*d*) *Emerson version*. Kane and his companions revel all night above
Waipio and blow blasts upon their conch shells which pre-vent the proper
observance of religious ceremonies, until the chief Liloa sends the
clever thief Puapualenalena to steal the Kiha-pu away from Kane, and
this puts an end to the reveling. <span id="fr_904"></span>[58](#fn_904)

Emerson prints a hula on the subject, part of which reads:

Meha na pali o Waipio  
A ke kani mau o Kiha-pu;  
A ono ole ka awa a ke alii  
I ke kani mau o Kiha-pu;  
Moe ole kona po o ka Hooilo;  
Uluhua, a uluhua,  
I ka mea nana e huli a loaa  
I kela kupua ino i ka pali,  
Olali la, a olali.

"Wearisome the cliffs of Waipio  
With the constant sounding of the Kiha-pu;  
Ineffective is the chief's awa  
With the constant sounding of the Kiha-pu;  
The chief cannot sleep all winter,  
Vexed and worried  
With the search for someone who will find  
That cursed kupua on the cliff  
Where it gleams there."

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_847"></span>[337:1](hm26.htm#fr_847) Malo, 289 note 1.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[337:2](hm26.htm#fr_848) For. Col. 5: 490;
Malo, 289.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[337:3](hm26.htm#fr_849) For. Col. 4: 310.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[338:4](hm26.htm#fr_850) For. Col. 5: 32.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[338:5](hm26.htm#fr_851) Thrum, *More Tales*,
81.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[338:6](hm26.htm#fr_852) Thrum, *Tales*, 104.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[338:7](hm26.htm#fr_853) For. Col. 5: 164-166.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[338:8](hm26.htm#fr_854) *Ibid*. 6: 277.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[338:9](hm26.htm#fr_855) Thrum, *More Tales*,
214 note 2.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[338:10](hm26.htm#fr_856) *Kuokoa*, December
22, 1866.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[338:11](hm26.htm#fr_857) For. Col. 5: 490-495.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[339:12](hm26.htm#fr_858) *Ibid*. 496; Malo,
289; Hyde, *HAA* 1883, 56.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[339:13](hm26.htm#fr_859) *HAA* 1909, 53.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[339:14](hm26.htm#fr_860) 42.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[339:15](hm26.htm#fr_861) For. Col. 5: 164-167.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[340:16](hm26.htm#fr_862) Gifford, *Bul.* 61:
206, 227-229; Mariner 1: 265.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[340:17](hm26.htm#fr_863) *JPS* 20: 201-207.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[340:18](hm26.htm#fr_864) White 2: 127.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[340:19](hm26.htm#fr_865) *Ibid*. 3: 21.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[340:20](hm26.htm#fr_866) 18.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[340:21](hm26.htm#fr_867) 28-29.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[340:22](hm26.htm#fr_868) Handy, *Bul.* 79: 73.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[340:23](hm26.htm#fr_869) *Researches* 1: 360.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[341:24](hm26.htm#fr_870) Dibble, 113-115; For.
Pol. Race 2:23 note 1; Kalakaua. 371-380; Westervelt, *Honolulu*,
194-203; McAllister, *Bul.* 104: 137-140.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[342:25](hm26.htm#fr_871) Thrum, *Tales*,
140-146.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[342:26](hm26.htm#fr_872) For. Col. 5: 238.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[342:27](hm26.htm#fr_873) 114-115.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[343:28](hm26.htm#fr_874) Given July, 1935.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[344:29](hm26.htm#fr_875) For. Col. 5: 490,
491.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[344:30](hm26.htm#fr_876) *Ibid*. 210-213;
Dickey, *HHS Reports* 25: 25.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[344:31](hm26.htm#fr_877) Green and Pukui,
132-133.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[344:32](hm26.htm#fr_878) Westervelt, *Gods and
Ghosts*, 11; local information.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[345:33](hm26.htm#fr_879) For. Col. 5: 498-500.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[345:34](hm26.htm#fr_880) White 3: 192-194,
291-292.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[345:35](hm26.htm#fr_881) Westervelt,
*Honolulu*, 90-96.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[346:36](hm26.htm#fr_882) Westervelt, *Gods and
Ghosts*, 1-13; local information, 1915.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[347:37](hm26.htm#fr_883) Westervelt, *Gods and
Ghosts*, 128-132; *AA* 30 (1928): 13.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[347:38](hm26.htm#fr_884) *Kuokoa*, January 12,
1867.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[347:39](hm26.htm#fr_885) *HAA* 1907, 48, 54.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[347:40](hm26.htm#fr_886) For. Col. 5: 332,
333.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[347:41](hm26.htm#fr_887) *Ibid*. 370-371.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[348:42](hm26.htm#fr_888) For. Col. 4: 518.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[348:43](hm26.htm#fr_889) *Ibid*. 524.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[348:44](hm26.htm#fr_890) Rice, 31.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[348:45](hm26.htm#fr_891) For. Col. 4: 54-61.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[348:46](hm26.htm#fr_892) *RBAE* 33: 472-475.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[348:47](hm26.htm#fr_893) *HAA* 1916, 143.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[348:48](hm26.htm#fr_894) Gifford, *Bul.* 8:
121-122.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[349:49](hm26.htm#fr_895) 279-305.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[349:50](hm26.htm#fr_896) Stuebel, 66.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[349:51](hm26.htm#fr_897) *JPS* 23: 173-175;
24: 69.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[349:52](hm26.htm#fr_898) White 2: 192-193.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[349:53](hm26.htm#fr_899) Fortune, 270-271.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[349:54](hm26.htm#fr_900) For. Pol. Race 2: 72;
N. Emerson, "Hula," 131.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[350:55](hm26.htm#fr_901) Honolulu, 105-111.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[350:56](hm26.htm#fr_902) Col. 4: 558-561.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[351:57](hm26.htm#fr_903) 250-265.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[351:58](hm26.htm#fr_904) "Hula," 129-131.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXV. The Moikeha-La‘a Migration](hm27)
