[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm28)  [Next](hm30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

### XXVII

### RULING CHIEFS

TRADITIONS relating to the colonizing period in Hawaiian history
emphasize the insignia of rank which became the tangible signs by which
a man's position was assured in aristocratic society. These were: First,
a family genealogy tracing back to the gods through one of the two sons
of Ki‘i, Ulu and Nana-ulu, and by as many branches (lala) as family
relationship could be stretched to cover. Second, a name chant, composed
at birth or given in afterlife, glorifying the family history not only
of persons concerned but also of places made sacred by particular events
or association. Third, signs in the heavens by which aumakua of the day
recognized their offspring on earth. Fourth, a special place set aside
as sacred to the birth of high-ranking chiefs. Fifth, the sacred cord
(aha) stretched at the entrance of a chief's dwelling, under which all
of lower rank must pass but which fell "of itself" before the approach
of anyone of equal or higher position. Sixth, wealth, especially in
lands, labor, and specialized objects such as foods, ornaments, colors
belonging to ranking chiefs alone. Seventh, the power of the tapu, which
gave the ranking chief immense personal privilege, although the ruling
chief might have actually more power over lands and wealth; before
certain captive chiefesses of Maui of incredible sanctity, according to
Kamakau, Kamehameha himself had to remove his garment. Eighth, the right
to officiate in the heiau as both chief and priest. Ninth, at death, the
final deification of the bones and their laying away in a sacred (in
later years a secret) place difficult of access, the most important such
place in ancient times being the Iao valley on the island of Maui. Rank
therefore depended primarily upon blood; but of equal importance was the
conduct of life by which one could, by carelessness in preserving the
tapus and in making proper marriages, lose caste and prerogatives under
the severe discipline of the Aha-ali‘i or so-called

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "college of chiefs," or could, through a royal
marriage, raise the rank of one's descendants upon the family line.

The period during which political life became thus stabilized--through
the building up of a ruling-chief class under a social system based upon
strict religious observances--follows or overlaps the mythical
migrations and colonization represented in legend by the arrival of the
Kamau group and the activities of the kupua Kamapua‘a, the coming of
Pele and her family, the arrival of Kane and Kanaloa and their attention
to the water supply, and the introduction of food plants.

Following the family of Akalana on the Ulu line appear three Nana names
of chiefs who are said, like the Maui brothers, to have ruled the
western end of Oahu in Waialua, Wahiawa, and Ewa districts. The last of
the three, Nana-kaoko, has a wife, Ka-hihi-o-ka-lani, whose name
resembles that of the chiefess as servants for whom Kahano son of Newa
brought over the Menehune to Oahu. It is this Nana-kaoko and his wife
who are the traditional founders on Oahu of the sacred place for the
birth of chiefs at Ku-kani-loko in the uplands of Wahiawa, similar to
that already set up at Holoholoku on Kauai. At Ho‘olono-pahu (Sounding
the pahu drum) the navel cord was tied and cut while the drum sounded.
Afterbirth, cord, and later the navel string (piko) were carefully
deposited, often in a heiau for safekeeping. <span
id="fr_960"></span>[1](#fn_960) The site chosen is one frequently
visited by thunderstorms, whose manifestations were regarded as the
voice of ancestral gods of the heavens welcoming an offspring of divine
rank. The drums perhaps simulated the voice of deity.

It was from the time of Heleipawa of Maui, whom some identify with
Kapawa, that there began to be composed chants for a ruling chief in
which were named his birth and burial places, the spots in which
afterbirth, umbilical cord, and navel string were deposited, his house
site, and other places sacred to his history. The site of the famous
pleasure house (Hale-i-ka-lea) in Kipahulu built by Heleipawa was still
to be seen in Kamakau's day, and the tapu spring of

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

fresh water, welling up in the sea at Kaui from a depth of twenty feet
and walled up so firmly that the waves had not loosened the stones,
where the chiefs of his day washed off the salt water when coming in
from surfing. <span id="fr_961"></span>[2](#fn_961)

Another Maui chief, Haho, son of Paumakua and grandson of
Hua-nui-ka-la‘ila‘i, was the traditional founder of the Aha-ali‘i or
ranking body of chiefs who might be distinguished by the use of the
sacred cord called aha. They cultivated a metaphorical form of speech in
order that their words might be concealed from the uninitiated. The awe
attached to rank was accentuated by the dreaded tapu which attended the
person of a chief. Those of highest rank never went abroad except at
night lest their shadow falling upon the ground render it tapu. They
were already gods, and at death their bones were separated from the
flesh and placed in a receptacle (kaai) woven out of sennit or ie vine,
in some cases shaped to imitate a torso, and worshiped as a family
deity, while the soft parts of the body were laid away in some sacred
place of burial like that back of the "Needle" in Iao valley. Kamakau
records the names of chiefs down to Kalaniopu‘u of Hawaii who were thus
honored and enumerates also the names of their sacred cords. <span
id="fr_962"></span>[3](#fn_962)

Many generations before Heleipawa and Haho, on the Ulu line, occur such
mythical figures as Ku-hele-i-moana and his wife Mapuna-i-aala
(Springing up in fragrance), daughter of Haumea; Akalana (Wakalana) and
the Maui brothers; the Aikanaka to Laka group--all, except the first,
famous names in southern tradition and all centering about the hill
Kauiki in the fertile Hana district on the rain-washed eastern extremity
of the island of Maui, where the sun rises out of the sea and the Kohala
coast is to be seen beyond the channel of Ale-nui-haha (Great waves
crashing).

From the time of La‘a-mai-kahiki down to that of Umi, East Maui,
comprising Koolau, Hana, Kipahulu, and Kaupo

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

districts, was governed separately from the rest of the island and its
chiefs were grouped about the fortified hill of Kauiki, famous in
history, song, and story. Myths are told about its origin. Some say that
it sprang from the navel of Hamoa. Others that it was born to the
parents of Pele, or to the hill Kai-hua-kala by his wife Kahaule. Others
relate how Ka-lala-walu (The eight-branched) brought the hill from
Kahiki as an adopted child, but grew tired of its nibbling at her
breasts and tried to leave it along the way, first at Kaloa, then at
Kaena, then at the Ka-wai-papa stream. Others tell of the wanderings and
death of Pu‘uhele, little sister of Pele. The bay about Kauiki gives
evidence of subsidence following some volcanic outbreak, and men say
that formerly Kane and Kanaloa planted a garden below the hill, and they
point out two rocks below the hill on the inaccessible sea side which
are called "the coconuts of Kane and Kanaloa" and the "root-stock"
(kumu) of Kauiki. Mythical names are attached to the dwellers on Kauiki
in ancient days. On the summit may be seen the rock placed by Aiai as an
outlook for schools of fish entering the bay. Here Maui stood to push
the sky higher because it lay so near the earth at Kauiki. Here lived
Hina-hana-ia-ka-malama, she who worked at tapa making in the moon, and
her husband, father of Puna and Hema on the Ulu line of chiefs.

All about the bay are crowded the memorials of those old days in the
shape of a rock, a basin of water, a wave, a spring, a cave, or a mere
name remembered from the time when chiefs and their followers thronged
the bay, whose trifling deeds or misdeeds are still cherished in the
memories of their living descendants. "If I told you all, it would fill
a book," said old Kilinahi, watchman for schools of fish off the bay.
Hawaiian verse loves to play with the memory of Kauiki. A hula begins,

O Kauiki, mauna ki‘eki‘e,  
Huki a‘e la a pa i ka lani  
He po‘ohiwi no kai halulu. . . .

"Kauiki, mountain famous in story,  
Stretching upward to touch the heavens,  
A shoulder for the buffeting sea. . . ."

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

and a modern verse opens with,

Healoha no Kauiki,  
Au i ke kai me he manu la!

"Kauiki is beloved,  
Afloat on the sea like a bird!"

\[paragraph continues\] Hana is called "a land beloved of chiefs because
of the fortress of Kauiki and the ease of living in that place." In time
of war the hill was reached by a ladder of ohia poles bound together
with withes. On the summit was spread a springy plant to serve as bed.
Fishponds below furnished unlimited stores of fish. Heaps of awa root
"delighted the nostrils of the dear firstborn chiefs." <span
id="fr_963"></span>[4](#fn_963)

Maui chiefs who settled with their families in later days about Kauiki
were Kanaloa and Kalahumoku, sons of Hualani the wife of Kanipahu, and
half-brothers to Kalapana who ruled Hawaii; Eleio; Ka-la-ehaeha; Lei;
Ka-mohohali‘i; Kalae-hina; Ho‘olae. <span
id="fr_964"></span>[5](#fn_964) Much earlier, on the Ulu line, comes the
name of Hua son of Pohukaina, said to be a contemporary of the prophet
Naula-a-Maihea who came with La‘a-mai-kahiki from the south. Two legends
are connected with his ns me. One is the tragic story of his
grandmother, the beautiful Popoalaea, put to death by her jealous
husband. The other is the story of Hua's quarrel with his prophet
Luaho‘omoe (Ulu-ho‘omoe) and the terrible drought that befell as a
result of his impious conduct in condemning the prophet to death on a
trumped-up charge. The story resembles the Kuula legend from the same
locality and in fact Kuula the fish god is said to be descended from a
son of the prophet whose death was attended by such evil results.
Kepelino tells us that a struggle for power early arose between the
secular and religious heads of the people, finally adjusted by uniting
both powers in the person of the ruling chief, who became thus entitled
to perform certain sacred offices in company with the priest. Both the
Hua and the Kuula legend

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

play up the priests' side of the contest. A story like that of the chief
Ka-lau-nui-a-hua (The long leaf of Hua, referring to family descent) on
the island of Hawaii shows the disaster that follows when a prophet's
warning is disregarded.

### LEGEND OF POPOALAEA

Popo-alaea (Ball of red clay), a chiefess of rank in Hana district on
Maui during the rule of Kamohoali‘i, is won as a re-ward of victory in
strength-testing games by the chief Kaakea (Makea) and he makes their
home close to the crater above Kaupo at a place called Koae-kea because
there the koae birds flock (or at the village of Hono-ka-lani). He is
jealous, especially of her fondness for her younger brother. People
bring malicious tales, and he sharpens his axe to kill her. She flees
with an attendant and the two women hide in the cavern at the pool of
Wai-anapanapa. At night they go to the village of Hono-kalani for food.
The people report seeing ghosts. He watches, and detects her hiding
place from the moving shadow of the fly brush, waved by her attendant,
cast upon the surface of the water. Searching the cave, he dashes out
the brains of the two women upon the rocks.

Today, on the night of Ku, god of justice, the water in the pool runs
red. At some time each morning prismatic colors (anapa) such as are
sacred to divine chiefs play over the waters of this pool as proof of
her innocence. The water of the pool makes even a dark skin look white
when immersed in it. <span id="fr_965"></span>[6](#fn_965)

### LEGEND OF HUA AND THE PROPHET

Hua's seer Lua-ho‘omoe (Ulu-ho‘omoe) arouses the chief's anger and he
seeks an excuse to discredit him and put him to death. He therefore
sends his men to the mountains after a certain species of bird found
only on the coast. They appeal to the seer, who points out the
impossibility of the task to his chief. When the men bring the birds
from the sea, Hua pretends that they have been trapped in the mountains
and condemns the seer for predicting falsely. The seer has the birds cut
open to show that it is seafood, not mountain berries, upon which they

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

have fed. Hua nevertheless orders his death. A drought ensues and fish
disappear from the sea. Only for the two sons of the seer, named
Kaa-ka-kai and Kaa-na-hua, is a place provided where rain falls, and
thither they retire in secret. Naula-a-Maihea scans the sky from the
summit of Kaala on Oahu and sees a cloud resting over Pu‘u-o-inaina in
Hanaula. He prepares a great offering of swine for the sons of Hua and
the drought is broken. <span id="fr_966"></span>[7](#fn_966)

### LEGEND OF KALAUNUIAHUA

Ka-lau-nui-a-hua consults the priestess Waahia as to the result of his
war expedition and she consistently predicts disaster. He attempts in
vain to put her to death. Finally at her own suggestion he has her body
burned in the heiau of Keeku in Kona. She puts a tapu against his coming
out of the house during the burning lest her god punish the land. As the
smoke rises, it takes the shape of two cocks fighting, then of two mud
hens. The chief can no longer resist tearing away the thatch with his
hand as he hears the shouts of the multitude at this last portent, and
the spirit of Waahia takes possession of his hand through the god
Kane-nui-akea. If he but points with his hand, the land falls before
him.

Hua conquers the chiefs of Maui, Molokai, Oahu, and proceeds with the
captured chiefs to Kauai. Here the spirit leaves his hand and enters
that of a man of Kauai. His men are routed and he and the three chiefs,
Ka-malo-o-Hua of Maui, Ka-hoku-o-Hua of Molokai, Hua-pouleilei of Ewa
and Waianae are taken prisoner by Kukona of Kauai, great-great-grandson
of La‘a-mai-kahiki, according to the genealogy. Kukona treats his
prisoners with great magnanimity. On one occasion he feigns sleep,
overhears them grumbling against him and discussing a plot to murder
him, a proposal vehemently protested against by Ka-malo-o-Hua, then
pretends to awaken and repeats to them the whole conversation as if it
were a dream. As a tribute to Ka-malo-o-Hua's good faith, he then
dismisses the three chiefs to their own lands with all the honors of
war, but keeps

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Ka-lau-nui for some years a captive. There are
in consequence no fresh invasions. <span id="fr_967"></span>[8](#fn_967)

The-long-leaf-of-Hua ruled on Hawaii as grandson of Kalapana descended
on the Pili line. He was a restless and ambitious chief bent on the
consolidation of the group under the rule of Hawaii, and his legend is
not without interest for its bearing upon the resistance attempted by
stubborn chiefs to the warnings of the priesthood. The incident of the
magnanimous conduct of the chief of Kauai had a bearing upon later
history, for even down to the time of Kamehameha, when chiefs consulted
the memories of their archivists as to the conduct of the forefathers in
like situations, the "peace of Ka-malo-o-Hua" was cited as precedent for
securing a peaceful ending of hostilities.

It was during the time of Kakaalaneo of Maui that the division of lands
is said to have taken place under a kahuna named Kalaihaohi‘a (Hew the
bark of the ohia tree) which portioned out the island into districts,
subdistricts, and smaller divisions, each ruled over by an agent
appointed by the landlord of the next larger division, and the whole
under control of the ruling chief over the whole island or whatever part
of it was his to govern. Land reforms and other means of strengthening
the power of the ruling chief and stabilizing control over a growing
population were carried out on Oahu also at about this time by
Mailikukahi, successor on the Moikeha line of the last ruling chief of
the elder Kumuhonua line, who was forced to retire because of his
unpopularity. The names of Mailikukahi, his son Kalona-iki, and his
grand-daughter Kukaniloko are handed down in tradition as wise and just
rulers. With Mailikukahi, Waikiki became the ruling seat of chiefs of
Oahu. He carried out strict laws, marked out land boundaries, and took
the firstborn son of each family to be educated in his own household. He
honored the priests, built heiaus, and discountenanced human sacrifice.
A raiding band from Hawaii and Maui he met at Waikakalaua gulch and
pursued and slaughtered at Kipapa gulch. Punalu‘u was

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

killed in the battle on the plain of that name. The head of Hilo, son of
Lakapu, was stuck up at a place called Po‘o-Hilo in Hono-uliuli. <span
id="fr_968"></span>[9](#fn_968)

Legends gather about the name of the ruling chief of Maui, Kakaalaneo
(Kukaalaneo, Kaalaneo), who lived in the present Lahaina district on the
hill Keka‘a, owned fish-ponds in Hana district on the opposite end of
the island, planted a famous breadfruit grove, and took to wife the
Molokai chiefess whom Eleio found for him and who brought him the first
feather cape seen on Maui, by whom he had the mischievous son Kaululaau
who killed off the spirits on Lanai. In his day the old name of Lele
became attached to Lahaina. <span id="fr_969"></span>[10](#fn_969) In
the legend of the red-skinned kupua of Puna Kepaka-ili-ula, Kakaalaneo
is represented as a skilful spearsman who "never misses a grassblade, an
ant, or a flea," but in a contest for the favors of a lady (drawn direct
from a tale from *The Arabian Nights*) he is worsted by the kupua and
ignominiously slain. <span id="fr_970"></span>[11](#fn_970) This way of
aggrandizing one hero at the expense of another's traditional fame is no
new thing in Hawaiian story-telling, but the treatment of the episode
marks it as a foreign imitation.

Tradition places in Kakaalaneo's time the arrival of a party of
strangers (haole) who played an active part in court life and whose
names were, according to Kamakau, kept in memory as late as Captain
Cook's day, for to the question whether Cook's party were gods or men,
the kahunas expressed the opinion that they were "men from the land of
Kaekae (Kakae) and Kukanaloa." After regular voyages between Hawaii and
the southern islands had ceased, chance seems to have brought some boats
to shore which had drifted from their course. One is said to have
arrived off Mokapu point on Oahu and another in the time of
Ka-malu-o-Hua to have been wrecked off the coast of Maui with five
persons on board, one of them a woman whom "Wakalana" took as his

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

wife and descendants of whom are said to be living on Maui and Oahu. A
third party of strangers was brought back by Paumakua from one of his
voyages. Kaekae and Maliu they are called, but a chant names them
Auakahinu and Auakamea, or, in one version, Kukahauula and Kukalepa.
They were priests, and it seems likely that the Kane and Kanaloa of the
Haumea tradition have been here confused with Paumakua's people. <span
id="fr_971"></span>[12](#fn_971) But all these arrivals are described so
much alike and in terms so similar to such incidents recounted in
southern groups, where the chance of a drifting boat making land with
women on board is much more plausible, that they must be regarded as
traditional rather than historical narratives.

Kukanaloa and Kaekae are the leaders of the party said to have arrived
in Kakaalaneo's day, and the legend of their arrival and the chant that
follows in which their names are played upon in listing names of chiefs
will illustrate the type rather than fix the event. The last allusion in
the legend is a pun upon the chief Lolale of Oahu who abducted the
pretty chiefess of Maui, Kelea, while she was out surfing and carried
her away to Oahu in the uplands of Lihue. She deserted him for his
cousin Kalamakua in Ewa, by whom she became mother of the high chiefess
Laie-lohelohe (The drooping pandanus vine), who became in turn the wife
of her Maui cousin Pi‘ilani. All these names appear in the chant linked
with the coming of Ku-kanaloa, together with the names of a wife and son
of Kakaalaneo. <span id="fr_972"></span>[13](#fn_972)

### LEGEND OF KUKANALOA

(*a*) The strangers land first at Keei in South Kona and then come on to
Waihe‘e, Maui, and land at a place called Ke-ala-i-Kahiki (The road to
Kahiki). They are exhausted and the natives clothe and feed them. In
looks they are light with sparkling eyes. When asked after their
homeland and parents they

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

point to the uplands "far, far above where our parents dwell," and show
themselves familiar with bananas, breadfruit, mountain-apple, and
candlenut trees. The two leaders become Kakaalaneo's property. There is
no tapu place closed to them. They marry chiefesses and some of their
descendants are living today. Kani-ka-wi and Kani-ka-wa (Whistle and
Flute) they are called, "perhaps because their speech was as
unintelligible as that of the lale birds that live in the hills." <span
id="fr_973"></span>[14](#fn_973)

Puka mai o Kanikawi, Kanikawa,  
O na haole iluna o Halakaipo,  
Puka mai nei Kukanaloa,  
Kupuna haole mai Kahiki  
Puka mai nei Kakaalaneo  
Me ke leo iki o Kakae,  
O Kaualua ia, o Kaihiwalua  
O Kelea, o Kalamakua,  
O Pi‘ilani ia, o Laielohelohe.

"Came Sharp-sound, Loud-sound,  
The strangers above Halakaipo,  
Came Ku-kanaloa,  
The stranger forefather from Kahiki,  
Came Kakaalaneo,  
With the soft-voiced Kakae,  
Kaualua (the wife), Kaihiwalua (the son),  
Kelea (the wife), Kalamakua (the husband),  
Pi‘ilani (the husband), Laielohelohe (the wife)."

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_960"></span>[377:1](hm29.htm#fr_960) For. Pol. Race 2: 272,
278; *HAA* 1912, 101-105.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[378:2](hm29.htm#fr_961) Malo, 322-323; For.
Col. 6: 319; Kamakau, *Ke Au Okoa*, October 14, 1869.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[378:3](hm29.htm#fr_962) *Ke Au Okoa*, November
4, 1869; For. Pol. Race 2: 28-30; Kalakaua, 84-85; Malo, 323; Ellis,
*Tour*, 270; Stokes, BPBM Oc. Papers 7: 4-5.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[380:4](hm29.htm#fr_963) Kamakau, *Kuokoa*,
December 1, 1866.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[380:5](hm29.htm#fr_964) For. Pol. Race 2:
78-79 note 2.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[381:6](hm29.htm#fr_965) Told by Sheriff
Wahiako, Hana, July, 1930.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[382:7](hm29.htm#fr_966) For. Col. 5: 514-519;
Kalakaua, 155-173; Thrum, *HAA* 1924, 127-133.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[383:8](hm29.htm#fr_967) Malo, 328-332; For.
Pol. Race 2: 67-69; Kalakaua, 175-205; Cartwright, table 4.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[384:9](hm29.htm#fr_968) For. Pol. Race 2:
89-91; Thrum, *More Tales*, 91-92; Kalakaua, 219-225.

<span id="fn_969"></span>[384:10](hm29.htm#fr_969) For. Pol. Race 2: 82;
Col. 4: 482-489; 5: 540-545.

<span id="fn_970"></span>[384:11](hm29.htm#fr_970) *Ibid*. 4: 504-505;
5: 386-393.

<span id="fn_971"></span>[385:12](hm29.htm#fr_971) For. Pol. Race 2:
24-26, 81; Col. 6: 247; J. Emerson, *HHS Papers* 5: 13; Kalakaua,
182-184; Kamakau, *Kuokoa*, January 19, 1867.

<span id="fn_972"></span>[385:13](hm29.htm#fr_972) For. Pol. Race 2:
82-87; Kalakaua, 227-246; *HAA* 1921, 58-62.

<span id="fn_973"></span>[386:14](hm29.htm#fr_973) Kamakau, *Kuokoa*,
January 19, 1867.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVIII. Usurping Chiefs](hm30)
