[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm29)  [Next](hm31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

### XXVIII

### USURPING CHIEFS

PI‘ILANI of Maui had by Laie-lohelohe two sons and a daughter named
Lono-pi‘ilani, Kiha-pi‘ilani, and Pi‘ikea. Lono-pi‘ilani succeeded to
the rule over his father's lands. Pi‘ikea made a marriage, considered a
misalliance by the blue-blooded chiefs of Maui and Oahu, with Umi,
ruling chief on Hawaii. The story of the younger son Kiha-pi‘ilani
belongs with a series of popular legends recounted in great detail in
which usurping chiefs on a younger branch wrest the ruling power from
the legitimate heir through superior ability and power to govern men. Of
these, the stories of Kihapi‘ilani on Maui and of Umi on Hawaii contain
no fantastic elements and the facts of their rule have substantial
historic support. The corresponding legends of Kuali‘i on Oahu and of
Kawelo on Kauai bear the marks of handling as fiction to such an extent
as to throw doubt upon their actual identity as historic figures.

The name of Kiha-pi‘ilani is preserved locally about the island of Maui
in connection with his feats of leaping from a height into a pool of
water, called lelekawa, and for the famous paved road about the island
with the building of which he oppressed the people. Men are said to have
stood in line and passed the stones from seashore to upland. Parts of
the road are still in place and may be followed where the trail cuts in
a straight line up and down the deep gorges which break the windward
slope of the island.

### LEGEND OF KIHAPI‘ILANI

Kihapi‘ilani is brought up on Oahu, but when his uncle scolds him for
wasting food he goes off to Lahaina to find his true father. He is
dissatisfied to take the place of a younger son. When his father sets
him on the left knee he jumps to the right, and he snatches from his
father's right hand the food and drink

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

intended for his older brother Lono. After their father's death Lono
takes pains to humiliate him. The brothers come to blows. Kiha is
defeated and saves himself only by leaping off a cliff down the hill
Pakui. He hides himself in Kula district at Kalani-wai in the Makawao
region with his wife Kumaka of a Hana family of chiefs, whom he passes
off as his sister. The two live with a man named Kahuakole, whose son he
is supposed to be. He proves a bad provider and is scolded for idleness.
He steals a stick for beating tapa in order that his high-born wife may
follow the custom of the commoners among whom they live, and himself
goes off to the potato patch at Kaluaama in Haiku after potato slips.
Offered "as many as he can carry away," he takes so large a load that an
old man who sees him pass recognizes him as a chief and takes up his
cause. He consults various kahunas as to the course he should pursue to
win the rule from his brother. He goes back to Oahu, learns surfing and,
returning to Hana district, surfs with the daughter of Ho‘olae. The
couple are repudiated by the father, but after a son is born, a
reconciliation is effected and Kiha sends his wife to ask of Ho‘olae
such lands as will give him control of the fortress Kauiki. Ho‘olae
recognizes at once that this is no common man to whom his daughter
Kolea-moku has born a child, but the chief Kihapi‘ilani. He nevertheless
loyally refuses to desert his old chief Lono. Kiha therefore retires to
Hawaii and succeeds in winning Umi's cooperation through the influence
of his sister Pi‘ikea. After the death of Lono, Umi sends an army to
establish Kiha in the succession. Ho‘olae defends Kauiki for Lono's son
and sets up a wooden image so huge as to frighten off Umi's men, who
believe it to be alive. Eventually Pi‘imaiwa‘a discovers the trick. Kiha
has Lono's son put to death and asks that the lands may be made over to
Pi‘ikea's sons. The two lads come to Maui, but are despised and done to
death and Kiha is established as ruler over his father's lands. It is
his famous son Kama-lala-walu (Son of eight branches) who gives the name
Maui-of-Kama to the island. <span id="fr_974"></span>[1](#fn_974)

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

Between the periods of Hua and Pi‘ilani, that is, between Moikeha's time
and that of Umi on Hawaii, were born at Kahinihini in Mokae, Hamoa, the
twins, "Little and big sacred ones of Hana," called Hana-la‘a-nui and
Hana-la‘a-iki, from whom respectively the chiefs of Hawaii and Maui
count descent. From the great Kaupo families of Ko‘o and Kaiuli,
descended from Kiha and his wife Koleamoku, came Kahekili's wife
Kauwahine, mother of Kalanikupule, the last ruling chief of Maui, and of
a daughter, Kailikauoha, who became the wife of the Maui chief
Ulumehe‘ihe‘i Hoapili and mother of Liliha, beloved wife of Boki of
sandalwood fame. <span id="fr_975"></span>[2](#fn_975)

The island of Hawaii lying over against Kauiki, home of the heaven-high
chiefs of the Pi‘ilani line, bred meanwhile the offspring of the second
of those usurping chiefs whose final example is found in the well-known
history of the first Kamehameha. Umi of Liloa wrested the rule over
Hamakua from the unpopular Hakau, legitimate heir of Liloa, and
eventually brought most of the island under subjection, a conquest
completed six generations later by Keawe, called "the first chief over
the whole island." Liloa is said to have died in 1575 at his home in
Waipio valley, where stood the most sacred heiau on the island, that of
Paka‘alana. To Liloa is ascribed by tradition the introduction of
homosexual practices. <span id="fr_976"></span>[3](#fn_976)

### LEGEND OF UMI SON OF LILOA

Liloa has a son Hakau by his mother's younger sister, Pinea. Later he
begets Umi upon a pretty chiefess of low rank whom he surprises at her
bathing pool and with her consent makes his wife. He leaves with her the
usual recognition tokens and Umi makes his way to his father's court and
becomes a favorite. Liloa at his death leaves the land to Hakau but the
god to Umi, and warns this favorite younger son to remain in hiding when
his father is no longer living to protect him. Umi withdraws from Waipio
with his three comrades Omaokamau, Pi‘imaiwa‘a, and Koi, whom he has
adopted from boyhood, and hides in the

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

country between Hamakua and Hilo, where he takes two wives and engages
in fishing and husbandry. The kahuna Kaoleioku observes a rainbow
hovering over the boy's head as he repairs to the place where his god is
hidden in order to lay before it the first offering of fish. To make
certain of his rank, the kahuna lets loose a pig, and when the pig
approaches the youth, the priest guesses his identity and takes up his
cause against Hakau. The youths train themselves in all the arts of war.
Four large houses are each filled with warriors from among the
disaffected who hate Hakau for his cruelties and for his neglect of the
common good. The two principal kahunas of Liloa, neglected and insulted
by Hakau, secretly take up his cause. Hakau is apprised of Umi's
preparations and induced to send his men to the forest to gather
feathers with which to adorn his warriors in a raid against Umi. Thus
left unprotected, he observes a long file of men approaching with
bundles and is told that his people are bringing in tribute. Out of the
bundles come hard tribute in the shape of stones with which Hakau is
stoned to death. Umi brings the whole land under subjection and
distributes its rule to his three comrades and the kahuna who has aided
his conquest. At the advice of this kahuna he takes wives of high rank
in order to overcome the odium of his inferior rank. Two of these are
his half-sister Kapu-kini, daughter of Liloa, and his aunt Pi‘ikea,
daughter of Pi‘ilani of Maui.

The subjection of Hilo comes about through a quarrel with the pretty
daughter of its chief Kulukulua, whom Umi has won as an unknown lover.
He makes fun of and destroys her necklace of wiliwili berries, boasting
of his own whale-tooth ornament which alone is worthy of chiefs. The
girl goes crying to her father and Umi is obliged to make good his boast
and give up his own necklace to repair the loss inflicted upon the
chiefess. A successful raid follows to regain the heirloom. Kau district
is won from the blind chief Imaikalani, who, though blind, is famed for
his stroke, which never misses. An attendant reveals to Umi that the
chief has two "birds" (guards) who give warning when anyone approaches.
The guards killed, the blind chief becomes helpless. But the most famous
of Umi's battles is that fought with the invisible powers of the spirit
world assembled to enforce a promise made by Umi's wife. Pi‘ikea has
promised her first

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

daughter to her mother's family on Oahu to rear, according to custom in
families of chiefs, but when her mother's supernatural relatives come to
take the child, Umi resists and a war follows during which an invisible
enemy strikes down Umi's men without their ever seeing who has dealt the
blow. Meanwhile the child is born, and the relatives snatch the child
and depart.

At Umi's death the body is entrusted to Koi to dispose in some concealed
spot. Koi takes with him his sister's husband; the two arrange a
substitute body to be publicly carried to burial while Umi's own body is
borne away to the cliffs of Waimanu. From this adventure the
brother-in-law, the only other man besides Koi who knows the place of
burial, never returns. Today, as the saying is, "Only the birds know
where Umi son of Liloa lies buried." <span
id="fr_977"></span>[4](#fn_977)

 

The legend of Umi is one of the most popular of all Hawaiian prose sagas
of heroes, embellished as it is with many stock episodes but still
preserving the thread of historical accuracy. Umi is still famed as a
farmer and fisherman. He laid out great taro patches in Waipio. Aku
fishing was his delight. He organized the people according to
occupations. He kept up the worship of the gods and magnified the
practice of human sacrifice. He built the heiau of Kuki‘i overlooking
the warm spring at Kapoho in Puna and that of Pohaku Hanalei in
Ka-u. <span id="fr_978"></span>[5](#fn_978) On the slope of the mountain
just back of the hill Hale-pohaha were to be seen, before the lava flows
of 1887 and 1907 covered them, the stone structures of "Umi's camp."
Seventy-five huts were counted, all facing away from the wind and built
of three slabs of pahoehoe lava rock, two set together at an angle and a
third forming the back, each hut large enough to hold two men. Larger
huts, perhaps designed for chiefs, were supported by slabs within and
built up outside

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

with stone walls shaped into a dome. <span
id="fr_979"></span>[6](#fn_979) The place on Kauiki is still pointed out
where the image stood which was later commemorated by Kamehameha as the
god Kawalaki‘i. Beside these tangible evidences of his fame, a number of
popular legends surround the name of Umi. One tells of the revenge he
took upon the man who crowded him unfairly in a surfboard contest when
he was living in obscurity in the country. Another recalls one of his
warriors named Mau-ku-leoleo who was so tall he could pick coconuts from
trees and wade out into the sea several fathoms without wetting himself
above the loins. It was said that a god, perhaps Kanaloa, gave him a
fish to eat which caused his growth. <span
id="fr_980"></span>[7](#fn_980)

No connected story is told of Keawe-nui-a-Umi. He is said to have
subdued the warring chiefs over Hawaii and to have established a popular
court in Hilo where story-telling flourished. Of his younger son
Lono-i-ka-makahiki, who made a lucky marriage and rose to the position
of ruling chief by his own ability, a long legend is recited, some of
the incidents of which historians say belong to namesakes.

### LEGEND OF LONOIKAMAKAHIKI

Lono-i-ka-makahiki is a younger son of Keawe-nui-a-Umi by his wife
Haokalani. Reared at Napo‘opo‘o near Kealakekua in Kona district by his
father's two prophets Hanna and Loli, he early becomes expert in the
arts of war and of wrestling and learns to respect his father's gods.
The old soothsayer Ka-wa‘amaukele at Kanokapa teaches him the art of
competitive word play (ho‘opa‘apa‘a) so that he is soon able to outwit
all his comrades.

At the death of his father, Kaiki-lani-wahine-ali‘i-o-Puna (The little
heavenly chiefess of Puna), daughter of Keawe-nui's older brother,
becomes the legitimate heir. Lono's older half-brother Kanaloa-kuaana is
her husband. He tests Lono's skill by hurling forty spears at him at
once, all of which Lono dodges. He therefore gives Kaikilani to Lono and
the two rule the land.

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

Lono and Kaikilani (or Kaikilani-mai-panio, another wife of Lono)
quarrel. Lono accuses her of infidelity and strikes her down (or kills
her). Her relatives on Hawaii rise against him. He retreats to the court
of Kakuhihewa at Kamooa, Kailua, on Oahu. Here he is treated with some
contempt as a nameless wanderer, but in a succession of contests in arts
with which he is unfamiliar or at a disadvantage he wins every bet by
his skill in word play and his quickness of memory. Thus he learns in a
single night a new name chant from a visiting chiefess from Kauai whose
favors he has won at a game of kiln, and is able to pass it off as his
own; succeeds in a fishing contest by punning on the names of the fish
he is supposed to have caught; visits other islands and excites envy by
his great fly brush named Eleeleua-lani made of feathers not to be had
save on Hawaii; displays a calabash containing the bones of the warring
chiefs of Hawaii subdued and slain by his father and chants their names;
wins a wife; and in general displays wit and talent to the credit of the
somewhat despised chiefly house of Umi.

After the death of Kaikilani (according to one version), he wanders
half-crazed through the uplands of Kauai, deserted by all his followers
but a single man named Kapaihi-a-Hilina, who follows him through all the
hardships of his forest life, cares for his needs, and constantly
observes the etiquette demanded toward a tapu chief, never even crossing
the chief's shadow. When Lono eats bananas the guardian contents himself
with the skins. Upon Lono's restoration to reason this man therefore is
raised to the position of favorite, which he enjoys until jealous
enemies accuse him to Lono of familiarity with the chiefess, Lono's
wife. Banished from the court, he raises a chant in which he describes
their wanderings together in such touching terms that Lono's affection
reawakens. No reconciliation is however possible until the slanderers
are put to death.

The invasion from Maui under the ambitious chief Kama-lala-walu (Son of
eight branches) occurs during Lono's rule. Lono visits Maui with his
younger brother and war leader Pupukea and the two carry on a contest of
wit with Kama-lala-walu and his brother Makakui-ka-lani, who is as tall
and slim as Pupukea is short and stocky. Observing the Maui chief's
ambition for conquest, Lono sends pretended deserters to represent

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

falsely the weakness of his own position, and thus lures Kamalalawalu
into a raid upon the island in which the Maui chief is completely
defeated, his army annihilated, and he himself slain. In spite of the
disastrous result of this expedition, undertaken as it was against the
advice of his wisest seers, the glory of Kamalalawalu's name remains
undimmed. Chants are sung in praise of his glorious death and the island
is called Maui-of-Kama because of his illustrious reign. <span
id="fr_981"></span>[8](#fn_981)

The last great name of succeeding chiefs on the Ulu line who ruled
Hawaii before the historic period of Kalani-opu‘u, ruling chief at the
time of Cook's arrival, and the rise of the Kamehameha chiefs, is that
of Keawe called chief over the whole island (-i-kekahi-ali‘i-o-ka-moku).
He had many wives and became, as the chroniclers say, "ancestor of
chiefs and commoners." When he died, his bones were encased in the woven
basket in which chiefs of high rank were worshiped. "Keawe returned and
rested in the kaai" says the chant. <span
id="fr_982"></span>[9](#fn_982)

Contemporary with or somewhat later than Keawe of Hawaii was the rise to
power of Ku-ali‘i (Ku the chief) of Oahu, said to have ultimately
subjugated the whole group and been succeeded in historic times by his
"son" Peleiholani. The Hawaiian chronologist records: "This chronology
begins with a famous chief and ruler named Kuali‘i. He was called a God,
one of supernatural power, a soldier, a runner, swift of foot. Five
times he ran around Oahu in a single day. He loved Oahu alone, he did
not care for any other country. He is said to have lived long, (until)
he walked with a cane; four times forty years. and fifteen he lived,
that is 175 years." <span id="fr_983"></span>[10](#fn_983) The story of
the famous genealogical chant of Kuali‘i has already been related, in
which through 610 lines he is glorified as "a god . . . a messenger from
heaven . . . a stranger (haole) from Kahiki." Genealogists give him a
place on the

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Kalona-iki line from Nana-ulu. <span
id="fr_984"></span>[11](#fn_984) History and fiction combine in the
account of his conquests.

### LEGEND OF KUALI‘I

Kuali‘i is born at Kalapawai (Kapalawai) in Kailua on the island of
Oahu. For the ceremony of the cutting of the navel string at the heiau
at Alala, the drums Opuku and Hawea are used. He shows his strength when
very young and is urged to save the people from the oppression of
Lono-ikaika, whom he defies by usurping his place at the dedication of
the heiau of Kawaluna in Waolani. A great army sent against him is
re-pulsed and most of the chiefs slain, although he has but a single
follower to wield the two-edged stone axe named Haula-nui-akea, called
also Manai-a-ka-lani, which is his only weapon. Thus the southern part
of the island between Moanalua and Maunaloa is brought under his rule.
He lives at Kalanihale in Kailua and becomes proficient in the arts of
war. At Kauai, to which island he goes after kauila wood for fashioning
spears, he takes on Malana‘ihaehae and Kaha‘i as chief warriors and
makes for himself the spear named Huli-moku-alana (Victorious
over-turner of islands). Returning, he meets a great army drawn up on
the plains in Lihue and three men defeat twelve thousand. In three great
battles, at Malama-nui, Pule‘e, Paupauwela, he subdues the whole island.
He goes to Hawaii and routs a chief named Haalilo, but returns to Oahu
to repel a revolt of the Waianae chiefs at Kalena. He wins Molokai when
called to help defend the fishing grounds of Kekaha against the chiefs
from the northern half of the island, Lanai when called to aid Haloalena
in a war with Maui. Kauai, hearing of his conquests, also hastens to
make peace with him, and thus the whole group acknowledges Kuali‘i as
lord.

Four Lono chiefs rule Oahu before the time of Kakuhihewa: Lono-huli-lani
rules the north side of the island and Waialua, Lono-ikaika the south
side, Lono-kukaelekoa has Waianae and Ewa, Lono-huli-moku has
Koolau-poko. It is hence against the Lono domination that Kuali‘i
rebels. His comrade in the first

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

battle is Maheleana \[a name given today to the place at the east point
of Hawaii where winds divide (mahele) and blow east down the Hamakua
coast and north down the Puna coast\]. Later leading warriors are
Kaha‘i; Malana‘i-haehae, called in chant

"Offspring of mischief-making Niheu  
Who dammed the waters of Kekeuna";

and Paepae from the fishing grounds of Kekaha in Molokai.

Kauhi, son of Kauhi-a-Kama of Maui, becomes his battle leader as a
result of the affair at Lanai. Haloalena, the amiable ruling chief of
Lanai, has a hobby for collecting bird skeletons and will demote any
district overseer who allows the bones of trapped birds to be broken.
The mischievous son of Kauhi-a-Kama is banished to Lanai. There he
breaks up the chief's skeletons. Haloalena sends to beg Kuali‘i to join
him in war against Maui. Kuali‘i questions Kauhi and finds that the boy
has twisted his father's innocent words of reproof for his conduct, when
banishing him to Lanai, into an order to stir up war. Kuali‘i is so
pleased with the boy's daring that he takes him into his house-hold and
makes him leader of his soldiers.

Kuali‘i takes as wife a very high chiefess of Maui born of a
brother-and-sister marriage and hence of pio rank. Her name is
Ka-lani-kahi-make-i-ali‘i. During the rule of their son Peleiholani,
Oahu is said to have prospered more than at any other time since
Maili-kukahi. <span id="fr_985"></span>[12](#fn_985)

 

Certain elements in the Kuali‘i tradition give the impression that we
have here the legend not of a single chief but of a political movement
led in the name of a god, perhaps belonging to the ancient Ku line and
directed against the Lono worshipers. The names Ku-ali‘i, Ku-nui-akea,
Ku-i-ke-ala-i-kaua-o-ka-lani (Ku in the stone in battle of the heavenly
one) and the repeated assertion of divinity suggest that some symbolic
object is here impersonated as a god, like the feather god Kaili, who
became in Kamehameha's day the war god Ku-kaili-moku, and was similarly
handed down in a family

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

line as a god of victory in battle. The impression is strengthened by
the chronological uncertainty of Kuali‘i's period, the length and
character of his chant, the story of his birth, ushered in by the sacred
pahu drums, the boast of his speed, and by the fact that his antagonists
on Oahu bear Lono names. His early act of rebellion in taking upon
himself a ceremony which belonged to the ruling chief to perform was in
itself an assumption of superior divinity.

Still more curious, if we are hearing the story of a mere rebel chief,
is the personal inactivity that accompanies his conquests. In his first
fight he is represented as too young to have learned the arts of war. He
persuades his father to stay beside him for his own protection, gives
his weapon into the hands of his comrade Maheleana, pulls the covers
over his head, and sleeps until completely surrounded by the enemy. It
is then Mahele, not Kuali‘i, who gets up and mows down the hosts until
most of Lono-ikaika's chiefs are slain. Again at Kalaupapa on Molokai he
lies inactive in the bottom of the boat until it is lifted on the
shoulders of the enemy to bring it ashore, when he and his companion mow
down all the bearers with the famous battle-axe. Thus he wins all
Molokai. Later, finding that his leading warriors are competent to fight
alone, he does not go out with them to battle. Instead he goes secretly
and each time brings back a feather cloak from a warrior he has slain.
Since he is a swift runner and a fear-less leaper, no one can keep up
with him to discover his identity. The legend continues:

At the battle of Kalakoa a boy from Kaoio point sees him passing Kualoa.
The boy's grandmother sends the boy out with shrimps to feed him and a
fan to do him honor. The boy is careful not to use the fan himself and
not to step on the chief's shadow. After the battle of Kukaniloko, when
Ku bears away the cloak, the boy takes a finger and an ear of the dead
warrior to whom it belonged. Ku is pleased with his daring and rewards
him with his own loincloth, through which Ku is recognized as the
slayer. <span id="fr_986"></span>[13](#fn_986)

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The well-known motive of the disguised champion
is here easily to be recognized as by no means an integral part of the
Kuali‘i legend. It occurs in several other kupua tales in Hawaii in
which the hero plays the part of an inactive conqueror. It is as if the
hero in such tales acts not in his nature as a human being but as a god
to insure victory to those who are fighting his cause. This is a
thoroughly native conception, one with which the romantic and no doubt
borrowed motive of the disguised champion, in spite of the pains taken
to work up the local color, is quite alien.

The episode of the disguised champion occurs in some South Sea groups.

*Maori*. Hatupatu's father sends his sons to slay his enemy Raumati. The
brothers sail without Hatupatu, who follows by diving under water. The
brothers still resist his company and refuse to give him any fighting
men. He dresses clumps of grass in feather cloaks taken from the enemy
and himself wears so many different costumes that he is believed to
represent a host. All his brother's divisions are broken. Hatupatu
rallies them and slays Raumati. Each of the brothers brings a head to
his father as Raumati's but only Hatupatu can produce the true
head. <span id="fr_987"></span>[14](#fn_987)

 

*Tonga*. A woman bears to Sinilau twelve sons who are made chiefs over
the different island groups, but her first child is born in the form of
a fat lizard called piliopo. A girl comes to marry him but is afraid of
his form and runs home. Her sister shows no fear and he takes her home
to his mother. When the young men go to match clubs, day by day a
handsome stranger comes off victor. She finally sees the red paint of
his cheeks under the lizard's skin and recognizes her husband. <span
id="fr_988"></span>[15](#fn_988)

 

*San Cristoval* (*Bauro*). Taraematawa while in seclusion with the other
boys of Bauro is drowned, but two girls find his body and persuade the
old kahuna to restore him sound and well. All the men have gone out
fishing save one lame boy. Tarae makes a tremendous haul of fish, then
hides himself and the lame boy

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

claims the credit until the men watch and discover the true hero. <span
id="fr_989"></span>[16](#fn_989)

With the semimythical legend of Kuali‘i concludes the legendary history
of Hawaiian chiefs up to the eighteenth century, and begins the
narratives of heroes whose lives are so bound up with fictional elements
as to class them with imaginative rather than with legendary
story-telling. Although often believed in as true, the facts they record
bear all the marks of conscious exaggeration and embellishment useful to
the entertainer rather than to the historian. They belong to the field
of story-telling as literature--equally true to the social background
which they represent and much more revealing of the imaginative range of
Hawaiian thought (conditioned as it is by tradition and circumstance and
colored by fancy) and of the philosophy of life which shapes the moral
action of the tale, but avoided by the scholar whose interest is in the
purely external facts of Polynesian migration.

The scholar will in fact already have discovered such a play of fancy
elaborating so-called legendary history as to discount the value of the
distinction and to challenge its purpose. Fiction may be used to
illustrate the general trend of a period or to emphasize the position of
figures who play a part in it. But fiction is also useful as a subject
in itself, with the idea of observing how the entertainer works up a
traditional story to please his particular audience, what favorite
characters occur, what types they present, and what embellishment either
of background, incident, or interpretation, enters into the invention.
This, in comparison with a similar type of tale told in other related
groups and under a different setting, gives an insight into the way in
which life looks to the mind of the composer. That words as signs of
thought are used rather than tangible material, that the pattern
followed is a story pictured to his mind out of his own knowledge of
life, rather than an object to be bettered for its particular purpose,
makes the completed form no less useful as an example of the culture
which it represents. Story-telling is not to be neglected as an element
in social life because it cannot

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

be exhibited on the shelves of a museum. Nor is it to be discredited by
the historian because it plays havoc with calendar events. The
comparison of stories over a related area gives, historically, evidence
of a parent form, and an accumulation of such evidence may eventually
help in the solution of worldwide problems of distribution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_974"></span>[388:1](hm30.htm#fr_974) For. Pol. Race 2:
97-99, 206-207; Col. 4: 236-255; 5: 176-181, 376-379; Thrum, *More
Tales*, 73-86; Kamakau, *Ke Au Okoa*, December 1-15, 1870.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[389:2](hm30.htm#fr_975) For. Pol. Race 2:
126-127, 261.

<span id="fn_976"></span>[389:3](hm30.htm#fr_976) *Ibid*. 73-78; For.
Col. 6: 320; Malo, 334-335.

<span id="fn_977"></span>[391:4](hm30.htm#fr_977) For. Pol. Race 1: 192;
2: 74-78, 96-108; Col. 4: 178-235, 244-255; 5: 176-181, 378-383;
*Moolelo Hawaii*, 41; Ellis, Tour, 89, 274; Pogue, 81-86; Malo, 336-345;
Kalakaua, 265-315; Thrum, *More Tales*, 98-103; Remy-Brigham, 18-29;
Remy-Alexander, *HAA* 1888, 78-85; Kamakau, *Ke Au Okoa*, November
3-December 1, 1870.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[391:5](hm30.htm#fr_978) For. Pol. Race 2: 101;
Col. 5: 200; *HAA* 1908, 55.

<span id="fn_979"></span>[392:6](hm30.htm#fr_979) A. S. Baker, *HAA*
1917, 62-70; and given by Judge Haselden of Waiohinu, Kau, December,
1914.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[392:7](hm30.htm#fr_980) Ellis, *Tour*, 89;
Kalakaua, 14, 279.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[394:8](hm30.htm#fr_981) For. Pol. Race 2:
114-125; Col. 4: 256-263; 5: 436-451; Kamakau, *Ke Au Okoa*, January
5-February 2, 1871.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[394:9](hm30.htm#fr_982) Kamakau, *Ke Au Okoa*,
February 2, 1871; Kalakaua, 333-349; For. Pol. Race 2: 125-129; Col. 4:
26-29.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[394:10](hm30.htm#fr_983) BPBM MS. col.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[395:11](hm30.htm#fr_984) For. Pol. Race 1:
195-196.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[396:12](hm30.htm#fr_985) For. Col. 4: 364-434;
Pol. Race 2: 278-288.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[397:13](hm30.htm#fr_986) For. Col. 4: 426-431.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[398:14](hm30.htm#fr_987) Grey, 120-124.

<span id="fn_988"></span>[398:15](hm30.htm#fr_988) Gifford, *Bul.* 8:
194-196.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[399:16](hm30.htm#fr_989) Fox, 119-121.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIX. Kupua Stories](hm31)
