[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm34)  [Next](hm36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

### XXXIII

### THE KANA LEGEND

KANA, the stretching kupua, is the hero of a number of local legends
explaining gashes in the contour of an island, or markings like a
footprint in the rocks, or displacement of rock ledges as in some
convulsion of nature. He travels about the islands destroying evil
kupua, makes a journey to the entrance to the underworld to restore the
stolen sun to his people, and, in association with his mischievous kupua
brother Niheu (Sand crab), restores to her home and husband his mother
Hina who has been abducted by a Molokai chief called Kapepe‘e-kauila
(The jagged lightning) and carried away to his home on the hill Haupu.

### LEGEND OF KANA AND THE RESCUE OF HINA

(*a*) *Fornander versions*. The firstborn of Hakalanileo and Hina is
born in the form of a rope and brought up by his grandmother Uli in the
uplands of Pi‘ihonua back of Hilo in a house called Halau-ololo. As the
child grows, the house has to be lengthened from mountain to sea in
order to contain him. The chief Kapepe‘ekauila sails over on the hill
Haupu to the island of Mokuola off Hilo bay. Hina climbs upon the hill
to take a look about and is borne off to Molokai to become the wife of
the Molokai chief. Her husband appeals to his son Niheu, who sends him
to Kana, at the sight of whose eyes the father flees terrified. Kana
joins the war party, but twice the weight of his hand sinks canoes
prepared by all the canoe builders of Hawaii. Finally Uli digs up the
canoe Kau-mai-elieli in the uplands of Paliuli. In vain the prophet Moi,
brother of Nuakea, warns the Molokai chief of defeat. Kapepe‘e trusts to
his warriors to defend the hill. The messenger birds Kolea (Plover) and
Ulili (Snipe) are sent to reconnoiter and the warrior snout-fish
Ke-au-leina-kahi (or a monster turtle) is despatched to destroy the
canoe. The warrior is slain with the club Wawa-i-ka-lani and a huge rock
rolled

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

from the cliff is caught by Kana and propped with a pebble to check its
progress (or the canoe turned aside to avoid a deceptive reef). Niheu
lands, breaks down a barricade of ulei and ti leaves, and would have
escaped with his mother from the house Hale-uki had not the birds laid
hold of his sacred hair and Hina run back when he put up his hands to
ward them off. Kana now attempts to raise himself above the hill and the
two contestants stretch themselves up into the blue sky. Kana's body
becomes like a spider web and to prevent starving he lays himself across
to Hawaii, and puts his head in at his grandmother's door. As his feet
become plump again with her feeding, Niheu cuts at them with his stone
axe to remind him of his task. Uli tells him that the hill Haupu is a
giant turtle named Ka-honu-nui-maeleka (or -maeaea) whose stretching
power lies in its flippers. He breaks these off, crushes its back to
pieces, and brings Hina back to her husband. From the pieces of the hill
Haupu come the turtles today in Hawaiian waters.

 

(*b*) *Rice version*. Haka-lani-leo (Listener to the heavenly voice),
child of Ku and Uli, weds Haka, ruling chief of Hilo district, and has
ten giant sons, then a dwarfish son Niheu with strength and cunning
beyond his brothers, and finally Kana, born in the shape of a rope and
flung into the pigpen. Uli comes and carries it away to the uplands
where she places it in a calabash of water and in a few days it develops
into a child and in forty days has acquired forty feet in length and
large bright eyes like the moon. Keoloewa abducts the beautiful
Hakalanileo while she is out surfing and carries her away in his canoe
to Haupu. The husband appeals to her sons, but Niheu is the only one
able to tell where she is hidden and as his strength is good only for
his own island he is unable to avenge his father on the Molokai chief.
Kana appears among them in the form of a child and easily catches in his
arms a great fish over which they are contesting in strength. His
brothers bind him, but Uli appears and at her bidding he breaks the
bonds. Niheu is now encouraged by this new supporter to attempt the
Molokai expedition. He tries to fell a tree for canoes but each morning
the tree is replaced, until Uli teaches him to make an offering to his
ancestors and the forest god Kaikupake‘e is caught and made to promise

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

aid for the building. In two days all is complete. Kana in rope form
joins Niheu for the launching and allows the canoes to run so swiftly
over the shoulders of the giant brothers that all are knocked down and
crushed to death. With a single helper called Stone the two brothers set
out. The chief's bird scouts find the track of a giant on the sand but
see no war party. In spite of Mo-i's warning the Molokai chief trusts to
the stretching powers of Haupu and to his warrior swordfish. Stone kills
the fish, Niheu fails when five hairs are pulled from his head, and Kana
tries the stretching contest with the hill Haupu, using each of his five
bodies in succession--human, rope, convolvulus vine, banana, and spider
web. Fed and instructed by Uli, as in the other version, he crushes the
backs of the turtles and so breaks their stretching power.

 

(*c*) *Forbes version*. The hairy chief Ka-pepe‘e-kauila desires the
beautiful Hina (or Hoohoakalani) and when she and her husband
Hakalanileo come to live on the east side of Haupu he takes her for his
wife and has 'all his hairs plucked out to please her. The deserted
husband goes to seek a strong man to restore his wife to him but finds
even such kupua heroes as Kamalalawalu, Niuloihiki, Kaulu, and Lonokaeho
unequal to the task. His kupua son Niheu fails also in bush-pulling and
canoe-building tests, but his son Kana merely scratches about in the
sand and a double canoe called Kaumueli is ready to set sail. The two
brothers embark and while Kana sleeps, Niheu with Kana's rod Waka-i-lani
crushes down a ledge on which the canoe runs aground, wards off a wall
of water, a monster fish, a sharp-toothed shark, and a turtle, all
warriors sent against them by the Molokai chief. In the morning they
free the canoe from en-tangling trees. Niheu, however, fails to capture
his mother and the stretching contest follows. One of Kana's legs is
named Keanea, the other Kaipanea. It is by pruning the kamani trees that
Kapepe‘e causes the hill to stretch upward. When these trees are
destroyed the power of Haupu is ended. <span
id="fr_1123"></span>[1](#fn_1123)

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

A comparison of the incidents in this story with similar fiction in the
South Seas shows that the legend is not native to Hawaii, however
exactly localized and firmly fixed in Hawaiian chronology, but reflects
social customs or story themes found also in other parts of the Pacific.

The swimming hill Haupu as the means of the abduction has parallels in
other groups. In a Tongan story the chief's rock at his bathing pool
hears him wish for Hina from Samoa. It goes away to Samoa, its top
covered with sweet-smelling herbs. Hina moves her sleeping mat to the
rock and is carried back to the Tongan chief. <span
id="fr_1124"></span>[2](#fn_1124) In Rarotonga it is said of Tinirau,
"If he desired to visit any island, his island would take him
there." <span id="fr_1125"></span>[3](#fn_1125) In Mangaia, Tinirau
calls his island Motutapu to shore and embarks upon it. <span
id="fr_1126"></span>[4](#fn_1126) In Dobu, Nuakekepoaki's "underwater
swift-moving rock is still one of the terrors of the seas to all bold
sailors who hug the reef between Dobu and the Trobriands." By means of
it he carries off a beauty of Tarawa whom men have courted in
vain. <span id="fr_1127"></span>[5](#fn_1127) The case of Anaelike and
her swimming island in Hawaiian romance is similar to these instances.
The fact that the word moku, meaning "cut off," is used for both an
island and a ship may have given impulse to this myth of the navigable
island. The Maori Nga-i-tahu tradition is that "some of the mountains
which we now see were ships in days gone by."

The stabilization of the hill Haupu is represented as depending upon
either cutting the flippers of the turtle upon which it rests or
thinning out the kamani trees that grow at the water's edge. A note in
Malo records an enigmatical folk-tale about the hill Haupu to the effect
that the hill sinks and rises again due to the movements of a giant
turtle, and only by killing the turtle can the disturbance be stopped.
Mo-i, the kupua ruler of Molokai, refuses to do this and the plovers
accordingly tear out his eyes and are banished to the barren hill of
Maakuewa. <span id="fr_1128"></span>[6](#fn_1128) In San Cristoval a
turtle holds up a rock at Haununu. When an earthquake occurs it clasps
the rock, otherwise the island would go under. <span
id="fr_1129"></span>[7](#fn_1129) The legend of the island

<span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

of Tahiti is that it was once part of Ra‘iatea but a pretty girl named
Terehe went to bathe during a time of tapu at Opoa and the gods were
angry. There was a great convulsion of the earth and the land came away
in the shape of a great fish which swallowed the girl and became
possessed by her spirit, and it swam away and formed the island of
Tahiti. In order to make the land stable its sinews must be cut. All the
warriors cut at the sinews in vain; finally the axe of King
Marere-nui-marua-to‘a in the hands of the victorious warrior Tafa‘i cuts
of itself and forms the winding gulfs of Tahiti, after which the land
becomes stable. <span id="fr_1130"></span>[8](#fn_1130)

The stretching contest of two kupua is told in Tahiti of Hiro and his
grandfather, who can reach up only to Hiro's shoulderblades. <span
id="fr_1131"></span>[9](#fn_1131) The Malay Nigritos of North Borneo say
that two magicians, father and son, contend and the father wins because
the son cannot attain the father's height. <span
id="fr_1132"></span>[10](#fn_1132) The story suggests the central
Polynesian myth of Tane pursuing his father Vatea. In San Cristoval two
serpents have a stretching contest. In the Lau islands the kupua of
Thakaundrove carries off a man's ornament while he is bathing. The god
Tui Vutu runs after him, wins in a stretching contest, and brings back
the ornament. <span id="fr_1133"></span>[11](#fn_1133)

The incident of the desecrated head of Niheu which causes him to lose
hold of Hina and permit her to escape to her new lover is not found in
other groups. Hawaiians call by the name niheu (sand crab) a special
method of head dressing, skewered on top, and plastered with red clay
(alaea) such as is worn by the impersonator of deity who accompanies the
kahuna when he removes the tapu and purifies the land during the
ceremonies accompanying the erection of a luakini heiau. <span
id="fr_1134"></span>[12](#fn_1134) The sacredness of the head of a
chief, which must never be touched if it can be avoided, even the
cutting of the hair being performed by a close relative, is reported
also for the Marquesas and the Lau islands, and is probably true for
other groups. <span id="fr_1135"></span>[13](#fn_1135)

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

But it is not detached incidents alone which correspond with southern
fiction; the whole setup of the legend has parallels, perhaps even
variants, in famous kupua legends from middle Polynesia. A kupua
champion like Kana is represented with the powers of stretching to the
heavens and terrifying by his gaze. Like Kana he is born in nonhuman
form and preserved by a supernatural relative who recognizes him as a
god. He develops human form and, in these South Sea stories, must be at
once fed with human food and provided with a loincloth before he is able
to live among men (as in similar Hawaiian stories the ceremony of
incision is performed in the heiau). He obtains a weapon and a canoe
famous in story. He serves as a champion against enemies who have
terrorized the country. In many kupua legends he himself becomes a
terror and his death is sought even by those he has protected.

The Hiro legend in the middle islands contains some of these traits. In
Ra‘iatea, Hiro is born a giant. He lives at Uporu on Tahiti with his
maternal grandmother Cave. <span id="fr_1136"></span>[14](#fn_1136) In
the Aitutaki version he is born in Enuakura and sails to avenge the
death of his younger brother. The clan inimical to him he crushes to
death by sending the canoe along their shoulders at the launching. <span
id="fr_1137"></span>[15](#fn_1137) This Aitutaki version resembles the
Kaha‘i legend, and in fact episodes are readily borrowed from one hero
tale to another.

A closer likeness to the kupua champion of the Kana legend is Hono‘ura
(Honokura, Ono) of Rarotonga, the Tuamotus, Ra‘iatea, the Marquesas,
Mangaia, and perhaps Rotuma. In Rarotonga, says Henry, Hono‘ura is a
contemporary of the Naea reputed to have fled to Hawaii. He is poet,
warrior, navigator. His name occurs in the genealogies of chiefs. He
lives in the mountains of Tahiti and his food consists in edible
fernroot and fresh-water fish. His canoe is named Te-ivi-i-kaua. He weds
Ata-nui and has a son named The-double-headed. He follows the chief
Ta‘ihia, wars with the Marquesans, and weds Ina. He dies at Tubai, but
others say at Ra‘iatea. <span id="fr_1138"></span>[16](#fn_1138)

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

(*a*) *Marquesan version*. Ono is born in the form of an egg to
Kua-iana-nei when her husband Tana-oa-kauhue is slain by her second
husband Aio. The egg enters a sacred temanu tree beside the gods' house.
His grandfathers Iipo and Iiao learn this in a dream and rear Ono on
air. Two of his brothers in succession are sent with offerings of fish
to their grandparents. They eat the fish on the way, and Ono kills them
and tears out their eyes, but subsequently restores them to life. In
human form Ono makes a great catch of fish. He is girded with a
loincloth and engages in wrestling matches, in which he kills
Na-mahi-a-Tanaoa at Taaoa and Na-mahi-o-tu-Fiti, brother of his Fijian
wife Peautona, at Atuona. The Atuona people try to put him to death.
They set him tasks such as lifting a rock from a pit and cutting down a
giant tree, both of which he easily performs and escapes their designs
for putting him to death while so engaged. He bids them cast him into
the sea, where he is caught in a net and his head cut off. The body
remains as a coral formation off the coast. The head is cherished by his
sisters and twelve births follow, each birth providing a portion of
Ono's now restored body. He goes again to live with his grand-fathers.
He sleeps and they plant a tree over him and flee in fear. While he
sleeps darkness reigns; when he stands up his head towers above the
clouds and it is light. In human proportions once more he contends with
two magicians in magic and gets possession of the island of Mohotani,
where he dwells thereafter. <span id="fr_1139"></span>[17](#fn_1139)

 

(*b*) *Tuamotu version*. The grandson of a chiefess from Borabora and
the chief of Ta‘aroa, upland on the island of Tahiti, weds a chiefess
and a son is born "concealed in a great dormant clod." He is hidden in
the cave Po-fatu-ra‘a on the side of the mountain Tahu‘a-reva where
dwells the god Ra‘a, and out of the clod springs Hono‘ura, "a giant with
telescopic powers." Three other shapely brothers are born to his
parents. He is discovered in the cave living upon stones, which he
alternately

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

swallows and rejects, and his mother hastens to bring him food and a
girdle. When he is brought out before the people his head towers above
the clouds. He is engaged to join an expedition of vengeance against
Tuamotuan warriors who have slain the young chief Tuo-ha‘a and carried
away his body to the royal altar at Takume. His weapon is the great
spear Ruaipaoa. No one can budge the ship Aere in which they are to sail
until he gives a shove. They pursue the enemy to Hiva (Nukuhiva), slay
the demon beast Tu-ma-tahi who guards Hiva, its chief Tu-tapu, and the
warrior billfish Te-a‘u-roa who leads the attack on Tahiti and now
guards Ta-kume. There they find the bones of the slain chief, beguile
and slay the hosts of the Toarere, and carry back the chiefess ‘Ata-ai
(or Maruia) to Tahiti. <span id="fr_1140"></span>[18](#fn_1140)

 

(*c*) *Ra‘iatea version* (*from text by Williams in 1846*). The
grandchild of Ta‘ihia of Tahiti and child of the warrior chiefess of
Puna-auia is born "a nondescript," placed in a cave, and develops into a
man of giant proportions. The well-formed brothers are sent to
propitiate him with food and a loincloth in order that he may join an
expedition after masts for the chief's canoes. When he shows himself his
head towers to the skies. They offer him a royal name, but he calls
himself Maui-tua, Maui-aro (Backwoodsman in front, -behind). In a
wrestling match he overcomes his warrior mother. The terrified father
attempts to have him killed by throwing stones down upon him, all of
which he catches in his hands. On a voyage in the ship Aere the sailors
throw him into the sea in his sleep, but his brothers pull him in and he
kills with his spear Rua-i-paoa the man-devouring beast (pua‘a) which
has been ravaging Ra‘iatea. On a second expedition after parrot feathers
he attacks the Hi-van warriors and finally leads his brothers against
the giant billfish of Hiva who has overcome Borabora, kills him and the
chief Tu-tapu, and takes back the chiefess Te-puna-ai-ari‘i to the chief
Ta‘ihia of Tahiti. <span id="fr_1141"></span>[19](#fn_1141)

 

(*d*) *Mangaia version*. Ono comes from the land whence came an ironwood
tree to the valley of Angaruaau which all have tried in vain to cut down
to make weapons out of the wood. It is

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

guarded by the demon boar Vaotere. With his spade Rua-i-paku he kills
the boar after uprooting the tree, and carves from the wood the weapons
of today. From the chips spring more iron-wood trees. In a chant the
destruction of Nukuhiva is lamented. <span
id="fr_1142"></span>[20](#fn_1142)

 

\(e\) *Rotuma version*. Foouma is a tall boy who can walk across the
sea. He is brought up in a house built in the bush and grows a fathom
each year up to eight fathoms. He overthrows the people who have exacted
tribute from his relatives and sets up and defends a ruling chief. <span
id="fr_1143"></span>[21](#fn_1143)

 

Still more closely related to the story of Kana at the hill Haupu is the
Apakura legend as told in the Marquesas. Apakura is descended from Kae
and his wife from the island of women. She has a kupua brother called
Pakaha-ima-oa (The long-armed one with fear-compelling eyes) or
Haa-tau-niva. Without his help, as in the Kana story, the other brother
who takes up her cause is unable to provide a canoe for the journey of
vengeance. Although the motive for revenge varies, the abduction of a
wife as against the death of a young relative, the action of these
stories follows exactly the same pattern, analyzed as follows:

\(A\) Search for a champion; (A1) one champion after another discarded;
(A2) a long-armed fierce-eyed champion discovered.

\(B\) Building of war canoes; (B1) unsuccessful without aid of the
champion; (B2) or some supernatural helper.

\(C\) Prophetic warnings disregarded by the enemy.

\(D\) Outguards of the enemy met and destroyed one by one.

\(E\) Defeat and death of the enemy; (E1) after a stretching contest.

### APAKURA LEGEND

(*a*) *Marquesas* (*Handy version from Atuona*). Te-hina-tu-o-kae, chief
of Taaroa, has eight children only two of whom have natural forms. The
two human children are Apekua (called Peikua) and the youngest son
E-tia-i-te-toua. Apekua's son Pota-a-te-mau

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

is affianced to the daughter of the chief Hatea-motua, but when he goes
to get his bride he is not recognized and, in spite of the signs he
shows and the warnings of Hatea-motua's priest, he is slain by
Hatea-motua. Apekua seeks revenge, but each of her brothers turns a deaf
ear to her plea until she comes to E-tia-i-te-toua, who arouses the
allied tribes and sets out to build a great war canoe. The tree
Aniani-te-ani resists felling and Etia is told in a dream to seek under
a seven-branched coral in the sea for his brother Haa-tau-niva, who is
called later Pakaha-ima-oa, "the long-armed one with fear-compelling
eyes." This brother tells Etia where to find the adz with which to fell
the tree. When the canoe is completed, Ima-oa stretches out his arm and
snatches victims from Hatea-motua's household to serve as the dedicatory
sacrifice. In vain Hatea trusts to his three defenders who have the
bodies of a living vine which drags down canoes, weeds to entangle them,
and a giant octopus to engulf them. All three are slain, the people
flee, and Hatea-motua suffers a cruel death in revenge for his treatment
of Apekua's sacred son. <span id="fr_1144"></span>[22](#fn_1144)

 

(*b*) *Samoa*. Sons of Tu-i-fiti go to make war against the chief Vaea
of Vaimauga village (on Upolu). While they sleep Vaea comes down and
sets their canoes up in the boughs of the trees. To appease Vaea they
offer him their sister Apa-‘ula. Her child is born on the return voyage.
The brothers kill and eat the child. The mother goes back to Vaea to
demand vengeance, but he is dead. His head speaks and tells her to apply
to his brother Va‘atausili. She meets an uncouth lad who tells her that
he is Va‘atausili. The lad enters a cave to sleep and his body grows
long, straight, and beautiful. He tears up a coconut tree, goes with
Apa‘ula to Fiji, and kills her brothers. Tu-i-savalalo is the name of
the child, from the place Savalalo where the father "stood" (tu) to
watch the boat off. <span id="fr_1145"></span>[23](#fn_1145)

 

(*c*) *Moriori* (*Shand version*). Apukura avenges herself upon Maurea
for the death of her son Tu who goes with his nine brothers, concealed,
to the house of Maurea and, being discovered,

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

is killed and his eyes gouged out and eaten by the sacred woman Maurea.
Apukura seeks her relative Whakatau to avenge her. As she passes along,
each person she questions sends her on farther. Whakatau is finally
found and proves to her his strength by leaping over a mountain. He
refuses her request, she leaves him, he follows and is there before her.
A canoe is manned and Whakatau is concealed among the rowers. Pairs of
warriors approach and are slain. Whakatau hides in the house of the two
leaders and, having put them to death, escapes and burns down the house
and all within. <span id="fr_1146"></span>[24](#fn_1146)

 

(*d*) *Maori*. Apakura bears to Tuhuruhuru, son of Rupe's sister, a son
named Tuwhakararo, next a daughter named Mairatea, who marries
Poporokewa of the Ati-Hapai tribe. Her brother comes to visit her and is
killed by a young man who is jealous of his sweetheart's attentions to
the stranger. The younger brother at home, named Whakatau-potiki,
determines to avenge his death. He gets up a great war party, comes to
the home of Poporokewa, gets inside in disguise, kills the chief, and
burns the house down with all those within. <span
id="fr_1147"></span>[25](#fn_1147)

 

(*e*) *Rarotonga*. The oldest of Apakura's eight brothers becomes
jealous of her son Turangataua because the nephew out-does him in reed
casting, and orders him killed and eaten. Apakura goes to seek
vengeance, but no one throughout the land is found to avenge her. The
sons of Tangaroa-maro-uka become her champions. Only two of her brothers
escape and one of these makes the first settlement on Rarotonga. The
last encounter is between Vakatau-ii and the oldest brother who has
given the order for her son's death. Her champion would have been slain
in the fight had not his brothers noosed the opponent. <span
id="fr_1148"></span>[26](#fn_1148)

 

It may well be argued that such a succession of incidents is an
exceedingly natural one for a revenge story which entails a journey
overseas, and is to be recognized in the Kaha‘i and Laka legends.
Nevertheless, the similarity of incident in connection with the
particular powers ascribed to the kupua in

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

each case makes it seem probable that the two legends are variants. The
stretching contest in the Hawaiian story does not occur in the much
grimmer and more realistic Marquesan. It is tempting to connect the
curious difference between the habitats of the two heroes--one dwelling
in Uli's "house" in the uplands which has to be made larger as the kupua
grows longer, the other asleep under a seven-branched coral in the
sea--with the Marquesan Ono story, where Ono's body grows into a coral
reef while his head is born again to perform added feats. A cave in the
uplands is the normal dwelling place of the wild champion in the
Hono‘ura story, before he is brought into public notice to perform some
service for his chief. But the Rarotongan story of the noosing of the
enemy in the last extremity makes it clear that the stretching power
ascribed to the Hawaiian Kana is derived from his use of the fighting
device of the lasso; possibly also his power to hold the canoe in
mid-channel from the use of rope and anchor. An intention of this sort
in the mind of the story teller is consistent with the concealment of
the champion in a packet and with his inertia while Niheu engages in
action, as in some versions of the story. It agrees also with the rope
form in which he was born and in which Kana is worshiped by jugglers
with the prayer,

O Kana! O Kana!  
Rough line of hala root or bark of hau tree,  
Point and declare as to the sleeper,  
The foster child of Uli,  
Put on your rope body,  
Lay off your human form  
In this trick of yours and mine, O Kana! <span
id="fr_1149"></span>[27](#fn_1149)

A contemporary of Honokura in Tuamotuan legend may supply the abduction
element of the Hawaiian Kana story. A Napuka legend tells how the
beautiful Huarei, betrothed to the famous voyager Moeava, "had not her
equal in all the surrounding isles"; how she was abducted by Patira, a
giant from a distant place called Marama, so tall that he strode

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

from island to island; and how Moeva slew Patira in single encounter
with a stone from his sling as David killed Goliath. <span
id="fr_1150"></span>[28](#fn_1150) Here again the rope element may have
significance in connection with the wielding of the sling.

A journey to restore the sun to a darkened world is told of Kana in much
the same terms as that told of Kahai's expedition in search of his
father, with the kupua Niheu, whose power is said to extend no farther
than his own island, playing the part of Alihi.

### LEGEND OF KANA RESTORING THE SUN

Niheu treats roughly the messenger of Kahoalei(-li‘i) ruling chief of
Kahiki, and the chief in anger takes away the sun, moon, and stars from
Hawaii. Uli sends Kana with Niheu to bring them back. As Kana stretches
to the sky to reach the light, Niheu dies of cold and is left behind,
but Kana bends over to Kahiki and drops into the spring of two old
relatives, who give him fire to' guide him ahead and wind to bear him
behind until he reaches the border of Kahoalei's land. He finds Uli's
brother Manu-a guarding the pit down which the food is kept by the
people below and handed up to those above. He puts down a plump black
hand which his relatives recognize and fill, first with food, then with
water, then with the birds called Kaiwea (fishhawk) which signal the
day, then birds and the cock that crows for dawn, finally stars, moon,
and sun, all of which he places in the sky. The chief himself next
emerges and returns with Kana to tour the land, restoring Niheu to life
on the way. When Ka-hoa-lei reaches Hawaii he finds that Kana and Niheu
have both died and he rules there many years. <span
id="fr_1151"></span>[29](#fn_1151)

The legend of the abduction of Hina is laid in the time of Keoloewa, son
of Kamauaua and ruling chief on Molokai, whose name is in some versions
given to the abductor; and since Niheu is said to have as grandmother
Hina-i-kapa‘i-kua, wife of Nana-maoa of Oahu on the Ulu line, in common
with Kapawa who came from the south and was contemporary

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

with Pili whom Paao brought to rule Hawaii, the chronology harks back to
an early period in Hawaiian annals. Nuakea, moreover, wife of Keoloewa,
was a granddaughter of the Maweke family on Oahu, and her brother Mo-i
is named as a famous kahuna in traditional history. Uli, the mother's
mother who saves the unformed kupua from the rubbish heap and cares for
him until he takes human form, is Uli-i-uka, sister to Uli-i-kai who
taught the art of praying to death, and both are called sisters of
Kuheilani, son of Hua-nui-ka-la‘ila‘i. <span
id="fr_1152"></span>[30](#fn_1152)

Kana is thought of, like the gigantic Lima-loa, as a being who can step
from one island to another (seventy miles distant) or wade through the
sea from island to island, but some say this is another Kana from the
brother of Niheu. <span id="fr_1153"></span>[31](#fn_1153) On Kauai is
shown his footprint where he stepped over from the island of Ni‘ihau to
Ke‘e near Kalalau. On the Puna coast of Hawaii is to be seen that of his
brother Niheu, made when he was chasing the mischievous kupua who used
to change into a goby fish and nibble Sandcrab's bait, and the hollow in
a rock close by where Goby-fish hid from his pursuer. The hill Haupu,
where lived the. abductor, juts out as a steep headland from the
precipitous north side of Molokai between Pelekunu and Halawa valleys.
The mounds at the foot of Halawa valley, called "rocks of Kana," are
said to have fallen from the heights of Haupu at the time of the fight
with Kana; some say Molokini island was thus formed. A notch in the
summit ridge of Haleakala on Maui is said to show where Kana leaned
across the mountain in his rope form from Haupu to be fed at his
grandmother's house in Hilo. The Kauai story is that he stood at Kipukai
on Kauai and leaned across to Haupu and fed his starving brother through
his own body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1123"></span>[466:1](hm35.htm#fr_1123) For. Col. 4:
436-449; 5: 518-521; 6: 158, 489-491; Pol. Race 2: 30-33; Rice, 93-102,
105; Thrum (from Forbes), Tales, 63-73; Malo, 298-301; Kalakaua, 67-94,
503; Dickey, *HHS Reports* 25: 21.

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[467:2](hm35.htm#fr_1124) Collocott, *Bul.*
46: 27-28.

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[467:3](hm35.htm#fr_1125) *JPS* 8: 118-119.

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[467:4](hm35.htm#fr_1126) Buck, *Bul.* 122:
12.

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[467:5](hm35.htm#fr_1127) Fortune, 267-270.

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[467:6](hm35.htm#fr_1128) Malo, 126-127 note
29.

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[467:7](hm35.htm#fr_1129) Fox, 133-134.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[468:8](hm35.htm#fr_1130) Henry, 437-443, 558.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[468:9](hm35.htm#fr_1131) *Ibid*., 539.

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[468:10](hm35.htm#fr_1132) Evans, 195.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[468:11](hm35.htm#fr_1133) Hocart, 193.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[468:12](hm35.htm#fr_1134) Malo, 215 and note
13.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[468:13](hm35.htm#fr_1135) Hocart, 44; Handy,
*Bul.* 9: 257-259.

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[469:14](hm35.htm#fr_1136) Henry, 537.

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[469:15](hm35.htm#fr_1137) *JPS* 12: 137-139.

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[469:16](hm35.htm#fr_1138) 535-536.

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[470:17](hm35.htm#fr_1139) Handy, *Bul.* 69:
104-107; Von den Steinen, *ZE* 1933, 364-365.

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[471:18](hm35.htm#fr_1140) Henry, 516-534.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[471:19](hm35.htm#fr_1141) *JPS* 4: 256-294.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[472:20](hm35.htm#fr_1142) Gill, 81-87.

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[472:21](hm35.htm#fr_1143) Romilly, Letters,
129-138.

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[473:22](hm35.htm#fr_1144) Handy, *Bul.* 69:
64-78; Von den Steinen, *ZE* 1933, 364-365.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[473:23](hm35.htm#fr_1145) *JPS* 18: 139-142.

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[474:24](hm35.htm#fr_1146) *JPS* 4: 161-176.

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[474:25](hm35.htm#fr_1147) Grey, 61-66.

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[474:26](hm35.htm#fr_1148) *JPS* 30: 53-70.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[475:27](hm35.htm#fr_1149) Malo, 298.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[476:28](hm35.htm#fr_1150) *JPS* 28: 31-39.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[476:29](hm35.htm#fr_1151) Rice, 102-105;
Ellis, Tour, 296.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[477:30](hm35.htm#fr_1152) Kamakau, *Ke Au
Okoa*, July 21, 1870; For. Col. 4: 270.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[477:31](hm35.htm#fr_1153) Ellis, *Tour*, 296;
Kalakaua, 502-503.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXIV. The Stretching-Tree Kupua](hm36)
