[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hm37)  [Next](hm39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

### XXXVI

### ROMANCE OF THE ISLAND OF VIRGINS

IT will be remembered that the story of Ola's building of the famous
watercourse Kikiola concludes with the refusal by Namakaokaha‘i,
chiefess of the Mu and Menehune people, of an offer of marriage and her
disappearance with her people on the floating land of Kane-huna-moku.
Kaanaelike (Anelike) in the story of the "rolling" island of Ulu-ka‘a is
the same chiefess under another name. Ulu-ka‘a and Kane-huna-moku are
interchangeable names for that garden of delight in which the gods first
placed Kumuhonua and his wife, ancestors of the Hawaiian people.
Ku-waha-ilo is the parent of Anaelike as of Namaka-o-kaha‘i in the
heavens. The lover who comes swimming to her over the sea is the
Man-of-the-sea of Namaka under another name. Even the poisoned food of
the Aukele test is here suggested, although with a quite different turn.
The son Eyebrows-burnt-off of Kaanaelike by her stranger husband is
Lightning-flashing-in-the-heavens whom Namaka bore to Aukele. The
concluding infidelity motive connects the story unmistakably with the
Pele legend with its outgush of fire which desolates the whole land.

### ROMANCE OF KAANAELIKE

(*a*) *Rice version*. Kaana-e-like (Striving to be alike), the
granddaughter of Ku-waha-ilo, lives with her parents and eleven sisters
on the floating island of the gods named Uluka‘a. Keaweaoho, ruling
chief of Hawaii at Waipio, is greatly beloved for his good government.
However, he shows such favoritism toward his fishermen that his head
steward is jealous and withholds the food which the chief invariably
portions out to them after a day's fishing. They are angry and on the
next fishing expedition persuade him to swim out after a lost oar and
abandon him in the sea, where he might have perished had not Ku-waha-ilo
in

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

the heavens coveted him as a husband for his granddaughter and sent the
floating island to his side.

The chief finds food plants growing and recovers strength and beauty. He
teaches Kaanaelike and her sisters, who have hitherto subsisted on
berries and edible roots, how to make fire with fire sticks and to eat
cooked food. "Man of the sea" he calls himself, and her parents send her
to the heavens on a stretching coconut sprout to ask her grandfather's
permission to marry the stranger. Kuwahailo is a man-eater. When he
approaches, the earth quakes, trees bend, winds blow; first comes his
tongue licking up his victims, then his body follows. Before entering
his cave house he hangs up his tongue outside. He would have killed the
girl whom he finds inside, but her sacred skirt protects her and he
recognizes his grandchild. He instructs her to marry the chief and
promises on his part to cease eating men. Then he lowers her to earth
seated on the crook of his tongue, she weds the stranger, and a feast
follows.

Meanwhile the bird sisters of the chief have been searching for him and
they come to him in a dream and tell him how badly things are going at
home since he left them. He grieves and the chiefess orders a canoe to
be built for him with red sails, ropes, and clothing for the sailors.
She warns him not to look back and follows him on the floating island as
he is rowed to shore, but when he looks back the island has disappeared.
He reestablishes his rule on Hawaii and puts to death the guilty
fishermen and steward.

His child is born on the floating island and named
Na-kuemaka-pau-i-ke-ahi (Eyebrows burnt off) because of an accident to
himself when he built the first fire for Kaanaelike. By the time the boy
is six days old he can play games with the other boys and he goes to
seek his father in a red canoe. He gives the waiting sailors outside a
sign that if he is received the smoke will blow seaward, if killed it
will blow landward. The attendants attempt to stop the boy and inflict
injuries but he gets through to his father's house and sits on his lap
and the smoke turns and blows seaward. The mother however prepares to
avenge the boy's injuries. She comes with her eleven beautiful sisters
who resemble herself, and sends each ashore in succession; but the

<span id="page_500">p. 500</span>

chief, warned by his son, sends each to a house prepared for her and
takes none but his wife.

There is a reconciliation and the chief and his son return to Uluka‘a,
where they live happily until he is attracted by the younger sister,
Ke-ahi-wela. One day he pretends to go fishing, another day bird hunting
in order to be with her. He is detected and the wife sends a fiery flood
which consumes him and all on the land save herself, the son, and the
sister, who has turned herself into a heap of rock and finally escapes
down the gullet of the dog Ku-ilio-loa (Ku long dog) who has been sent
to bring her home to her foster parents; but not before Kaanaelike cuts
off its ears and tail with her sacred skirt, and hence bob-tailed dogs
today. The dog goes to live on Kauai, the son leaves his mother, and she
lives alone on the still burning island Uluka‘a. <span
id="fr_1205"></span>[1](#fn_1205)

 

(*b*) *Green version*. To Kane-ko-kai (Kane who owns the sea) belongs
the rolling island of Uala-ka‘a (or koa) where he places his twelve
pretty daughters. The oldest, Analike (Almost alike), swims to Hawaii
and takes as her husband the handsome Kanaka-o-kai (Man of the sea) but
tires of him and returns swimming to her island. He wanders inconsolable
until instructed by an old woman how to regain her by swimming past the
Island-of-silence covered with flowering red purslane, past the
Island-of-darkness, until he reaches a third island, shaped round like a
potato (uala), where he must land but avoid mistaking any of her pretty
sisters for his wife. All goes well and the wife receives him joyfully.
Their uncooked food does not please him and there is a great outcry
among the girls when he cooks and eats the plants to which he is
accustomed at home. Kane-ko-kai sends his youngest daughter mounted on
the back of a huge dog to reassure them and advise them to eat the food
which the man of Hawaii offers them. <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[2](#fn_1206)

 

(*c*) *Lydgate version*. The chief Keawe-ahu of Kona, Hawaii, rules
harshly and is hence abandoned at sea by a ruse. A land teeming with
good things floats up beside him and he finds there a wife in the person
of a little Menehune girl who lives with her

<span id="page_501">p. 501</span>

father and mother and whom he teaches to make fire and eat cooked food.
Her name is Ana-like, their child is Na-maka-o-ke-ahi (The light of the
fireside). He becomes homesick and one day when the island floats near
the Kona coast he seizes up the child and swims ashore. <span
id="fr_1207"></span>[3](#fn_1207)

 

In this tale, as in many Hawaiian romances, the story tells of a
highborn maiden kept apart in a tapu place, surrounded by maidens, and
watched over by careful guardians until a suitable match can be found
for their ward. The setting here is that of one of the floating islands
of the gods. The journey of the child to seek his unknown father in a
distant land, the mother's revenge for indignities to the child, here
transferred to jealous wrath for the infidelity of the husband, are both
incidents common to this group of romances. The broken tapu against
looking back which results in the disappearance of the floating island,
common also to the Maui cycle where the broken tapu prevents the
successful joining of the fished-up island to the Hawaiian group, may
perhaps be meant to symbolize the unsuccessful union between the two
families. The recognition test, found also by Stimson in Anaa, where
Te-horo-ruga comes from Vavau to woo Moho-tu in the Po and the girl
hides while her attendant maidens try vainly to tempt Te-horo by their
charms, occurs in the Pele and Hi‘iaka story where Pahoa comes to Pele,
who conceals herself in the guise of an old woman but is recognized by
the heat of her hand.

The whole story represents a type thoroughly Polynesian in color but
well known to European romance and folktale as the Fairy Mistress type.
The taking of a wife who is more than human, the husband's homesickness
(characteristically induced in this Hawaiian version by spirit sisters
in the forms of bird messengers from home), the broken tapu, the search
for the lost lover, the warning by the child of danger from his offended
wife, the identification test for the recovery of the wife--all these
are familiar incidents of worldwide distribution, perhaps most closely
paralleled, although representing

<span id="page_502">p. 502</span>

a quite different background, in the American Indian tale of the Buffalo
wife.

As a Polynesian story it may be reckoned as a Hawaiian variant of the
story of Kae at the island of women.

### ROMANCE OF KAE AND THE ISLAND OF WOMEN

*Marquesas*. Rae (Drooler) is abandoned at sea, swallowed by a fish,
cuts his way out and reaches an island of women (Vainoki, Vaino‘i) where
the women seek pandanus roots as husbands. He weds Hina-i-Vaino‘i to
whom he teaches natural methods of childbirth without, as was the
custom, cutting open the mother. When he finds that he as a mortal has
wedded an immortal who can, when her hair grows gray, ride the surf and
become young again while he remains as before, he becomes homesick and
Hina sends him home on her whale brother Tunua-nui. He prepares a house,
bathing pool, and garden for his son Hina-tupu-o-Kae who is to follow
him. When the boy comes on the whale Tunua-iki and treats the house,
pool, and garden as his own, the guards are about to have him killed,
but he is saved by a chant repeating his name and those of his family.
Either he or Kae forgets to send the whale brother home properly but
nothing comes of it. <span id="fr_1208"></span>[4](#fn_1208) Kena comes
to a similar land of women in the second Havai‘i when he goes to seek
his lost wife. <span id="fr_1209"></span>[5](#fn_1209)

 

*Maori*. Tura joins Whiro's canoe party but when it enters a whirlpool
he catches the overhanging boughs of a tree and lives among the
Nuku-mai-tore, to whom he teaches the use of fire, the art of cooking,
and the natural way of childbirth together with the ceremonies attending
the birth of a child. When his wife Turakihau (Hina-kura) discovers gray
hairs on his head he goes off and lives alone and becomes covered with
sores. He lives upon the meat from a stranded whale until his son by his
former wife comes to rescue him. From Tura proceed diseases and the
incantations and ceremonies for their cure. <span
id="fr_1210"></span>[6](#fn_1210)

<span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

The Maori say that in Hawaiki-raro live the Nuku-mai-toro "in the midst
of plenty," whose hair never turns gray, who eat raw food, and cut open
women at childbirth. <span id="fr_1211"></span>[7](#fn_1211)

 

*Rarotonga*. Chief Ati of Rarotonga weds a fairy woman to whom he
teaches natural delivery and she begs him to come to spirit land to
teach the art there, but he is unable to follow her when she returns
thither. <span id="fr_1212"></span>[8](#fn_1212)

The Marquesans say that in Rarotonga the people have no breadfruit, do
not cook food, and cut open women to deliver children. The Marquesan
legends of Pepe-ui represent the sister of Toni sailing to Rarotonga in
a double canoe formed of two fishes, hiding in the chief's bathing basin
where the chief finds her and takes her to wife, and teaching natural
childbirth and the use of cooked food. <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[9](#fn_1213)

 

*Niue*. A whale swallows a woman named Gini-fale and makes off with her
to another island. She cuts it open with a shell she had in her hand
when swallowed, marries the chief Lei-pua, and teaches natural
childbirth. <span id="fr_1214"></span>[10](#fn_1214)

 

*Tuamotus*. Kuru comes from Nukutavake. He is swallowed by a shark, cuts
his way out, and comes to the island of Nukumautoru, where live warrior
women who seek holothurians as husbands. He has children by one of the
women, but when he takes his family home some of the children have wings
and fly back. . . . <span id="fr_1215"></span>[11](#fn_1215)

Tangaroa is once swallowed by a whale but cuts his way out with hair
gone and finds an island of women who use pandanus roots as husbands.
His sister's child Hina comes to seek him, bears a child, and is about
to be burned to death by the other women when she prays and rain falls
and Rupe appears and bears her away. . . . <span
id="fr_1216"></span>[12](#fn_1216)

Kae is a sacrilegious man, a gourmand, and a giant. He eats

<span id="page_504">p. 504</span>

a part of the feast reserved for the god and the spirit of the god
enters a shark and swallows Kae on his way home, but Rae cuts his way
out. <span id="fr_1217"></span>[13](#fn_1217)

*Rotumah*. Toak is taken to the land of spirits and teaches the king's
daughter natural delivery. <span id="fr_1218"></span>[14](#fn_1218)

*Rapa*. Te Kopara visits the island of women. <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[15](#fn_1219)

*Isabel Island*. A fish swallows Kamakajaku. He cuts it open with a
piece of obsidian, leaps out, and follows the sun to the sky. There he
teaches the use of fire to cook food. He opens up a stone where he has
been forbidden to go, looks down to earth, and lets down a cane upon
which to descend. The sky people give him a banana to plant and the seed
of a dye plant. He comes down on the hill Gaji and lives long
thereafter. <span id="fr_1220"></span>[16](#fn_1220)

 

The Kae story is not always connected with the teaching of natural
childbirth and the use of cooked food. Interest is sometimes centered
upon the whale-brother carrier whom Rae has cut up and eaten, whereupon
avengers are sent who pack Rae into a canoe (or basket) in his sleep and
bring him back to be killed (and eaten). The Maori say that with Kae
cannibalism began.

### KAE AND THE WHALE CARRIERS

*Tonga*. Kae escapes shipwreck and gets to Samoa by clinging to the leg
of a great bird. Sinilau sends him back to Tonga with his two whales
Tonga and Samoa. Kae orders the whales slaughtered, but Samoa escapes
and Sinilau has two large baskets prepared and brings Kae back together
with the dung of all those who ate of Tonga, through which Tonga is
restored to life while Kae is killed and eaten. One of the teeth of the
whale has been presented to the Tui-tonga, hence there is a vacant place
when the whale opens its mouth too wide. <span
id="fr_1221"></span>[17](#fn_1221)

<span id="page_505">p. 505</span>

*Samoa*. Tinilau of Samoa sends Ae of Tonga home with his pet turtles.
Ae kills them. He finds himself returned to Tinilau's house where he is
killed. <span id="fr_1222"></span>[18](#fn_1222)

Moso the god carries a Savai‘i man home on his back. He asks for
coconuts to take home. The man is ungrateful and Moso seeks him out and
kills him. <span id="fr_1223"></span>[19](#fn_1223)

 

*Maori*. Rae comes to the home of Tini-rau at Motu-tapu (to visit Hina
or to perform the proper ceremonies for her child left with Tini-rau
when she returned home, and recognized only by a chant when he came to
seek his mother). Tini-rau sends him home on his pet whale. Kae has it
killed and eaten upon reaching home and Tini-rau sends messengers,
bidding them recognize Kae by the gap in his teeth where two have been
knocked out. The messengers dance to make all laugh and show their
teeth, then pack Kae into a basket in his sleep and bring him back to
Motu-tapu, where he is speared to death. <span
id="fr_1224"></span>[20](#fn_1224)

 

*Tuamotus*. Rae comes from Vavau to Motu-tapu and takes Rua-tamahine to
wife. She has two whale brothers, Tutu-nui and Toga-mahutu. Kae is sent
home on Tutu-nui. He lands at Vavau and cuts up the whale for food. Its
spirit returns to Motu-tapu and Rua-tamahine comes to avenge her
brother. As they play a game she blinds him, then packs him into a
basket and takes him home, where he is killed and eaten. <span
id="fr_1225"></span>[21](#fn_1225)

 

The revenge of the mother, motivated in the Hawaiian story of Niauepo‘o
by the father's nonrecognition of the son, in the Aukele romance by
Namaka's jealousy of her younger sisters, may be a carry-over from this
familiar ending of the South Sea Rae story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[500:1](hm38.htm#fr_1205) 19-31.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[500:2](hm38.htm#fr_1206) 115-118.

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[501:3](hm38.htm#fr_1207) Given by Mrs. S.
Polani of Kauai, *HAA* 1924, 134-137.

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[502:4](hm38.htm#fr_1208) Von den Steinen,
*ZE* 1933: (Vaitahu) 347-349, (Atuona) 360-364; Handy, *Bul.* 69: 56-63.

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[502:5](hm38.htm#fr_1209) *Ibid*. 119.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[502:6](hm38.htm#fr_1210) White 2: 8-15,
17-19; *JPS* 21: 110-116.

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[503:7](hm38.htm#fr_1211) *JPS* 14: 47 note
177; cf. *JPS* 3: 101-104; White 2: 30-34.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[503:8](hm38.htm#fr_1212) Gill, 265-267.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[503:9](hm38.htm#fr_1213) Handy, *Bul.* 69:
127-128 and note 22.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[503:10](hm38.htm#fr_1214) *JPS* 12: 100-102.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[503:11](hm38.htm#fr_1215) Audran 32: 319-321.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[503:12](hm38.htm#fr_1216) Seurat 20: 433-435.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[504:13](hm38.htm#fr_1217) Montiton, 343.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[504:14](hm38.htm#fr_1218) Romilly, *Letters*,
144-146.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[504:15](hm38.htm#fr_1219) Stokes MS. in BPBM
MS. col.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[504:16](hm38.htm#fr_1220) Fox, 121-122.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[504:17](hm38.htm#fr_1221) Gifford, *Bul.* 8:
139-152. Compare also the story of Sangone, *ibid.* 49-54.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[505:18](hm38.htm#fr_1222) Turner, 110-111;
Krämer 1: 127-131.

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[505:19](hm38.htm#fr_1223) Turner, 266.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[505:20](hm38.htm#fr_1224) White 2: 127-140,
145-146; Grey, 55-60; Taylor, 241-244.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[505:21](hm38.htm#fr_1225) Stimson MS.; Seurat
20: 435-436; Audran 33: 343-344.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXVII. Romances of Match-Making](hm39)
