[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Inuit](../index) 
[Siberian](../../../asia/index.htm#siberia)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eos07)  [Next](eos09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQAB3E/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Eskimo of Siberia*, by Waldemar Bogoras, \[1913\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 7. The Eagle-Boy. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

   There was a man of very bad temper. All the time he beat his wife.
When he was coming back from sea-hunting, he would call aloud, "There,
come out! Shake the snow off my clothes!" If she did not jump out in
time and meet him halfway down, he would threaten her, "Oh, I will kill
you!"

   At last one day his wife resolved to flee. She took a bucket full of

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span> water and set it before herself. Into
that bucket she put a small package of meat. The bucket turned into a
sea; and the package of meat, into a boat. She put her little infant on
her back, boarded the boat, and set off.

   A current caught her and carried her toward the shore. She came
ashore, and saw a large house. She stood before the entrance irresolute.
In the house lived a man with his daughter. He was a widower, and had no
wife. Then he said to his daughter, "Go and see what woman is standing
there!" She went out, and said to the stranger, "My father bids you
enter." She entered, and they had a meal. The host said, "Let us sleep!"
They lay down. His membrum virile was a fathom long. In the night-time
it moved, and struck her little child. The child cried. "Oh, the child
is crying! I had better go out." — "No, come back!" He wanted to
copulate with her, but she staid throughout the night in the outer
house.

   The next morning he went hunting. Before leaving he said to the
woman, "You may look at everything here; but in that corner there lies a
white thing you must not look at. It is evil." — "All right!" But as
soon as he was gone, she thought, "Why did he forbid me to look at that
white thing?" She looked at it. It was a woman's corpse, torn and
lacerated by a large membrum virile.

   Oh, she fled, frightened! Soon he came home and gave pursuit. She
took along her water-bucket and the package of meat. She put the bucket
down. It turned into a lake. Then she threw down a tuft of her own hair,
and it turned into high woods along the lake-shore. She climbed a tree
and waited for her pursuer. After a while he came, all the time
following her fresh tracks. Thus it happened that he saw her face in the
water. She was sitting above, in the tree.

   "Oh, you are there!" She nodded on her tree. The woman in the water
nodded also. He could not understand his mistake. "Oh, I will catch you
yet! Let me plunge down!" He plunged down, and struck his head against
the bottom. It was hard wood, being the bucket. He came up to the
surface, and stepped out of the water. Then he looked down again. The
face was still there. "Oh, I could not reach you!" She shook her head.
"Ah, indeed! But I will try once more, and this time I will tie a stone
around my neck so as to have more weight." He plunged down with a stone
around his neck, and was nearly drowned. In the end he came ashore, and
again he saw the face in the water. "Ah, indeed! I could not reach you
by any means whatever." She shook her head. "Oh, you beloved one!" Then
she laughed aloud. He raised his head, and saw her on the tree. "Aha,
you are here!" He tried to chop down the tree with his membrum virile,
and in a short time cut it down; but the woman jumped over to another
tree. The tree, in falling, hit the assailant, and he was killed.

   The woman put her package upon the lake, and it turned again into a
<span id="page_428">p. 428</span> boat. She boarded the boat, and set
off downstream. After a while she came to the shore, and saw another
house; but she was afraid to enter there. In the house there lived a man
with five daughters. He said to his daughters, "Go and look at that
woman and at her child. If it is a girl, drive her away; but if it is a
boy, let her enter."

   One of the daughters came out, and said to the woman, "The old man
says, if your child is a little girl, then you must go away; but if it
is a little boy, then you may enter." — "Oh, I will not enter! You seem
to be evil-minded. Indeed, my child is a boy; but I will not enter." The
girl went back without success. "She refuses to come!" — "Oh, you are
too awkward! — Go you, now, and call her." He sent another daughter; and
she said, "The old man says if your little child is a boy, you may
enter." — "Oh, I will not enter!"

   Finally the last daughter came out. "The old man sent me to take your
boy into the house." She snatched the child away from her, and carried
it in. "Oh," said the mother, "they have taken it by force! Now I must
follow." She entered, following the girl. A tall lad was sitting in the
sleeping-room opposite the entrance. "Where is my child?" — "This is
your child!" The old man stretched the child's arms and legs by pulling
them, and made him a grown-up man. "Oh, you are deceiving me! This is
not my child. My child is quite small." — "Indeed, it is your child. You
may recognize him by a scar on his neck, caused by that membrum virile."
Then she recognized him. The next day the child went hunting, and killed
a mouse. His new father was much pleased. The day after that he killed a
hare. Then he killed polar foxes and wolves, and in due time even
reindeer.

   The eagle dress of his new father was hanging outside of the house,
on a horizontal pole. It was crying with the voice of an eagle. The boy
tried to put it on, but could not do it. The dress was so heavy, he fell
down under its weight. The Eagle-Sisters laughed at his awkwardness. In
the evening their father asked him, "How did you try to put on this
dress? I presume you put your hands into the wings, and your feet into
the feet?" — "Yes, I did so." — "That was wrong. You should put your
hands and feet together into the eagle's feet, and let the wings hang
loose."

   He did so, and the dress proved to be quite light. He put it on, and
walked in the manner in which birds walk. Then he flapped the
eagle-wings and flew up. He saw under himself a big mammoth (literally,
a "master of mammoth's bone"). He was as large as a house. His feet sank
into the ground. He caught him, but could not lift him into the air. The
mammoth was too heavy. So the mammoth fell down, and was sinking into
the ground. He sank down to the shoulders, but the young man was still
unable to free his talons. Then he called on the Eagle-Sisters for help.
They came, and aided him to lift the mammoth again, and carried him to
their father. The <span id="page_429">p. 429</span> father was pleased.
"Oh, oh!" he said, "you are strong. At your time of life I could not do
that much."

   After that the young man flew about and brought to his father all
kinds of game. One day he saw a large whale, and caught it, but again
could not lift it. So he called his Eagle-Sisters, and they assisted
him. At last the father and his daughters said to him, "We want to eat
man's flesh. We are not human. We are of a different nature, therefore
we have a desire for human flesh." — "And where shall I get it?" —
"There is plenty of it in the world below." — "All right!" said he. He
flew down, and came to our world below. Men and women were walking
along. He caught two, and carried them up. On the way he would let them
drop, and then catch them again in mid-air. Thus he killed them and
brought them home. He dropped them down to the ground near the house.
"There is your meat!"

   The Upper Beings ate of the human flesh; but his mother said, "Do not
eat of it. We are not of their kind. And this is not your real father.
Your father is human. He lives there on the earth. He beat me too much.
That was the reason why I fled." — "Then I will go and find him." His
father was paddling in a canoe. The Eagle-Boy descended, and perched on
the gunwale of the canoe. "Oh, is it you?" His father recognized him.
"Let us go home! I will take you to my home." — "No, we are of a
different kind from you. We live in the upper world. I shall take you to
my home." He took up with his talons the canoe, together with the crew,
and carried it up. Then he would let it drop, and immediately overtake
it and catch it again in mid-air. Thus he killed his father and brought
him to his house. He dropped him down before his mother. "Here he is! He
shall not beat you any more." That is all.

Told by Ñịpe´wġi, an Asiatic Eskimo man, in the village of Uñi´sak, at
Indian Point, June, 1901.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[426:1](eos08.htm#fr_4) This tale was said, by
the narrator, to come from the village Nu´yak, on the American shore.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. The Old Woman and the Wild Beasts.](eos09)
