[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Inuit](../index) 
[Siberian](../../../asia/index.htm#siberia)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eos04)  [Next](eos06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQAB3E/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Eskimo of Siberia*, by Waldemar Bogoras, \[1913\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4. The Girl who watched in the Night-Time.

   Two cousins lived in the village of Uñi´sak. One had five sons, the
other had a single daughter. Then the sons of the former began to die,
and only the youngest one remained alive; and even he began to suffer.
<span id="page_423">p. 423</span> Then his mother sent to her
sister-in-law, and said, "My lost son is suffering. Please send your
daughter to cheer him up. He feels quite ill." The other woman said to
her daughter, "They have sent for you. You may go after the meal." —
"No," said the girl, "Let me go at once!" The mother said, "Then at
least put on your clothes." — "Why should I? It is not a long way."

   She put on only her boots, and, being quite naked, went out of the
sleeping-room and crossed over to the other cousin's house. She entered
the sleeping-room. The suffering boy was stretched out upon the skins,
moaning. He could neither eat nor drink. Night came, and they lay down
to sleep. A new line, made of a thong-seal hide, was lying near the
entrance. The girl picked it up, made a noose in the shape of a lasso,
and crouched near the entrance, watching. She was quite naked, and had
on only her boots, as before.

   The sun had set, and it was quite dark. Then she heard a
rustling-sound from the direction of sunset. She listened attentively,
and heard some wary steps. She peered into the darkness, and at last
noticed a form. It was a Raven. He approached noiselessly. Behind the
house were some scraps of food. He picked at them, and crept slowly to
the entrance. The girl threw the lasso over him, and caught him.

   "Ah, ah, ah! Let me alone! I have done nothing." — "And why do you
steal in here in the night-time, without giving notice to the master of
the house?" — "I am looking for food, gathering meat-scraps and even
excrements. Let me go!" — "All right!" She let him go, and he flew away.
She watched on, the lasso in hand, quite naked. Then from the direction
of midnight she heard a rustling-noise approaching guardedly. It was a
Fox creeping toward the house. As soon as she approached, the suffering
boy moaned louder. The Fox stopped, and put her nose close to the
ground. She listened, and then said, "This time I shall probably carry
him away."

   The Fox approached nearer, and the girl threw the lasso and caught
her. "Qa, qa, qa!" — "And why are you stealing in here in the
night-time? The master of the house knows nothing about you. It is you,
probably, who have taken away those boys." — "Why, yes, I did it." —
"Then I shall kill you." — "Why will you kill me? — "Why, you scoundrel,
you make all the people mourn. You source of trouble!" — "Oh, it is not
my fault. This neighbor of yours induces me to do it, and pays me for
it." — "Is that so? Nevertheless, I shall kill you." — "Oh, I will leave
here and go away!" — "No, I shall kill you." — "I will pay you a large
ransom. You shall be happy along with your husband. And I will kill your
enemy." — "Ah, then you may go!"

   The Fox ran away. The girl entered the sleeping-room; and her body,
which was quite naked in the cold, felt warmer. She awakened the
sleeping ones. "Get up! You have slept enough," she said. The boy did
not moan <span id="page_424">p. 424</span> any more, and asked for food.
They gave him some. She cut it into small pieces. He swallowed a morsel,
then another one, and still another. So he ate five pieces of meat. She
gave him some water to drink. Only then she herself ate and drank. They
went to sleep. The boy also slept. In the morning they awoke, and the
boy was quite well.

   But their neighbor came, the secret enemy. "Ah, ah! What girl is that
whom I saw last night going around quite naked, lasso in hand? She must
be my secret enemy." The girl took off her clothes and went out. "It was
I. Then I know that you also are my enemy."

   He felt ashamed, and from mere shame he fell down and died. They
lived on. The girl lived with the boy; and when they grew up, they
married. She brought forth many children. All the people loved her. She
was rich. It is finished.

Told by Ñịpe´wġi, an Asiatic Eskimo man, in the village of Uñi´sak, at
Indian Point, May, 1901.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Creation of the World.](eos06)
