[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Inuit](../index) 
[Siberian](../../../asia/index.htm#siberia)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eos14)  [Next](eos16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQAB3E/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Eskimo of Siberia*, by Waldemar Bogoras, \[1913\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 14. Creation of St. Lawrence Island.

   When Creator was creating the earth, he made at first the shore of
Uñi´sak; then he made the Russian land, after that the American land.
Then he felt tired, and lay down to have a rest. The sun, however, had
not set, and he said, "It is still light. Let me create sornething
small. So he stretched out his hand, and took from the bottom of the sea
a handful of sand. He pressed the water out of it, — and therefore our
island is called Čibu´kak ("pressed out," "wrung out"), — and put it
upon the ground before himself. Then he picked up a few small pebbles
and put them in various places on this mound of sand. These were men.
They were weak and without enterprise.

   He said to them, "You must take your food out of the water. I shall
not give you reindeer. They are too good for you." They sought food, and
found a walrus, a thong-seal, and a ringed-seal. Still it was not
enough, and they were starving. All the people died of starvation; only
an orphan was left alive. He was covered with scabs; his skin had large
ulcers, and in some places hung down in tatters. He had no food for
nearly a month. So he lay in the cold sleeping-room, unable to rise. His
body was covered with an old coat of bird-skins without feathers. He lay
shaking with cold, and asking for a speedy death.

   He wanted to sleep, but could not. So he prayed to the Sea-God, <span
id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9) not for food, at least for a little sleep.
But the sleep did not come. Then he prayed to the Upper God for a little
sleep. The sleep did not come. But the Sea-God had compassion on him,
and sent a walrus. The walrus came roaring, and emerged out of the
ground near the house. Then it plunged back, but left behind a few
jelly-fish. Some of them were right

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span> in the sleeping-room. The boy felt
around with his hands. He found one jelly-fish, and swallowed it; but
his stomach was so little used to food, that he died of cramps. The
Upper God had compassion on him, and brought him back to life. He ate
five more jelly-fishes, and died again. The Upper God brought him back
to life another time. Now his stomach was stronger. He ate plenty of
jelly-fish, and felt better. Still he had no sleep. He prayed again to
the Upper God, who had compassion on him and sent him sleep.

   He slept three days and two nights. Then he dreamed. Six women — one
old one and five young ones — entered the sleeping-room. They put
everything in good order, cleaned away the rubbish, spread the skins,
and lighted the lamp. Then the room was warm and tidy. He wished to move
nearer the lamp, and then he awoke. The sleeping-room was dark and cold,
as before. He prayed again for sleep, but without success. Three days
and two nights he was there, trembling with cold, then he dozed off and
had the same dream. The women came and put the sleeping-room in order.
The old woman said, "We are assistants of the Upper God. We must not
waken him till everything is ready. Now prepare the food!" The younger
women brought a large dish filled with fish, walrus-meat, and
seal-blubber. There was everything except whale-skin.

   He was awake, but felt afraid to stir, lest the happy dream should
vanish, as before. Then the old woman nudged him, "Get up! The meal is
ready." He ate. The old woman urinated into a chamber-vessel, and rubbed
his body all over with urine. Instantly he was healed of his sores. She
blew upon him, and he became strong, like a walrus. Then he copulated
with all five of the younger women, one after another; so that his name
after that was The-One-copulating-with-Five-Divine-Women. After that he
went out and set off, journeying towards the sky. He came to the
Sun-Man, and said, "Give us reindeer!" Sun-Man answered, "I cannot do
so. In the world above me there lives another God greater than I: he
would be angry. Instead of that, I will give you something large and
oily, — a great mass of food. Keep it as your property." He took two
handfuls of small pebbles. "Take these, and when you come home, throw
them into the water." The young man descended, and threw the stones into
the water. They turned into whales of various kinds. After that he lived
on the surface of the sea. He walked about with the walrus. In the end
the people of Kuku´lik killed him by mistake. When dying, he said, "Such
are you, and such shall be your fate. When you go out to sea, you shall
be drowned. When you stay ashore, you shall die of starvation. When you
have food enough, you shall be visited by to´ṛnaṛaks of the disease."
After that he died. That is all.

Told by Ale´qat, an Asiatic Eskimo man, on St. Lawrence Island, May,
1901.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[433:2](eos15.htm#fr_9) Ima´m Kịya´ṛnaṛak.
Kịya´ṛnaṛak fully corresponds to the Chukchee Va´ịrġịn, and signifies
"(Good) Being."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15. The Contest between the Giant and the Plover.](eos16)
