[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes03)  [Next](tes05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

# I. TALES OF THE TUNDRA YUKAGHIR. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

### 1. (THE GIRL AND THE EVIL SPIRIT.)

There lived a girl who knew no man. Nor could she tell who were her
parents. She was rich in reindeer and other property. So she walked
about, singing lustily. She never went to watch over her reindeer. When
the reindeer strayed away too far, she would merely sing one of her
songs, and they would come back of their own will. She sang and sang;
and when she came back to her home, she would find the fire burning, the
food cooked, and everything ready. Thus she lived on without work, care,
or trouble.

One day she saw that half the sky was darkened. This darkness approached
nearer and nearer. It was the evil spirit. One of his lips touched the
sky, the other dragged along the ground. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2) Between was an open mouth, ready to swallow
up whatever came in its way. "Ah!" said the girl, "my death is coming.
What shall I do?" She took her iron-tipped staff and fled.

The evil spirit gave chase, and was gaining on her. She drew from her
pocket a small comb of ivory and threw it back over her shoulder. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[3](#fn_3) The comb turned into a dense forest. The
girl ran onward. When the evil spirit reached the forest he swallowed
it, chewed it, and gulped it down. He digested it and then defecated.
The dense forest turned again into a small ivory comb. After that he
continued his pursuit and was gaining on her, as before. She loosened
from her waist a red handkerchief, which became a fire extending from
heaven to earth. The evil spirit reached the fire. He went to a river
and drank it completely dry. Then he came back to the fire, and poured
the water upon it. The fire was extinguished. Only a red handkerchief
lay on the ground, quite small, and dripping wet.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

After that he gave chase again, and gained steadily on the girl. She
struck the ground with her iron-tipped staff, and all at once she turned
into an arctic fox. In this form she sped on, swifter than ever. The big
mouth, however, followed after, wide open, and ready to swallow her. She
struck the ground with her iron-tipped staff, turned into a wolverene
and fled swifter than ever, but the evil mouth followed after. She
struck the ground with her iron-tipped staff and turned into a wolf and
sped away swifter than ever. She struck the ground with her iron-pointed
staff and turned into a bear, with a copper bell in each ear. She ran
off swifter than ever, but the big mouth followed and gained on her
steadily. Finally, it came very near, and was going to swallow her.

Then she saw a Lamut tent covered with white skins. She summoned all her
strength, and rushed on toward that tent. She stumbled at the entrance
and fell down, exhausted and senseless. After a while, she came to
herself and looked about. On each side of her stood a young man, their
caps adorned with large silver plates. She looked backward, and saw the
evil spirit who had turned into a handsome youth, fairer than the sun.
He was combing and parting his hair, making it smooth and fine. The girl
rose to her feet.

The three young men came to her and asked her to enter the tent. The one
who had appeared in the form of the evil spirit said, "We are three
brothers, and I am the eldest one. I wanted to bring you to my tent. Now
you must tell us which of us you will choose for your husband." She
chose the eldest, and married him, and they lived together. The end.

Told by John Korkin, a Tundra Yukaghir man, on the western tundra of the
Kolyma, spring of 1895.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[9:1](tes04.htm#fr_1) These tales were collected
among the Tundra Yukaghir on the western tundra of the Kolyma country.
The Tundra Yukaghir have a mixture of Tungus blood, and call themselves
"Tungus" in the Russian and in the Yakut languages. Though the language
of the tales is Yukaghir they were written down mostly without the
original text. Conversation with the narrators was carried on in the
Chukchee language and partly also in Russian. The tales often include
well-known episodes of Old World folklore, borrowed from the Yakut or
from Russian neighbors. Most of them had no titles. The titles have been
introduced by me according to the contents of the tales.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[9:2](tes04.htm#fr_2) Altai-Katunja (W. Radloff,
*Proben der Volkslitteratur der Türkischen Stämme Süd-Sibiriens*, vol.
1, 39, 73); Ainu (B. Pilsudski, *Materials for the Study of the Ainu
Language and Folklore* \[Cracow, 1912\], 205, 240).--F. B.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[9:3](tes04.htm#fr_3) Bolte und Polívka,
*Anmerkungen zu den Kinder-u. Hausmärchen der Brüder Grimm*, vol. 2,
140.--F. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. A Tale About the Wood-Master](tes05)
