[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes00)  [Next](tes02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# TALES OF YUKAGHIR, LAMUT, AND RUSSIANIZED NATIVES OF EASTERN SIBERIA.

## By WALDEMAR BOGORAS.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### INTRODUCTION.

The following tales were collected among Russianized natives of the
Kolyma and the Anadyr country, and also among Russian creoles, who,
indeed, lead the same kind of life as the Russianized natives. I have
excluded a large number of those tales which treat of kings, young
heroes on horseback, etc., and which, on the whole, clearly show their
Russian or Turko-Mongol provenience, and have given only those that
represent elements of native life. The narrators ascribe quite a number
of the tales given here to the Lamut, Yukaghir, or Chuvantzi; but, so
far as I am able to judge, most of those coming from the Kolyma indicate
a Yukaghir provenience, and those from the Anadyr would seem to be of
Chuvantzi origin. Nothing more definite than this is known. Most of the
tales were taken down by myself, a large part by Mrs. Sophie Bogoras,
and a few by a couple of Russian creoles who could read and write after
a fashion.

The majority have titles corresponding to their context, which must be
due to Russian influence, as the same stories in native languages rarely
have titles.

As to the transcription of proper names and such words-as are said to
belong to native languages, I have used, for the more or less
Russianized words, the usual English alphabet; and for native words not
Russianized, the special alphabet which I have used in the Publications
of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, vol. 7. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

Some of the tales are composed in part of rhymed prose. Some of these
prose rhymes, though quite local and Dative as to contents, are arranged
in the form of the ancient Russian lays. For most of these I give the
Russian text with English translation. Notes signed W. B. are by the
author. A few comparative notes have been added by Franz Boas and signed
with his initials.

WALDEMAR BOGORAS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[3:1](tes01.htm#fr_0) Bogoras, "The Chukchee,"
10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](tes02)
