[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes08)  [Next](tes10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6. (THE SHAMAN WHO TURNED INTO A FOX.)

There lived an old man who had a pretty young daughter. He was a great
shaman, and he wanted to find a husband for her, the best of all human
kind. So he turned into an arctic fox and ran along. Whomsoever he met,
by him he would allow himself to be caught. And as soon as the man
caught him, his hand would stick to the fox's back. Then the fox would
rush onward, dragging the man along. The fox would come to a river and
turn into a fish. Then it would dive into the water, dragging the man
along. And so the man would be drowned.

Another time he turned into a red fox and ran along. Whomsoever he met,
by him he would permit himself to be caught. Then the hand of the man
would stick to the fox's back. The fox would rush onward, dragging the
man along, and soon would drown him in the river.

A third time he turned into an ermine, and the same happened as before.

Finally, he turned into a black fox and ran along. He met a young man, a
wanderer, who knew neither father nor mother, and who walked about
without aim and in great poverty. The fox allowed himself to be taken.
Then the hand of the wanderer stuck to his back, and the fox rushed on,
dragging the man along. The fox ran to the river, turned into a fish,
and dived into the water, dragging the man along. The fish crossed the
river, came to the opposite shore, and turned again into a fox. And, lo!
the young man was still alive. The fox rushed on, and came to some
rocks. The rocks were all covered with sharp-pointed spikes. The number
of the rocks was ten. The fox ran through between all of them, and the
man along with him. The man was winding along like a thin hair, and he
was still alive. The fox ran into a forest, which was as dense and thick
as the autumn grass. The bark of one tree touched the bark of another.
They crossed this dense forest, but the young man was still alive. The
fox came to the sea, and plunged into the sea. He went across the sea to
the opposite shore,

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

but the man was still alive. Then the fox said, "Oh, you are an
excellent man! I want to have you for a husband for my daughter. I will
let go of your hand. So please let go of my back." The man said, "I do
not want to have your daughter. I want rather to have your skin." He
lifted the black fox high into the air, and then struck it upon the
ground with much force. The fox was dead. That is all.

Told by Innocent Karyakin, a Tundra Yukaghir man, on the western tundra
of Kolyma, winter of 1895.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. Tale About Three Storks](tes10)
