[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes11)  [Next](tes13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

# II. TALES OF THE LAMUT. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14)

### 1. CHAUN STORY. <span id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15)

There was a Lamut man in the country of Chaun who went to East Cape to
look for some thong-seal hides. He moved and moved, and so came to the
very end of the country. He had with him his wife and also a son, young
and active. All around the country was wholly deserted. Not a single
trace of man was to be seen anywhere. The young man said, "I will go and
look for people." The father retorted, "Do not go! You will lose your
way, and in any case you will find nothing."--"No, I shall find them.
And I shall even take a wife among them."

He went away on snowshoes, and after a considerable time came to a river
wholly unknown to him. There was a large camp there. Several tents were
pitched in two clusters. In one of them lived a man who had a single
daughter. He entered, and stayed with this family as an adopted
son-in-law. One day the father-in-law said to him, "Let us go to the
river to catch fish!"

There was on the river a large open place. They set off. The son-in-law
was very light of foot. He was the first to reach the open water.
Without much ado he cast into the water his fish-line, and immediately
felt something heavy on it. So he pulled it up, and there, caught on the
hook, was a small child, human in appearance. He was much afraid, and
threw the child back into the water. After that he again cast his
fish-line back into the water, and in a moment drew out another human
child. He threw it back into the water, but in the meantime the other
people arrived. "Why are you throwing the fish back into the water?"
said the old man angrily. If you do so, you will destroy our fishing
luck and the fish is our existence. Everything will be
destroyed."--"Oh," said the young man, "but I caught a human child! I
was afraid."--"I say, it was no child, it was a fish.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

\[paragraph continues\] You are playing jokes on us. Better go away! I
was mistaken when I called you a reliable man. Be off! You are no longer
my son-in-law." They cast into the water their own fish lines, and after
a while they also caught a small human child. They put it upon a long
wooden spit and roasted it, before the fire. Then they sat down and made
a meal of it. This done, they went back.

The human son-in-law felt very angry. So he also cast his line and
angled for fish. He caught one after another, and all his fish were
human. In a short time, he had collected a large heap. He covered them
with sticks and stones, and went home late in the evening. "Where have
you been the whole day long?" asked the father-in-law quite sternly. "I
have been angling."--"Caught anything?"--"I covered a large heap of fish
with sticks and stones." The old man was very glad. "Oh, indeed, you are
the very son-in-law for me!" The spring was coming. The snow was covered
with a hard crust. The old man said, "Let us go on snowshoes to hunt
wild reindeer-bucks!" They went out on snowshoes, and came to a forest.
The old man said to his son-in-law, "You must hide behind this large
tree as we will drive the reindeer towards you, that you may kill them
one by one." The young man crouched behind the tree, having his bow
ready. The other people drove the reindeer toward him. He saw running
past him two giant men, all naked, with long hair that reached to the
ground. He was so much frightened, that he did not dare to shoot at
them.

The other people came. "Well," asked the old man, "have you killed
them?"--"Whom must I kill? Two giant men passed by, both naked, with
hair hanging down to the very ground. I did not dare to shoot at
them."--"Ah!" said the old man angrily, "they were no men, they were
wild reindeer-bucks. You spoil our hunting pursuit. This hunt is our
very life. Be off! I was mistaken when I called you a reliable man.
Cease being my son-in-law! Be gone from my house and family!"

They went home. The young man was angrier than ever. He ran to the
forest and looked for some trace of those human reindeer-bucks. He found
tracks and followed them. At last he saw those giant naked men. They
were sitting on the ground leaning against the trees, and fast asleep.
So he crept toward them and tied their long hair around the tree. Then
he crept off and made a large fire on their windward side. They were
killed by the smoke.

Late in the evening he came home. "Where have you been the whole day
long?"--"I found those reindeer bucks and killed both of them." Oh, they
were very glad. Now they had plenty of food, but the son-in-law could
not eat it. They slaughtered for him real reindeer. One day his

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

wife said to him, "They are very angry with you because of those
everlasting slaughters. They are going to kill you too. You had better
flee to your own country."--"And will you go with me?"--"Yes, I
will."--"And what will you eat in our land?"--"I shall eat fish and
reindeer meat. I want no more human flesh."

Once when she had to keep watch over the reindeer herd, she crept out of
the tent quite naked. She took some new clothing from the large bags
outside and put it on. They fled, and came to his father. There they
made her walk three times around a new fire, and thus her mind was
changed. After that they left that country and moved away. They went
back to their own land and lived there.

Told by HIrkán, a Lamut man from the desert of Chaun, in the village of
Nishne-Kolymsk, the Kolyma country, winter of 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[26:1](tes12.htm#fr_14) These tales were
collected among the Lamut living on the upper course of the Omolon River
and on its affluents in the Kolyma country, a few also among the Lamut
of the Chaun desert met with in the Russian village of Nishne-Kolymsk.
They were written down without the original texts.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[26:2](tes12.htm#fr_15) The Lamut people living
on the river Chaun are a branch of this tribe that has migrated farthest
to the northeast. They are composed of stragglers from several clans of
the Kolyma country, who came to the Chaun desert for various reasons;
therefore, they do not form a separate clan. Their ways of living in the
treeless tundra of Chaun, however, are different from those of all other
Lamut, and are nearer to the mode of life of the Chukchee, among whom
they dwell. They number about thirty or forty families.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. A Tale of the Chukchee Invasion](tes13)
