[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes21)  [Next](tes23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

# III. KOLYMA TALES.

### 1. ONE-SIDE.

There was a family of Tungus. They lived in a tent. They had three
daughters. The girls, when going to pick berries, would turn into female
geese. In this form they visited the sea islands. One time they flew
farther than usual. On a lonely island they saw a one-sided man. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23) When he breathed, his heart and lungs
would jump out of his side. The Geese were afraid and flew home. After
some time, they had nothing to eat, so they went again to the sea
islands for berries. Wherever they chose a spot on which to alight,
One-Side appeared and frightened them away. At last they found a place
full of berries. They descended and laid aside their wings. They picked
so many berries that they could hardly carry them all. They went back to
the place where they had left their wings. The wings of the youngest
daughter were gone. <span id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_24) They looked for
them a long time. At last, evening came and the sun went down. It grew
very dark. The two elder sisters reproached the youngest one: "Probably
you have taken a liking to One-Side, and you have asked him to hide your
wings. Now remain here alone and let him take you!" She almost cried
while assuring them that their suspicions were unjust. "I have never
seen him and never thought of him." They left her and flew away. She
remained alone.

As soon as they were out of sight, One-Side appeared carrying her wings.
"Well, now," he said, "fair maiden, will you not consent to marry me?"
She refused for a long time, then she gave in, and said, "I will!"--"If
you are willing," said One-Side, "I will lead the way." He took her to
his house. It was the usual house, made of wood, with a wooden
fireplace. <span id="fr_25"></span>[3](#fn_25) He proved to be a good
hunter, able to catch any kind of game. Still he had only one side, and
with every breath his heart would jump out. They lived together for a
while, and the woman brought forth a son. The young

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

woman nursed the infant. But One-Side did not want to stay at home. He
would wander about all the time, and bring back reindeer and elk. They
had so much meat that the storehouses would no longer hold it. He was a
great hunter. He hunted on foot on snowshoes, for he had neither
reindeer,--nor horses for traveling.

One time he set off to hunt as usual. Then his wife's sisters suddenly
came and carried the youngest sister and her little son off to their own
country. The small boy, while carried on high, shouted, "O father! O my
father! We are being carried by aunties to their home, to their home."
One-Side ran home as fast as he could, but he came too late. They were
out of sight. Only the boy's voice was heard far away. Then he shot an
arrow with a forked head in the direction whence the voice seemed to
come, and the arrow cut off one of the boy's little fingers. One-Side
found the arrow and the finger, and put them into his pouch.

Then he started in search of his boy. He walked and walked. A whole year
passed. Then he arrived at a village. A number of children were playing
"sticks." <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) He looked from one to
another, thinking of his boy. There was one poor boy who was dressed in
the poorest of clothing. His body was mangy, and his head bruised and
covered with scars. First, One-Side paid no attention to him, but when
he finally looked at this boy he saw that the little finger on his left
hand was missing. He snatched the finger out of his pouch and placed it
beside the hand, and indeed it fitted! The poor boy was his son! "Whose
boy are you?" asked One-Side. "I am mamma's boy."--"And where is your
father?"--"I have no father: I used to have one, but now I have
none."--"I am your father." The boy refused to believe it, and only
cried bitterly. "If my father were alive, we should not be so wretched,
mother and I." The elder sisters had married and made their youngest
sister a drudge in the house. "Why is your head so bruised and scarred?"
asked One-Side. "It is because my aunts order me to enter the house only
by the back entrance, and every time I try to go in by the front
entrance, they strike my head with their heavy staffs." <span
id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_27) "Let us go to your house." They arrived at
the house. The boy

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

went ahead and One-Side followed him. They came to the front entrance.
As soon as the boy tried to go in, his eldest aunt jumped up and struck
him with her iron staff. Then the woman saw the boy's father, and felt
so much ashamed, that she fell down before him.

He entered the house. They hustled about, brought food of every kind,
and prepared tea. They ate so long that it grew very late and it was
time to go to bed. On the following morning, after breakfast, he said to
his brothers-in-law, "Let us go and try which of us can shoot the best
with the bow! You are two, and I am only one." They made ready their
bows and arrows and began to shoot at each other. The elder
brother-in-law shot first; but One-Side jumped upward, and the arrow
missed him. The second brother-in-law also shot. One-Side jumped aside
and dodged the arrow. "Now I shall shoot," said One-Side, "and you try
to dodge my arrows." He shot once, and hit his elder brother-in-law
straight through the heart. With the second shot he killed his other
brother-in-law. Then he went back to the house, killed his wife's
sisters, and took home his wife and his son.

One time he set off, as usual, to look for game. When he was out of
sight of his wife, he took off the skin that disguised his true form and
hung it up on the top of a high larch tree. He became a young man, quite
fair and handsome, just like the sunrise. He went home and sat down on
his wife's bed. While he was sitting there, he was about to take off his
boots. The woman began to argue, "Go away from here! My husband will be
here soon, and he will be angry with me. He will say, 'Why have you let
a strange man sit down on your bed?'" "I am your husband," said he. "Why
do you try to drive me away?" "No," said the woman, "my husband is
one-sided, and you are like other men." They argued for a long time. At
last he said, "Go and look at that tree yonder. I hung up my one-sided
skin on it." She found the tree and the one-sided skin, and now she
believed him. Then she caught him in her arms and covered him with
kisses. After that they lived happier than ever. The end.

Told by Katherine Rumiantzer, a Russianized Yukaghir woman, in the
village of Pokhotsk, in the Kolyma country, in the summer of 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[38:1](tes22.htm#fr_23) Samoyed (M. Alexander
Castrén, *Ethnologische Vorlesungen über die altaischen Völker*
\[Petersburg, 1857\], 160).--F. B.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[38:2](tes22.htm#fr_24) Samoyed (*Ibid*., 172);
Ainu (B. Pi~~l~~sudski, Materials for the Study of the Ainu Language and
Folklore \[Cracow, 1912\], 27); E. Cosquin, *l. c.*, vol. 2, 16.--F. B.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[38:3](tes22.htm#fr_25) The type of house
generally used among Russian creoles and Russianized natives,--a square
log cabin, having a fireplace in the corner, with a straight chimney
made of wood and plastered with clay, the so-called "Yakut chimney." It
is improbable that this chimney is really a Yakut invention. The ancient
type of Yakut house had only an uncovered fireplace, with an opening in
the roof above it. At the present time, however, the "Yakut chimney" is
used everywhere among the Yakut, as well as among Russian creoles.--W.
B.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[39:1](tes22.htm#fr_26) A play of Russian
provenience much in use among the Russianized natives--W. B.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[39:2](tes22.htm#fr_27) This passage is
interesting, since it shows that perhaps some of the native peoples on
the Kolyma River had houses with two entrances, and that some members of
the family were not allowed to pass through the main entrance. This
recalls the type of house of the Maritime Koryak and Kamchadal, with its
different entrances for winter and summer. Among the Koryak, as well as
among the Kamchadal, in former times, women and children, also
transformed shamans, often entered, even in the winter time, by the rear
entrance from the storage room, while men considered it beneath their
dignity to do so. (cf., for instance, W. Jochelson. "The Koryak,"
*Publications of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition*, vol. VI, 458). It
is quite certain that this tale, though it mentions the Tungus, must
have referred, not to the nomadic reindeer-riding Tungus, with their
light tents of curried reindeer skin, but to the people living <span
id="page_40">p. 40</span> more or less sedentary lives along the Kolyma
River or on the seacoast near its mouth. On the Bear Islands, for
example, were found remnants of some houses, deserted long ago. The
people living along the Kolyma were chiefly Yukaghir; and along the
seacoast, also the little known Ca'ačet and Shelags. At the present
time, among the Russian creoles and the Russianized natives on the
Kolyma, several type of houses are in use; but the ancient type of house
cannot be ascertained, because of the preponderant influence of the
Russian log cabin with its wooden chimney of so-called "Yakut" type.--W.
B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. A Yukaghir Tale](tes23)
