[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes48)  [Next](tes50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 28. A STORY OF MACHEKUR.

Machekur lived with his wife Machekur-woman. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_80) Their neighbors were three Mice-Girls. The
old man used to pay them frequent visits. Finally, the old woman grew
angry, and said, "Cease going there! They will do something unpleasant
to you." The old man, however, paid no attention to these warnings. One
time the Mice-Girls offered him some fat pudding, made of fish-roe mixed
with oil. He ate so much that he could not eat any more, and fell
asleep. They took a large bladder and fastened it to the old man's anus.
He awoke and went home, and on account of the quantity

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

of oil he had swallowed, he had diarrhoea. So he would sit down and try
to defecate; but when he stood up, no faeces were to be seen on the
ground. In the meanwhile, after three or four attempts, he felt
something heavy attached to his buttocks. He went to his wife, and said,
"Machekur-Woman! I tried to defecate, but it seems in vain, for I saw no
faeces on the ground. Meantime I feel as if my intestines had gone out
of my anus." "Sit down!" said the woman. But he remained standing. "Sit
down!" she again shouted, and he was much frightened, and flopped down
upon a bench. The bladder burst, and the faeces flowed around. The end.

Told by Mary Korkin, a Russianized Yukaghir woman, in the village of
Pokhotsk, the Kolyma country, summer of 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_79"></span>[103:1](tes48.htm#fr_79) In Russian creole
чудинка (literally, "phantom"), or also пужанка (literally, "fright").
Both these words are unknown in European Russian though they are clearly
of Russian origin.--W. B.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[103:2](tes49.htm#fr_80) In Russian Мачекуръ and
Мачекуриха. This tale represents only one of the well-known episodes of
the story of Raven and the Mice. I give it here because of the names
Machekur and Machekur-Woman, which have replaced the usual Kutq
(Ku'rgil) and Miti. Perhaps these names belong to some Yukaghir version
of the story.--W. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 29. The Mouse and the Snow-Bunting](tes50)
