[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes41)  [Next](tes43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 21. SEA-WANDERERS.

On the seashore, upon an island, stood a village of the Maritime people.
The village was very large, the houses were more numerous than the
leaves on a tree. Several people began to talk among themselves. "Let us
travel, that we may see all the wonders of the sea!" One of them was "a
knowing one." <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62) He knew all kinds of
incantations, even the chief incantation of the Zyrian people. These
Zyrian people were an ancient heathen tribe, who lived on the
seashore. <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63) All the other travelers
were quite common people. They entered a skin boat and started off.
After a long time the winds and the currents carried them toward an
island. They landed at a safe place and walked along the shore. It was a
broad strip of sand, and higher up was a steep bank of firm ground. On
it were the houses of people. They climbed the bank, but the houses had
disappeared. The entrances were not to be found. Only a number of willow
bushes were scattered about and wherever they stepped, or wherever they
put their feet a great clamoring of children came up from underground.
The whole

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

bank resounded with the noise of their voices. At last they found an
entrance among the roots of a willow bush, and entered a house, which
lay entirely underground. The people bade them welcome, and gave them
food and drink. These people were Polar Fox people. All of them were
quite young and strong. Only one was an aged, decrepit old man who could
hardly walk about, even with the help of his long staff. The other
people soon went out; but the old man stayed behind, and immediately
said to the guests, "O you Christians! <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) if you are such, indeed, do not stay here
for a single night, but rather sail away. While walking above, you trod
down ever so many Fox children. If you should stay here for a night,
they would certainly kill you out of spite and revenge. Take warning and
go away in time. So they entered their skin boat and sailed away. They
moved on for a long time, and at last they saw another island. On that
island was a village and some people were living there. In front of the
island, in the sea, stood a tree of gigantic size, full of boughs. These
boughs and branches were so close to one another, that not even a finger
could be thrust in between them; and in the middle of the trunk there
was an excrescence, ever so large. They stopped their skin boat and
gazed at the new wonder. The tree stood bolt upright; then all at once
it bowed down lower and lower, and at last was immersed in the water,
boughs, excrescence, and all--and vanished from sight. Then they saw on
shore a number of people, all one-sided, <span
id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65) running to and fro, and catching fish.
They were just like ordinary men split in two. The two halves would meet
and stick together and would become whole men. Then they would part
again, and each half would race along the shore so swiftly that it would
outrun a flying bird. These halves of men were catching fish in the
following manner. They spread their fingers, ran down into the water and
vanished in the sea. After a while they came back on a run and to every
finger a fish was hanging. They caught the fish with their fingers.
After that the big tree would also emerge from the water, bough after
bough, and stand straight up again, as before; but it would be
thoroughly white from the mass of fish on it. Every little bough would
have a fat fish hanging on it. The tree stood up and trembled, as if
alive; and then all the fish were swung up to the excrescence, when they
vanished. <span id="fr_66"></span>[3](#fn_66)

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

The voyagers gazed upon these wonders, but, being afraid of the
one-sided people, they did not land there, but sailed by. After a while
they were carried off to still another island. They landed there, and
walked along the shore. A village stood there, with numerous houses.
They approached, and saw near the village, down the steep bank, a great
mass oi food lying in heaps higher than a man's stature. It was mostly
meat of wild reindeer. The people had neither anus nor urethra. They
killed many wild reindeer. Then they cooked the meat in huge iron
kettles. When it was done, they put the kettle under their bare armpits
and kept it there for a while. They lived on the steam they inhaled
through their armpits. After that they would turn the kettles over and
throw all the meat down the bank. The voyagers felt very hungry, and
wanted to eat of this strange refuse; but all of a sudden there came
from the houses men with long staffs, who shouted to them, "Don't touch
that meat! It is bad. Rather come here! We will give you good meat, we
will feed you with clean provisions. That is offal!" <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67) They entered the nearest house. The people
of the island gave them the choicest meat and dried fat and brought in
large bladders filled with pure oil. They ate heartily.

An old man was sitting opposite them, and was all the time attentively
watching their doings. "Ah!" said he, "so this is your manner of eating!
It seems you relish it." The "knowing one," the man with incantations,
wanted him to do the same. "Do try and have a morsel!" "I wish I could!"
said the old man; "But you see yourself, with your own eyes that we have
neither anus nor urethra. What, then, would become of, me?" The other
one, however, did not desist. "Ah, father! Do take a morsel! I will
arrange that you may enjoy it without danger." "Ah!" said the old man,
"I have lived long enough; so let me try it once, though I die from
it!", He took a small bit and swallowed it. "Ah! it is sweet." He took
another piece, and by and by had eaten a large and hearty meal, in the
manner of human beings. In due time, however, he felt uncomfortable, and
shouted, "My buttocks prick me, my buttocks prick me!" Tears started
from his eyes from pain. The man with incantations took a splinter of
drift larch-wood and made it round and sharp-pointed. He pronounced
several incantations over it, and then thrust it through the old man's
breeches, thus making an anus for him. In a similar manner he made for
him also a urethra. At the same moment the old man eased himself in both
way and became like an ordinary man. But the others were without
openings, as before.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

The next morning, however, the visitors were requested to furnish the
hole population with anus and urethra, for which they were paid
generously with costly fur. Till then they had traveled among all these
wonders and terrors without any provisions, but from here they took
along plenty of dried meat. <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68)

They sailed on, and reached another island. A single house, quite large,
stood on the bank. In it lived an old man and his wife. Before the
entrance a big brown bear was tied to a post. It was their watch-dog.
Close to the house stood two racks of drying poles filled with human
flesh. There were shoulders along with arms and hands in one piece; and
the fingers glistened with rings, gold and silver. The heads were
ornamented with earrings, and the legs with feet booted in leather and
chamois. The travelers were much afraid, but they did not dare to say
anything. The old man said to his wife, "Bring some cloud-berries for
our guests." So she brought a dish full of rosy finger tips of women and
children, cut off with great care. These finger tips, indeed, looked
like so many berries. The "knowing one" said to his companions. "Do not
eat this food. Hide it in the bosom of your clothes." They were all clad
in fur shirts, and girt around with large girdles of many-colored stuff,
as is the custom with our people. So they did as they were told, and
after the meal they went out of the house as if to ease themselves. They
loosened their girdles, and all these awful finger tips glided down to
the ground. They went back. The old woman was already preparing beds for
them. "These places are for you, and these also. Lie down and have your
rest." They went out again; and the "knowing one" said, "We cannot stay
here. The only way to do is the following. We will return, and I shall
take my pipe and have a short smoke. That done, I shall knock the
glowing ashes out of the bowl. Then all at once I shall howl like a
wolf. You must be careful and hold on to me at that very moment. I shall
rush out and take you along."

He had a smoke, and knocked the glowing ashes out of the pipe bowl. Then
all at once he howled like a wolf. The bear in front of the door fell
down at once and snored loudly. The old man and the old woman within F
the house fell asleep and slept like logs. The visitors went out and
found

the skin boat.

They gave up journeying farther, and turned homeward. On the return
journey, they made almost no landings, but sailed steadily on. They
revisited only those people whose intestines they had provided with
openings, and obtained from them more provisions for the last part of
their journey.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

\[paragraph continues\] They were traveling, not for a single year, nor
for two years, but for three complete years, of twelve months each. All
of them had wives at home, some of whom had been left with child. These
women had had time to give birth to their children, and the children
were already toddling about and babbling lustily, though not very
intelligibly. So they came home. Their wives were told by neighbors,
"Come out! Your husbands have come back!" They almost lost their senses
for joy, because they had believed that their husbands were dead and
gone. As soon as the men came into the house, the women glanced at them
and swooned. They remained unconscious for many hours, and could hardly
be restored. After that they lived with their husbands exactly as they
had in former times. The end. <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69)

Told by Innocent Korkin, a Russianized Yukaghir man, in the village of
Pokhotsk, in the Kolyma country, summer of 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[86:1](tes42.htm#fr_62) In local Russian
знатливый. This is nearly the same as "shaman," but of more indefinite
character. Cf. also Bogoras, "The Chukchee," 472--W. B.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[86:2](tes42.htm#fr_63) The Zyrian tribe is of
Finnish origin. The Zyrians live on both sides of the Northern Ural
Mountains, along the Pechora River, and also along some tributaries of
the Obi River. A confused remembrance of them was brought into
northeastern Asia by Russian cossacks and other immigrants, the greater
part of whom came from northern European Russia and all along the
northern parts of Siberia--W. B.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[87:1](tes42.htm#fr_64) Literally, "orthodox"
привославные), an invocation much used in Russian among the larger
classes of People, meaning about the same as the English
"gentlemen."--W. B.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[87:2](tes42.htm#fr_65) see Bella Coola (Boas,
Franz, *Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen Küste Amerikas*,
256); Chipewyan (Petitot, Emile, *Traditions Indiennes du Canada
Nord-Ouest*, 363); Tsimshian (Boas, Franz, "Tsimshian Texts" *Bulletin
27, Bureau of American Ethnology*, Washington, 1902, 105.).--F. B.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[87:3](tes42.htm#fr_66) see the Eskimo tale of
Giviok (references in Boas, Franz, "Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson
Bay" *Bulletin, American Museum of Natural History*, vol. 15, 36);
Tlingit (Swanton, John R., "Tlingit Myths and Texts" *Bulletin 39,
Bureau of American Ethnology*, Washington, 1909, 317).--F. B.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[88:1](tes42.htm#fr_67) See references in Boas,
"Tsimshian Mythology" (*Thirty-first Annual Report, Bureau of American
Ethnology*, Washington, 1916), 773--F. B.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[89:1](tes42.htm#fr_68) See Eskimo (Boas, "The
Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay" Bulletin American Museum of
Natural History, vol. 15, \[170\]); for other references, *Ibid*., 360;
Wishram (Sapir, "Wishram Texts" Publications, American Ethnological
Society, vol. 2, 19).--F. B.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[90:1](tes42.htm#fr_69) See [p. 87](#page_87),
note 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22. The Tale Of La'la (Kolyma Version)](tes43)
