[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes42)  [Next](tes44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 22. THE TALE OF LA'LA. <span id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_70)

(*Kolyma Version*)

La'la was very rich in peltries. Among all the Chukchee people along the
border he was known for his costly furs. He was also a great warrior,
and lived all by himself; only with his own family. One time the
Chukchee said among themselves, "Let us go and make war on La'la! We
will take his peltries and kill the people." They went, and they were
more numerous than mosquitoes, all young men and strong. La'la's father
and mother were quite old. He had also a single brother, a mere lad, not
yet full grown. This morning La'la walked on snowshoes and broke the one
for the right foot. Therefore, after dinner, he went into the woods with
his brother to hew out a new board for the broken snowshoe. While he was
working the lad climbed a high tree, and was playing among the thin
branches near the top. He played there, and looked homeward. From the
top of the tree he could see their house and everything around. He
played there for some time, and said suddenly, "Khadya, <span
id="fr_71"></span>[3](#fn_71) there are the Chukchee, coming to

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

attack La'la!" La'la looked up, and asked, "What do you say? Ah,
nothing! I am only playing with twigs." After a while he said again,
"Khadya, they are coming to La'la's house." La'la looked up, and asked
again, "What do you say?"--"Ah, nothing! I am playing with twigs." A
third time he said, "Khadya, they are coming!" And indeed, they had
come. The old man ran out, and they followed him around the house. He
said, "Khadya, they are going to kill him." Three times they chased him
around the house, then one of them seized a piece of a sledge runner of
birch-wood and struck the old man on the head. "Khadya," said the young
brother, "they have killed the old man. The old man is gone." And after
a while, "Khadya, they are breaking down the house and are looting the
sledges. They are driving a long needle into mother's tongue and make
her drag the tent poles. Now they are gone."

At last La'la had finished his snowshoes, "Let us go home!" They went
home. "Why is it so quiet here? Not a voice is to be heard. And where is
the old man? Why, the tent cover is torn off the poles! Are they going
to move to another place?" Then he looked at the sledges, and they were
empty. He came to the entrance. His father lay there in the house, close
to the entrance. The old man's head was broken, like an egg. The mother
was gone. "Ah, sorrow!" said La'la, "was it of this you spoke up in the
tree?"--"Just so," answered the lad. "I saw from the tree, how they
killed the old man, and looted the sledges, and drove a long needle
through the old woman's tongue. Then they made her drag the tent
poles."--"Ah!" wailed La'la, "what is to be done?" They thought and
thought; but the bow and the quiver, the arrow and the
spears,--everything had been carried off. They were unarmed, and he had
only the snowshoes which he had mended in the forest. La'la put on the
snowshoes, and they set off. His younger brother followed him. They
walked on; then they came to a large lake, round and smooth, just like a
frying pan. In the middle of it, on the smooth ice, was pitched the camp
of the assaulters. They were distributing the spoils among themselves.
La'la spoke to his younger brother, and said to him, "Listen! I am going
to turn you into a fox. After that I shall go straight to them, and you
must stay here and wait. I shall go to them and try to get my bow and
quiver. You must watch me; and if I succeed in getting them, at that
very moment you must appear, and run within shooting distance. Glide in
among the sledges, turn in zigzag directions, and try not to be
hit."--"How shall I do it?" said the young man. "Are you not a
Yukaghir?" <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72) said La'la. You must know
how to

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

avoid arrows and spears. Run down the lake and lure them on, only mind
not to lead them too far away, and I shall follow." He made a circuit
around the lake, then he took off his snowshoes and left them behind. He
went to the Chukchee camp from the north, along their usual way. He
waded in the snow, pretended to stumble, and assumed the air of being
very tired. Then he went over the beaten path, and boldly approached the
camp. "Here, boys! What about La'la? Have you killed La'la?"--"Oh, yes,
we killed him with a piece of wood, just like an old woman. He did not
lift a hand in his own defence."--"Ah, all! I thought he was a great
warrior. I came here from afar merely to have a look at him. I was told
several times that people would try to assault him, and he would wind in
among the assailers like a wet nettle-cord."--"All, nonsense! he was an
old man. He never struck a blow." "True, he did not, but at least his
peltries were numerous."--"As to that," said the Chukchee, "there is no
mistake about them. The peltries were abundant. We are ever so numerous,
and every one of us had a share." After a while he said again, "See
here, brothers! They say his bow and quiver are ever so large, and also
his snowshoes. Show them to me! I have come from afar in order to have a
look at them, because it is said, 'La'la's bow is a three men's bow.' Is
it really so heavy and imposing?" They suspected nothing, and so brought
forth La'la's arms. Two men were carrying his bow, two others his
quiver, and two more his snowshoes. "Ah!" said La'la, "indeed, it is
true! They are quite heavy." He took the bow and pretended to drop it.
Then he tried the snowshoes and deftly put them on. At that moment, the
small fox started off and ran away. All the young people rushed out, and
crossed his path, far ahead of him. So the fox returned to the camp, and
hid among the lodges. The Chukchee shot at it (as thick as rain fell the
arrows), but nobody could so much as graze it. It turned again and ran
away up the trail. The young men followed it, shooting and shouting. Two
old men were sitting on a pack-sledge looking on at the chase. One said
in his mother tongue, "He, he, he! La'la monia'lo khanidula," <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73) which means, "Be careful, boys! La'la will
tear the stomach out of your bodies." <span
id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_74) "Why have you given him the bow and the
quiver?" His neighbor, however, nudged him with his elbow. "You fool!
Hold your tongue!" The young people, however, did not listen to any one,
and ran on. La'la followed in the rear, and one by one he killed the
Chukchee, beginning with the one running farthest in the rear. He shot
and shot. Not a single arrow missed its aim. After that he turned back
to the

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

sledges. These two old men were sitting there. He killed one,--the one:
who said, "Be careful, boys!" He struck him on the head with a piece of
wood. He took the other one along and married him to his mother. He also
turned his brother back into a man. To these three he gave everything he
took from the Chukchee.

He went away from there, and arrived at another village. There he
married the pretty daughter of the chief. He lived there with his pretty
wife. They had two children,--a boy and a girl. The children were
growing up. The girl already could carry water from the river, and the
boy could fetch fuel from the woods. One time the father brought home a
large heath cock, and said to his wife, "Cook that heath cock!" She
cooked it, and they had a meal. After the meal she carried out the bones
and the odd pieces in a large frying-pan, and then she vanished. They
waited for her, but she never came back. La'la went out to look for her;
but she was nowhere to be seen. There were left only traces in the snow,
as if a giant bird had brushed it with its wings. From this he knew that
someone with wings had carried her off.

One night passed. In the morning, he said to his children, "I will go
and look for your mother. You must stay at home and not show yourselves
outside. In three days, I shall come back. Whether I find her or not, I
shall come to you." After that he left. On the way, he met a Buzzard.
"Here, Buzzard! have you not seen my wife?"--"I will not tell you. Every
time you meet me, you shoot at me. Why, then, should I tell you the
truth?" After awhile he met a Bluejay. "Here Jay! who carried off my
wife?"--"I will tell you. When you lived with your wife, you used to
bring home all kinds of meat and other food. When I came and pecked at
the food, you would not hinder me; so I will tell you the truth. He who
carried off your wife is Raven-Son, with beak of iron, and tail of
grass. You must go straight ahead in this direction, then you will find
him." La'la thanked the Jay and set off. He walked straight ahead, and
came to a place where there was a round hole in the ground, just like
the furrow of a fox. He looked in. A small old woman, wearing an apron
of summer skins, was there, skipping about like a grasshopper. As soon
as she saw him, she tore off a narrow shred from her apron, cut it into
small pieces,--which she put into the kettle. She hung the kettle over
the fire; and after a while she took it off and invited La'la to eat,
saying, "The meal is ready. Sit down and eat!" He tasted of the food,
and it was fat meat of the mountain-sheep cooked with edible roots.

He went on, and after a while he came to another place. Smoke was coming
up out of the ground. He looked down the hole. An old woman clad in a
coat of autumn skins was skipping about like a jumping hare.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

\[paragraph continues\] As soon as she saw him, she cut off a narrow
piece of her coat, chopped it up fine, and put it into a kettle. She
cooked it and invited him to partake of the meal. He ate of the food,
and it was fat meat of wild reindeer. When he wanted to go away, the old
woman said, "Go straight ahead, then you will reach a place where the
ground is smooth as ice. There you will see a village. A number of
children will be playing near the houses. Many of them will call after
you. You must not answer, or go near them. Far off, alone by himself, a
small boy will be standing, all covered with scabs. You must go to him.
It is your own son."--"How can it be my son," shouted La'la. "My son is
at home. I left him at home." "You did," said the old woman, "but
meanwhile the Raven went back there and carried off your boy. You must
wait there till sunset. After sunset, in the pale light of the night,
when the moon is rising in the sky, Raven will be asleep. Then three
women will come out of his house. They will walk around and cry softly
in the moonlight. You must go to them. They are his wives, all carried
off from their husbands." La'la went on and found the village. In the
evening, when the three women appeared, he went to them. They saw him,
and cried more bitterly than before. "Oh, cease crying! Better let us
talk over what is to be done! Is there anyway to kill Raven-Son?"--"How
can you kill him? His body is iron. Unless, you succeed insetting fire
to his house, so that he may burn with the house, being asleep, and
unable to wake from fatigue."--"All right, let us try it!" They went to
fetch fuel, and carried it to the house quite noiselessly, like so many
mice,--green wood and dry wood, branches and sticks--all kinds of fuel.
They surrounded the house with a wall of wood as high as the vent-hole.
Then they set fire to it. The whole blazed up, and Raven-Son with it. He
had no time to wake up and groaned only once in his sleep. The fire
subsided, the coals burned out, and even the ashes grew cold. La'la
gathered the ashes and let them fly to the winds. Then he went home,
taking along the three women. He kept his own wife and sent the other
two away to their former husbands. After some time he gathered all his
goods and set off for his own country. The end.

Told by Nicholas Kusakoff, a Russian creole, in the village of Pokhotsk,
the Kolyma country, summer of 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[90:2](tes43.htm#fr_70) This story is very
interesting, because it treats of La'la, the tribal hero of the
Chuvantzi, whose name is known to the present day among the last
remnants of this tribe, and also speaks of the wars between the
Chuvantzi and the Chukchee. It is probably only a fragment of a longer
tale. The episodes composing it reappear in several other tales among
the Russianized natives, Chukchee, and Yukaghir. The Kolyma version of
this story, however, calls La'la and his brother Yukaghir. The
interchange of these two tribal names, adds to the probability that the
Chuvantzi were a branch of the Yukaghir tribe (Bogoras, "The Chukchee,"
15).--W. B.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[90:3](tes43.htm#fr_71) This word was indicated
as belonging to the Chuvantzi language. It is supposed to mean "elder
brother".--W. B.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[91:1](tes43.htm#fr_72) But the word "Khadya" a
little above was indicated as Chuvantzi. Cf. Anadyr version, footnote,
p. 95--W. B.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[92:1](tes43.htm#fr_73) These words were also
said to belong to the Chuvantzi language--W. B.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[92:2](tes43.htm#fr_74) In dressing the
hunting-quarry, the belly is ripped up, and the stomach and other
intestines are immediately pulled out--W. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 23. The Tale Of La'la (Anadyr Version)](tes44)
