[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tes72)  [Next](tes74) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 8. A LAMUT TALE.

There was a man or perhaps a Monster. He prepared a fish trap of willow,
and made a weir across the river. He put the fish trap in a suitable
place and waited for the catch. After a while he listened, and heard the
fish trap whistle. "Eh, fish trap! are you whistling?"--"Yes, I am
whistling because the water runs through me." After a while he asked
again, "Eh, fish trap I are you choking now?"--"Yes, I am," said the
fish trap. So the man drew out the fish trap, and it was full of the
choicest fish. He constructed a drying rack, and hung up the fish. Then
he asked again, "Eh, fish trap! are you choking?" Again he pulled out
the fish trap, and it was full of the best fish. Thus he worked for nine
days. He built nine fish racks and filled every one with the precious
fish. Then he built nine storehouses and stored his dried fish in them.
After that he began to live on the fish. The first day he consumed one
storehouse full. The second

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

day he finished the second storehouse. Thus in nine days he was through
with all his stores of dried fish. Then he said, "I have nothing to eat,
so I will go and try to find a dwelling."

He walked about, and after a while saw a village. He felt full of joy.
"Oh, now I shall have a meal!" Then he sang aloud, "Nia'hu, nia'hu,
there live some people! I shall have a meal, and I shall have much joy
from it!" Some Lamut boys were kicking a football. A needle case shouted
from within a work bag, "Take care! The Monster is coming. Hear him
roar!" "What do we hear! It is you that roar." And the Monster sang
again, "Nia'hu, nia'hu, there live some people!" They heard his voice,
and ran away. Only the needle case was left among the offal. The
Monstrous old man came to the village and passed from house to house.
Not a soul was there. Only a gray jay was skipping from one drying rack
to another. "Here, grandfather! come play with us! Let us have a
skipping-match!"--"I cannot skip." He skipped once and once again. The
third time he tried he broke one of his legs. He drew out a small knife
and cut off his leg. "See here!" said the Monster, "my marrow is quite
fat." At that moment the Needle Case jumped up from the heap of offal
and sang, "Goldiá, goldiá, nesoyá, koroyá. The monstrous old man has
broken his leg! Ub-čub, čub!" <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108) "Oh,
oh! stop your shouting! Take this little knife." "I do not want it."
"Then take a little marrow of this bone."--"I do not eat it,
Ub-čub-čub!" As soon as the people heard his voice, they came with
knives and axes and attacked the Monster. Some struck him with axes,
some cut him with knives. At last they killed him. They turned the body
over and examined its back. They found that a long whetstone had entered
his anus fully a foot. The end.

Told by Mary Alin, a Russianized Chuvantzi woman, in the village of
Markova. Recorded by Mrs. Sophie Bogoras, winter of 1900.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_108"></span>[133:1](tes73.htm#fr_108) These words represent
probably an imitation of Lamut talk, though they have no particular
meaning. The last word, úbču, is in the Russian-Chukchee-Lamut trading
jargon, and means "food," to "eat."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9. A Yukaghir Tale](tes74)
