<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act008)  [Next](act010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 9:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. The famous story of St. Paul's conversion
from being an outrageous persecutor of the gospel of Christ to be an
illustrious professor and preacher of it. I. How he was first awakened
and wrought upon by an appearance of Christ himself to him as he was
going upon an errand of persecution to Damascus: and what a condition he
was in while he lay under the power of those convictions and terrors
([Act 9:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001)). 2. How he was baptized
by Ananias, by immediate directions from heaven ([Act
9:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#010)). 3. How he immediately
commenced doctor, and preached the faith of Christ, and proved what he
preached ([Act 9:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#020)). 4. How he was
persecuted, and narrowly escaped with his life ([Act
9:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023)). 5. How he was admitted among
the brethren at Jerusalem: how he preached, and was persecuted there
([Act 9:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026)). 6. The rest and
quietness which the churches enjoyed for some time after this ([Act
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#031)). II. The cure wrought by Peter
on Eneas, who had long been laid up with a palsy ([Act
9:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#032)). III. The raising of Tabitha
from death to life, at the prayer of Peter ([Act
9:36-43](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036)).

[Acts 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 9:1</span></span>

We found mention made of Saul twice or thrice in the story of Stephen,
for the sacred penman longed to come to his story; and now we are come
to it, not quite taking leave of Peter but from henceforward being
mostly taken up with Paul the apostle of the Gentiles, as Peter was of
the circumcision. His name in Hebrew was Saul - desired, though as
remarkably little in stature as his namesake king Saul was tall and
stately; one of the ancients calls him, Homo tricubitalis - but four
feet and a half in height; his Roman name which he went by among the
citizens of Rome was Paul - little. He was born in Tarsus, a city of
Cilicia, a free city of the Romans, and himself a freeman of that city.
His father and mother were both native Jews; therefore he calls himself
a Hebrew of the Hebrews; he was of the tribe of Benjamin, which adhered
to Judah. His education was in the schools of Tarsus first, which was a
little Athens for learning; there he acquainted himself with the
philosophy and poetry of the Greeks. Thence he was sent to the
university at Jerusalem, to study divinity and the Jewish law. His tutor
was Gamaliel, an eminent Pharisee. He had extraordinary natural parts,
and improved mightily in learning. He had likewise a handicraft trade
(being bred to tent-making), which was common with those among the Jews
who were bred scholars (as Dr. Lightfoot saith), for the earning of
their maintenance, and the avoiding of idleness. This is the young man
on whom the grace of God wrought this mighty change here recorded, about
a year after the ascension of Christ, or little more. We are here told,

I. How bad he was, how very bad, before his conversion; just before he
was an inveterate enemy to Christianity, did his utmost to root it out,
by persecuting all that embraced it. In other respects he was well
enough, as touching the righteousness which is of the law, blameless, a
man of no ill morals, but a blasphemer of Christ, a persecutor of
Christians, and injurious to both, [Ti1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013). And so ill informed was his
conscience that he thought he ought to do what he did against the name
of Christ ([Act 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#009)) and that he did
God service in it, as was foretold, [Joh
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002). Here we have,

1\. His general enmity and rage against the Christian religion ([Act
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001)): He yet breathed out threatenings
and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord. The persons persecuted
were the disciples of the Lord; because they were so, under that
character he hated and persecuted them. The matter of the persecution
was threatenings and slaughter. There is persecution in threatenings
([Act 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#017), [Act
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#021)); they terrify and break the
spirit: and though we say, Threatened folks live long, yet those whom
Saul threatened, if he prevailed not thereby to frighten them from
Christ, he slew them, he persecuted them to death, [Act
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#004). His breathing out threatenings
and slaughter intimates that it was natural to him, and his constant
business. He even breathed in this as in his element. He breathed it out
with heat and vehemence; his very breath, like that of some venomous
creatures, was pestilential. He breathed death to the Christians,
wherever he came; he puffed at them in his pride ([Psa
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004), [Psa
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)), spit his venom at them in his
rage. Saul yet breathing thus intimates, (1.) That he still persisted in
it; not satisfied with the blood of those he had slain, he still cries,
Give, give. (2.) That he should shortly be of another mine; as yet he
breathes out threatenings and slaughter, but he has not long to live
such a life as this, that breath will be stopped shortly.

2\. His particular design upon the Christians at Damascus; thither was
the gospel now lately carried by those that fled from the persecution at
Stephen's death, and thought to be safe and quiet there, and were
connived at by those in power there: but Saul cannot be easy if he knows
a Christian is quiet; and therefore, hearing that the Christians in
Damascus were so, he resolves to give them disturbance. In order to
this, he applies to the high priest for a commission ([Act
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001)) to go to Damascus, [Act
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#002). The high priest needed not to be
stirred up to persecute the Christians, he was forward enough to do it;
but it seems the young persecutor drove more furiously than the old one.
Leaders in sin are the worst of sinners; and the proselytes which the
scribes and Pharisees make often prove seven times more the children of
hell than themselves. He saith ([Act
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#005)) that this commission was had
from the whole estate of the elders: and proud enough this furious bigot
was to have a commission directed to him, with the seal of the great
sanhedrim affixed to it. Now the commission was to empower him to
enquire among the synagogues, or congregations, of the Jews that were at
Damascus, whether there were any that belonged to them that inclined to
favour this new sect or heresy, that believed in Christ; and if he found
any such, whether men or women, to bring them up prisoners to Jerusalem,
to be proceeded against according to law by the great council there.
Observe, (1.) The Christians are here said to be those of this way;
those of the way, so it is in the original. Perhaps the Christians
sometimes called themselves so, from Christ the Way; or, because they
looked on themselves as but in the way, and not yet at home; or, the
enemies thus represented it as a way by itself, a by-way, a party, a
faction. (2.) The high priest and sanhedrim claimed a power over the
Jews in all countries, and had a deference paid to their authority in
matters of religion, by all their synagogues, even those that were not
of the jurisdiction of the civil government of the Jewish nation. And
such a sovereignty the Roman pontiff now claims as the Jewish pontiff
then did, though he has not so much to show for it. (3.) By this
commission, all that worshipped God in the way that they called heresy,
though agreeing exactly with the original institutes even of the Jewish
church, whether they were men or women, were to be prosecuted. Even the
weaker sex, who in a case of this nature might deserve excuse, or at
least compassion, shall find neither with Saul any more than they do
with the popish persecutors. (4.) He was ordered to bring them all bound
to Jerusalem as criminals of the first magnitude, which, as it would be
the more likely to terrify them, so it would be to magnify Saul, as
having the command of the forces that were to carry them up, and
opportunity of breathing out threatenings and slaughter. Thus was Saul
employed when the grace of God wrought that great change in him. Let not
us then despair of renewing grace for the conversion of the greatest
sinners, nor let such despair of the pardoning mercy of God for the
greatest sin; for Paul himself obtained mercy, that he might be a
monument, [Ti1 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013).

II\. How suddenly and strangely a blessed change was wrought in him, not
in the use of any ordinary means, but by miracles. The conversion of
Paul is one of the wonders of the church. Here is,

1\. The place and time of it: As he journeyed, he came near to Damascus;
and there, Christ met with him.

(1.) He was in the way, travelling upon his journey; not in the temple,
nor in the synagogue, nor in the meeting of the Christians, but by the
way. The work of conversion is not tied to the church, though ordinarily
public administrations are made use of. Some are reclaimed in
slumberings on the bed ([Job
33:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#015)), and some in travelling upon
the road alone: Thoughts are as free, and there is as good an
opportunity of communing with our own hearts there, as upon the bed; and
there the Spirit may set in with us, for that wind blows where it
listeth. Some observe that Saul was spoken to abroad in the open air
that there might be no suspicion of imposture, nor of a trick put upon
him in it.

(2.) He was near Damascus, almost at his journey's end, ready to enter
the city, the chief city of Syria. Some observe that he who was to be
the apostle of the Gentiles was converted to the faith of Christ in a
Gentile country. Damascus had been infamous for persecuting God's people
formerly - they threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron ([Amo
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003)), and now it was likely to be so
again.

(3.) He was in a wicked way, pursuing his design against the Christians
at Damascus, and pleasing himself with the thought that he should devour
this new-born child of Christianity there. Note, Sometimes the grace of
God works upon sinners when they are at the worst, and hotly engaged in
the most desperate sinful pursuits, which is much for the glory both of
God's pity and of his power.

(4.) The cruel edict and decree he had with him drew near to be put in
execution; and now it was happily prevented, which may be considered,
\[1.\] As a great kindness to the poor saints at Damascus, who had
notice of his coming, as appears by what Ananias said ([Act
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#013), [Act
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#014)), and were apprehensive of their
danger from him, and trembled as poor lambs at the approach of a
ravening wolf; Saul's conversion was their security for the present.
Christ has many ways of delivering the godly out of temptation, and
sometimes does it by a change wrought in their persecutors, either
restraining their wrathful spirits ([Psa
76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010)) and mollifying them for a time,
as the Old Testament Saul, who relented towards David more than once
([Sa1 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#016); [Sa1
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#021)), or renewing their spirits, and
fixing upon them durable impressions, as upon the New Testament Saul
here. \[2.\] It was also a very great mercy to Saul himself to be
hindered from executing his wicked design, in which if he had now
proceeded, perhaps it had been the filling up of the measure of his
iniquity. Note, It is to be valued as a signal token of the divine
favour if God, either by the inward operations of his grace or the
outward occurrences of his providence, prevent us from prosecuting and
executing a sinful purpose, [Sa1
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#032).

2\. The appearance of Christ to him in his glory. Here it is only said
that there shone round about him a light from heaven; but it appears
from what follows ([Act 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#017)) that the
Lord Jesus was in this light, and appeared to him by the way. He saw
that just One ([Act 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#014)), and see
[Act 26:13](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#013). Whether he saw him at a
distance, as Stephen saw him, in the heavens, or nearer in the air, is
not certain. It is not inconsistent with what is said of the heavens
receiving Christ till the end of time ([Act
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021)) to suppose that he did, upon
such an extraordinary occasion as this, make a personal visit, but a
very short one, to this lower world; it was necessary to Paul's being an
apostle that he should see the Lord, and so he did, [Co1
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001); [Co1
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008). (1.) This light shone upon him
suddenly - exaiphnēs, when Paul never thought of any such thing, and
without any previous warning. Christ's manifestations of himself to poor
souls are many times sudden and very surprising, and he anticipates them
with the blessings of his goodness. This the disciples that Christ
called to himself found. Or ever I was aware, [Sol
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#012). (2.) It was a light from Heaven,
the fountain of light, from the God of heaven, the Father of lights. It
was a light above the brightness of the sun ([Act
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#013)), for it was visible at mid-day,
and outshone the sun in his meridian strength and lustre, [Isa
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023). (3.) It shone round about him,
not in his face only, but on every side of him; let him turn which way
he will, he finds himself surrounded with the discoveries of it. And
this was designed not only to startle him, and awaken his attention (for
well may he expect to hear when he is thus made to see something very
extraordinary), but to signify the enlightening of his understanding
with the knowledge of Christ. The devil comes to the soul in darkness;
by this he gets and keeps possession of it. But Christ comes to the soul
in light, for he is himself the light of the world, bright and glorious
to us, as light. The first thing in this new creation, as in that of the
world, is light, [Co2 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006). Hence all
Christians are said to be children of the light and of the day, [Eph
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008).

3\. The arresting of Saul, and his detachment: He fell to the earth,
[Act 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004). Some think that he was on
foot, and that this light, which perhaps was accompanied with a
thunderclap, so terrified him that he could not keep his feet, but fell
upon his face, usually a posture of adoration, but here of astonishment.
It is probable that he was mounted, as Balaam, when he went to curse
Israel, and perhaps better mounted than he; for Saul was now in a public
post, was in haste, and the journey was long, so that it is not likely
he should travel on foot. The sudden light would frighten the beast he
rode on, and make it throw him; and it was God's good providence that
his body got no hurt by the fall: but angels had a particular charge
concerning him, to keep all his bones, so that not one of them was
broken. It appears ([Act 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#014)) that
all that were with him fell to the earth as well as he, but the design
was upon him. This may be considered, (1.) As the effect of Christ's
appearing to him, and of the light which shone round about him. Note,
Christ's manifestations of himself to poor souls are humbling; they lay
them very low, in mean thoughts of themselves, and a humble submission
to the will of God. Now mine eyes see thee, saith Job, I abhor myself. I
saw the Lord, saith Isaiah, sitting upon a throne, and I said, Woe is
me, for I am undone. (2.) As a step towards this intended advancement.
He is designed not only to be a Christian, but to be a minister, an
apostle, a great apostle, and therefore he must thus be cast down. Note,
Those whom Christ designs for the greatest honours are commonly first
laid low. Those who are designed to excel in knowledge and grace are
commonly laid low first, in a sense of their own ignorance and
sinfulness. Those whom God will employ are first struck with a sense of
their unworthiness to be employed.

4\. The arraigning of Saul. Being by the fall taken into custody, and as
it were set to the bar, he heard a voice saying to him (and it was
distinguishing, to him only, for though those that were with him heard a
sound, [Act 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#007), yet they knew not the
words, [Act 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#009)), Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? Observe here,

(1.) Saul not only saw a light from heaven, but heard a voice from
heaven; wherever the glory of God was seen, the word of God was heard
([Exo 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#018)); and to Moses ([Num
7:89](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#089)); and to the prophets. God's
manifestations of himself were never dumb shows, for he magnifies his
word above all his name, and what was seen was alway designed to make
way for what was said. Saul heard a voice. Note, Faith comes by hearing;
hence the Spirit is said to be received by the hearing of faith, [Gal
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#002). The voice he heard was the voice
of Christ. When he saw that just One, he heard the voice of his mouth,
[Act 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#014). Note, The word we hear is
likely to profit us when we hear it as the voice of Christ, [Th1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013). It is the voice of my beloved;
no voice but his can reach the heart. Seeing and hearing are the two
learning senses; Christ here, by both these doors, entered into Saul's
heart.

(2.) What he heard was very awakening.

\[1.\] He was called by his name, and that doubled: Saul, Saul. Some
think, in calling him Saul, he hints at that great persecutor of David
whose name he bore. He was indeed a second Saul, and such an enemy to
the Son of David as the other was to David. Calling him by his name
intimates the particular regard that Christ had to him: I have surnamed
thee, though thou hast not known me, [Isa
45:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#004) See [Exo
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#012). His calling him by name brought
the conviction home to his conscience, and put it past dispute to whom
the voice spoke this. Note, What God speaks in general is then likely to
do us good when we apply it to ourselves, and insert our own names into
the precepts and promises which are expressed generally, as if God spoke
to us by name, and when he saith, Ho, every one, he had said, Ho, such a
one: Samuel, Samuel; Saul, Saul. The doubling of it, Saul, Saul,
intimates, First, The deep sleep that Saul was in; he needed to be
called again and again, as [Jer 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#029),
O earth, earth, earth. Secondly, The tender concern that the blessed
Jesus had for him, and for his recovery. He speaks as one in earnest; it
is like Martha, Martha ([Luk 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#041)),
or Simon, Simon ([Luk 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031)), or O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, [Mat 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037). He
speaks to him as to one in imminent danger, at the pit's brink, and just
ready to drop in: "Saul, Saul, dost thou know whither thou art going, or
what thou art doing?"

\[2.\] The charge exhibited against him is, Why persecutest thou me?
Observe here, First, Before Saul was made a saint, he was made to see
himself a sinner, a great sinner, a sinner against Christ. Now he was
made to see that evil in himself which he never saw before; sin revived
and he died. Note, A humbling conviction of sin is the first step
towards a saving conversion from sin. Secondly, He is convinced of one
particular sin, which he was most notoriously guilty of, and had
justified himself in, and thereby way is made for his conviction of all
the rest. Thirdly, The sin he is convinced of is persecution: Why
persecutest thou me? It is a very affectionate expostulation, enough to
melt a heart of stone. Observe, 1. The person sinning: "It is thou;
thou, that art not one of the ignorant, rude, unthinking crowd, that
will run down any thing they hear put into an ill name, but thou that
hast had a liberal learned education, has good parts and
accomplishments, hast the knowledge of the scriptures, which, if duly
considered, would show thee the folly of it. It is worse in thee than in
another." 2. The person sinned against: "It is I, who never did thee any
harm, who came from heaven to earth to do thee good, who was not long
since crucified for thee; and was not that enough, but must I afresh be
crucified by thee?" 3. The kind and continuance of the sin. It was
persecution, and he was at this time engaged in it: "Not only thou hast
persecuted, but thou persecutest, thou persistest in it." He was not at
this time hauling any to prison, nor killing them; but this was the
errand he came upon to Damascus; he was now projecting it, and pleasing
himself with the thought of it. Note, Those that are designing mischief
are, in God's account, doing mischief. 4. The question put to him upon
it: "Why dost thou do it?" (1.) It is complaining language. "Why dealest
thou thus unjustly, thus unkindly, with my disciples?" Christ never
complained so much of those who persecuted him in his own person as he
did here of those who persecuted him in his followers. He complains of
it as it was Saul's sin: "Why art thou such an enemy to thyself, to thy
God?" Note, The sins of sinners are a very grievous burden to the Lord
Jesus. He is grieved for them ([Mar
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#005)), he is pressed under them, [Amo
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#013). (2.) It is convincing language:
"Why dost thou thus: Canst thou give any good reason for it?" Note, It
is good for us often to ask ourselves why we do so and so, that we may
discern what an unreasonable thing sin is: and of all sins none so
unreasonable, so unaccountable, as the sin of persecuting the disciples
of Christ, especially when it is discovered to be, as certainly it is,
persecuting Christ. Those have no knowledge who eat up God's people,
[Psa 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004). Why persecutest thou me? He
thought he was persecuting only a company of poor, weak, silly people,
that were an offence and eye-sore to the Pharisees, little imagining
that is was one in heaven that he was all this while insulting; for
surely, if he had known, he would not have persecuted the Lord of glory.
Note, Those who persecute the saints persecute Christ himself, and he
takes what is done against them as done against himself, and accordingly
will be the judgment in the great day, [Mat
25:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#045).

5\. Saul's question upon his indictment, and the reply to it, [Act
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#005).

(1.) He makes enquiry concerning Christ: Who art thou, Lord? He gives no
direct answer to the charge preferred against him, being convicted by
his own conscience, and self-condemned. If God contend with us for our
sins, we are not able to answer for one of a thousand, especially such a
one as the sin of persecution. Convictions of sin, when they are set
home with power upon the conscience, will silence all excuses and
self-justifications. Though I were righteous, yet would I not answer.
But he desires to know who is his judge; the compellation is respectful:
Lord. He who had been a blasphemer of Christ's name now speaks to him as
his Lord. The question is proper: Who art thou? This implies his present
unacquaintedness with Christ; he knew not his voice as his own sheep do,
but he desired to be acquainted with him; he is convinced by this light
which encloses him that it is one from heaven that speaks to him, and he
has a veneration for every thing that appears to him to come from
heaven; and therefore, Lord, who art thou? What is thy name? [Jdg
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#017); [Gen
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#029). Note, there is some hope of
people when they begin to enquire after Jesus Christ.

(2.) He has an answer immediately, in which we have,

\[1.\] Christ's gracious revelation of himself to him. He is always
ready to answer the serious enquiries of those who covet an acquaintance
with him: I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. The name of Jesus was not
unknown to him; his heart had risen against it many a time, and gladly
would he bury it in oblivion. He knew it was the name that he
persecuted, but little did he think to hear it from heaven, or from the
midst of such a glory as now shone round about him. Note, Christ brings
souls into fellowship with himself by manifesting himself to them. He
said, First, I am Jesus, a Saviour; I am Jesus of Nazareth, so it is,
[Act 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#008). Saul used to call him so
when he blasphemed him: "I am that very Jesus whom thou usedst to call
in scorn Jesus of Nazareth." And he would show that now that he is in
his glory he is not ashamed of his humiliation. Secondly, "I am that
Jesus whom thou persecutest, and therefore it will be at thy peril if
thou persist in this wicked course." There is nothing more effectual to
awaken and humble the soul than to see sin to be against Christ, an
affront to him, and a contradiction to his designs.

\[2.\] His gentle reproof of him: It is hard for thee to kick against
the pricks, or goads - to spurn at the spur. It is hard, it is in itself
an absurd and evil thing, and will be of fatal consequence to him that
does it. Those kick at the goad that stifle and smother the convictions
of conscience, that rebel against God's truths and laws, that quarrel
with his providences, and that persecute and oppose his ministers,
because they reprove them, and their words are as goads and as nails.
Those that revolt more and more when they are stricken by the word or
rod of God, that are enraged at reproofs and fly in the face of their
reprovers, kick against the pricks and will have a great deal to answer
for.

6\. His surrender of himself to the Lord Jesus at length, [Act
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#006). See here,

(1.) The frame and temper he was in, when Christ had been dealing with
him. \[1.\] He trembled, as one in a great fright. Note, Strong
convictions, set home by the blessed Spirit, will make an awakened soul
to tremble. How can those choose but tremble that are made to see the
eternal God provoked against them, the whole creation at war with them,
and their own souls upon the brink of ruin! \[2.\] He was astonished,
was filled with amazement, as one brought into a new world, that knew
not where he was. Note, The convincing, converting, work of Christ is
astonishing to the awakened soul, and fills it with admiration. "What is
this that God has done with me, and what will he do?"

(2.) His address to Jesus Christ, when he was in this frame: Lord, what
wilt thou have me to do? This may be taken, \[1.\] As a serious request
for Christ's teachings: "Lord, I see I have hitherto been out of the
way; thou hast shown me my error, set me to rights; thou hast discovered
sin to me, discover to me the way to pardon and peace." It is like that,
Men and brethren, what must we do? Note, A serious desire to be
instructed by Christ in the way of salvation is an evidence of a good
work begun in the soul. Or, \[2.\] As a sincere resignation of himself
to the direction and government of the Lord Jesus. This was the first
word that grace spoke in Paul, and with this began a spiritual life:
Lord Jesus, What wilt thou have me to do? Did not he know what he had to
do? Had he not his commission in his pocket? And what had he to do but
to execute it? No, he had done enough of this work already, and resolves
now to change his master, and employ himself better. Now it is not, What
will the high priest and the elders have me to do? What will my own
wicked appetites and passions have me to do? But, What wilt thou have me
to do? The great change in conversion is wrought upon the will, and
consists in the resignation of that to the will of Christ.

(3.) The general direction Christ gave him, in answer to this: Arise, go
into the city of Damascus, which thou art now near to, and it shall be
told thee what thou must do. It is encouragement enough to have further
instruction promised him, but, \[1.\] He must not have it yet; it shall
be told him shortly what he must do, but, for the present, he must pause
upon what has been said to him, and improve that. Let him consider
awhile what he has done in persecuting Christ, and be deeply humbled for
that, and then he shall be told what he has further to do. \[2.\] He
must not have it in this way, by a voice from heaven, for it is plain
that he cannot bear it; he trembles, and is astonished. He shall be told
therefore what he must do by a man like himself, whose terror shall not
make him afraid, nor his hand be heavy upon him, which Israel desired at
mount Sinai. Or, it is an intimation that Christ would take some other
time to manifest himself further to him, when he was more composed, and
this fright pretty well over. Christ manifests himself to his people by
degrees; and both what he does and would he have them to do, though they
know not now, they shall know hereafter.

7\. How far his fellow travellers were affected with this, and what
impression it made upon them. They fell to the earth, as he did, but
rose without being bidden, which he did not, but lay still till it was
said to him, Arise; for he lay under a heavier load than any of them
did; but when they were up, (1.) They stood speechless, as men in
confusion, and that was all, [Act 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#007).
They were going on the same wicked errand that Paul was, and perhaps, to
the best of their power, were as spiteful as he; yet we do not find that
any of them were converted, though they saw the light, and were struck
down and struck dumb by it. No external means will of themselves work a
change in the soul, without the Spirit and grace of God, which
distinguish between some and others; among these that journeyed
together, one is taken, and the others left. They stood speechless; none
of them said, Who art thou, Lord? or, What wilt thou have me to do? as
Paul did, but none of God's children are born dumb. (2.) They heard a
voice, but saw no man; they heard Paul speak, but saw not him to whom he
spoke, nor heard distinctly what was said to him: which reconciles it
with what is said of this matter, [Act
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#009), where it is said, They saw the
light and were afraid (which they might do and yet see no man in the
light, as Paul did), and that they heard not the voice of him that spoke
to Paul, so as to understand what he said, though they did hear a
confused noise. Thus those who came hither to be the instruments of
Paul's rage against the church serve for witnesses of the power of God
over him.

8\. What condition Saul was in after this, [Act
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#008), [Act
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#009). (1.) He arose from the earth,
when Christ commanded him, but probably not without help, the vision had
made him so faint and weak, I will not say like Belshazzar, when the
joints of his loins were loosed and his knees smote one against another,
but like Daniel, when upon the sight of a vision no strength remained in
him, [Dan 10:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#016). (2.) When his eyes
were opened, he found that his sight was gone, and he saw no man, none
of the men that were with him, and began now to be busy about him. It
was not so much this glaring light that, by dazzling his eyes, had
dimmed them - Nimium sensibile laedit sensum; for then those with him
would have lost their sight too; but it was a sight of Christ, whom the
rest saw not, that had this effect upon him. Thus a believing sight of
the glory of God in the face of Christ dazzles the eyes to all things
here below. Christ, in order to the further discovery of himself and his
gospel to Paul, took him off from the sight of other things, which he
must look off, that he may look unto Jesus, and to him only. (3.) They
led him by the hand into Damascus; whether to a public house, or to some
friend's house, is not certain; but thus he who thought to have led the
disciples of Christ prisoners and captives to Jerusalem was himself led
a prisoner and a captive to Christ into Damascus. He was thus taught
what need he had of the grace of Christ to lead his soul (being
naturally blind and apt to mistake) into all truth. (4.) He lay without
sight, and without food, neither did eat nor drink for three days, [Act
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#009). I do not think, as some do, that
now he had his rapture into the third heavens, which he speaks of, 2
Cor. 12. So far from this that we have reason to think he was all this
time rather in the belly of hell, suffering God's terrors for his sins,
which were now set in order before him: he was in the dark concerning
his own spiritual state, and was so wounded in spirit for sin that he
could relish neither meat nor drink.

[Acts 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 9:10</span></span>

As for God, his work is perfect; if he begin, he will make an end: a
good work was begun in Saul, when he was brought to Christ's feet, in
that word, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? And never did Christ
leave any that were brought to that. Though Saul was sadly mortified
when he lay three days blind, yet he was not abandoned. Christ here
takes care of the work of his own hands. He that hath torn will heal -
that hath smitten will bind up - that hath convinced will comfort.

I. Ananias is here ordered to go and look after him, to heal and help
him; for he that causeth grief will have compassion.

1\. The person employed is Ananias, a certain disciple at Damascus, not
lately driven thither from Jerusalem, but a native of Damascus; for it
is said ([Act 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#012)) that he had a
good report of all the Jews who dwelt there, as a devout man according
to the law; he had lately embraced the gospel, and given up his name to
Christ, and, as it should seem, officiated as a minister, at least pro
hac vice - on this occasion, though it does not appear that he was
apostolically ordained. But why were not some of the apostles from
Jerusalem sent for upon this great occasion, or Philip the evangelist,
who had lately baptized the eunuch, and might have been fetched hither
by the Spirit in a little time? Surely, because Christ would employ
variety of hands in eminent services, that the honours might not be
monopolized nor engrossed by a few - because he would put work into the
hands, and thereby put honour upon the heads, of those that were mean
and obscure, to encourage them - and because he would direct us to make
much of the ministers that are where our lot is cast, if they have
ordained mercy to be faithful, though they are not of the most eminent.

2\. The direction given him is to go and enquire at such a house,
probably an inn, for one Saul of Tarsus. Christ, in a vision, called to
Ananias by name, [Act 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#010). It is
probable it was not the first time that he had heard the words of God,
and seen the visions of the Almighty; for, without terror or confusion,
he readily answers, "Behold I am here, Lord, ready to go wherever thou
sendest me, and to do whatever thou biddest me." Go then, saith Christ,
into the street which is called Straight, and enquire in the house of
Judas (where strangers used to lodge) for one called Saul of Tarsus.
Note, Christ very well knows where to find out those that are his, in
their distresses: when their relations, it may be, know not what is
become of them, they have a friend in heaven, that knows in what street,
in what house, nay, and which is more, in what frame they are: he knows
their souls in adversity.

3\. Two reasons are given him why he must go and enquire for this
stranger, and offer him his service -

(1.) Because he prays, and his coming to him must answer his prayer.
This is a reason, \[1.\] Why Ananias needed not to be afraid of him, as
we find he was, [Act 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#013), [Act
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#014). There is no question, saith
Christ, but he is a true convert, for behold he prayeth. Behold denotes
the certainty of it: "Assure thyself it is so; go and see." Christ was
so pleased to find Paul praying that he must have others to take notice
of it: Rejoice with me, for I have found the sheep which I had lost. It
denotes also the strangeness of it: "Behold, and wonder, that he who but
the other day breathed nothing but threatenings and slaughter, now
breathes nothing but prayer." But was it such a strange thing for Saul
to pray? Was he not a Pharisee? and have we not reason to think he did,
as the rest of them did, make long prayers in the synagogues and the
corners of the streets? Yes; but now he began to pray after another
manner than he had done; then he said his prayers, now he prayed them.
Note, Regenerating grace evermore sets people on praying; you may as
soon find a living man without breath as a living Christian without
prayer; if breathless, lifeless; and so, if prayerless, graceless.
\[2.\] As a reason why Ananias must go to him with all speed. It is no
time to linger, for behold he prayeth: if the child cry, the tender
nurse will hasten to it with the breast. Saul here, like Ephraim, is
bemoaning himself, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, and kicking
against the goad. "Oh! go to him quickly, and tell him he is a dear son,
a pleasant child, and since I spoke against him, for persecuting me, I
do earnestly remember him still." [Jer
31:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018). Observe what condition Saul
was now in. He was under conviction of sin, trembling and astonished;
the setting of sin in order before us should drive us to prayer. He was
under a bodily affliction, blind and sick; and, Is any afflicted? Let
him pray. Christ had promised him that it should be further told him
what he should do ([Act 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#006)), and he
prays that one may be sent to him to instruct him. Note, What God has
promised we must pray for; he will for this be enquired of, and
particularly for divine instruction.

(2.) Because he hath seen in a vision such a man coming to him, to
restore him to his sight; and Ananias's coming to him must answer his
dream, for it was of God ([Act 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#012)):
He hath seen in a vision a man named Ananias, and just such a man as
thou art, coming in seasonably for his relief, and putting his hand on
him that he might receive his sight. Now this vision which Paul had may
be considered, \[1.\] As an immediate answer to his prayer, and the
keeping up of that communion with God which he had entered into by
prayer. He had, in prayer, spread the misery of his own case before God,
and God presently manifests himself and the kind intentions of his grace
to him; and it is very encouraging to know God's thoughts to us-ward.
\[2.\] As designed to raise his expectations, and to make Ananias's
coming more welcome to him. He would readily receive him as a messenger
from God when he was told beforehand, in vision, that one of that name
would come to him. See what a great thing it is to bring a spiritual
physician and his patient together: here were two visions in order to
it. When God, in his providence, does it without visions, brings a
messenger to the afflicted soul, an interpreter, one among a thousand,
to show unto man his uprightness, it must be acknowledged with
thankfulness to his praise.

II\. Ananias objects against going to him, and the Lord answers the
objection. See how condescendingly the Lord admits his servant to reason
with him.

1\. Ananias pleads that this Saul was a notorious persecutor of the
disciples of Christ, [Act 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#013), [Act
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#014). (1.) He had been so at
Jerusalem: "Lord, I have heard by many of this man, what a malicious
enemy he is to the gospel of Christ: all those that were scattered upon
the late persecution, many of whom are come to Damascus, tell how much
evil he hath done to thy saints in Jerusalem, that he was the most
virulent, violent persecutor of all, and a ringleader in the mischief -
what havoc he has made in the church: there was no man they were more
afraid of, no, not the high priest himself, than of Saul; nay," (2.)
"His errand to Damascus at this time is to persecute us Christians: Here
he has authority from the chief priests to bind all that call on thy
name, to treat the worshippers of Christ as the worst of criminals."
Now, why does Ananias object this. Not, "Therefore I do not owe him so
much service. Why should I do him a kindness who has done and designed
us so much unkindness?" No, Christ has taught us another lesson, to
render good for evil, and pray for our persecutors; but if he be such a
persecutor of Christians, \[1.\] Will it be safe for Ananias to go to
him? Will he not throw himself like a lamb into the mouth of a lion?
And, if he thus bring himself into trouble, he will be blamed for his
indiscretion. \[2.\] Will it be to any purpose to go to him? Can such a
hard heart ever be softened, or such an Ethiopian ever change his skin?

2\. Christ overrules the objection ([Act
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015), [Act
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#016)): "Do not tell me how bad he has
been, I know it very well; but go thy way with all speed, and give him
all the help thou canst, for he is a chosen vessel, or instrument, unto
me; I design to put confidence in him, and then thou needest not fear
him." He was a vessel in which the gospel-treasure should be lodged, in
order to the conveyance of it to many; an earthen vessel ([Co2
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)), but a chosen vessel. The vessel
God uses he himself chooses; and it is fit he should himself have the
choosing of the instruments he employs ([Joh
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016)): You have not chosen me, but I
have chosen you. He is a vessel of honour, and must not be neglected in
his present forlorn condition, nor thrown away as a despised broken
vessel, or a vessel in which there is no pleasure. He is designed, (1.)
For eminent services: He is to bear my name before the Gentiles, is to
be the apostle of the Gentiles, and to carry the gospel to heathen
nations. Christ's name is the standard to which souls must be gathered,
and under which they must be enlisted, and Saul must be a
standard-bearer. He must bear Christ's name, must bear witness to it
before kings, king Agrippa and Caesar himself; nay, he must bear it
before the children of Israel, though there were so many hands already
at work about them. (2.) For eminent sufferings ([Act
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#016)): I will show him how great
things he must suffer for my name's sake. He that has been a persecutor
shall be himself persecuted. Christ's showing him this intimates either
his bringing him to these trials (as [Psa
60:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#003)), Thou hast shown thy people hard
things, or his giving notice of them beforehand, that they might be no
surprise to him. Note, Those that bear Christ's name must expect to bear
the cross for his name; and those that do most for Christ are often
called out to suffer most for him. Saul must suffer great things. This,
one would think, was a cold comfort for a young convert; but it is only
like telling a soldier of a bold and brave spirit, when he is enlisted,
that he shall take the field, and enter upon action, shortly. Saul's
sufferings for Christ shall redound so much to the honour of Christ and
the service of the church, shall be so balanced with spiritual comforts
and recompensed with eternal glories, that it is no discouragement to
him to be told how great things he must suffer for Christ's name's sake.

III\. Ananias presently goes on Christ's errand to Saul, and with good
effect. He had started an objection against going to him, but, when an
answer was given to it, he dropped it, and did not insist upon it. When
difficulties are removed, what have we to do but to go on with our work,
and not hang upon an objection?

1\. Ananias delivered his message to Saul, [Act
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#017). Probably he found him in bed,
and applied to him as a patient. (1.) He put his hands on him. It was
promised, as one of the signs that should follow those that believe,
that they should lay hands on the sick, and they should recover ([Mar
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018)), and it was for that intent
that he put his hands on him. Saul came to lay violent hands upon the
disciples at Damascus, but here a disciple lays a helping healing hand
upon him. The blood-thirsty hate the upright, but the just seek his
soul. (2.) He called him brother, because he was made a partaker of the
grace of God, though not yet baptized; and his readiness to own him as a
brother intimated to him God's readiness to own him as a son, though he
had been a blasphemer of God and a persecutor of his children. (3.) He
produces his commission from the same hand that had laid hold on him by
the way, and now had him in custody. "That same Jesus that appeared unto
thee in the way as thou camest, and convinced thee of thy sin in
persecuting him, has now sent me to thee to comfort thee." Una eademque
manus vulnus opemque tulit - The hand that wounded heals. "His light
struck thee blind, but he hath sent me to thee that thou mightest
receive thy sight; for the design was not to blind thine eyes, but to
dazzle them, that thou mightest see things by another light: he that
then put clay upon thine eyes hath sent me to wash them, that they may
be cured." Ananias might deliver his message to Saul very appositely in
the prophet's words ([Hos 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001), [Hos
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002)): Come and turn to the Lord, for
he hath torn and he will heal thee; he hath smitten, and he will bind
thee up; now after two days he will revive thee, and the third day he
will raise thee up, and thou shalt live in his sight. Corrosives shall
be no more applied, but lenitives. (4.) He assures him that he shall not
only have his sight restored, but be filled with the Holy Ghost: he must
himself be an apostle, and must in nothing come behind the chief of the
apostles, and therefore must receive the Holy Ghost immediately, and
not, as others did, by the interposition of the apostles; and Ananias's
putting his hands upon him before he was baptized was for the conferring
of the Holy Ghost.

2\. Ananias saw the good issue of his mission. (1.) In Christ's favour
to Saul. At the word of Ananias, Saul was discharged from his
confinement by the restoring of his sight; for Christ's commission to
open the prison to those that were bound ([Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)) is explained by the giving of
sight to the blind, [Luk 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018); [Isa
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#007). Christ's commission is to open
the blind eyes, and to bring out the prisoners from the prison. Saul is
delivered from the spirit of bondage by receiving sight ([Act
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#018)), which was signified by the
falling of scales from his eyes; and this immediately, and forthwith:
the cure was sudden, to show that it was miraculous. This signified the
recovering of him, \[1.\] From the darkness of his unconverted state.
When he persecuted the church of God, and walked in the spirit and way
of the Pharisees, he was blind; he saw not the meaning either of the law
or of the gospel, [Rom 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#009). Christ
often told the Pharisees that they were blind, and could not make them
sensible of it; they said, We see, [Joh
9:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#041). Saul is saved from his
Pharisaical blindness, by being made sensible of it. Note, Converting
grace opens the eyes of the soul, and makes the scales to fall from them
([Act 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#018)), to open men's eyes, and
turn them from darkness to light: this was what Saul was sent among the
Gentiles to do, by the preaching of the gospel, and therefore must first
experience it in himself. \[2.\] From the darkness of his present
terrors, under the apprehension of guilt upon his conscience, and the
wrath of God against him. This filled him with confusion, during those
three days he sat in darkness, like Jonah for three days in the belly of
hell; but now the scales fell from his eyes, the cloud was scattered,
and the Sun of righteousness rose upon his soul, with healing under his
wings. (2.) In Saul's subjection to Christ: He was baptized, and thereby
submitted to the government of Christ, and cast himself upon the grace
of Christ. Thus he was entered into Christ's school, hired into his
family, enlisted under his banner, and joined himself to him for better
for worse. The point was gained: it is settled; Saul is now a disciple
of Christ, not only ceases to oppose him, but devotes himself entirely
to his service and honour.

IV\. The good work that was begun in Saul is carried on wonderfully;
this new-born Christian, though he seemed as one born out of due time,
yet presently comes to maturity.

1\. He received his bodily strength, [Act
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#019). He had continued three days
fasting, which, with the mighty weight that was all that time upon his
spirits, had made him very weak; but, when he had received meat, he was
strengthened, [Act 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#019). The Lord is
for the body, and therefore care must be taken of it, to keep it in good
plight, that it may be fit to serve the soul in God's service, and that
Christ may be magnified in it, [Phi
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#020).

2\. He associated with the disciples that were at Damascus, fell in with
them, conversed with them, went to their meetings, and joined in
communion with them. He had lately breathed out threatenings and
slaughter against them, but now breathes love and affection to them. Now
the wolf dwells with the lamb, and the leopard lies down with the kid,
[Isa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006). Note, Those that take God
for their God take his people for their people. Saul associated with the
disciples, because now he saw an amiableness and excellency in them,
because he loved them, and found that he improved in knowledge and grace
by conversing with them; and thus he made profession of his Christian
faith, and openly declared himself a disciple of Christ, by associating
with those that were his disciples.

3\. He preached Christ in the synagogues, [Act
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#020). To this he had an extraordinary
call, and for it an extraordinary qualification, God having immediately
revealed his Son to him and in him, that he might preach him, [Gal
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015), [Gal
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016). He was so full of Christ
himself, that the Spirit within him constrained him to preach him to
others, and, like Elihu, to speak that he might be refreshed, [Job
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#020). Observe, (1.) Where he preached
- in the synagogues of the Jews, for they were to have the first offer
made them. The synagogues were their places of concourse; there he met
with them together, and there they used to preach against Christ and to
punish his disciples, by the same token that Paul himself had punished
them oft in every synagogue ([Act
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#011)), and therefore there he would
face the enemies of Christ where they were most daring, and openly
profess Christianity where he had most opposed it. (2.) What he
preached: He preached Christ. When he began to be a preacher, he fixed
this for his principle, which he stuck to ever after: We preach not
ourselves, but Christ Jesus our Lord; nothing but Christ, and him
crucified. He preached concerning Christ, that he is the Son of God, his
beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased, and with us in him, and not
otherwise. (3.) How people were affected with it ([Act
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#021)): All that heard him were amazed,
and said, "Is not this he that destroyed those who called on this name
in Jerusalem, and now does he call on this name himself, and persuade
others to call upon it, and strengthen the hands of those that do?"
Quantum mutatus ab illo - Oh how changed! Is Saul also among the
prophets? Nay, did he not come hither for that intent, to seize all the
Christians he could find, and bring them bound to the chief priests?
Yes, he did. Who would have thought then that he would ever preach
Christ as he does? Doubtless this was looked upon by many as a great
confirmation of the truth of Christianity, that one who had been such a
notorious persecutor of it came, on a sudden, to be such an intelligent,
strenuous, and capacious preacher of it. This miracle upon the mind of
such a man outshone the miracles upon men's bodies; and giving a man
such another heart was more than giving men to speak with other tongues.

4\. He confuted and confounded those that opposed the doctrine of
Christ, [Act 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#022). He signalized
himself, not only in the pulpit, but in the schools, and showed himself
supernaturally enabled, not only to preach the truth, but to maintain
and defend it when he had preached it. (1.) He increased in strength. He
became more intimately acquainted with the gospel of Christ, and his
pious affections grew more strong. He grew more bold and daring and
resolute in defence of the gospel: He increased the more for the
reflections that were cast upon him ([Act
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#021)), in which his new friends
upbraided him as having been a persecutor, and his old friends upbraided
him as being now a turncoat; but Saul, instead of being discouraged by
the various remarks made upon his conversion, was thereby so much the
more emboldened, finding he had enough at hand wherewith to answer the
worst they could say to him. (2.) He ran down his antagonists, and
confounded the Jews who dwelt in Damascus; he silenced them, and shamed
them - answered their objections to the satisfaction of all indifferent
persons, and pressed them with arguments which they could make no reply
to. In all his discourses with the Jews he was still proving that this
Jesus is very Christ, is the Christ, the anointed of God, the true
Messiah promised to the fathers. He was proving it, sumbibazōn -
affirming it and confirming it, teaching with persuasion. And we have
reason to think he was instrumental in converting many to the faith of
Christ, and building up the church at Damascus, which he went thither to
make havoc of. Thus out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the
strong sweetness.

[Acts 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 9:23</span></span>

Luke here makes no mention of Paul's journey into Arabia, which he tells
us himself was immediately after his conversion, [Gal
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016), [Gal
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#017). As soon as God had revealed his
Son in him, that he might preach him, he went not up to Jerusalem, to
receive instructions from the apostles (as any other convert would have
done, that was designed for the ministry), but he went to Arabia, where
there was new ground to break up, and where he would have opportunity of
teaching, but not learning; thence he returned to Damascus, and there,
three years after his conversion, this happened, which is here recorded.

I. He met with difficulties at Damascus, and had a narrow escape of
being killed there. Observe, 1. What his danger was ([Act
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023)): The Jews took counsel to kill
him, being more enraged at him than at any other of the preachers of the
gospel, not only because he was more lively and zealous in his preaching
than any of them, and more successful, but because he had been such a
remarkable deserter, and his being a Christian was a testimony against
them. It is said ([Act 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#024)), The Jews
watched the gates day and night to kill him; they incensed the governor
against him, as a dangerous man, who therefore kept the city with a
guard to apprehend him, at his going out or coming in, [Co2
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#032). Now Christ showed Paul what
great things he must suffer for his name ([Act
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#016)), when here was presently the
government in arms against him, which was a great thing, and, as all his
other sufferings afterwards, helped to make him considerable. Saul was
no sooner a Christian than a preacher, no sooner a preacher than a
sufferer; so quickly did he rise to the summit of his preferment. Note,
Where God gives great grace he commonly exercises it with great trials.
2. How he was delivered. (1.) The design against him was discovered:
Their lying in wait was known of Saul, by some intelligence, whether
from heaven or from men we are not told. (2.) The disciples contrived to
help him away - hid him, it is likely, by day; and in the night, the
gates being watched, that he could not get away through them, they let
him down by the wall, in a basket, as he himself relates it ([Co2
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#033)), so he escaped out of their
hands. This story, as it shows us that when we enter into the way of God
we must look for temptation, and prepare accordingly, so it shows us
that the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and will
with the temptation also make a way to escape, that we may not be by it
deterred nor driven from the way of God.

II\. He met with difficulties at Jerusalem the first time he went
thither, [Act 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026). He came to
Jerusalem. This is thought to be that journey to Jerusalem of which he
himself speaks ([Gal 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)): After
three years I went up to Jerusalem, saith he, to see Peter, and abode
with him fifteen days. But I rather incline to think that this was a
journey before that, because his coming in and going out, his preaching
and disputing ([Act 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#028), [Act
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#029)), seem to be more than would
consist with his fifteen days' stay (for that was no more) and to
require a longer time; and, besides, now he came a stranger, but then he
came, historēsai - to confer with Peter, as one he was intimate with;
however, it might possibly be the same. Now observe,

1\. How shy his friends were of him ([Act
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026)): When he came to Jerusalem, he
did not go to the chief priests and the Pharisees (he had taken his
leave of them long since), but he assayed to join himself to the
disciples. Wherever he came, he owned himself one of that despised
persecuted people, and associated with them. They were now in his eyes
the excellent ones of the earth, in whom was all his delight. He desired
to be acquainted with them, and to be admitted into communion with them;
but they looked strange upon him, shut the door against him, and would
not go about any of their religious exercises if he were by, for they
were afraid of him. Now might Paul be tempted to think himself in an ill
case, when the Jews had abandoned and persecuted him, and the Christians
would not receive and entertain him. Thus does he fall into divers
temptations, and needs the armour of righteousness, as we all do, both
on the right hand and on the left, that we may not be discouraged either
by the unjust treatment of our enemies or the unkind treatment of our
friends. (1.) See what was the cause of their jealousy of him: They
believed not that he was a disciple, but only pretended to be so, and
came among them as a spy or an informer. They knew what a bitter
persecutor he had been, with what fury he went to Damascus some time
ago; they had heard nothing of him since, and therefore thought he was
but a wolf in sheep's clothing. The disciples of Christ had need to be
cautious whom they admit into communion with them. Believe not every
spirit. There is need of the wisdom of the serpent, to keep the mean
between the extremes of suspicion on the one hand and credulity on the
other; yet methinks it is safer to err on the charitable side, because
it is an adjudged case that it is better the tares should be found among
the wheat than that the wheat should any of it be rooted up and thrown
out of the field. (2.) See how it was removed ([Act
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027)): Barnabas took him to the
apostles themselves, who were not so scrupulous as the inferior
disciples, to whom he first assayed to join himself, and he declared to
them, \[1.\] What Christ had done for him: He had shown himself to him
in the way and spoken to him; and what he said. \[2.\] What he had since
done for Christ: He had preached boldly at Damascus in the name of
Jesus. How Barnabas came to know this, more than the rest of them, we
are not told; whether he had himself been at Damascus, or had had
letters thence, or discoursed with some of that city, by which he came
to the knowledge of this; or whether he had formerly been acquainted
with Paul in the Grecian synagogues, or at the feet of Gamaliel, and had
such an account of his conversion from himself as he saw cause enough to
give credit to: but so it was that, being satisfied himself, he gave
satisfaction to the apostles concerning him, he having brought no
testimonials from the disciples at Damascus, thinking he needed not, as
some others, epistles of commendation, [Co2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001). Note, The introducing of a young
convert into the communion of the faithful is a very good work, and one
which, as we have opportunity, we should be ready to do.

2\. How sharp his enemies were upon him. (1.) He was admitted into the
communion of the disciples, which was no little provocation to his
enemies. It vexed the unbelieving Jews to see Saul a trophy of Christ's
victory, and a captive to his grace, who had been such a champion for
their cause - to see him coming in, and going out, with the apostles
([Act 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#028)), and to hear them glorying
in him, or rather glorifying God in him. (2.) He appeared vigorous in
the cause of Christ, and this was yet more provoking to them ([Act
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#029)): He spoke boldly in the name of
the Lord Jesus. Note, Those that speak for Christ have reason to speak
boldly; for they have a good cause, and speak for one who will at last
speak for himself and them too. The Grecians, or Hellenist Jews, were
most offended at him, because he had been one of them; and they drew him
into a dispute, in which, no doubt, he was too hard for them, as he had
been for the Jews at Damascus. One of the martyrs said, Though she could
not dispute for Christ, she could die for Christ; but Paul could do
both. Now the Lord Jesus divided the spoils of the strong man armed in
Saul. For that same natural quickness and fervour of spirit which, while
he was in ignorance and unbelief, made him a furious bigoted persecutor
of the faith, made him a most zealous courageous defender of the faith.
(3.) This brought him into peril of his life, with which he narrowly
escaped: The Grecians, when they found they could not deal with him in
disputation, contrived to silence him another way; they went about to
slay him, as they did Stephen when they could not resist the Spirit by
which he spoke, [Act 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#010). That is a
bad cause that has recourse to persecution for its last argument. But
notice was given of this conspiracy too, and effectual care taken to
secure this young champion ([Act
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#030)): When the brethren knew what was
designed against him they brought him down to Cesarea. They remembered
how the putting of Stephen to death, upon his disputing with the
Grecians, had been the beginning of a sore persecution; and therefore
were afraid of having such a vein opened again, and hastened Paul out of
the way. He that flies may fight again. He that fled from Jerusalem
might do service at Tarsus, the place of his nativity; and thither they
desired him by all means to go, hoping he might there go on in his work
with more safety than at Jerusalem. Yet it was also by direction from
heaven that he left Jerusalem at this time, as he tells us himself ([Act
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#017), [Act
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#018)), that Christ now appeared to
him, and ordered him to go quickly out of Jerusalem, for he must be sent
to the Gentiles, [Act 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015). Those by
whom God has work to do shall be protected from all the designs of their
enemies against them till it be done. Christ's witnesses cannot be slain
till they have finished their testimony.

III\. The churches had now a comfortable gleam of liberty and peace
([Act 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#031)): Then had the churches
rest. Then, when Saul was converted, so some; when that persecutor was
taken off, those were quiet whom he used to irritate, and then those
were quiet whom he used to molest. Or, then, when he had gone from
Jerusalem, the fury of the Grecian Jews was a little abated, and they
were the more willing to bear with the other preachers now that Saul had
gone out of the way. Observe,

1\. The churches had rest. After a storm comes a calm. Though we are
always to expect troublesome times, yet we may expect that they shall
not last always. This was a breathing-time allowed them, to prepare them
for the next encounter. The churches that were already planted were
mostly in Judea, Galilee, and Samaria, within the limits of the holy
land. There were the first Christian churches, where Christ had himself
laid the foundation.

2\. They made a good use of this lucid interval. Instead of growing more
secure and wanton in the day of their prosperity, they abounded more in
their duty, and made a good use of their tranquillity. (1.) They were
edified, were built up in their most holy faith; the more free and
constant enjoyment they had of the means of knowledge and grace, the
more they increased in knowledge and grace. (2.) They walked in the fear
of the Lord - were more exemplary themselves for a holy heavenly
conversation. They so lived that all who conversed with them might say,
Surely the fear of God reigns in those people. (3.) They walked in the
comfort of the Holy Ghost - were not only faithful, but cheerful, in
religion; they stuck to the ways of the Lord, and sang in those ways.
The comfort of the Holy Ghost was their consolation, and that which they
made their chief joy. They had recourse to the comfort of the Holy
Ghost, and lived upon that, not only in days of trouble and affliction,
but in days of rest and prosperity. The comforts of the earth, when they
had the most free and full enjoyment of them, could not content them
without the comfort of the Holy Ghost. Observe the connection of these
two: when they walked in the fear of the Lord, then they walked in the
comfort of the Holy Ghost. Those are most likely to walk cheerfully that
walk circumspectly.

3\. God blessed it to them for their increase in number: They were
multiplied. Sometimes the church multiplies the more for its being
afflicted, as Israel in Egypt; yet if it were always so, the saints of
the Most High would be worn out. At other times its rest contributes to
its growth, as it enlarges the opportunity of ministers, and invites
those in who at first are afraid of suffering. Or, then, when they
walked in the fear of God and his comforts, they were multiplied. Thus
those that will not be won by the word may be won by the conversation of
professors.

[Acts 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 9:32</span></span>

Here we have, I. The visit Peter made to the churches that were newly
planted by the dispersed preachers, [Act
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#032). 1. He passed through all
quarters. As an apostle, he was not to be the resident pastor of any one
church, but the itinerant visitor of many churches, to confirm the
doctrine of inferior preachers, to confer the Holy Ghost on those that
believed, and to ordain ministers. He passed dia pantōn - among them
all, who pertained to the churches of Judea, Galilee, and Samaria,
mentioned in the foregoing chapter. He was, like his Master, always upon
the remove, and went about doing good; but still his head-quarters were
at Jerusalem, for there we shall find him imprisoned, [Act
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002). He came to the saints at Lydda.
This seems to be the same with Lod, a city in the tribe of Benjamin,
mentioned [Ch1 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#012); [Ezr
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#033). The Christians are called
saints, not only some particular eminent ones, as saint Peter and saint
Paul, but every sincere professor of the faith of Christ. These are the
saints on the earth, [Psa 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003).

II\. The cure Peter wrought on Eneas, a man that had been bedridden
eight years, [Act 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#033). 1. His case
was very deplorable: He was sick of the palsy, a dumb palsy, perhaps a
dead palsy. The disease was extreme, for he kept his bed; it was
inveterate, for he kept his bed eight years; and we may suppose that
both he himself and all about him despaired of relief for him, and
concluded upon no other than that he must still keep his bed till he
removed to his grave. Christ chose such patients as this, whose disease
was incurable in a course of nature, to show how desperate the case of
fallen mankind was when he undertook their cure. When we were without
strength, as this poor man, he sent his word to heal us. 2. His cure was
very admirable, [Act 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#034). (1.) Peter
interested Christ in his case, and engaged him for his relief: Eneas,
Jesus Christ maketh thee whole. Peter does not pretend to do it himself
by any power of his own, but declares it to be Christ's act and deed,
directs him to look up to Christ for help, and assures him of an
immediate cure - not, "He will make thee," but, "He does make thee,
whole;" and a perfect cure - not, "He makes thee easy," but "He makes
thee whole." He does not express himself by way of prayer to Christ that
he would make him whole, but as one having authority from Christ, and
that knew his mind, he declares him made whole. (2.) He ordered him to
bestir himself, to exert himself: "Arise and make thy bed, that all may
see thou art thoroughly cured." Let none say that because it is Christ
that by the power of his grace works all our works in us therefore we
have no work, no duty, to do; for, though Jesus Christ makes thee whole,
yet thou must arise and make use of the power he gives thee: "Arise, and
make thy bed, to be to thee no longer a bed of sickness, but a bed of
rest." (3.) Power went along with this word: he arose immediately, and
no doubt very willingly made his own bed.

III\. The good influence this had upon many ([Act
9:35](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#035)): All that dwelt at Lydda and
Saron saw him, and turned to the Lord. We can scarcely think that every
individual person in those countries took cognizance of the miracle, and
was wrought upon by it; but many, the generality of the people in the
town of Lydda and in the country of Saron, or Sharon, a fruitful plain
or valley, of which it was foretold, Sharon shall be a fold of flocks,
[Isa 65:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#010). 1. They all made enquiry
into the truth of the miracle, did not overlook it, but saw him that was
healed, and saw that it was a miraculous cure that was wrought upon him
by the power of Christ, in his name, and with a design to confirm and
ratify that doctrine of Christ which was now preached to the world. 2.
They all submitted to the convincing proof and evidence there was in
this of the divine origin of the Christian doctrine, and turned to the
Lord, to the Lord Jesus. They turned from Judaism to Christianity; they
embraced the doctrine of Christ, and submitted to his ordinances, and
turned themselves over to him to be ruled and taught and saved by him.

[Acts 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 9:36</span></span>

Here we have another miracle wrought by Peter, for the confirming of the
gospel, and which exceeded the former - the raising of Tabitha to life
when she had been for some time dead. Here is,

I. The life, and death, and character of Tabitha, on whom this miracle
was wrought, [Act 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036), [Act
9:37](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#037). 1. She lived at Joppa, a
sea-port town in the tribe of Dan, where Jonah took shipping to go to
Tarshish, now called Japho. 2. Her name was Tabitha, a Hebrew name, the
Greek for which is Dorcas, both signifying a doe, or hind, or deer, a
pleasant creature. Naphtali is compared to a hind let loose, giving
goodly words; and the wife to the kind and tender husband is as the
loving hind, and as the pleasant roe, [Pro
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#019). 3. She was a disciple, one that
had embraced the faith of Christ and was baptized; and not only so, but
was eminent above many for works of charity. She showed her faith by her
works, her good works, which she was full of, that is, in which she
abounded. Her head was full of cares and contrivances which way she
should do good. She devised liberal things, [Isa
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#008). Her hands were full of good
employment; she made a business of doing good, was never idle, having
learned to maintain good works ([Tit
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008)), to keep up a constant course and
method of them. She was full of good works, as a tree that is full of
fruit. Many are full of good words, who are empty and barren in good
works; but Tabitha was a great doer, no great talker: Non magna
loquimur, sed vivimus - We do not talk great things, but we live them.
Among other good works, she was remarkable for her alms - deeds, which
she did, not only her works of piety, which are good works and the
fruits of faith, but works of charity and beneficence, flowing from love
to her neighbour and a holy contempt of this world. Observe, She is
commended not only for the alms which she gave, but for the alms - deeds
which she did. Those that have not estates wherewith to give in charity
may yet be able to do in charity, working with their hands, or walking
with their feet, for the benefit of the poor. And those who will not do
a charitable deed, whatever they may pretend, if they were rich would
not bestow a charitable gift. She was full of alms - deeds, hōn epoiei -
which she made; there is an emphasis upon her doing them, because what
her hand found to do of this kind she did with all her might, and
persevered in. They were alms - deeds, not which she purposed and
designed and said she would do, but which she did; not which she began
to do, but which she did, which she went through with, which she
performed the doing of, [Co2 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#011);
[Co2 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007). This is the life and
character of a certain disciple,; and should be of all the disciples of
Christ; for, if we thus bear much fruit, then are we his disciples
indeed, [Joh 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#008). 4. She was removed
in the midst of her usefulness ([Act
9:37](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#037)): In those days she fell sick,
and died. It is promised to those who consider the poor, not that they
shall never be sick, but that the Lord will strengthen them upon the bed
of languishing, at least with strength in their souls, and so will make
all their bed in their sickness, will make it easy, [Psa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001), [Psa
41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003). They cannot hope that they shall
never die (merciful men are taken away, and merciful women too, witness
Tabitha), but they may hope that they shall find mercy of the Lord in
that day, [Ti2 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#018). 5. Her friends
and those about her did not presently bury her, as usual, because they
were in hopes Peter would come and raise her to life again; but they
washed the dead body, according to the custom, which, it is said, was
with warm water, which, if there were any life remaining in the body,
would recover it; so that this was done to show that she was really and
truly dead. They tried all the usual methods to bring her to life, and
could not. Conclamatum est - the last cry was uttered. They laid her out
in her grave-clothes in an upper chamber, which Dr. Lightfoot thinks was
probably the public meeting-room for the believers of that town; and
they laid the body there, that Peter, if he would come, might raise her
to life the more solemnly in that place.

II\. The request which her Christian friends sent to Peter to come to
them with all speed, not to attend the funeral, but, if it might be, to
prevent it, [Act 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#038). Lydda, where
Peter now was, was nigh to Joppa, and the disciples at Joppa had heard
that Peter was there, and that he had raised Eneas from a bed of
languishing; and therefore they sent him two men, to make the message
the more solemn and respectful, desiring him that he would not delay to
come to them; not telling him the occasion, lest he should modestly
decline coming upon so great an errand as to raise the dead: if they can
but get him to them, they will leave it to him. Their friend was dead,
and it was too late to send for a physician, but not too late to send
for Peter. Post mortem medicus - a physician after death, is an
absurdity, but not Post mortem apostolus - an apostle after death.

III\. The posture in which he found the survivors, when he came to them
([Act 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#030)): Peter arose and went with
them. Though they did not tell him what they wanted him for, yet he was
willing to go along with them, believing it was upon some good account
or other that he was sent for. Let not faithful ministers grudge to be
at every body's beck, as far as they have ability, when the great
apostle made himself the servant of all, [Co1
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019). He found the corpse laid in the
upper chamber, and attended by widows, probably such as were in the
communion of the church, poor widows; there they were,

1\. Commending the deceased - a good work, when there was that in them
which was truly commendable, and worthy of imitation, and when it is
done modestly and soberly, and without flattery of the survivors or any
sinister intention, but purely for the glory of God and the exciting of
others to that which is virtuous and praiseworthy. The commendation of
Tabitha was like her own virtues, not in word, but in deed. Here were no
encomiums of her in orations, nor poems inscribed to her memory; but the
widows showed the coats and garments which she made for them, and
bestowed upon them while she was with them. It was the comfort of Job,
while he lived, that the loins of the poor blessed him, because they
were warmed with the fleece of his sheep, [Job
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#020). And here it was the credit of
Tabitha, when she was dead, that the backs of the widows praised her for
the garments which she made them. And those are certainly best praised
whose own works praise them in the gates, whether the words of others do
or no. It is much more honourable to clothe a company of decrepit widows
with needful clothing for night and day, who will pray for their
benefactors when they do not see them, than to clothe a company of lazy
footmen with rich liveries, who perhaps behind their backs will curse
those that clothe them ([Ecc 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#021));
and it is what all that are wise and good will take a greater pleasure
in, for goodness is true greatness, and will pass better in the account
shortly. Observe, (1.) Into what channel Tabitha turned much of her
charity. Doubtless there were other instances of her alms - deeds which
she did, but this was now produced; she did, as it should seem with her
own hands, make coats and garments for poor widows, who perhaps with
their own labour could make a shift to get their bread, but could not
earn enough to buy clothes. And this is an excellent piece of charity,
If thou seest the naked, that thou cover him ([Isa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)), and not think it enough to say,
Be ye warmed, [Jam 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#015), [Jam
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#016). (2.) What a grateful sense the
poor had of her kindness: They showed the coats, not ashamed to own that
they were indebted to her for the clothes on their backs. Those are
horribly ungrateful indeed who have kindness shown them and will not
make at least an acknowledgment of it, by showing the kindness that is
done them, as these widows here did. Those who receive alms are not
obliged so industriously to conceal it, as those are who give alms. When
the poor reflect upon the rich as uncharitable and unmerciful, they
ought to reflect upon themselves, and consider whether they are not
unthankful and ungrateful. Their showing the coats and garments which
Dorcas made tended to the praise not only of her charity, but of her
industry, according to the character of the virtuous woman, that she
lays her hands to the spindle, or at least to the needle, and then
stretches out her hand to the poor, and reaches forth her hands to the
needy, of what she has worked; and, when God and the poor have thus had
their due, she makes herself coverings of tapestry and her own clothing
is silk and purple, [Pro 31:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#019).

2\. They were here lamenting the loss of her: The widows stood by Peter,
weeping. When the merciful are taken away, it should be laid to heart,
especially by those to whom they have been in a particular manner
merciful. They need not weep for her; she is taken from the evil to
come, she rests from her labours and her works follow her, besides those
she leaves behind her: but they weep for themselves and for their
children, who will soon find the want of such a good woman, that has not
left her fellow. Observe, They take notice of what good Dorcas did while
she was with them, but now she is gone from them, and this is their
grief. Those that are charitable will find that the poor they have
always with them; but it is well if those that are poor find that they
have always the charitable with them. We must make a good use of the
lights that yet a little while are with us, because they will not be
always with us, will not be long with us: and when they are gone we
shall think what they did when they were with us. It should seem, the
widows wept before Peter, as an inducement to him, if he could do any
thing, to have compassion on them and help them, and restore one to them
that used to have compassion on them. When charitable people are dead,
there is no praying them to life again; but, when they are sick, this
piece of gratitude is owing to them, to pray for their recovery, that,
if it be the will of God, those may be spared to live who can ill be
spared to die.

IV\. The manner in which she was raised to life. 1. Privately: She was
laid in the upper room where they used to have their public meetings,
and, it should seem, there was great crowding about the dead body, in
expectation of what would be done; but Peter put them all forth, all the
weeping widows, all but some few relations of the family, or perhaps the
heads of the church, to join with him in prayer; as Christ did, [Mat
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#025). Thus Peter declined every thing
that looked like vainglory and ostentation; they came to see, but he did
not come to be seen. He put them all forth, that he might with the more
freedom pour out his soul before God in prayer upon this occasion, and
not be disturbed with their noisy and clamorous lamentations. 2. By
prayer. In his healing Eneas there was an implied prayer, but in this
greater work he addressed himself to God by solemn prayer, as Christ
when he raised Lazarus; but Christ's prayer was with the authority of a
Son, who quickens whom he will; Peter's with the submission of a
servant, who is under direction, and therefore he knelt down and prayed.
3. By the word, a quickening word, a word which is spirit and life: He
turned to the body, which intimates that when he prayed he turned from
it; lest the sight of it should discourage his faith, he looked another
way, to teach us, like Abraham, against hope, to believe in hope, and
overlook the difficulties that lie in the way, not considering the body
as now dead, lest we should stagger at the promise, [Rom
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019), [Rom
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#020). But, when he had prayed, he
turned to the body, and spoke in his Master's name, according to his
example: "Tabitha, arise; return to life again." Power went along with
this word, and she came to life, opened her eyes which death had closed.
Thus, in the raising of dead souls to spiritual life, the first sign of
life is the opening of the eyes of the mind, [Act
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#018). When she saw Peter, she sat up,
to show that she was really and truly alive; and ([Act
9:41](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#041)) he gave her his hand and lifted
her up, not as if she laboured under any remaining weakness, but thus he
would as it were welcome her to life again, and give her the right hand
of fellowship among the living, from whom she had been cut off. And,
lastly, he called the saints and widows, who were all in sorrow for her
death, and presented her alive to them, to their great comfort,
particularly of the widows, who laid her death much to heart ([Act
9:41](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#041)); to them he presented her, as
Elijah ([Kg1 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#023)), and Elisha ([Kg2
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#036)), and Christ ([Luk
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#015)), presented the dead sons alive
to their mothers. The greatest joy and satisfaction are expressed by
life from the dead.

V. The good effect of this miracle. 1. Many were by it convinced of the
truth of the gospel, that is was from heaven, and not of men, and
believed in the Lord, [Act 9:42](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#042). The
thing was known throughout all Joppa; it would be in every body's mouth
quickly, and, it being a town of seafaring men, the notice of it would
be the sooner carried thence to other countries, and though some never
minded it many were wrought upon by it. This was the design of miracles,
to confirm a divine revelation. 2. Peter was hereby induced to continue
some time in this city, [Act 9:43](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#043).
Finding that a door of opportunity was opened for him there, he tarried
there many days, till he was sent thence, and sent for thence upon
business to another place. He tarried not in the house of Tabitha,
though she was rich, lest he should seem to seek his own glory; but he
took up his lodgings with one Simon a tanner, an ordinary tradesman,
which is an instance of his condescension and humility: and hereby he
has taught us not to mind high things, but to condescend to those of low
estate, [Rom 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#016). And, though Peter
might seem to be buried in obscurity here in the house of a poor tanner
by the sea-side, yet hence God fetched him to a noble piece of service,
which is recorded in the next chapter; for those that humble themselves
shall be exalted.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 10](act010)

</div>
