<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act019)  [Next](act021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 20:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. Paul's travels up and down about Macedonia,
Greece, and Asia, and his coming at length to Troas ([Act
20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001)). II. A particular account of
his spending one Lord's day at Troas, and his raising Eutychus to life
there ([Act 20:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007)). III. His
progress, or circuit, for the visiting of the churches he had planted,
in his way towards Jerusalem, where he designed to be by the next feast
of pentecost ([Act 20:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#013)). IV. The
farewell sermon he preached to the presbyters at Ephesus, now that he
was leaving that country (v. 17-35). V. The very sorrowful parting
between him and them ([Act 20:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#036)).
And in all these we find Paul very busy to serve Christ, and to do good
to the souls of men, not only in the conversion of heathen, but in the
edification of Christians.

[Acts 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 20:1</span></span>

These travels of Paul which are thus briefly related, if all in them had
been recorded that was memorable and worthy to be written in letters of
gold, the world would not contain the books that would have been
written; and therefore we have only some general hints of occurrences,
which therefore ought to be the more precious. Here is,

I. Paul's departure from Ephesus. He had tarried there longer than he
had done at any one place since he had been ordained to the apostleship
of the Gentiles; and now it was time to think of removing, for he must
preach in other cities also; but after this, to the end of the
scripture-history of his life (which is all we can depend upon), we
never find him breaking up fresh ground again, nor preaching the gospel
where Christ had not been named, as hitherto he had done ([Rom
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#020)), for in the close of the next
chapter we find him made a prisoner, and so continued, and so left, at
the end of this book. 1. Paul left Ephesus soon after the uproar had
ceased, looking upon the disturbance he met with there to be an
indication of Providence to him not to stay there any longer, [Act
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001). His removal might somewhat
appease the rage of his adversaries, and gain better quarter for the
Christians there. Currenti cede furori - It is good to lie by in a
storm. Yet some think that before he now left Ephesus he wrote the first
epistle to the Corinthians, and that his fighting with beasts at
Ephesus, which he mentions in that epistle, was a figurative description
of this uproar; but I rather take that literally. 2. He did not leave
them abruptly and in a fright, but took leave of them solemnly: He
called unto him the disciples, the principal persons of the
congregation, and embraced them, took leave of them (saith the Syriac)
with the kiss of love, according to the usage of the primitive church.
Loving friends know not how well they love one another till they come to
part, and then it appears how near they lay to one another's hearts.

II\. His visitation of the Greek churches, which he had planted, and
more than once watered, and which appear to have laid very near his
heart. 1. He went first to Macedonia ([Act
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001)), according to his purpose before
the uproar ([Act 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021)); there he
visited the churches of Philippi and Thessalonica, and gave them much
exhortation, [Act 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#002). Paul's visits
to his friends were preaching visits, and his preaching was large and
copious: He gave them much exhortation; he had a great deal to say to
them, and did not stint himself in time; he exhorted them to many
duties, in many cases, and (as some read it) with many reasonings. He
enforced his exhortation with a great variety of motives and arguments.
2. He staid three months in Greece ([Act
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#002), [Act
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#003)), that is, in Achaia, as some
think, for thither also he purposed to go, to Corinth, and thereabouts
([Act 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021)), and, no doubt, there
also he gave the disciples much exhortation, to direct and confirm them,
and engage them to cleave to the Lord.

III\. The altering of his measures; for we cannot always stand to our
purposes. Accidents unforeseen put us upon new counsels, which oblige us
to purpose with a proviso. 1. Paul was about to sail into Syria, to
Antioch, whence he was first sent out into the service of the Gentiles,
and which therefore in his journeys he generally contrived to take in
his way; but he changed his mind, and resolved to return to Macedonia,
the same way he came. 2. The reason was because the Jews, expecting he
would steer that course as usual, had way-laid him, designing to be the
death of him; since they could not get him out of the way by stirring up
both mobs and magistrates against him, which they had often attempted,
they contrived to assassinate him. Some think they laid wait for him, to
rob him of the money that he was carrying to Jerusalem for the relief of
the poor saints there; but, considering how very spiteful the Jews were
against him, I suppose they thirsted for his blood more than for his
money.

IV\. His companions in his travels when he went into Asia; they are here
named, [Act 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004). Some of them were
ministers, whether they were all so or no is not certain. Sopater of
Berea, it is likely, is the same with Sosipater, who is mentioned [Rom
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#021). Timothy is reckoned among them,
for though Paul, when he departed from Ephesus ([Act
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001)), left Timothy there, and
afterwards wrote his first epistle to him thither, to direct him as an
evangelist how to settle the church there, and in what hands to leave it
(see [Ti1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003); [Ti1
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014), [Ti1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)), which epistle was intended for
direction to Timothy what to do, not only at Ephesus where he now was,
but also at other places where he should be in like manner left, or
whither he should be sent to reside as an evangelist (and not to him
only, but to the other evangelists that attended Paul, and were in like
manner employed); yet he soon followed him, and accompanied him, with
others here named. Now, one would think, this was no good husbandry, to
have all these worthy men accompanying Paul, for there was more need of
them where Paul was not than where he was; but so it was ordered, 1.
That they might assist him in instructing such as by his preaching were
awakened and startled; wherever Paul came, the waters were stirred, and
then there was need of many hands to help the cripples in. It was time
to strike when the iron was hot. 2. That they might be trained up by
him, and fitted for future service, might fully know his doctrine and
manner of life, [Ti2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010). Paul's
bodily presence was weak and despicable, and therefore these friends of
his accompanied him, to put a reputation upon him, to keep him in
countenance, and to intimate to strangers, who would be apt to judge by
the sight of the eye, that he had a great deal in him truly valuable,
which was not discovered upon the outward appearance.

V. His coming to Troas, where he had appointed a general rendezvous of
his friends. 1. They went before, and staid for him at Troas ([Act
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#005)), designing to go along with him
to Jerusalem, as Trophimus particularly did, [Act
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#029). We should not think it hard to
stay awhile for good company in a journey. 2. Paul made the best of his
way thither; and, it should seem, Luke was now in company with him; for
he says We sailed from Philippi ([Act
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#006)), and the first time we find him
in his company was here at Troas, [Act
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#011). The days of unleavened bread
are mentioned only to describe the time, not to intimate that Paul kept
the passover after the manner of the Jews; for just about this time he
had written in his first epistle to the church at Corinth, and taught,
that Christs is our Passover, and a Christian life our feast of
unleavened bread ([Co1 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007), [Co1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)), and when the substance was come
the shadow was done away. He came to them to Troas, by sea, in five
days, and when he was there staid but seven days. There is no remedy,
but a great deal of time will unavoidably be lost in travelling to and
fro, by those who go about doing good, yet it shall not be put upon the
score of lost time. Paul thought it worth while to bestow five days in
going to Troas, though it was but for an opportunity of seven days' stay
there; but he knew, and so should we, how to redeem even journeying
time, and make it turn to some good account.

[Acts 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 20:7</span></span>

We have here an account of what passed at Troas the last of the seven
days that Paul staid there.

I. There was a solemn religious assembly of the Christians that were
there, according to their constant custom, and the custom of all the
churches. 1. The disciples came together, [Act
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007). Though they read, and meditated,
and prayed, and sung psalms, apart, and thereby kept up their communion
with God, yet that was not enough; they must come together to worship
God in concert, and so keep up their communion with one another, by
mutual countenance and assistance, and testify their spiritual communion
with all good Christians. There ought to be stated times for the
disciples of Christ to come together; though they cannot all come
together in one place, yet as many as can. 2. They came together upon
the first day of the week, which they called the Lord's day ([Rev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010)), the Christian sabbath,
celebrated to the honour of Christ and the Holy Spirit, in remembrance
of the resurrection of Christ, and the pouring out of the Spirit, both
on the first day of the week. This is here said to be the day when the
disciples came together, that is, when it was their practice to come
together in all the churches. Note, The first day of the week is to be
religiously observed by all the disciples of Christ; and it is a sign
between Christ and them, for by this it is known that they are his
disciples; and it is to be observed in solemn assemblies, which are, as
it were, the courts held in the name of our Lord Jesus, and to his
honour, by his ministers, the stewards of his courts, to which all that
hold from and under him owe suit and service, and at which they are to
make their appearance, as tenants at their Lord's courts, and the first
day of the week is appointed to be the court-day. 3. They were gathered
together in an upper chamber ([Act
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#008)); they had no temple nor
synagogue to meet in, no capacious stately chapel, but met in a private
house, in a garret. As they were few, and did not need, so they were
poor, and could not build, a large meeting-place; yet they came
together, in that despicable inconvenient place. It will be no excuse
for our absenting ourselves from religious assemblies that the place of
them is not so decent nor so commodious as we would have it to be. 4.
They came together to break bread, that is, to celebrate the ordinance
of the Lord's supper, that one instituted sign of breaking the bread
being put for all the rest. The bread which we break is the communion of
the body of Christ, [Co1 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016). In the
breaking of the bread, not only the breaking of Christ's body for us, to
be a sacrifice for our sins, is commemorated, but the breaking of
Christ's body to us, to be food and a feast for our souls, is signified.
In the primitive times it was the custom of many churches to receive the
Lord's supper every Lord's day, celebrating the memorial of Christ's
death in the former, with that of his resurrection in the latter; and
both in concert, in a solemn assembly, to testify their joint
concurrence in the same faith and worship.

II\. In this assembly Paul gave them a sermon, a long sermon, a farewell
sermon, [Act 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007). 1. He gave them a
sermon: he preached to them. Though they were disciples already, yet it
was very necessary they should have the word of God preached to them, in
order to their increase in knowledge and grace. Observe, The preaching
of the gospel ought to accompany the sacraments. Moses read the book of
the covenant in the audience of the people, and then sprinkled the blood
of the covenant, which the Lord had made with them concerning all these
words, [Exo 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007), [Exo
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008). What does the seal signify
without a writing? 2. It was a farewell sermon, he being ready to depart
on the morrow. When he was gone, they might have the same gospel
preached, but not as he preached it; and therefore they must make the
best use of him that they could while they had him. Farewell sermons are
usually in a particular manner affecting both to the preacher and to the
hearers. 3. It was a very long sermon: He continued his speech until
midnight; for he had a great deal to say, and knew not that ever he
should have another opportunity of preaching to them. After they had
received the Lord's supper, he preached to them the duties they had
thereby engaged themselves to, and the comforts they were interested in,
and in this he was very large and full and particular. There may be
occasion for ministers to preach, not only in season, but out of season.
We know some that would have reproached Paul for this as a long-winded
preacher, that tired his hearers; but they were willing to hear: he saw
them so, and therefore continued his speech. He continued it till
midnight; perhaps they met in the evening for privacy, or in conformity
to the example of the disciples who came together on the first Christian
sabbath in the evening. It is probable he had preached to them in the
morning, and yet thus lengthened out his evening sermon even till
midnight; we wish we had the heads of this long sermon, but we may
suppose it was for substance the same with his epistles. The meeting
being continued till midnight, there were candles set up, many lights
([Act 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#008)), that the hearers might
turn to the scriptures Paul quoted, and see whether these things were
so; and that this might prevent the reproach of their enemies, who said
they met in the night for works of darkness.

III\. A young man in the congregation, that slept at sermon, was killed
by a fall out of the window, but raised to life again; his name
signifies one that had good fortune - Eutychus, bene fortunatus; and he
answered his name. Observe,

1\. The infirmity with which he was overtaken. It is probable his
parents brought him, though but a boy, to the assembly, out of a desire
to have him well instructed in the things of God by such a preacher as
Paul. Parents should bring their children to hear sermons as soon as
they can hear with understanding ([Neh
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#002)), even the little ones, [Deu
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#011). Now this youth was to be
blamed, (1.) That he presumptuously sat in the window, unglazed perhaps,
and so exposed himself; whereas, if he could have been content to sit on
the floor, he had been safe. Boys that love to climb, or otherwise
endanger themselves, to the grief of their parents, consider not how
much it is also an offence to God. (2.) That he slept, nay, he fell into
a deep sleep when Paul was preaching, which was a sign he did not duly
attend to the things that Paul spoke of, though they were weighty
things. The particular notice taken of his sleeping makes us willing to
hope none of the rest slept, though it was sleeping time and after
supper; but this youth fell fast asleep, he was carried away with it (so
the word is), which intimates that he strove against it, but was
overpowered by it, and at last sunk down with sleep.

2\. The calamity with which he was seized herein: He fell down from the
third loft, and was taken up dead. Some think that the hand of Satan was
in it, by the divine permission, and that he designed it for a
disturbance to this assembly and a reproach to Paul and it. Others think
that God designed it for a warning to all people to take heed of
sleeping when they are hearing the word preached; and certainly we are
to make this use of it. We must look upon it as an evil thing, as a bad
sign of our low esteem of the word of God, and a great hindrance to our
profiting by it. We must be afraid of it, do what we can to prevent our
being sleepy, not compose ourselves to sleep, but get our hearts
affected with the word we hear to such a degree as may drive sleep far
enough. Let us watch and pray, that we enter not into this temptation,
and by it into worse. Let the punishment of Eutychus strike an awe upon
us, and show us how jealous God is in the matters of his worship; Be not
deceived, God is not mocked. See how severely God visited an iniquity
that seemed little, and but in a youth, and say, Who is able to stand
before this holy Lord God? Apply to this story that lamentation ([Jer
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#020), [Jer
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#021)), Hear the word of the Lord, for
death is come up into our windows, to cut off the children from without
and the young men from the streets.

3\. The miraculous mercy shown him in his recovery to life again, [Act
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#010). It gave a present distraction
to the assembly, and an interruption to Paul's preaching; but it proved
an occasion of that which was a great confirmation to his preaching, and
helped to set it home and make it effectual. (1.) Paul fell on the dead
body, and embraced it, thereby expressing a great compassion to, and an
affectionate concern for, this young man, so far was he from saying, "He
was well enough served for minding so little what I said!" Such tender
spirits as Paul had are much affected with sad accidents of this kind,
and are far from judging and censuring those that fall under them, as if
those on whom the tower of Siloam fell were sinners above all that dwelt
at Jerusalem; I tell you, nay. But this was not all; his falling on him
and embracing him were in imitation of Elijah ([Kg1
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#021)), and Elisha ([Kg2
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#034)), in order to the raising of him
to life again; not that this could as a means contribute any thing to
it, but as a sign it represented the descent of that divine power upon
the dead body, for the putting of life into it again, which at the same
time he inwardly, earnestly, and in faith prayed for. (2.) He assured
them that he had returned to life, and it would appear presently.
Various speculations, we may suppose, this ill accident had occasioned
in the congregation, but Paul puts an end to them all: "Trouble not
yourselves, be not in any disorder about it, let it not put you into any
hurry, for his life is in him; he is not dead, but sleepeth: lay him
awhile upon a bed, and he will come to himself, for he is now alive."
Thus, when Christ raised Lazarus, he said, Father, I thank thee that
thou hast heard me. (3.) He returned to his work immediately after this
interruption ([Act 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#011)): He came up
again to the meeting, they broke bread together in a love-feast, which
usually attended the eucharist, in token of their communion with each
other, and for the confirmation of friendship among them; and they
talked a long while, even till break of day. Paul did not now go on in a
continued discourse, as before, but he and his friends fell into a free
conversation, the subject of which, no doubt, was good, and to the use
of edifying. Christian conference is an excellent means of promoting
holiness, comfort, and Christian love. They knew not when they should
have Paul's company again, and therefore made the best use they could of
it when they had it, and reckoned a night's sleep well lost for that
purpose. (4.) Before they parted they brought the young man alive into
the congregation, every one congratulating him upon his return to life
from the dead, and they were not a little comforted, [Act
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#012). It was matter of great
rejoicing among them, not only to the relations of the young man, but to
the whole society, as it not only prevented the reproach that would
otherwise have been cast upon them, but contributed very much to the
credit of the gospel.

[Acts 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 20:13</span></span>

Paul is hastening towards Jerusalem, but strives to do all the good he
can by the way, ōs en parodō̂ "as it were by the by." He had called at
Troas, and done good there; and now he makes a sort of coasting voyage,
the merchants would call it a trading voyage, going from place to place,
and no doubt endeavouring to make every place he came to the better for
him, as every good man should do.

I. He sent his companions by sea to Assos, but he himself was minded to
go afoot, [Act 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#013). He had decreed
or determined within himself that whatever importunity should be used
with him to the contrary, urging either his ease or his credit, or the
conveniency of a ship that offered itself, or the company of his
friends, he would foot it to Assos: and, if the land-way which Paul took
was the shorter way, yet it is taken notice of by the ancients as a
rough way (Homer, Iliad 6, and Eustathius upon him, say, it was enough
to kill one to go on foot to Assos. - Lorin. in locum); yet that way
Paul would take, 1. That he might call on his friends by the way, and do
good among them, either converting sinners or edifying saints; and in
both he was serving his great Master, and carrying on his great work.
Or, 2. That he might be alone, and might have the greater freedom of
converse with God and his own heart in solitude. He loved his
companions, and delighted in their company, yet he would show hereby
that he did not need it, but could enjoy himself alone. Or, 3. That he
might inure himself to hardship, and not seem to indulge his ease. Thus
he would by voluntary instances of mortification and self-denial keep
under the body, and bring it into subjection, that he might make his
sufferings for Christ, when he was called out to them, the more easy,
[Ti2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#003). We should use ourselves to
deny ourselves.

II\. At Assos he went on board with his friends. There they took him in;
for by this time he had enough of his walk, and was willing to betake
himself to the other way of travelling; or perhaps he could not go any
further by land, but was obliged to go by water. When Christ sent his
disciples away by ship, and tarried behind himself, yet he came to them,
and they took him in, [Mar 6:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#045), [Mar
6:51](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#051).

III\. He made the best of his way to Jerusalem. His ship passed by Chios
([Act 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#015)), touched at Samos (these
are places of note among the Greek writers, both poets and historians);
they tarried awhile at Trogyllium, the sea-port next to Samos; and the
next day they came to Miletus, the sea-port that lay next to Ephesus;
for ([Act 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#016)) he had determined not
to go to Ephesus at this time, because he could not go thither without
being urged by his friends whose importunity he could not resist, to
make some stay with them there; and, because he was resolved not to
stay, he would not put himself into a temptation to stay; for he hasted,
if it were possible for him, to be at Jerusalem on the day of pentecost.
He had been at Jerusalem about four or five years ago ([Act
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#021), [Act
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#022)), and now he was going thither
again to pay his continued respects to that church, with which he was
careful to keep a good correspondence, that he might not be thought
alienated from it by his commission to preach among the Gentiles. He
aimed to be there by the feast of pentecost because it was a time of
concourse, which would give him an opportunity of propagating the gospel
among the Jews and proselytes, who came from all parts to worship at the
feast: and the feast of pentecost had been particularly made famous
among the Christians by the pouring out of the Spirit. Note, Men of
business must fit themselves, and it will contribute to the expediting
of it, to set time (with submission to Providence) and strive to keep
it, contriving to do that first which we judge to be most needful, and
not suffering ourselves to be diverted from it. It is a pleasure to us
to be with our friends; it diverts us, nothing more; but we must not by
it be diverted from our work. When Paul has a call to Jerusalem, he will
not loiter away the time in Asia, though he had more and kinder friends
there. This is not the world we are to be together in; we hope to be so
in the other world.

[Acts 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 20:17</span></span>

It should seem the ship Paul and his companions were embarked in for
Jerusalem attended him on purpose, and staid or moved as he pleased; for
when he came to Miletus, he went ashore, and tarried thee so long as to
send for the elders of Ephesus to come to him thither; for if he had
gone up to Ephesus, he could never have got away from them. These
elders, or presbyters, some think, were those twelve who received the
Holy Ghost by Paul's hands, [Act 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#006).
But, besides these, it is probable that Timothy had ordained other
elders there for the service of that church, and the country about;
these Paul sent for, that he might instruct and encourage them to go on
in the work to which they had laid their hands. And what instructions he
gave to them they would give to the people under their charge.

It is a very pathetic and practical discourse with Paul here takes leave
of these elders, and has in it much of the excellent spirit of this good
man.

I. He appeals to them concerning both his life and doctrine, all the
time he had been in and about Ephesus ([Act
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#018)): "You know after what manner I
have been with you, and how I have done the work of an apostle among
you." He mentions this as a confirmation of his commission and
consequently of the doctrine he had preached among them. They all knew
him to be a man of serious, gracious, heavenly spirit, that he was no
designing self-seeking man, as seducers are; he could not have been
carried on with so much evenness and constancy in his services and
sufferings, but by the power of divine grace. The temper of his mind,
and the tenour both of his preaching and conversation, were such as
plainly proved that God was with him of a truth, and that he was
actuated and animated by a better spirit than his own. - He likewise
makes this reference to his own conduct as an instruction to them, in
whose hands the work was now left, to follow his example: "You know
after what manner I have been with you, how I have conducted myself as a
minister; in like manner be you with those that are committed to your
charge when I am gone ([Phi 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#009)), what
you have seen in me that is good do."

1\. His spirit and conversation were excellent and exemplary; they knew
after what manner he had been among them, and how he had had his
conversation towards them, in simplicity and godly sincerity ([Co2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)), how holily, justly, and
unblamably he behaved himself, and how gentle he was towards them, [Th1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#007), [Th1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#010). (1.) He had conducted himself
well all along, from the very first day that he came into Asia - at all
seasons; the manner of his entering in among them was such as nobody
could find fault with. He appeared from the first day they knew him to
be a man that aimed not only to do well, but to do good, wherever he
came. He was a man that was consistent with himself, and all of a piece;
take him where you would he was the same at all seasons, he did not turn
with the wind nor change with the weather, but was uniform like a die,
which, throw it which way you will, lights on a square side. (2.) He had
made it his business to serve the Lord, to promote the honour of God and
the interest of Christ and his kingdom among them. He never served
himself, nor made himself a servant of men, of their lusts and humours,
nor was he a time-server; but he made it his business to serve the Lord.
In his ministry, in his whole conversation, he proved himself what he
wrote himself, Paul a servant of Jesus Christ, [Rom
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001). (3.) He had done his work with
all humility of mind - meta pasēs tapeinophrosunēs, that is, in all
works of condescension, modesty, and self-abasement. Though he was one
that God had put a great deal of honour upon, and done a great deal of
good by, yet he never took state upon him, nor kept people at a
distance, but conversed as freely and familiarly with the meanest, for
their good, as if he had stood upon a level with them. He was willing to
stoop to any service, and to make himself and his labours as cheap as
they could desire. Note, Those that would in any office serve the Lord
acceptably to him, and profitably to others, must do it with all
humility of mind, [Mat 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026), [Mat
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#027). (4.) He had always been very
tender, affectionate, and compassionate, among them; he had served the
Lord with many tears. Paul was herein like his Master; often in tears;
in his praying, he wept and made supplication, [Hos
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#005). In his preaching, what he had
told them before he told them again, even weeping, [Phi
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#018). In his concern for them, though
his acquaintance with them was but of a late standing, yet so near did
they lie to his heart that he wept with those that wept, and mingled his
tears with theirs upon every occasion, which was very endearing. (5.) He
had struggled with many difficulties among them. He went on in his work
in the face of much opposition, many temptations, trials of his patience
and courage, such discouragements as perhaps were sometimes temptations
to him, as to Jeremiah in a like case to say, I will not speak any more
in the name of the Lord, [Jer 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#008),
[Jer 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#009). These befell him by the
lying in wait of the Jews, who still were plotting some mischief or
other against him. Note, Those are the faithful servants of the Lord
that continue to serve him in the midst of troubles and perils, that
care not what enemies they make, so that they can but approve themselves
to their Master, and make him their friend. Paul's tears were owing to
his temptations; his afflictions helped to excite his good affections.

2\. His preaching was likewise such as it should be, [Act
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#020), [Act
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#021). He came to Ephesus to preach
the gospel of Christ among them, and he had been faithful both to them
and to him that appointed him. (1.) He was a plain preacher, and one
that delivered his message so as to be understood. This is intimated in
two words, I have shown you, and have taught you. He did not amuse them
with nice speculations, nor lead them into, and then lose them in, the
clouds of lofty notions and expressions; but he showed them the plain
truths of the gospel, which were of the greatest consequence and
importance, and taught them as children are taught. "I have shown you
the right way to happiness, and taught you to go in it." (2.) He was a
powerful preacher, which is intimated in his testifying to them; he
preached as one upon oath, that was himself fully assured of the truth
of what he preached and was desirous to convince them of it and to
influence and govern them by it. He preached the gospel, not as a hawker
proclaims news in the street (it is all one to him whether it be true or
false), but as a conscientious witness gives in his evidence at the bar,
with the utmost seriousness and concern. Paul preached the gospel as a
testimony to them if they received it, but as a testimony against them
if they rejected it. (3.) He was a profitable preacher, one that in all
his preaching aimed at doing good to those he preached to; he studied
that which was profitable unto them, which had a tendency to make them
wise and good, wiser and better, to inform their judgments and reform
their hearts and lives. He preached ta sumpheronta, such things as
brought with them divine light, and heat, and power to their souls. It
is not enough not to preach that which is hurtful, which leads into
error or hardens in sin, but we must preach that which is profitable. We
do all things, dearly beloved, for your edifying. Paul aimed to preach
not that which was pleasing, but that which was profitable, and to
please only in order to profit. God is said to teach his people to
profit, [Isa 48:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#017). Those teach for
God that teach people to profit. (4.) He was a painstaking preacher,
very industrious and indefatigable in his work; he preached publicly,
and from house to house. He did not confine himself to a corner when he
had opportunity of preaching in the great congregation; nor did he
confine himself to the congregation when there was occasion for private
and personal instruction. He was neither afraid nor ashamed to preach
the gospel publicly, nor did he grudge to bestow his pains privately,
among a few, when there was occasion for it. He preached publicly to the
flock that came together into the green pastures, and went from house to
house to seek those that were weak and had wandered, and did not think
that the one would excuse him from the other. Ministers should in their
private visits, and as they go from house to house, discourse of those
things which they have taught publicly, repeat them, inculcate them, and
explain them, if it be needful, asking, Have you understood all these
things? And, especially, they should help persons to apply the truth to
themselves and their own case. (5.) He was a faithful preacher. He not
only preached that which was profitable, but he preached every thing
that he thought might be profitable, and kept back nothing, though the
preaching of it might either cost him more pains or be disobliging to
some and expose him to their ill-will. He declined not preaching
whatever he thought might be profitable, though it was not fashionable,
nor to some acceptable. He did not keep back reproofs, when they were
necessary and would be profitable, for fear of offending; nor did he
keep back the preaching of the cross, though he knew it was to the Jews
a stumbling-block and to the Greeks foolishness, as the Roman
missionaries in China lately did. (6.) He was a catholic preacher. He
testified both to the Jews and also to the Greeks. Though he was born
and bred a Jew, and had an entire affection for that nation, and was
trained up in their prejudices against the Gentiles, yet he did not
therefore confine himself to the Jews and avoid the Gentiles; but
preached as readily to them as to the Jews, and conversed as freely with
them. And, on the other hand, though he was called to be the apostle of
the Gentiles, and the Jews had an implacable enmity against him upon
that score, had done him many an ill turn, and here at Ephesus were
continually plotting against him, yet he did not therefore abandon them
as reprobates, but continued to deal with them for their good. Ministers
must preach the gospel with impartiality; for they are ministers of
Christ for the universal church. (7.) He was a truly Christian
evangelical preacher. He did not preach philosophical notions, or
matters of doubtful disputation, nor did he preach politics, or
intermeddle at all with affairs of state or the civil government; but he
preached faith and repentance, the two great gospel graces, the nature
and necessity of them; these he urged upon all occasions. \[1.\]
Repentance towards God; that those who by sin had gone away from God,
and were going further and further from him into a state of endless
separation from him, should by true repentance look towards God, turn
towards him, move towards him, and hasten to him. He preached repentance
as God's great command ([Act 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030)),
which we must obey - that men should repent, and turn to God, and do
works meet for repentance (so he explains it, [Act
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#020)); and he preached it as Christ's
gift, in order to the remission of sins ([Act
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#031)), and directed people to look up
to him for it. \[2.\] Faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ. We must be
repentance look towards God as our end; and by faith towards Christ as
our way to God. Sin must by repentance be abandoned and forsaken, and
then Christ must by faith be relied on for the pardon of sin. Our
repentance towards God is not sufficient, we must have a true faith in
Christ as our Redeemer and Saviour, consenting to him as our Lord and
our God. For there is no coming to God, as penitent prodigals to a
Father, but in the strength and righteousness of Jesus Christ as
Mediator.

Such a preacher as this they all knew Paul had been; and, if they will
carry on the same work, they must walk in the same spirit, in the same
steps.

II\. He declares his expectation of sufferings and afflictions in his
present journey to Jerusalem, [Act
20:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#022). Let them not think that he
quitted Asia now for fear of persecution; nor, he was so far from
running away like a coward from the post of danger that he was now like
a hero hastening to the high places of the field, where the battle was
likely to be hottest: Now, behold, I go bound in the spirit to
Jerusalem, which may be understood either, (1.) Of the certain foresight
he had of trouble before him. Though he was not yet bound in body, he
was bound in spirit; he was in full expectation of trouble, and made it
his daily business to prepare for it. He was bound in spirit, as all
good Christians are poor in spirit, endeavouring to accommodate
themselves to the will of God if they should be reduced to poverty. Or,
(2.) Of the strong impulse he was under from the Spirit of God working
upon his spirit to go this journey: "I go bound in the spirit, that is,
firmly resolved to proceed, and well assured that it is by a divine
direction and influence that I am so, and not from any humour or design
of my own. I go led by the Spirit, and bound to follow him wherever he
leads me."

1\. He does not know particularly the things that shall befall him at
Jerusalem. Whence the trouble shall spring, what shall be the occasion
of it, what the circumstances and to what degree it shall arise, God had
not thought fit to reveal to him. It is good for us to be kept in the
dark concerning future events, that we may be always waiting on God and
waiting for him. When we go abroad, it should be with this thought, we
know not the things that shall befall us, nor what a day, or a night, or
an hour, may bring forth; and therefore must refer ourselves to God, let
him do with us as seemeth good in his eyes, and study to stand complete
in his whole will.

2\. Yet he does know in general that thee is a storm before him; for the
prophets in every city he passed through told him, by the Holy Ghost,
that bonds and afflictions awaited him. Besides the common notice given
to all Christians and ministers to expect and prepare for sufferings,
Paul had particular intimations of an extraordinary trouble, greater and
longer than any he had yet met with, that was now before him.

3\. He fixes a brave and heroic resolution to go on with his work,
notwithstanding. It was a melancholy peal that was rung in his ears in
every city, that bonds and afflictions did abide him; it was a hard case
for a poor man to labour continually to do good, and to be so ill
treated for his pains. Now it is worth while to enquire how he bore it.
He was flesh and blood as well as other men; he was so, and yet by the
grace of God he was enabled to go on with his work, and to look with a
gracious and generous contempt upon all the difficulties and
discouragements he met with in it. Let us take it from his own mouth
here ([Act 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#024)), where he speaks not
with obstinacy nor ostentation, but with a holy humble resolution: "None
of these things move me; all my care is to proceed and to persevere in
the way of my duty, and to finish well." Paul is here an example,

(1.) Of holy courage and resolution in our work, notwithstanding the
difficulties and oppositions we meet with in it; he saw them before him,
but he made nothing of them: None of these things move me; oudenos logon
poioumai - I make no account of them. He did not lay these things to
heart, Christ and heaven lay there. None of these things moved him.
\[1.\] They did not drive him off from his work; he did not tack about,
and go back again, when he saw the storm rise, but went on resolutely,
preaching there, where he knew how dearly it would cost him. \[2.\] They
did not deprive him of his comfort, nor make him drive on heavily in his
work. In the midst of troubles he was as one unconcerned. In his
patience he possessed his soul, and, when he was as sorrowful, yet he
was always rejoicing, and in all things more than a conqueror. Those
that have their conversation in heaven can look down, not only upon the
common troubles of this earth but upon the threatening rage and malice
of hell itself, and say that none of these things moved them, as knowing
that none of these things can hurt them.

(2.) Of a holy contempt of life, and the continuance and comforts of it:
Neither count I my life dear to myself. Life is sweet, and is naturally
dear to us. All that a man has will he give for his life; but all that a
man has, and life too, will he give who understands himself aright and
his own interest, rather than lose the favour of God and hazard eternal
life. Paul was of this mind. Though to an eye of nature life is
superlatively valuable, yet to an eye of faith it is comparatively
despicable; it is not so dear but it can be cheerfully parted with for
Christ. This explains [Luk 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#026),
where we are required to hate our own lives, not in a hasty passion, as
Job and Jeremiah, but in a holy submission to the will of God, and a
resolution to die for Christ rather than to deny him.

(3.) Of a holy concern to go through with the work of life, which should
be much more our care than to secure either the outward comforts of it
or the countenance of it. Blessed Paul counts not his life dear in
comparison with this, and resolves in the strength of Christ, non
propter vitam vivendi perdere causas - that he never will, to save his
life, lose the ends of living. He is willing to spend his life in
labour, to hazard his life in dangerous services, to waste it in
toilsome services; nay, to lay down his life in martyrdom, so that he
may but answer the great intentions of his birth, of his baptism, and of
his ordination to the apostleship. Two things this great and good man is
in care about, and if he gain them it is no matter to him what becomes
of life: - \[1.\] That he may be found faithful to the trust reposed in
him, that he may finish the ministry which he has received of the Lord
Jesus, may do the work which he was sent into the world about, or,
rather, which he was sent into the church about, - that he may complete
the service of his generation, may make full proof of his ministry, -
that he may go through the business of it, and others may reap the
advantage of it, to the utmost of what was designed, - that he may, as
is said of the two witnesses, finish his testimony ([Rev
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007)), and may not do his work by
halves. Observe, First, The apostleship was a ministry both to Christ
and to the souls of men; and those that were called to it considered
more the ministry of it than the dignity or dominion of it; and, if the
apostles did so, much more ought the pastors and teachers to do so, and
to be in the church as those who serve. Secondly, This ministry was
received from the Lord Jesus. He entrusted them with it, and from him
they received their charge; for him they do their work, in his name, in
his strength; and to him they must give up their account. It was Christ
that put them into the ministry ([Ti1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#012)); it is he that carries them on
in their ministry, and from him they have strength to do their service
and bear up under the hardships of it. Thirdly, The work of this
ministry was to testify the gospel of the grace of God, to publish it to
the world, to prove it, and to recommend it; and, being the gospel of
the grace of God, it has enough in it to recommend itself. It is a proof
of God's good-will to us, and a means of his good work in us; it shows
him gracious towards us, and tends to make us gracious, and so is the
gospel of the grace of God. Paul made it the business of his life to
testify this, and desired not to live a day longer than he might be
instrumental to spread the knowledge and savour and power of this
gospel. \[2.\] That he may finish well. He cares not when the period of
his life comes, nor how, be it ever so soon, ever so sudden, ever so
sad, as to outward circumstances, so that he may but finish his course
with joy. First, He looks upon his life as a course, a race, so the word
is. Our life is a race set before us, [Heb
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001). This intimates that we have our
labours appointed us, for we were not sent into the world to be idle;
and our limits appointed us, for we were not sent into the world to be
here always, but to pass through the world, nay, to run through it, and
it is soon run through; I may add, to run the gauntlet through it.
Secondly, He counts upon the finishing of his course, and speaks of it
as sure and near, and that which he had his thoughts continually upon.
Dying is the end of our race, when we come off either with honour or
shame. Thirdly, He is full of care to finish it well, which implies a
holy desire of obtaining and a holy fear of coming short. "Oh! that I
may but finish my course with joy; and then all will be well, perfectly
and eternally well." Fourthly, He thinks nothing too much to do, nor too
hard to suffer, so that he may but finish well, finish with joy. We must
look upon it as the business of our life to provide for a joyful death,
that we may not only die safely, but die comfortably.

III\. Counting upon it that this was the last time they should see him,
he appeals to their consciences concerning his integrity, and demands of
them a testimony to it.

1\. He tells them that he was now taking his last leave of them ([Act
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#025)): I know that you all, among
whom I have been conversant preaching the kingdom of God, though you may
have letters from me, shall never see my face again. When any of us part
with our friends, we may say, and should say, "We know not that ever we
shall see one another again: our friends may be removed, or we ourselves
may." But Paul here speaks it with assurance, by the Spirit of prophecy,
that these Ephesians should see his face no more; and we cannot think
that he who spoke so doubtfully of that which he was not sure of (not
knowing the things that shall befall me there, v. 22) would speak this
with so much confidence, especially when he foresaw what a trouble it
would be to his friends here, unless he had had a special warrant from
the Spirit to say it, to whom I think those do wrong who suppose that,
notwithstanding this, Paul did afterwards come to Ephesus, and see them
again. He would never have said thus solemnly, Now, behold, I know it,
if he had not known it for certain. Not but that he foresaw that he had
a great deal of time and work yet before him, but he foresaw that his
work would be cut out for him in other places, and in these parts he had
no more to do. Here he had for a great while gone about preaching the
kingdom of God, preaching down the kingdom of sin and Satan, and
preaching up the authority and dominion of God in Christ, preaching the
kingdom of glory as the end and the kingdom of grace as the way. Many a
time they had been glad to see his face in the pulpit, and saw it as it
had been the face of an angel. If the feet of these messengers of peace
were beautiful upon the mountains, what were their faces? But now they
shall see his face no more. Note, We ought often to think of it, that
those who now are preaching to us the kingdom of God will shortly be
removed and we shall see their faces no more: the prophets, do they live
for ever? Yet a little while is their light with us; it concerns us
therefore to improve it while we have it, that when we shall see their
faces no more on earth, yet we may hope to look them in the face with
comfort in the great day.

2\. He appeals to them concerning the faithful discharge of his ministry
among them ([Act 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#026)): "Wherefore,
seeing my ministry is at an end with you, it concerns both you and me to
reflect, and look back;" and, (1.) He challenges them to prove him
unfaithful, or to have said or done any thing by which he had made
himself accessory to the ruin of any precious soul: I am pure from the
blood of all men, the blood of souls. This plainly refers to that of the
prophet ([Eze 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#006)), where the blood
of him that perishes by the sword of the enemy is said to be required at
the hand of the unfaithful watchman that did not give warning: "You
cannot say but I have given warning, and therefore no man's blood can be
laid at my door." If a minister has approved himself faithful, he may
have this rejoicing in himself, I am pure from the blood of all men, and
ought to have this testimony from others. (2.) He therefore leaves the
blood of those that perish upon their own heads, because they had fair
warning given them, but they would not take it. (3.) He charges these
ministers to look to it that they took care and pains, as he had done:
"I am pure from the blood of all men, see that you keep yourselves so
too. I take you to record this day" - en tē sēmeron hēmera, "I call this
day to witness to you:" so Streso. As sometimes the heaven and earth are
appealed to, so here this day shall be a witness, this parting day.

3\. He proves his own fidelity with this ([Act
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#027)): For I have not shunned to
declare unto you all the counsel of God. (1.) He had preached to them
nothing but the counsel of God, and had not added any inventions of his
own; "it was pure gospel, and nothing else, the will of God concerning
your salvation." The gospel is the counsel of God; it is admirably
contrived by his wisdom, it is unalterably determined by his will, and
it is kindly designed by his grace for our glory, [Co1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007). This counsel of God it is the
business of ministers to declare as it is revealed, and not otherwise
nor any further. (2.) He had preached to them the whole counsel of God.
As he had preached to them the whole counsel of God. As he had preached
to them the gospel pure, so he had preached it to them entire; he had
gone over a body of divinity among them, that, having the truths of the
gospel opened to them methodically from first to last in order, they
might the better understand them, by seeing them in their several
connections with, and dependences upon, one another. (3.) He had not
shunned to do it; had not wilfully nor designedly avoided the declaring
of any part of the counsel of God. He had not, to save his own pains,
declined preaching upon the most difficult parts of the gospel, nor, to
save his own credit, declined preaching upon the most plain and easy
parts of it; he had not shunned preaching those doctrines which he knew
would be provoking to the watchful enemies of Christianity, or
displeasing to the careless professors of it, but faithfully took his
work before him, whether they would hear or forbear. And thus it was
that he kept himself pure from the blood of all men.

IV\. He charges them as ministers to be diligent and faithful in their
work.

1\. He commits the care of the church at Ephesus, that is, the saints,
the Christians that were there and thereabouts ([Eph
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)), to them, who, though doubtless
they were so numerous that they could not all meet in one place, but
worshipped God in several congregations, under the conduct of several
ministers, are yet called here one flock, because they not only agreed
in one faith, as they did with all Christian churches, but in many
instances they kept up communion one with another. To these elders or
presbyters the apostle here, upon the actual foresight of his own final
leaving them, commits the government of this church, and tells them that
not he, but the Holy Ghost, had made them overseers, episkopous -
bishops of the flock. "You that are presbyters are bishops of the Holy
Ghost's making, that are to take the oversight of this part of the
church of God," [Pe1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001), [Pe1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#002); [Tit
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005), [Tit
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007). While Paul was present at
Ephesus, he presided in all the affairs of that church, which made the
elders loth to part with him; but now this eagle stirs up the nest,
flutters over her young; now that they begin to be fledged they must
learn to fly themselves, and to act without him, for the Holy Ghost had
made them overseers. They took not this honour to themselves, nor was it
conferred upon them by any prince or potentate, but the Holy Ghost in
them qualified them for, and enriched them to, this great undertaking,
the Holy Ghost fell upon them, [Act
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#006). The Holy Ghost also directed
those that chose, and called, and ordained, them to this work in answer
to prayer.

2\. He commanded them to mind the work to which they were called.
Dignity calls for duty; if the Holy Ghost has made them overseers of the
flock, that is, shepherds, they must be true to their trust. (1.) They
must take heed to themselves in the first place, must have a very
jealous eye upon all the motions of their own souls, and upon all they
said and did, must walk circumspectly, and know how to behave themselves
aright in the house of God, in which they were now advanced to the
office of stewards: "You have many eyes upon you, some to take example
by you, others to pick quarrels with you, and therefore you ought to
take heed to yourselves." Those are not likely to be skilful or faithful
keepers of the vineyards of others that do not keep their own. (2.)
"Take heed to the flock, to all the flock, some to one part of it,
others to another, according as your call and opportunity are, but see
that no part of it be neglected among you." Ministers must not only take
heed to their own souls, but must have a constant regard to the souls of
those who are under their charge, as shepherds have to their sheep, that
they may receive no damage: "Take heed to all the flock, that none of
them either of themselves wander from the fold or be seized by the
beasts of prey; that none of them be missing, or miscarry, through your
neglect." (3.) They must feed the church of God, must do all the parts
of the shepherd's office, must lead the sheep of Christ into the green
pastures, must lay meat before them, must do what they can to heal those
that are distempered and have no appetite to their meat, must feed them
with wholesome doctrine, with a tender evangelical discipline, and must
see that nothing is wanting that is necessary in order to their being
nourished up to eternal life. There is need of pastors, not only to
gather the church of God by bringing in of those that are without, but
to feed it by building up those that are within. (4.) They must watch
([Act 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031)), as shepherds keep watch
over their flocks by night, must be awake and watchful, must not give
way to spiritual sloth and slumber, but must stir up themselves to their
business and closely attend it. Watch thou in all things ([Ti2
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#005)), watch against every thing that
will be hurtful to the flock, and watch to every thing that will be
advantageous to it; improve every opportunity of doing it a kindness.

3\. He gives them several good reasons why they should mind the business
of their ministry.

(1.) Let them consider the interest of their Master, and his concern for
the flock that was committed to their charge, [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028). It is the church which he has
purchased with his own blood. \[1.\] "It is his own; you are but his
servants to take care of it for him. It is your honour that you are
employed for God, who will own you in his service; but then your
carelessness and treachery are so much the worse if you neglect your
work, for you wrong God and are false to him. From him you received the
trust, and to him you must give up your account, and therefore take heed
to yourselves. And, if it be the church of God, he expects you should
show your love to him by feeding his sheep and lambs." \[2.\] He has
purchased it. The world is God's by right of creation, but the church is
his by right of redemption, and therefore it ought to be dear to us, for
it was dear to him, because it cost him dear, and we cannot better show
it than by feeding his sheep and his lambs. \[3.\] This church of God is
what he has purchased; not as Israel of old, when he gave men for them,
and people for their life ([Isa 43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003),
[Isa 43:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#004)), but with his own blood.
This proves that Christ is God, for he is called so here, where yet he
is said to purchase the church with his own blood; the blood was his as
man, yet so close is the union between the divine and human nature that
it is here called the blood of God, for it was the blood of him who is
God, and his being so put such dignity and worth into it as made it both
a valuable ransom of us from evil, and a valuable purchase for us of all
good, nay, a purchase of us to Christ, to be to him a peculiar people:
Thine they were, and thou gavest them to me. In consideration of this,
therefore, feed the church of God, because it is purchased at so dear a
rate. Did Christ lay down his life to purchase it, and shall his
ministers be wanting in any care and pains to feed it? Their neglect of
its true interest is a contempt of his blood that purchased it.

(2.) Let them consider the danger that the flock was in of being made a
prey to its adversaries, [Act 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029),
[Act 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#030). "If the flock be thus
precious upon the account of its relation to God, and its redemption by
Christ, then you are concerned to take heed both to yourselves and to
it." Here are reasons for both. \[1.\] Take heed to the flock, for
wolves are abroad, that seek to devour ([Act
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029)): I know this, that after my
departure grievous wolves shall enter in among you. First, Some
understand it of persecutors, that will inform against the Christians,
and incense the magistrates against them, and will have no compassion on
the flock. They thought, because, while Paul was with them, the rage of
the Jews was most against him, that, when he had gone out of the
country, they would be quiet: "No," says he, "after my departure you
will find the persecuting spirit still working, therefore take heed to
the flock, confirm them in the faith, comfort and encourage them, that
they may not either leave Christ for fear of suffering or lose their
peace and comfort in their sufferings." Ministers must take a more
ordinary care of the flock in times of persecution. Secondly, It is
rather to be understood of seducers and false teachers. Probably Paul
has an eye to those of the circumcision, who preached up the ceremonial
law; these he calls grievous wolves, for though they came in sheep's
clothing, nay, in shepherds' clothing, they made mischief in the
congregations of Christians, sowed discord among them, drew away many
from the pure gospel of Christ, and did all they could to blemish and
defame those that adhered to it; not sparing the most valuable members
of the flock, stirring up those whom they could influence to bite and
devour them ([Gal 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015)); therefore
they are called dogs ([Phi 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002)), as
here wolves. While Paul was at Ephesus, they kept away, for they durst
not face him; but, when he was gone, then they entered in among them,
and sowed their tares where he had sown the good seed. "Therefore take
heed to the flock, and do all you can to establish them in the truth,
and to arm them against the insinuations of the false teachers." \[2.\]
Take heed to yourselves, for some shepherds will apostatise ([Act
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#030)): "Also of your ownselves, among
the members, nay, perhaps, among the ministers of your own church, among
you that I am now speaking to (though I am willing to hope it does not
go so far as that), shall men arise speaking perverse things, things
contrary to the right rule of the gospel, and destructive of the great
intentions of it. Nay, they will pervert some sayings of the gospel, and
wrest them to make them patronize their errors, [Pe2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016). Even those that were well
thought of among you, and that you had confidence in, will grow proud,
and conceited, and opinionative, and will refine upon the gospel, and
will pretend with more nice and curious speculations to advance you to a
higher form; but it is to draw away disciples after them, to make a
party for themselves, that shall admire them, and be led by them, and
pin their faith upon their sleeve." Some read it, to draw away disciples
after them - those that are already disciples of Christ, draw them from
him to follow them. "Therefore, take heed to yourselves; when you are
told that some of you shall betray the gospel, you are each of you
concerned to ask, Is it I? and to look well to yourselves." This was
there fulfilled in Phygellus and Hermogenes, who turned away from Paul
and the doctrine he had preached ([Ti2
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#015)), and in Hymeneus and Philetus,
who concerning the truth erred, and overthrew the faith of some ([Ti2
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#018)), which explains the expression
here. But, though there were some such seducers in the church of
Ephesus, yet it should seem by Paul's Epistle to that church (wherein we
do not find such complaints and reprehensions as we meet with in some
other of his epistles) that that church was not so much infested with
false teachers, at least not so much infected with their false doctrine,
as some other churches were; but its peace and purity were preserved by
the blessing of God on the pains and vigilance of these presbyters, to
whom the apostle, in the actual foresight and consideration of the rise
of heresies and schisms, as well as of his own death, committed the
government of this church.

(3.) Let them consider the great pains that Paul had taken in planting
this church ([Act 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031)): "Remember
that for the space of three years" (for so long he had been preaching in
Ephesus, and the parts adjacent) "I ceased not to warn every one night
and day with tears; and be not you negligent in building upon that
foundation which I was so diligent to lay." \[1.\] Paul, like a faithful
watchman, had warned them, and, by the warnings he gave men of the
danger of their continuing in their Judaism and heathenism, he prevailed
with them to embrace Christianity. \[2.\] He warned every one; besides
the public warnings he gave in his preaching, he applied himself to
particular persons according as he saw their case called for it, which
he had something to say peculiar to. \[3.\] He was constant in giving
warning; he warned night and day; his time was filled up with his work.
In the night, when he should have been reposing himself, he was dealing
with those he could not get to speak with in the day about their souls.
\[4.\] He was indefatigable in it; he ceased not to warn. Though they
were ever so obstinate against his warnings, yet he did not cease to
warn, not knowing but that at length they might, by the grace of God, be
overcome; though they were ever so pliable to his warnings, yet he did
not think this would be a sufficient excuse for him to desist, but still
he warned those that were righteous as not to turn from their
righteousness, as he had warned them when they were wicked to turn from
their wickedness, [Eze 3:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#018). \[5.\]
He spoke to them about their souls with a great deal of affection and
concern: he warned them with tears. As he had served the Lord, so he had
served them, with many tears, [Act
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#019). He warned them with tears of
compassion, thereby showing how much he was himself affected with their
misery and danger in a sinful state and way, that he might affect them
with it. Thus Paul had begun the good work at Ephesus, thus free had he
been of his pains; and why then should they be sparing of their pains in
carrying it on?

V. He recommends them to divine direction and influence ([Act
20:32](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#032)): "And now, brethren, having
given you this solemn charge and caution, I commend you to God. Now that
I have said what I have to say, The Lord be with you; I must leave you,
but I leave you in good hands." They were in care what would become of
them, how they should go on in their work, break through their
difficulties, and what provision would be made for them and their
families. In answer to all these perplexities, Paul directs them to look
up to God with an eye of faith, and beseeches God to look down on them
with an eye of favour.

1\. See here to whom he commends them. He calls them brethren, not only
as Christians, but as ministers, and thereby encourages them to hope in
God, as he had done; for they and he were brethren. (1.) He commends
them to God, begs of God to provide for them, to take care of them, and
to supply all their needs, and encourages them to cast all their care
upon him, with an assurance that he cared for them: "Whatever you want,
go to God, let your eye be ever towards him, and your dependence upon
him, in all your straits and difficulties; and let this be your comfort,
that you have a God to go to, a God all sufficient." I commend you to
God, that is, to his providence, and to the protection and care of that.
It is enough that, from whomsoever we are separated, still we have God
nigh unto us, [Pe1 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#019). (2.) He
commends them to the word of his grace, by which some understand Christ:
he is the word ([Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)), the word of
life, because life is treasured up for us in him ([Jo1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)), and in the same sense he is here
called the word of God's grace, because from his fulness we receive
grace for grace. He commends them to Christ, puts them into his hand, as
being his servants, whom he would in a particular manner take care of.
Paul commends them not only to God and to his providence, but to Christ
and his grace as Christ himself did his disciples when he was leaving
them: You believe in God, believe also in me. It comes to much the same
thing, if by the word of his grace we understand the gospel of Christ,
for it is Christ in the word that is nigh unto us for our support and
encouragement, and his word is spirit and life: "You will find much
relief by acting faith on the providence of God, but much more by acting
faith on the promises of the gospel." He commends them to the word of
Christ's grace, which he spoke to his disciples when he sent them forth,
the commission he gave them, with assurance that he would be with them
always to the end of the world: "Take hold of that word, and God give
you the benefit and comfort of it, and you need no more." He commends
them to the word of God's grace, not only as the foundation of their
hope and the fountain of their joy, but as the rule of their walking: "I
commend you to God, as your Master, whom you are to serve, and I have
found him a good Master, and to the word of his grace, as cutting you
out your work, and by which you are to govern yourselves; observe the
precepts of this word, and then live upon the promises of it."

2\. See here what he commends them to the word of God's grace for, not
so much for a protection from their enemies, or a provision for their
families, as for the spiritual blessings which they most needed and
ought most to value. They had received the gospel of the grace of God,
and were entrusted to preach it. Now he recommends them to that, (1.)
For their edification: "It is able (the Spirit of grace working with it
and by it) to build you up, and you may depend upon this, while you keep
close to it, and are deriving daily from it. Though you are already
furnished with good gifts, yet this is able to build you up; there is
that in it with which you need to be better acquainted and more
affected." Note, Ministers, in preaching the word of grace, must aim at
their own edification as well as at the edification of others. The most
advanced Christians, while they are in this world, are capable of
growing, and they will find the word of grace to have still more and
more in it to contribute to their growth. It is still able to build them
up. (2.) For their glorification: It is able to give you an inheritance
among all those who are sanctified. The word of God's grace gives it,
not only as it gives the knowledge of it (for life and immortality are
brought to light by the gospel), but as it gives the promise of it, the
promise of a God that cannot lie, and which is yea and amen in Christ;
and by the word, as the ordinary vehicle, the Spirit of grace is given
([Act 10:44](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044)), to be the seal of the
promise, and the earnest of the eternal life promised; and thus it is
the word of God's grace that gives us the inheritance. Note, \[1.\]
Heaven is an inheritance which gives an indefeasible right to all the
heirs; it is an inheritance like that of the Israelites in Canaan, which
was by promise and yet by lot, but was sure to all the seed. \[2.\] This
inheritance is entailed upon and secured to all those, and those only,
that are sanctified; for as those cannot be welcome guests to the holy
God, or the holy society above, that are unsanctified, so really heaven
would be no heaven to them; but to all that are sanctified, that are
born again, and on whom the image of God is renewed, it is as sure as
almighty power and eternal truth can make it. Those therefore that would
make out a title to that inheritance must make it sure that they are
among the sanctified, are joined to them and incorporated with them, and
partake of the same image and nature; for we cannot expect to be among
the glorified hereafter unless we be among the sanctified here.

VI\. He recommends himself to them as an example of indifference to this
world, and to every thing in it, which, if they would walk in the same
spirit and in the same steps, they would find to contribute greatly to
their easy and comfortable passage through it. He had recommended them
to God, and to the word of his grace, for spiritual blessings, which,
without doubt, are the best blessings; but what shall they do for food
for their families, an agreeable subsistence for themselves, and
portions for their children? "As to these," Paul says, "do as I did;"
and how was that? He here tells them,

1\. That he never aimed at worldly wealth ([Act
20:33](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#033)): "I have coveted no man's
silver, or gold, or apparel; nor do you, and then you will be easy."
There were many in Ephesus, and many of those that had embraced the
Christian faith, who were rich, had a great deal of money, and plate,
and rich furniture, and wore very good clothes, and made a very good
appearance. Now, (1.) Paul was not ambitious to live like them. We may
take it in this sense: "I never coveted to have so much silver and gold
at command as I see others have, nor to wear such rich clothes as I see
others wear. I neither condemn them nor envy them. I can live
comfortably and usefully without living great." The false apostles
desired to make a fair show in the flesh ([Gal
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#012)), to make a figure in the world;
but Paul did not do so. He knew how to want and how to be abased. (2.)
He was not greedy to receive from them, silver, or gold, or apparel; so
far from being always craving that he was not so much as coveting, nor
desired them to allow him so and so for his pains among them, but was
content with such things as he had; he never made a gain of them, [Co2
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#017). He could not only say with
Moses ([Num 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#015)), and with Samuel
([Sa1 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003), [Sa1
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#005)), Whose ox have I taken? Or whom
have I defrauded? But, "Whose kindness have I coveted, or asked? Or to
whom have I been burdensome?" He protests against desiring a gift, [Phi
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#017).

2\. That he had worked for his living, and taken a great deal of pains
to get bread ([Act 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#034)) "Yea, you
yourselves know, and have been eye-witnesses of it, that these hands of
mine have ministered to my necessities, and to those that were with me;
you have seen me busy early and late, cutting out tents and making them
up;" and, they being commonly made of leather, it was very hard work.
Observe, (1.) Paul was sometimes reduced to necessities, and the want of
the common supports of life, though he was so great a favourite of
Heaven and so great a blessing to this earth. What an unthinking,
unkind, and ungrateful world is this, that could let such a man as Paul
be poor in it! (2.) He desired no more than to have his necessities
supplied; he did not work at his calling to enrich himself, but to
maintain himself with food and raiment. (3.) When he was to earn his
bread, he did it by a manual occupation. Paul had a head and a tongue
that he might have got money by, but they were these hands, saith he,
that ministered to my necessities. What a pity was it that those hands
by the laying on of which the Holy Ghost had been so often conferred,
those hands by which God had wrought special miracles, and both these at
Ephesus too ([Act 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#006), [Act
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#011)), should there be obliged to lay
themselves to the needle and shears, the awl and tacking-end, in
tent-making, purely to get bread! Paul puts these presbyters (and others
in them) in mind of this, that they may not think it strange if they be
thus neglected, and yet to go on in their work, and make the best shift
they can to live; the less encouragement they have from men, the more
they shall have from God. (4.) He worked not only for himself, but for
the support of those also that were with him. This was hard indeed. It
had better become them to have worked for him (to maintain him as their
tutor) than he for them. But so it is; those that are willing to take
the labouring oar will find those about them willing they should have
it. If Paul will work for the maintenance of his companions, he is
welcome to do it.

[Acts 20:36](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 20:36</span></span>

After the parting sermon that Paul preached to the elders of Ephesus,
which was very affecting, we have here the parting prayer and tears,
which were yet more affecting; we can scarcely read the account here
given of them, and meditate upon them with dry eyes.

I. They parted with prayer ([Act
20:36](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#036)): And, when he had thus spoken,
he kneeled down, and prayed with them all. And, no doubt, it was a
prayer every way suited to the present mournful occasion. He committed
them to God in this prayer, prayed that he would not leave them, but
continue his presence with them. 1. It was a joint prayer. He not only
prayed for them, but prayed with them, prayed with them all; that they
might put up the same petitions for themselves and one another that he
put up to God for them all, and that they might learn what to ask of God
for themselves when he was gone. Public prayers are so far from being
intended to supersede our own secret prayers, and make them needless,
that they are designed to quicken and encourage them, and to direct us
in them. When we are alone we should pray over the prayers that our
ministers have put up with us. 2. It was a humble reverent prayer. This
was expressed by the posture they used: He kneeled down, and prayed with
them, which is the most proper gesture in prayer, and significant both
of adoration and of petition, especially petition for the forgiveness of
sin. Paul used it much: I bow my knees, [Eph
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#014). 3. It was a prayer after sermon;
and, we may suppose, he prayed over what he had preached. He had
committed the care of the church at Ephesus to those elders, and now he
prays that God would enable them faithfully to discharge this great
trust reposed in them, and would give them those measures of wisdom and
grace which it required; he prayed for the flock, and all that belonged
to it, that the great Shepherd of the sheep would take care of them all,
and keep them from being a prey to the grievous wolves. Thus he taught
these ministers to pray for those they preached to, that they might not
labour in vain. 4. It was a parting prayer, which might be likely to
leave lasting impressions, as the farewell sermon did. It is good for
friends, when they part, to part with prayer, that by praying together
just at parting they may be enabled to pray the more feelingly one for
another when they are separated, which is one part of our Christian
duty, and an improvement of the communion of saints. The Lord watch
between us, and watch over us both, when we are absent one from the
other, is a good parting prayer ([Gen
31:49](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#049)), as also that our next meeting
may be either nearer heaven or in heaven. Paul here followed the example
of Christ, who, when he took leave of his disciples, after he had
preached to them, prayed with them all, [Joh
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001).

II\. They parted with tears, abundance of tears, and most affectionate
embraces, [Act 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#037), [Act
20:38](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#038). 1. They all wept sorely. We
have reason to think the Paul himself began; though he was determined to
go, and saw his call clear to other work, yet he was sorry in his heart
to leave them, and many a tear it cost him. He that was so often in
tears while he was with them ([Act
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#019), [Act
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031)), no doubt shed many at parting,
so watering what he had sown among them. But the notice is taken of
their tears: They all wept sorely; there was not a dry eye among them,
and it is probable the affectionate expressions Paul used in prayer set
them a-weeping. These were tears of love and mutual endearment, like
those of Jonathan and David, when they were forced to part, and wept one
with another, until (as if they wept for strife) David exceeded, [Sa1
20:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#041). 2. They fell upon Paul's neck,
and kissed him, all, one after another, each bewailing his own loss:
"How can I part with this invaluable man, this blessed Paul," says one,
"in whom my life is a manner bound up?" - "Farewell, my dear friend,"
says another, "a thousand thanks to thee, and ten thousand to God for
thee, and for all the pains thou hast taken with me for my good." "And
must we part?" says another: "must I lose my spiritual father, nurse,
and guide?" - "What will become of us now?" says another, "when we shall
no more have him to apply to, and receive direction from? What shall I
do, if the Lord take away my master from my head? My father, my father,
the chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof." Note, Those that are
most loving are commonly best beloved. Paul, who was a most affectionate
friend himself, had friends that were very affectionate to him. These
tears at parting with Paul were a grateful return for all the tears he
had shed in preaching to them and praying with them. He that watereth
shall be watered also himself. 3. That which cut them to the heart thus,
and made this place such a Bochim, such a place of weepers, was, that
word which Paul spoke, that he was certain they should see his face no
more. If he had given them directions to follow him, as he did to those
that were his usual companions, or any intimation that he would come
hereafter and make them a visit, they could have borne this parting
pretty well; but when they are told that they shall see his face no more
in this world, that it is a final farewell they are now giving and
taking, this makes it a great mourning; it makes farewell just like a
funeral, and puts them into this passion of weeping. There were other
things for which they sorrowed - that they should lose the benefit of
his public performances, and see him no longer presiding in their
assemblies, should have none of his personal counsels and comforts; and,
we hope, they sorrowed for their own sin, in not profiting more by his
labours while they had him among them, and which had provoked God to
order his remove. But that which gave the most sensible accent to their
grief was that they should see his face no more. When our friends are
separated from us by death, this is the consideration with which we
raise up our mourning, that we shall see their faces no more; but we
complain of this as those that have no hope, for if our friends died in
Christ, and we live to him, they are gone to see God's face, to behold
his glory, with the reflection of which their faces shine, and we hope
to be with them shortly. Though we shall see their faces no more in this
world, we hope to see them again in a better world, and to be there
together for ever and with the Lord.

III\. They accompanied him unto the ship, partly to show their respect
for him (they would bring him on his way as far as they could), and
partly that they might have a little more of his company and
conversation; if it must be the last interview, they will have as much
of him as they can, and see the last of him. And we have reason to think
that when they came to the water-side, and he was about to go on board,
their tears and embraces were repeated; for loth to part bids oft
farewell. But this was a comfort to both sides, and soon turned this
tide of passion, that the presence of Christ both went with him and
staid with them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 21](act021)

</div>
