<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act010)  [Next](act012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 11:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. Peter's necessary vindication of what he did
in receiving Cornelius and his friends into the church, from the censure
he lay under for it among the brethren, and their acquiescence in it (v.
1-18). II. The good success of the gospel at Antioch, and the parts
adjacent ([Act 11:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019).md). III. The
carrying on of the good work that was begun at Antioch, by the ministry
of Barnabas first, and afterwards of Paul in conjunction with him, and
the lasting name of Christian first given to the disciples there ([Act
11:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#022).md). IV. A prediction of an
approaching famine, and the contribution that was made among the Gentile
converts for the relief of the poor saints in Judea, upon that occasion
([Act 11:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#027).md).

[Acts 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 11:1</span></span>

The preaching of the gospel to Cornelius was a thing which we poor
sinners of the Gentiles have reason to reflect upon with a great deal of
joy and thankfulness; for it was the bringing of light to us who sat in
darkness. Now it being so great a surprize to the believing as well as
the unbelieving Jews, it is worth while to enquire how it was received,
and what comments were made upon it. And here we find,

I. Intelligence was presently brought of it to the church in Jerusalem,
and thereabouts; for Cesarea was not so far from Jerusalem but that they
might presently hear of it. Some for good-will, and some for ill-will,
would spread the report of it; so that before he himself had returned to
Jerusalem the apostles and the brethren there and in Judea heard that
the Gentiles also had received the word of God, that is, the gospel of
Christ, which is not only a word of God, but the word of God; for it is
the summary and centre of all divine revelation. They received Christ;
for his name is called the Word of God, [Rev
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#013.md). Not only that the Jews who were
dispersed into the Gentile countries, and the Gentiles who were
proselyted to the Jewish religion, but that the Gentiles also
themselves, with whom it had hitherto been thought unlawful to hold
common conversation, were taken into church-communion, that they had
received the word of God. That is, 1. That the word of God was preached
to them, which was a greater honour put upon them than they expected.
Yet I wonder this should seem strange to those who were themselves
commissioned to preach the gospel to every creature. But thus often are
the prejudices of pride and bigotry held fast against the clearest
discoveries of divine truth. 2. That it was entertained and submitted to
by them, which was a better work wrought upon them than they expected.
It is likely they had got a notion that if the gospel were preached to
the Gentiles it would be to no purpose, because the proofs of the gospel
were fetched so much out of the Old Testament, which the Gentiles did
not receive: they looked upon them as not inclined to religion, nor
likely to receive the impressions of it; and therefore were surprized to
hear that they had received the word of the Lord. Note, We are too apt
to despair of doing good to those who yet, when they are tried, prove
very tractable.

II\. That offence was taken at it by the believing Jews ([Act
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#002.md), [Act
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#003).md): When Peter had himself come up
to Jerusalem, those that were of the circumcision, those Jewish converts
that still retained a veneration for circumcision, contended with him.
They charged it upon him as a crime that he went in to men
uncircumcised, and did eat with them; and thereby they think he has
stained, if not forfeited, the honour of his apostleship, and ought to
come under the censure of the church: so far were they from looking upon
him as infallible, or as the supreme head of the church that all were
accountable to, and he to none. See here, 1. How much it is the bane and
damage of the church, to monopolize it, and to exclude those from it,
and from the benefit of the means of grace, that are not in every thing
as we are. There are narrow souls that are for engrossing the riches of
the church, as there are that would engross the riches of the world, and
would be placed alone in the midst of the earth. These men were of
Jonah's mind, who, in a jealousy for his people, was angry that the
Ninevites received the word of God, and justified himself in it. 2.
Christ's ministers must not think it strange if they be censured and
quarrelled with, not only by their professed enemies, but by their
professing friends; not only for their follies and infirmities, but for
their good actions seasonably and well done; but, if we have proved our
own work, we may have rejoicing in ourselves, as Peter had, whatever
reflections we may have from our brethren. Those that are zealous and
courageous in the service of Christ must expect to be censured by those
who, under pretence of being cautious, are cold and indifferent. Those
who are of catholic, generous, charitable principles, must expect to be
censured by such as are conceited and strait-laced, who say, Stand by
thyself, I am holier than thou.

III\. Peter gave such a full and fair account of the matter of fact as
was sufficient, without any further argument or apology, both to justify
him, and to satisfy them ([Act 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#004).md):
He rehearsed the matter from the beginning, and laid it before them in
order, and then could appeal to themselves whether he had done amiss;
for it appeared all along God's own work, and not his.

1\. He takes it for granted that if they had rightly understood how the
matter was they would not have contended with him, and commended him.
And it is a good reason why we should be moderate in our censures, and
sparing of them, because if we rightly understood that which we are so
forward to run down perhaps we should see cause to run in with it. When
we see others do that which looks suspicious, instead of contending with
them, we should enquire of them what ground they went upon; and, if we
have not an opportunity to do that, should ourselves put the best
construction upon it that it will bear, and judge nothing before the
time.

2\. He is very willing to stand right in their opinion, and takes pains
to give them satisfaction. He does not insist upon his being the chief
of the apostles, for he was far from the thought of that supremacy which
his pretended successors claim. Nor does he think it enough to tell them
that he is satisfied himself in the grounds he went upon, and they need
not trouble themselves about it; but he is ready to give a reason of the
hope that is in him concerning the Gentiles, and why he had receded from
his former sentiments, which were the same with theirs. It is a debt we
owe both to ourselves and to our brethren to set those actions of ours
in a true light which at first looked ill and gave offence, that we may
remove stumbling-blocks out of our brethren's way. Let us now see what
Peter pleads in his own defence.

(1.) That he was instructed by a vision no longer to keep up the
distinctions which were made by the ceremonial law; he relates the
vision ([Act 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#005.md), [Act
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#006).md), as we had it before [Act
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009.md), etc. The sheet which was there
said to be let down to the earth he here says came even to him, which
circumstance intimates that it was particularly designed for instruction
to him. We should thus see all God's discoveries of himself, which he
has made to the children of men, coming even to us, applying them by
faith to ourselves. Another circumstance here added is that when the
sheet came to him he fastened his eyes upon it, and considered it, [Act
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#006.md). If we would be led into the
knowledge of divine things, we must fix our minds upon them, and
consider them. He tells them what orders he had to eat of all sorts of
meat without distinction, asking no questions for conscience' sake, [Act
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#007.md). It was not till after the flood
(as it should seem) that man was allowed to eat flesh at all, [Gen
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#003.md). That allowance was afterwards
limited by the ceremonial law; but now the restrictions were taken off,
and the matter set at large again. It was not the design of Christ to
abridge us in the use of our creature-comforts by any other law than
that of sobriety and temperance, and preferring the meat that endures to
eternal life before that which perishes. He pleads that he was as averse
to the thoughts of conversing with Gentiles, or eating of their
dainties, as they could be, and therefore refused the liberty given him:
Not so, Lord; for nothing common or unclean has at any time entered into
my mouth, [Act 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#008.md). But he was told
from heaven that the case was now altered, that God had cleansed those
persons and things which were before polluted; and therefore that he
must no longer call them common, nor look upon them as unfit to be
meddled with by the peculiar people ([Act
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#009).md); so that he was not to be blamed
for changing his thoughts, when God had changed the thing. In things of
this nature we must act according to our present light; yet must not be
so wedded to our opinion concerning them as to be prejudiced against
further discoveries, when the matter may either be otherwise or appear
otherwise; and God may reveal even this unto us, [Phi
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015.md). And, that they might be sure he
was not deceived in it, he tells them it was done three times ([Act
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#010).md), the same command given, to
kill and eat, and the same reason, because that which God hath cleansed
is not to be called common, repeated a second and third time. And,
further to confirm him that it was a divine vision, the things he saw
did not vanish away into the air, but were drawn up again into heaven,
whence they were let down.

(2.) That he was particularly directed by the Spirit to go along with
the messengers that Cornelius sent. And, that it might appear that the
vision was designed to satisfy him in this matter, he observes to them
the time when the messengers came - immediately after he had that
vision; yet, lest this should not be sufficient to clear his way, the
Spirit bade him go with the men that were then sent from Cesarea to him,
nothing doubting ([Act 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#011.md), [Act
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#012).md); though they were Gentiles he
went to, and went with, yet he must make no scruple of going along with
them.

(3.) That he took some of his brethren along with him, who were of the
circumcision, that they might be satisfied as well as he; and these he
had brought up from Joppa, to witness for him with what caution he
proceeded, forseeing the offence that would be taken at it. He did not
act separately, but with advice; not rashly, but upon due deliberation.

(4.) That Cornelius had a vision too, by which he was directed to send
for Peter ([Act 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#013).md): He showed us
how he had seen a angel in his house, that bade him send to Joppa for
one Simon, whose surname is Peter. See how good it is for those that
have communion with God, and keep up a correspondence with heaven, to
compare notes, and communicate their experiences to each other; for
hereby they may strengthen one another's faith: Peter is the more
confirmed in the truth of his vision by Cornelius's, and Cornelius by
Peter's. Here is something added in what the angel said to Cornelius;
before it was, Send for Peter, and he shall speak to thee, he shall tell
thee what thou oughtest to do ([Act
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#006.md), [Act
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#032).md); but here it is, "He shall tell
thee words whereby thou and thy house shall be saved ([Act
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#014).md), and therefore it is of vast
concern to thee, and will be of unspeakable advantage, to send for him."
Note, \[1.\] The words of the gospel are words whereby we may be saved,
eternally saved; not merely by hearing them and reading them, but by
believing and obeying them. They set the salvation before us, and show
us what it is; they open the way of salvation to us, and, if we follow
the method prescribed us by them, we shall certainly be saved from wrath
and the curse, and be for ever happy. \[2.\] Those that embrace the
gospel of Christ will have salvation brought by it to their families:
"Thou and all thy house shall be saved; thou and thy children shall be
taken into covenant, and have the means of salvation; thy house shall be
as welcome to the benefit of the salvation, upon their believing, as
thou thyself, even the meanest servant thou hast. This day is salvation
come to this house," [Luk 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#009.md).
Hitherto salvation was of the Jews ([Joh
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022).md), but now salvation is brought to
the Gentiles as much as ever it was with the Jews; the promises,
privileges, and means of it are conveyed to all nations as amply and
fully, to all intents and purposes, as ever it had been appropriated to
the Jewish nation.

(5.) That which put the matter past all dispute was the descent of the
Holy Ghost upon the Gentile hearers; this completed the evidence that it
was the will of God that he should take the Gentiles into communion.
\[1.\] The fact was plain and undeniable ([Act
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#015).md): "As I began to speak" (and
perhaps he felt some secret reluctance in his own breast, doubting
whether he was in the right to preach to the uncircumcised), "presently
the Holy Ghost fell on them in as visible signs as on us at the
beginning, in which there could be no fallacy." Thus God attested what
was done, and declared his approbation of it; that preaching is
certainly right with which the Holy Ghost is given. The apostle supposes
this, when he thus argues with the Galatians: Received you the Spirit by
the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith? [Gal
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#002.md). \[2.\] Peter was hereby put in
mind of a saying of his Master's, when he was leaving them ([Act
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#005).md): John baptized with water; but
you shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, [Act
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#016.md). This plainly intimated, First,
that the Holy Ghost was the gift of Christ, and the product and
performance of his promise, that great promise which he left with them
when he went to heaven. It was therefore without doubt from him that
this gift came; and the filling of them with the Holy Ghost was his act
and deed. As it was promised by his mouth, so it was performed by his
hand, and was a token of his favour. Secondly, That the gift of the Holy
Ghost was a kind of baptism. Those that received it were baptized with
it in a more excellent manner than any of those that even the Baptist
himself baptized with water. \[3.\] Comparing that promise, so worded,
with this gift just now conferred, when the question was started,
whether these persons should be baptized or no, he concluded that the
question was determined by Christ himself ([Act
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#017).md): "Forasmuch then as God gave
them the like gift as he did to us - gave it to us as believing in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and to them upon their believing in him - What was I,
that I could withstand God? Could I refuse to baptize them with water,
whom God had baptized with the Holy Ghost? Could I deny the sign to
those on whom he had conferred the thing signified? But, as for me, who
was I? What! able to forbid God? Did it become me to control the divine
will, or to oppose the counsels of Heaven?" Note, Those who hinder the
conversion of souls withstand God; and those take too much upon them who
contrive how to exclude from their communion those whom God has taken
into communion with himself.

IV\. This account which Peter gave of the matter satisfied them, and all
was well. Thus, when the two tribes and a half gave an account to
Phinehas and the princes of Israel of the true intent and meaning of
their building themselves an altar on the banks of Jordan, the
controversy was dropped, and it pleased them that it was so, [Jos
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#030.md). Some people, when they have
fastened a censure upon a person, will stick to it, though afterwards it
appear ever so plainly to be unjust and groundless. It was not so here;
for these brethren, though they were of the circumcision, and their bias
went the other way, yet, when they heard this, 1. They let fall their
censures: they held their peace, and said no more against what Peter had
done; they laid their hand upon their mouth, because now they perceived
that God did it. Now those who prided themselves in their dignities as
Jews began to see that God was staining their pride, by letting in the
Gentiles to share, and to share equally, with them. And now that
prophecy was fulfilled, Thou shalt no more be haughty because of my holy
mountain, [Zep 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#011.md). 2. They turned
them into praises. They not only held their peace from quarrelling with
Peter, but opened their mouths to glorify God for what he had done by
and with Peter's ministry; they were thankful that their mistake was
rectified, and that God had shown more mercy to the poor Gentiles than
they were inclined to show them, saying, Then hath God also to the
Gentiles granted repentance unto life! He hath granted them not only the
means of repentance, in opening a door of entrance for his ministers
among them, but the grace of repentance, in having given them his Holy
Spirit, who, wherever he comes to be a Comforter, first convinces, and
gives a sight of sin and sorrow for it, and then a sight of Christ and
joy in him. Note, (1.) Repentance, if it be true, is unto life. It is to
spiritual life; all that truly repent of their sins evidence it by
living a new life, a holy, heavenly, and divine life. Those that by
repentance die unto sin thenceforward live unto God; and then, and not
till then, we begin to live indeed, and it shall be to eternal life. All
true penitents shall live, that is, they shall be restored to the favour
of God, which is life, which is better than life; they shall be
comforted with the assurance of the pardon of their sins, and shall have
the earnest of eternal life, and at length the fruition of it. (2.)
Repentance is God's gift; it is not only his free grace that accepts it,
but his mighty grace that works it in us, that takes away the heart of
stone, and gives us a heart of flesh. The sacrifice of God is a broken
spirit; it is he that provides himself this lamb. (3.) Wherever God
designs to give life he gives repentance; for this is a necessary
preparative for the comforts of a sealed pardon and a settled peace in
this world, and for the seeing and enjoying of God in the other world.
(4.) It is a great comfort to us that God has exalted his Son Jesus, not
only to give repentance to Israel, and the remission of sins ([Act
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#031).md), but to the Gentiles also.

[Acts 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 11:19</span></span>

We have here an account of the planting and watering of a church at
Antioch, the chief city of Syria, reckoned afterwards the third most
considerable city of the empire, only Rome and Alexandria being
preferred before it, next to whose patriarch that of Antioch took place.
It stood where Hamath or Riblah did, which we read of in the Old
Testament. It is suggested that Luke, the penman of this history, as
well as Theophilus, to whom he dedicates it, was of Antioch, which may
be the reason why he takes more particular notice of the success of the
gospel at Antioch, as also because there it was that Paul began to be
famous, towards the story of whom he is hastening. Now concerning the
church at Antioch observe,

I. The first preachers of the gospel there were such as were dispersed
from Jerusalem by persecution, that persecution which arose five or six
years ago (as some compute), at the time of Stephen's death ([Act
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019).md): They travelled as far as
Phenice and other places preaching the word. God suffered them to be
persecuted, that thereby they might be dispersed in the world, sown as
seed to God, in order to their bringing forth much fruit. Thus what was
intended for the hurt of the church was made to work for its good; as
Jacob's curse of the tribe of Levi (I will divide them in Jacob, and
scatter them in Israel) was turned into a blessing. The enemies designed
to scatter and lose them, Christ designed to scatter and use them. Thus
the wrath of man is made to praise God. Observe,

1\. Those that fled from persecution did not flee from their work;
though for the time they declined suffering, yet they did not decline
service; nay, they threw themselves into a larger field of opportunity
than before. Those that persecuted the preachers of the gospel hoped
thereby to prevent their carrying it to the Gentile world; but it proved
that they did but hasten it the sooner. Howbeit, they meant not so,
neither did their heart think so. Those that were persecuted in one city
fled to another; but they carried their religion along with them, not
only that they might take the comfort of it themselves, but that they
might communicate it to others, thus showing that when they got out of
the way it was not because they were afraid of suffering, but because
they were willing to reserve themselves for further service.

2\. They pressed forward in their work, finding that the good pleasure
of the Lord prospered in their hands. When they had preached
successfully in Judea, Samaria, and Galilee, they got out of the borders
of the land of Canaan, and travelled into Phoenicia, into the island of
Cyprus, and into Syria. Though the further they travelled the more they
exposed themselves, yet they travelled on; plus ultra-further still, was
their motto; grudging no pains, and dreading no perils, in carrying on
so good a work, and serving so good a Master.

3\. They preached the word to none but to the Jews only who were
dispersed in all those parts, and had synagogues of their own, in which
they met with them by themselves, and preached to them. They did not yet
understand that the Gentiles were to be fellow-heirs, and of the same
body; but left the Gentiles either to turn Jews, and so come into the
church, or else remain as they were.

4\. They particularly applied themselves to the Hellenist Jews, here
called the Grecians, that were at Antioch. Many of the preachers were
natives of Judea and Jerusalem; but some of them were by birth of Cyprus
and Cyrene, as Barnabas himself ([Act
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036).md), and Simon ([Mar
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#021).md), but had their education in
Jerusalem; and these, being themselves Grecian Jews, had a particular
concern for those of their own denomination and distinction, and applied
themselves closely to them at Antioch. Dr. Lightfoot says that they were
there called Hellenists, or Grecians, because they were Jews of the
corporation or enfranchisement of the city; for Antioch was a
Syrogrecian city. To them they preached the Lord Jesus. This was the
constant subject of their preaching; what else should the ministers of
Christ preach, but Christ - Christ, and him crucified - Christ, and him
glorified?

5\. They had wonderful success in their preaching, [Act
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#021). (1..md) Their preaching was
accompanied with a divine power: The hand of the Lord was with them,
which some understand of the power they were endued with to work
miracles for the confirming of their doctrine; in these the Lord was
working with them, for he confirmed the word with signs following ([Mar
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020).md); in these God bore them
witness, [Heb 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#004.md). But I rather
under-stand it of the power of divine grace working on the hearts of the
hearers, and opening them, as Lydia's heart was opened, because many saw
the miracles who were not converted; but when by the Spirit the
understanding was enlightened, and the will bowed to the gospel of
Christ, that was a day of power, in which volunteers were enlisted under
the banner of the Lord Jesus, [Psa
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003.md). The hand of the Lord was with
them, to bring that home to the hearts and consciences of men which they
could but speak to the outward ear. Then the word of the Lord gains its
end, when the hand of the Lord goes along with it, to write it in their
heart. Then people are brought to believe the report of the gospel, when
with it the arm of the Lord is revealed ([Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001).md), when God teaches with a strong
hand, [Isa 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#011.md). These were not
apostles, but ordinary ministers, yet they had the hand of the Lord with
them, and did wonders. (2.) Abundance of good was done: A great number
believed, and turned unto the Lord - many more than could have been
expected, considering the outward disadvantages they laboured under:
some of all sorts of people were wrought upon, and brought into
obedience to Christ. Observe, What the change was. \[1.\] They believed;
they were convinced of the truth of the gospel, and subscribed to the
record God had given in it concerning his Son. \[2.\] The effect and
evidence of this was that they turned unto the Lord. They could not be
said to turn from the service of idols, for they were Jews, worshippers
of the true God only; but they turned from a confidence in the
righteousness of the law, to rely only upon the righteousness of Christ,
the righteousness which is by faith; they turned from a loose, careless,
carnal way of living, to live a holy, heavenly, spiritual, and divine
life; they turned from worshipping God in show and ceremony, to worship
him in spirit and in truth. They turned to the Lord Jesus, and he became
all in all with them. This was the work of conversion wrought upon them,
and it must be wrought upon every one of us. It was the fruit of their
faith. All that sincerely believe will turn to the Lord; for, whatever
we profess or pretend, we do not really believe the gospel if we do not
cordially embrace Christ offered to us in the gospel.

II\. The good work thus begun at Antioch was carried on to great
perfection; and the church, thus founded, grew to be a flourishing one,
by the ministry of Barnabas and Saul, who built upon the foundation
which the other preachers had laid, and entered into their labours, [Joh
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#037.md), [Joh
4:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#038.md).

1\. The church at Jerusalem sent Barnabas thither, to nurse this
new-born church, and to strengthen the hands both of preachers and
people, and put a reputation upon the cause of Christ there.

(1.) They heard the good news, that the gospel was received at Antioch,
[Act 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#022.md). The apostles there were
inquisitive how the work went on in the countries about; and, it is
likely, kept up a correspondence with all parts where preachers were, so
that tidings of these things, of the great numbers that were converted
at Antioch, soon came to the ears of the church that was in Jerusalem.
Those that are in the most eminent stations in the church ought to
concern themselves for those in a lower sphere.

(2.) They despatched Barnabas to them with all speed; they desired him
to go, and assist and encourage these hopeful beginnings. They sent him
forth as an envoy from them, and a representative of their whole body,
to congratulate them upon the success of the gospel among them, as
matter of rejoicing both to preachers and hearers, and with both they
rejoiced. He must go as far as Antioch. It was a great way, but, far as
it was, he was willing to undertake the journey for a public service. It
is probable that Barnabas had a particular genius for work of this kind,
was active and conversable, loved to be in motion, and delighted in
doing good abroad as much as others in doing good at home, was as much
of Zebulun's spirit, who rejoiced in his going out, as others are of
Issachar's, who rejoiced in his tent; and, his talent lying this way, he
was fittest to be employed in this work. God gives various gifts for
various services.

(3.) Barnabas was wonderfully pleased to find that the gospel got
ground, and that some of his countrymen, men of Cyprus (of which country
he was, [Act 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036).md) were instrumental
in it ([Act 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#023).md): When he came, and
had seen the grace of God, the tokens of God's good-will to the people
of Antioch and the evidences of his good work among them, he was glad.
He took time to make his observations, and not only in their public
worship, but in their common conversations and in their families, he saw
the grace of God among them. Where the grace of God is it will be seen,
as the tree is known by its fruits; and, where it is seen, it ought to
be owned. What we see which is good in any we must call God's grace in
them, and give that grace the glory of it; and we ought ourselves to
take the comfort of it, and make it the matter of our rejoicing. We must
be glad to see the grace of God in others, and the more when we see it
where we did not expect it.

(4.) He did what he could to fix them, to confirm those in the faith who
were converted to the faith. He exhorted them - parekalei. It is the
same word with that by which the name of Barnabas is interpreted ([Act
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036).md), huios paraklēseōs - a son of
exhortation; his talent lay that way, and he traded with it; let him
that exhorteth attend to exhortation, [Rom
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008.md). Or, being a son of consolation
(for so we render the word), he comforted or encouraged them with
purpose of heart to cleave to the Lord. The more he rejoiced in the
beginning of the good work among them, the more earnest he was with them
to proceed according to these good beginnings. Those we have comfort in
we should exhort. Barnabas was glad for what he saw of the grace of God
among them, and therefore was the more earnest with them to persevere.
\[1.\] To cleave to the Lord. Note, Those that have turned to the Lord
are concerned to cleave unto the Lord, not to fall off from following
him, not to flag and tire in following him. To cleave to the Lord Jesus
is to live a life of dependence upon him and devotedness to him: not
only to hold him fast, but to hold fast by him, to be strong in the Lord
and in the power of his might. \[2.\] To cleave to him with purpose of
heart, with an intelligent, firm, and deliberate resolution, founded
upon good grounds, and fixed upon that foundation, [Psa
108:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001.md). It is to bind our souls with a
bond to be the Lord's, and to say as Ruth, Entreat me not to leave him,
or to return from following after him.

(5.) Herein he gave a proof of his good character ([Act
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#024).md): He was a good man, and full of
the Holy Ghost, and of faith, and approved himself so upon this
occasion. \[1.\] He showed himself to be a man of a very sweet, affable,
courteous disposition, that had himself the art of obliging, and could
teach others. He was not only a righteous man, but a good man, a
good-tempered man. Ministers that are so recommend themselves and their
doctrine very much to the good opinion of those that are without. He was
a good man, that is, a charitable man; so he had approved himself, when
he sold an estate, and gave the money to the poor, [Act
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#037.md). \[2.\] By this it appeared that
he was richly endued with the gifts and graces of the Spirit. The
goodness of his natural disposition would not have qualified him for
this service if he had not been full of the Holy Ghost, and so full of
power by the Spirit of the Lord. \[3.\] He was full of faith, full of
the Christian faith himself, and therefore desirous to propagate it
among others; full of the grace of faith, and full of the fruits of that
faith that works by love. He was sound in the faith, and therefore
pressed them to be so.

(6.) He was instrumental to do good, by bringing in those that were
without, as well as by building up those that were within: Much people
were added to the Lord, and thereby added to the church; many were
turned to the Lord before, yet more are to be turned; it is done as thou
hast commanded, and yet there is room.

2\. Barnabas went to fetch Saul, to join with him in the work of the
gospel at Antioch. The last news we heard of him was that, when his life
was sought at Jerusalem, he was sent away to Tarsus, the city where he
was born, and, it should seem, he continued there ever since, doing
good, no doubt. But now Barnabas takes a journey to Tarsus on purpose to
see what had become of him, to tell him what a door of opportunity was
opened at Antioch, and to desire him to come and spend some time with
him there, [Act 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#025.md), [Act
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026.md). And here also it appears that
Barnabas was a good sort of a man in two things - (1.) That he would
take so much pains to bring an active useful man out of obscurity. It
was he that introduced Saul to the disciples at Jerusalem, when they
were shy of him; and it was he that brought him out of the corner into
which he was driven, into a more public station. It is a very good work
to fetch a candle from under a bushel, and to set it in a candlestick.
(2.) That he would bring in Saul at Antioch, who, being a chief speaker
([Act 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#012).md), and probably a more
popular preacher, would be likely to eclipse him there, by outshining
him; but Barnabas is very willing to be eclipsed when it is for the
public service. If God by his grace inclines us to do what good we can,
according to the ability we have, we ought to rejoice if others that
have also larger capacities have larger opportunities, and do more good
than we can do. Barnabas brought Saul to Antioch, though it might be the
lessening of himself, to teach us to seek the things of Christ more than
our own things.

3\. We are here further told,

(1.) What service was now done to the church at Antioch. Paul and
Barnabas continued there a whole year, presiding in their religious
assemblies, and preaching the gospel, [Act
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026.md). Observe, \[1.\] The church
frequently assembled. The religious assemblies of Christians are
appointed by Christ for his honour, and the comfort and benefit of his
disciples. God's people of old frequently came together, at the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation; places of meeting are now
multiplied, but they must come together, though it be with difficulty
and peril. \[2.\] Ministers were the masters of those assemblies, and
held those courts in Christ's name to which all that hold by, fRom. and
under him, owe suit and service. \[3.\] Teaching the people is one part
of the work of ministers, when they preside in religious assemblies.
They are not only to be the people's mouth to God in prayer and praise,
but God's mouth to the people in opening the scriptures, and teaching
out of them the good knowledge of the Lord. \[4.\] It is a great
encouragement to ministers when they have opportunity of teaching much
people, of casting the net of the gospel where there is a large shoal of
fish, in hopes that the more may be enclosed. \[5.\] Preaching is not
only for the conviction and conversion of those that are without, but
for the instruction and edification of those that are within. A
constituted church must have its teachers.

(2.) What honour was now put upon the church at Antioch: There the
disciples were first called Christians; it is probable they called
themselves so, incorporated themselves by that title, whether by some
solemn act of the church or ministers, or whether this name insensibly
obtained there by its being frequently used in their praying and
preaching, we are not told; but it should seem that two such great men
as Paul and Barnabas continuing there so long, being exceedingly
followed, and meeting with no opposition, Christian assemblies made a
greater figure there than any where, and became more considerable, which
was the reason of their being called Christians first there, which, if
there were to be a mother-church to rule over all other churches, would
give Antioch a better title to the honour than Rome can pretend to.
Hitherto those who gave up their names to Christ were called disciples,
learners, scholars, trained up under him, in order to their being
employed by him; but henceforward they were called Christians. \[1.\]
Thus the reproachful names which their enemies had hitherto branded them
with would, perhaps, be superseded and disused. They called them
Nazarenes ([Act 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#005).md), the men of that
way, that by-way, which had no name; and thus they prejudiced people
against them. To remove the prejudice, they gave themselves a name which
their enemies could not but say was proper. \[2.\] Thus those who before
their conversion had been distinguished by the names of Jews and
Gentiles might after their conversion be called by one and the same
name, which would help them to forget their former dividing names, and
prevent their bringing their former marks of distinction, and with them
the seeds of contention, into the church. Let not one say, "I was a
Jew;" nor the other, "I was a Gentile;" when both the one and the other
must now say, "I am a Christian." \[3.\] Thus they studied to do honour
to their Master, and showed that they were not ashamed to own their
relation to him, but gloried in it; as the scholars of Plato called
themselves Platonists, and so the scholars of other great men. They took
their denomination not from the name of his person, Jesus, but of his
office, Christ - anointed, so putting their creed into their names, that
Jesus is the Christ; and they were willing all the world should know
that this is the truth they will live and die by. Their enemies will
turn this name to their reproach, and impute it to them as their crime,
but they will glory in it: If this be to be vile, I will be yet more
vile. \[4.\] Thus they now owned their dependence upon Christ, and their
receivings from him; not only that they believed in him who is the
anointed, but that through him they themselves had the anointing, [Jo1
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020.md), [Jo1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027.md). And God is said to have anointed
us in Christ, [Co2 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#021.md). \[5.\] Thus
they laid upon themselves, and all that should ever profess that name, a
strong and lasting obligation to submit to the laws of Christ, to follow
the example of Christ, and to devote themselves entirely to the honour
of Christ - to be to him for a name and a praise. Are we Christians?
Then we ought to think, and speak, and act, in every thing as becomes
Christians, and to do nothing to the reproach of that worthy name by
which we are called; that that may not be said to us which Alexander
said to a soldier of his own name that was noted for a coward, Aut
nomen, aut mores muta - Either change thy name or mend thy manners. And
as we must look upon ourselves as Christians, and carry ourselves
accordingly, so we must look upon others as Christians, and carry
ourselves towards them accordingly. A Christian, though not in every
thing of our mind, should be loved and respected for his sake whose name
he bears, because he belongs to Christ. \[6.\] Thus the scripture was
fulfilled, for so it was written ([Isa
62:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#002).md) concerning the gospel-church,
Thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall
name. And it is said to the corrupt and degenerate church of the Jews,
The Lord God shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name,
[Isa 65:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#015.md).

[Acts 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 11:27</span></span>

When our Lord Jesus ascended on high he gave gifts unto men, not only
apostles and evangelists, but prophets, who were enabled by the Spirit
to foresee and foretel things to come, which not only served for a
confirmation of the truth of Christianity (for all that these prophets
foretold came to pass, which proved that they were sent of God, [Deu
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#022.md); [Jer
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#009).md), but was also of great use to
the church, and served very much for its guidance. Now here we have,

I. A visit which some of these prophets made to Antioch ([Act
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#027).md): In these days, during that
year that Barnabas and Saul lived at Antioch, there came prophets from
Jerusalem to Antioch: we are not told how many, nor is it certain
whether these were any of those prophets that we afterwards find in the
church at Antioch, [Act 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001.md). 1. They
came from Jerusalem, probably because they were not now so much regarded
there as they had been; they saw their work in a manner done there, and
therefore thought it time to be gone. Jerusalem had been infamous for
killing the prophets and abusing them, and therefore is now justly
deprived of these prophets. 2. They came to Antioch, because they heard
of the flourishing state of that church, and there they hoped they might
be of some service. Thus should every one as he hath received the gift
minister the same. Barnabas came to exhort them, and they, having
received the exhortation well, now have prophets sent them to show them
things to come, as Christ had promised, [Joh
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013.md). Those that are faithful in
their little shall be entrusted with more. The best understanding of
scripture-predictions is to be got in the way of obedience to
scripture-instructions.

II\. A particular prediction of a famine approaching, delivered by one
of these prophets, his name Agabus; we read of him again prophesying
Paul's imprisonment, [Act 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#010.md), [Act
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#011.md). Here he stood up, probably in
one of their public assemblies, and prophesied, [Act
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028.md). Observe, 1. Whence he had his
prophecy. What he said was not of himself, nor a fancy of his own, nor
an astronomical prediction, nor a conjecture upon the present workings
of second causes, but he signified it by the Spirit, the Spirit of
prophecy, that there should be a famine; as Joseph, by the Spirit
enabling him, understood Pharaoh's dreams, foretold the famine in Egypt,
and Elijah the famine in Israel in Ahab's time. Thus God revealed his
secrets to his servants the prophets. 2. What the prophecy was: There
should be great dearth throughout all the world, by unseasonable
weather, that corn should be scarce and dear, so that many of the poor
should perish for want of bread. This should be not in one particular
country, but through all the world, that is, all the Roman empire, which
they in their pride, like Alexander before them, called the world.
Christ had foretold in general that there should be famines ([Mat
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#007.md); [Mar
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#008.md); [Luk
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#011).md); but Agabus foretels one very
remarkable famine now at hand. 3. The accomplishment of it: It came to
pass in the days of Claudius Caesar; it began in the second year of his
reign, and continued to the fourth, if not longer. Several of the Roman
historians make mention of it, as does also Josephus. God sent them the
bread of life, and they rejected it, loathed the plenty of that manna;
and therefore God justly broke the staff of bread, and punished them
with famine; and herein he was righteous. They were barren, and did not
bring forth to God, and therefore God made the earth barren to them.

III\. The good use they made of this prediction. When they were told of
a famine at hand, they did not do as the Egyptians, hoard up corn for
themselves; but, as became Christians, laid by for charity to relieve
others, which is the best preparative for our own sufferings and want.
It is promised to those that consider the poor that God will preserve
them, and keep them alive, and they shall be blessed upon the earth,
[Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md), [Psa
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002.md). And those who show mercy, and
give to the poor, shall not be ashamed in the evil time, but in the days
of famine they shall be satisfied, [Psa
37:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#019.md), [Psa
37:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#021.md). The best provision we can lay
up against a dear time is to lay up an interest in these promises, by
doing good, and communicating, [Luk
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#033.md). Many give it as a reason why
they should be sparing, but the scripture gives it as a reason why we
should be liberal, to seven, and also to eight, because we know not what
evil shall be upon the earth, [Ecc
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#002.md). Observe,

1\. What they determined - that every man, according to his ability,
should send relief to the brethren that dwelt in Judea, [Act
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029). (1..md) The persons that were
recommended to them as objects for charity were the brethren that dwelt
in Judea. Though we must, as we have opportunity, do good to all men,
yet we must have a special regard to the household of faith, [Gal
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010.md). No poor must be neglected, but
God's poor most particularly regarded. The care which every particular
church ought to take of their own poor we were taught by the early
instance of that in the church at Jerusalem, where the ministration was
so constant that none lacked, [Act
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#034.md). But the communion of saints in
that instance is here extended further, and provision is made by the
church at Antioch for the relief of the poor in Judea, whom they call
their brethren. It seems it was the custom of the Jews of the dispersion
to send money to those Jews who dwelt in Judea, for the relief of the
poor that were among them, and to make collections for that purpose
(Tully speaks of such a thing in his time, Orat. pro Flacco), which
supposes there were many poor in Judea, more than in other countries, so
that the rich among them were not able to bear the charge of keeping
them from starving; either because their land had become barren, though
it had been a fruitful land, for the iniquity of those that dwelt
therein, or because they had no traffic with other nations. Now we may
suppose that the greatest part of those who turned Christians in that
country were the poor ([Mat 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005.md), The
poor are evangelized), and also that when the poor turned Christians
they were put out of the poor's book, and cut off from their shares in
the public charity; and it were easy to foresee that if there came a
famine it would go very hard with them; and, if any of them should
perish for want, it would be a great reproach to the Christian
profession; and therefore this early care was taken, upon notice of this
famine coming, to send them a stock beforehand, lest, if it should be
deferred till the famine came, it should be too late. (2.) The agreement
there was among the disciples about it, that every man should
contribute, according to his ability, to this good work. The Jews
abroad, in other countries, grew rich by trade, and many of the rich
Jews became Christians, whose abundance ought to be a supply to the want
of their poor brethren that were at a great distance; for the case of
such ought to be considered, and not theirs only that live among us.
Charitable people are traders with what God has given them, and the
merchants find their account in sending effects to countries that lie
very remote; and so should we in giving alms to those afar off that need
them, which therefore we should be forward to do when we are called to
it. Every man determined to send something, more or less, according to
his ability, what he could spare from the support of himself and his
family, and according as God had prospered him. What may be said to be
according to our ability we must judge for ourselves, but must be
careful that we judge righteous judgment.

2\. What they did - they did as they determined ([Act
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030).md). Which also they did. They not
only talked of it, but they did it. Many a good motion of that kind is
made and commended, but is not prosecuted, and so comes to nothing. But
this was pursued, the collection was made, and was so considerable that
they thought it worth while to send Barnabas and Saul to Jerusalem, to
carry it to the elders there, though they would want their labours in
the mean time at Antioch. They sent it, (1.) To the elders, the
presbyters, the ministers or pastors, of the churches in Judea, to be by
them distributed according to the necessity of the receivers, as it had
been contributed according to the ability of the givers. (2.) It was
sent by Barnabas and Saul, who perhaps wanted an occasion to go to
Jerusalem, and therefore were willing to take this. Josephus tells us
that at this time king Irates sent his charity to the chief men of
Jerusalem, for the poor of that country; and Helena, queen of the
Adiabeni, being now at Jerusalem, and hearing of many that died of
famine there, and in the country about, sent for provisions from Cyprus
and Alexandria, and distributed them among the people; so says Dr.
Lightfoot, who also computes, by the date of Paul's rapture, "fourteen
years before he wrote the second Epistle to the Corinthians" ([Co2
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001.md), [Co2
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002).md), that it was in this journey of
his to Jerusalem, with these alms and offerings, that he had his trance
in the temple (which he speaks of, [Act
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#017).md), and in that trance was rapt up
into the third heaven; and then it was that Christ told him he would
send him thence unto the Gentiles, which accordingly he did as soon as
ever he came back to Antioch. It is no disparagement, in an
extraordinary case, for ministers of the gospel to be messengers of the
church's charity, though to undertake the constant care of that matter
would ordinarily be too great a diversion from more needful work to
those who have given themselves to prayer and the ministry of the word.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 12](act012.md)

</div>
