<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act014)  [Next](act016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 15:0</span></span>

Hitherto we have, with a great deal of pleasure, attended the apostles
in their glorious travels for the propagating of the gospel in foreign
parts, have seen the bounds of the church enlarged by the accession both
of Jews and Gentiles to it; and thanks be to that God who always caused
them to triumph. We left them, in the close of the foregoing chapter,
reposing themselves at Antioch, and edifying the church there with the
rehearsal of their experiences, and it is a pity they should ever be
otherwise employed; but in this chapter we find other work (not so
pleasant) cut out for them. The Christians and ministers are engaged in
controversy, and those that should have been now busied in enlarging the
dominions of the church have as much as they can do to compose the
divisions of it; when they should have been making war upon the devil's
kingdom they have much ado to keep the peace in Christ's kingdom. Yet
this occurrence and the record of it are of great use to the church,
both for warning to us to expect such unhappy discords among Christians,
and direction to us what method to take for accommodating them. Here is,
I. A controversy raised at Antioch by the judaizing teachers, who would
have the believing Gentiles brought under the yoke of circumcision and
the ceremonial law ([Act 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001), [Act
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)). II. A consultation held with
the church at Jerusalem about this matter, and the sending of delegates
thither for that purpose, which occasioned the starting of the same
question there ([Act 15:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#003)). III. An
account of what passed in the synod that was convened upon this occasion
([Act 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#006)). What Peter said ([Act
15:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007)). What Paul and Barnabas
discoursed of ([Act 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#012)). And,
lastly, what James proposed for the settling of this matter ([Act
15:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#013)). IV. The result of this
debate, and the circular letter that was written to the Gentile
converts, directing them how to govern themselves with respect to Jews
([Act 15:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022)). V. The delivering of
this determination to the church at Antioch, and the satisfaction it
gave them ([Act 15:30-35](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#030)). VI. A
second expedition designed by Paul and Barnabas to preach to the
Gentiles, in which they quarrelled about their assistant, and separated
upon it, one steering one course and the other another ([Act
15:36-41](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036)).

[Acts 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 15:1</span></span>

Even when things go on very smoothly and pleasantly in a state or in a
church, it is folly to be secure, and to think the mountain stands
strong and cannot be moved; some uneasiness or other will arise, which
is not foreseen, cannot be prevented, but must be prepared for. If ever
there was a heaven upon earth, surely it was in the church at Antioch at
this time, when there were so many excellent ministers there, and
blessed Paul among them, building up that church in her most holy faith.
But here we have their peace disturbed, and differences arising. Here
is,

I. A new doctrine started among them, which occasioned this division,
obliging the Gentile converts to submit to circumcision and the
ceremonial law, [Act 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001). Many that
had been proselytes to the Jewish religion became Christians; and they
would have such as were proselyted to the Christian religion to become
Jews.

1\. The persons that urged this were certain men who came down from
Judea; some think such as had been of the Pharisees ([Act
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005)), or perhaps of those priests who
were obedient to the faith, [Act 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007).
They came from Judea, pretending perhaps to be sent by the apostles at
Jerusalem, at least to be countenanced by them. Having a design to
spread their notions, they came to Antioch, because that was the
head-quarters of those that preached to the Gentiles, and the rendezvous
of the Gentile converts; and, if they could but make an interest there,
this leaven would soon be diffused to all the churches of the Gentiles.
They insinuated themselves into an acquaintance with the brethren,
pretended to be very glad that they had embraced the Christian faith,
and congratulated them on their conversion; but tell them that yet one
thing they lack, they must be circumcised. Note, Those that are ever so
well taught have need to stand upon their guard that they be not
untaught again, or ill taught.

2\. The position they laid down, the thesis they gave, was this, that
except the Gentiles who turned Christians were circumcised after the
manner of Moses, and thereby bound themselves to all the observances of
the ceremonial law, they could not be saved. As to this, (1.) Many of
the Jews who embraced the faith of Christ, yet continued very zealous
for the law, [Act 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#020). They knew it
was from God and its authority was sacred, valued it for its antiquity,
had been bred up in the observance of it, and it is probable had been
often devoutly affected in their attendance on these observances; they
therefore kept them up after they were by baptism admitted into the
Christian church, kept up the distinction of meats, and used the
ceremonial purifyings from ceremonial pollutions, attend the temple
service, and celebrated the feasts of the Jews. Herein they were
connived at, because the prejudices of education are not to be overcome
all at once, and in a few years the mistake would be effectually
rectified by the destruction of the temple and the total dissolution of
the Jewish church, by which the observance of the Mosaic ritual would
become utterly impracticable. But it did not suffice them that they were
herein indulged themselves, they must have the Gentile converts brought
under the same obligations. Note, There is a strange proneness in us to
make our opinion and practice a rule and a law to every body else, to
judge of all about us by our standard, and to conclude that because we
do well all do wrong that do not just as we do. (2.) Those Jews who
believed that Christ was the Messiah, as they could not get clear of
their affection to the law, so they could not get clear of the notions
they had of the Messiah, that he should set up a temporal kingdom in
favour of the Jewish nation, should make this illustrious and
victorious; it was a disappointment to them that there was as yet
nothing done towards this in the way they expected. But now that they
hear the doctrine of Christ is received among the Gentiles, and his
kingdom begins to be set up in the midst of them, if they can but
persuade those that embrace Christ to embrace the law of Moses too they
hope their point will be gained, the Jewish nation will be made as
considerable as they can wish, though in another way; and "Therefore by
all means let the brethren be pressed to be circumcised and keep the
law, and then with our religion our dominion will be extended, and we
shall in a little time be able to shake off the Roman yoke; and not only
so, but to put it on the necks of our neighbours, and so shall have such
a kingdom of the Messiah as we promised ourselves." Note, It is no
wonder if those who have wrong notions of the kingdom of Christ take
wrong measures for the advancement of it, and such as really tend to the
destruction of it, as these do. (3.) The controversy about the
circumcising of the Gentile proselytes had been on foot among the Jews
long before this. This is observed by Dr. Whitby out of Josephus -
Antiq. 20.38-45: "That when Izates, the son of Helen queen of Adiabene,
embraced the Jews' religion, Ananias declared he might do it without
circumcision; but Eleazar maintained that it was a great impiety to
remain uncircumcised." And when two eminent Gentiles fled to Josephus
(as he relates in the history of his own life) "the zealots among the
Jews were urgent for their circumcision; but Josephus dissuaded them
from insisting upon it." Such has been the difference in all ages
between bigotry and moderation. (4.) It is observable what a mighty
stress they laid upon it; they do not only say, "You ought to be
circumcised after the manner of Moses, and it will be good service to
the kingdom of the Messiah if you be; it will best accommodate matters
between you and the Jewish converts, and we shall take it very kindly if
you will, and shall converse the more familiarly with you;" but, "Except
you be circumcised you cannot be saved. If you be not herein of our mind
and way, you will never go to heaven, and therefore of course you must
go to hell." Note, it is common for proud impostors to enforce their own
inventions under pain of damnation; and to tell people that unless they
believe just as they would have them believe, and do just as they would
have them do, they cannot be saved, it is impossible they should; not
only their case is hazardous, but it is desperate. Thus the Jews tell
their brethren that except they be of their church, and come into their
communion, and conform to the ceremonies of their worship, though
otherwise good men and believers in Christ, yet they cannot be saved;
salvation itself cannot save them. None are in Christ but those that are
within their pale. We ought to see ourselves well warranted by the word
of God before we say, "Except you do so and so, you cannot be saved."

II\. The opposition which Paul and Barnabas gave to this schismatical
notion, which engrossed salvation to the Jews, now that Christ has
opened the door of salvation to the Gentiles ([Act
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)): They had no small dissension
and disputation with them. They would by no means yield to this
doctrine, but appeared and argued publicly against it. 1. As faithful
servants of Christ, they would not see his truths betrayed. They knew
that Christ came to free us from the yoke of the ceremonial law, and to
take down that wall of partition between Jews and Gentiles and unite
them both in himself; and therefore could not bear to hear of
circumcising the Gentile converts, when their instructions were only to
baptize them. The Jews would unite with the Gentiles, that is, they
would have them to conform in every thing to their rites, and then, and
not till then they will look upon them as their brethren; and no thanks
to them. But, this not being the way in which Christ designed to unite
them, it is not to be admitted. 2. As spiritual fathers to the Gentile
converts, they would not see their liberties encroached upon. They had
told the Gentiles that if they believed in Jesus Christ they should be
saved; and now to be told that this was not enough to save them, except
they were circumcised and kept the law of Moses, this was such a
discouragement to them at setting out, and would be such a
stumbling-block in their way, as might almost tempt them to think of
returning into Egypt again; and therefore the apostles set themselves
against it.

III\. The expedient pitched upon for preventing the mischief of this
dangerous notion, and silencing those that vented it, as well as
quieting the minds of the people with reference to it. They determined
that Paul and Barnabas, and some others of their number, should go to
Jerusalem to the apostles and elders, concerning this doubt. Not that
the church at Antioch had any doubt concerning it: they knew the liberty
wherewith Christ had made them free; but they sent the case to
Jerusalem, 1. Because those who taught this doctrine came from
Jerusalem, and pretended to have directions from the apostles there to
urge circumcision upon the Gentile converts; it was therefore very
proper to send to Jerusalem about it, to know if they had any such
direction from the church there. And it was soon found to be all wrong,
which yet pretended to be of apostolical right. It was true that these
went out from them ([Act 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#024)), but
they never had any such orders from them. 2. Because those who were
taught this doctrine would be the better confirmed in their opposition
to it, and in the less danger of being shocked and disturbed by it, if
they were sure that the apostles and elders at Jerusalem (which was the
Christian church that of all others retained the most affection to the
law of Moses) were against it; and, if they could but have this under
their hands, it would be the likeliest means to silence and shame these
incendiaries, who had pretended to have it from them. 3. Because the
apostles at Jerusalem were fittest to be consulted in a point not yet
fully settled; and being most eminent for an infallible spirit, peculiar
to them as apostles, their decision would be likely to end the
controversy. It was owing to the subtlety and malice of the great enemy
of the church's peace (as it appears by Paul's frequent complaints of
these judaizing teachers, these false apostles, these deceitful workers,
these enemies of the cross of Christ), that it had not this effect.

IV\. Their journey to Jerusalem upon this errand, [Act
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#003). Where we find, 1. That they were
honoured at parting: They were brought on their way by the church, which
was then much used as a token of respect to useful men, and is directed
to be done after a godly sort, [Jo3
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#006). Thus the church showed their
favour to those who witnessed against these encroachments on the
liberties of the Gentile converts, and stood up for them. 2. That they
did good as they went along. They were men that would not lose time, and
therefore visited the churches by the way; they passed through Phenice
and Samaria, and as they went declared the conversion of the Gentiles,
and what wonderful success the gospel had had among them, which caused
great joy to all the brethren. Note, The progress of the gospel is and
ought to be a matter of great joy. All the brethren, the faithful
brethren in Christ's family, rejoice when more are born into the family;
for the family will be never the poorer for the multitude of its
children. In Christ and heaven there is portion enough, and inheritance
enough for them all.

V. Their hearty welcome at Jerusalem, [Act
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004). 1. The good entertainment their
friends gave them: They were received of the church, and of the apostles
and elders, were embraced as brethren, and had audience as messengers of
the church at Antioch; they received them with all possible expressions
of love and friendship. 2. The good entertainment they gave their
friends: They declared all things that God had done with them, gave them
an account of the success of their ministry among the Gentiles, not what
they had done, but what God had done with them, what he had by his grace
in them enabled them to do, and what he had by his grace in their
hearers enabled them to receive. As they went they had planted, as they
came back they had watered; but in both they were ready to own it was
God that gave the increase. Note, It is a great honour to be employed
for God, to be workers for him; for those that are so have him a worker
with them, and he must have all the glory.

VI\. The opposition they met with from the same party at Jerusalem, [Act
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005). When Barnabas and Paul gave an
account of the multitude of the Gentiles, and of the great harvest of
souls gathered in to Christ there, and all about them congratulated them
upon it, there rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees, who
received the tidings very coldly, and, though they believed in Christ,
yet were not satisfied in the admission of these converts, but thought
it was needful to circumcise them. Observe here, 1. That those who have
been most prejudiced against the gospel yet have been captivated by it;
so mighty has it been through God to the pulling down of strong-holds.
When Christ was here upon earth, few or none of the rulers and of the
Pharisees believed on him; but now there are those of the sect of the
Pharisees who believed, and many of them, we hope, in sincerity. 2. That
it is very hard for men suddenly to get clear of their prejudices: those
that had been Pharisees, even after they became Christians, retained
some of the old leaven. All did not so, witness Paul, but some did; and
they had such a jealousy for the ceremonial law, and such a dislike of
the Gentiles, that they could not admit the Gentiles into communion with
them, unless they would be circumcised, and thereby engage themselves to
keep the law of Moses. This was, in their opinion, needful; and for
their parts they would not converse with them unless they submitted to
it.

[Acts 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 15:6</span></span>

We have here a council called, not by writ, but by consent, on this
occasion ([Act 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#006)): The apostles and
presbyters came together, to consider this matter. They did not give
their judgment separately, but came together to do it, that they might
hear one another's sense in this matter; for in the multitude of
counsellors there is safety and satisfaction. They did not give their
judgment rashly, but considered of this matter. Though they were clear
concerning it in their own minds, yet they would take time to consider
of it, and to hear what might be said by the adverse party. Nor did the
apostles give their judgment concerning it without the elders, the
inferior ministers, to whom they thus condescended, and on whom they
thus put an honour. Those that are most eminent in gifts and graces, and
are in the most exalted stations in the church, ought to show respect to
their juniors and inferiors; for, though days should speak, yet there is
a spirit in man, [Job 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#007), [Job
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#008). Here is a direction to the
pastors of the churches, when difficulties arise, to come together in
solemn meetings for mutual advice and encouragement, that they may know
one another's mind, and strengthen one another's hands, and may act in
concert. Now here we have,

I. Peter's speech in this synod. He did not in the least pretend to any
primacy or headship in this synod. He was not master of this assembly,
nor so much as chairman or moderator, pro hac vice - on this occasion;
for we do not find that either he spoke first, to open the synod (there
having been much disputing before he rose up), nor that he spoke last,
to sum up the cause and collect the suffrages; but he was a faithful,
prudent zealous member of this assembly, and offered that which was very
much to the purpose, and which would come better from him than from
another, because he had himself been the first that preached the gospel
to the Gentiles. There had been much disputing, pro and con, upon this
question, and liberty of speech allowed, as ought to be in such cases;
those of the sect of the Pharisees were some of them present, and
allowed to say what they could in defence of those of their opinion at
Antioch, which probably was answered by some of the elders; such
questions ought to be fairly disputed before they are decided. When both
sides had been heard, Peter rose up, and addressed himself to the
assembly, Men and brethren, as did James afterwards, [Act
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#013). And here,

1\. He put them in mind of the call and commission he had some time ago
to preach the gospel to the Gentiles; he wondered there should be any
difficulty made of a matter already settled: You know that aph' hēmerōn
archaiōn - from the beginning of the days of the gospel, many years ago,
God made choice among us apostles of one to preach the gospel to the
Gentiles, and I was the person chosen, that the Gentiles by my mouth
should hear the word, and believe, [Act
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007). You know I was questioned about
it and cleared myself to the universal satisfaction; every body rejoiced
that God had granted to the Gentiles repentance unto life, and nobody
said a word of circumcising them, nor was there any thought of such a
thing. See [Act 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#018). "Why should the
Gentiles who hear the word of the gospel by Paul's mouth be compelled to
submit to circumcision, any more than those that heard it by my mouth?
Or why should the terms of their admission now be made harder than they
were then?"

2\. He puts them in mind how remarkably God owned him in preaching to
the Gentiles, and gave testimony to their sincerity in embracing the
Christian faith ([Act 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#008)): "God, who
knows the hearts, and therefore is able to judge infallibly of men, bore
them witness that they were his indeed, by giving them the Holy Ghost;
not only the graces and comforts, but the extraordinary miraculous gifts
of the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us apostles." See [Act
11:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#015). Note, The Lord knows those
that are his, for he knows men's hearts; and we are as our hearts are.
Those to whom God gives the Holy Ghost, he thereby bears witness to that
they are his; hence we are said to be sealed with that Holy Spirit of
promise - marked for God. God had bidden the Gentiles welcome to the
privilege of communion with him, without requiring them to be
circumcised and to keep the law; and therefore shall not we admit them
into communion with us but upon those terms? "God has put no difference
between us and them ([Act 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009)); they,
though Gentiles, are as welcome to the grace of Christ and the throne of
grace as we Jews are; why then should we set them at a distance, as if
we were holier than they?" [Isa 65:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005).
Note, We ought not to make any conditions of our brethren's acceptance
with us but such as God has made the conditions of their acceptance with
him, [Rom 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003). Now the Gentiles were
fitted for communion with God, in having their hearts purified by faith,
and that faith God's own work in them; and therefore why should we think
them unfit for communion with us, unless they will submit to the
ceremonial purifying enjoined by the law to us? Note, (1.) By faith the
heart is purified; we are not only justified, and conscience purified,
but the work of sanctification is begun and carried on. (2.) Those that
have their hearts purified by faith are therein made so nearly to
resemble one another, that, whatever difference there may be between
them, no account is to be made of it; for the faith of all the saints is
alike precious, and has like precious effects ([Pe2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001)), and those that by it are united
to Christ are so to look upon themselves as joined to one another as
that all distinctions, even that between Jew and Gentile, are merged and
swallowed up in it.

3\. He sharply reproves those teachers (some of whom, it is likely, were
present) who went about to bring the Gentiles under the obligation of
the law of Moses, [Act 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010). The
thing is so plain that he cannot forbear speaking of it with some
warmth: "Now therefore, since God has owned them for his, why tempt you
God to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, of the believing
Gentiles and their children" (for circumcision was a yoke upon their
infant seed, who are here reckoned among the disciples), "a yoke which
neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?" Here he shows that in
this attempt, (1.) They offered a very great affront to God: "You tempt
him, by calling that in question which he has already settled and
determined by no less an indication than that of the gift of the Holy
Ghost; you do, in effect, ask, 'Did he know what he did? Or was he in
earnest in it? Or will he abide by his own act?' Will you try whether
God, who designed the ceremonial law for the people of the Jews only,
will now, in its last ages, bring the Gentiles too under the obligation
of it, to gratify you?" Those tempt God who prescribe to him, and say
that people cannot be saved but upon such and such terms, which God
never appointed; as if the God of salvation must come into their
measures. (2.) They offered a very great wrong to the disciples: Christ
came to proclaim liberty to the captives, and they go about to enslave
those whom he has made free. See [Neh
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#008). The ceremonial law was a heavy
yoke; they and their fathers found it difficult to be borne, so
numerous, so various, so pompous, were the institutions of it. The
distinction of meats was a heavy yoke, not only as it rendered
conversation less pleasant, but as it embarrassed conscience with
endless scruples. The ado that was made about even unavoidable touch of
a grave or a dead body, the pollution contracted by it, and the many
rules about purifying from that pollution, were a heavy burden. This
yoke Christ came to ease us of, and called those that were weary and
heavy laden under it to come and take his yoke upon them, his easy yoke.
Now for these teachers to go about to lay that yoke upon the neck of the
Gentiles from which he came to free even the Jews was the greatest
injury imaginable to them.

4\. Whereas the Jewish teachers had urged that circumcision was
necessary to salvation, Peter shows it was so far from being so that
both Jews and Gentiles were to be saved purely through the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and in no other way ([Act
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#011)): We believe to be saved through
that grace only; pisteuomen sōthēnai - We hope to be saved; or, We
believe unto salvation in the same manner as they - kath' hon tropon
kakeinoi̇ "We that are circumcised believe to salvation, and so do those
that are uncircumcised; and, as our circumcision will be no advantage to
us, so their uncircumcision will be no disadvantage to them; for we must
depend upon the grace of Christ for salvation, and must apply that grace
by faith, as well as they. There is not one way of salvation for the
Jews and another for the Gentiles; neither circumcision avails any thing
nor uncircumcision (that is neither here nor there), but faith which
works by love, [Gal 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006). Why should we
burden them with the law of Moses, as necessary to their salvation, when
it is not that, but the gospel of Christ, that is necessary both to our
salvation and theirs?"

II\. An account of what Barnabas and Paul said in this synod, which did
not need to be related, for they only gave in a narrative of what was
recorded in the foregoing chapters, what miracles and wonders God had
wrought among the Gentiles by them, [Act
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#012). This they had given in to the
church at Antioch ([Act 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#027)), to
their brethren by the way ([Act 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#003)),
and now again to the synod; and it was very proper to be given in here.
That which was contended for was that the Gentiles ought to submit to
the law of Moses; now, in opposition to this, Paul and Barnabas
undertake to show, by a plain relation of matters of fact, that God
owned the preaching of the pure gospel to them without the law, and
therefore to press the law upon them now was to undo what God had done.
Observe, 1. What account they gave; they declared, or opened in order,
and with all the magnifying and affecting circumstances, what glorious
miracles, what signs and wonders, God had wrought among the Gentiles by
them, what confirmation he had given to their preaching by miracles
wrought in the kingdom of nature, and what success he had given to it by
miracles wrought in the kingdom of grace. Thus God had honoured these
apostles whom Jewish teachers condemned, and had thus honoured the
Gentiles whom they contemned. What need had they of any other advocate
when God himself pleaded their cause? The conversion of the Gentiles was
itself a wonder, all things considered, no less than a miracle. Now if
they received the Holy Ghost by the hearing of faith, why should they be
embarrassed with the works of the law? See [Gal
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#002). 2. What attention was given to
them: All the multitude (who, though they had not voted, yet came
together to hear what was said) kept silence, and gave audience to Paul
and Barnabas; it should seem they took more notice of their narrative
than they did of all the arguments that were offered. As in natural
philosophy and medicine nothing is so satisfactory as experiments, and
in law nothing is so satisfactory as cases adjudged, so in the things of
God the best explication of the word of grace is the accounts given of
the operations of the Spirit of grace; to these the multitude will with
silence give audience. Those that fear God will most readily hear those
that can tell them what God has done for their souls, or by their means,
[Psa 66:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#016).

III\. The speech which James made to the synod. He did not interrupt
Paul and Barnabas, though, it is likely, he had before heard their
narrative, but let them go on with it, for the edification of the
company, and that they might have it from the first and best hand; but,
after they had held their peace, then James stood up. You may all
prophesy one by one, [Co1 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#031). God
is the God of order. He let Paul and Barnabas say what they had to say,
and then he made the application of it. The hearing of variety of
ministers may be of use when one truth does not drive out, but clench,
another.

1\. He addresses himself respectfully to those present: "Men and
brethren, hearken unto me. You are men, and therefore, it is to be
hoped, will hear reason; you are my brethren, and therefore will hear me
with candour. We are all brethren, and equally concerned in this cause
that nothing be done to the dishonour of Christ and the uneasiness of
Christians."

2\. He refers to what Peter had said concerning the conversion of the
Gentiles ([Act 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#014)): "Simeon" (that
is, Simon Peter) "hath declared, and opened the matter to you - how God
at the first did visit the Gentiles, in Cornelius and his friends, who
were the first-fruits of the Gentiles-how, when the gospel began first
to spread, presently the Gentiles were invited to come and take the
benefit of it;" and James observes here, (1.) That the grace of God was
the origin of it; it was God that visited the Gentiles; and it was a
kind visit. Had they been left to themselves, they would never have
visited him, but the acquaintance began on his part; he not only visited
and redeemed his people, but visited and redeemed those that were lo
ammi - not a people. (2.) that the glory of God was the end of it: it
was to take out of them a people for his name, who should glorify him,
and in whom he would be glorified. As of old he took the Jews, so now
the Gentiles, to be to him for a name, and for a praise, and for a
glory, [Jer 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#011). Let all the people
of God remember that therefore they are thus dignified in God, that God
may be glorified in them.

3\. He confirms this with a quotation out of the Old Testament: he could
not prove the calling of the Gentiles by a vision, as Peter could, nor
by miracles wrought by his hand, as Paul and Barnabas could, but he
would prove that it was foretold in the Old Testament, and therefore it
must be fulfilled, [Act 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#015). To this
agree the words of the prophets; most of the Old Testament prophets
spoke more or less of the calling in of the Gentiles, even Moses
himself, [Rom 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#019). It was the
general expectation of the pious Jews that the Messiah should be a light
to enlighten the Gentiles ([Luk 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#032)):
but James waives the more illustrious prophecies of this, and pitches
upon one that seemed more obscure: It is written, [Amo
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011), [Amo
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#012), where is foretold, (1.) The
setting up of the kingdom of the Messiah ([Act
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#016)): I will raise up the tabernacle
of David, that is fallen. The covenant was made with David and his seed;
but the house and family of David are here called his tabernacle,
because David in his beginning was a shepherd, and dwelt in tents, and
his house, that had been as a stately palace, had become a mean and
despicable tabernacle, reduced in a manner to its small beginning. This
tabernacle was ruined and fallen down; there had not been for many ages
a king of the house of David; the sceptre had departed from Judah, the
royal family was sunk and buried in obscurity, and, as it should seem,
not enquired after. But God will return, and will build it again, raise
it out of its ruins, a phoenix out of its ashes; and this was now lately
fulfilled, when our Lord Jesus was raised out of that family, had the
throne of his father David given him, with a promise that he should
reign over the house of Jacob for ever, [Luk
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032), [Luk
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#033). And, when the tabernacle of
David was thus rebuilt in Christ, all the rest of it was, not many years
after, wholly extirpated and cut off, as was also the nation of the Jews
itself, and all their genealogies were lost. The church of Christ may be
called the tabernacle of David. This may sometimes be brought very low,
and may seem to be in ruins, but it shall be built again, its withering
interests shall revive; it is cast down, but not destroyed: even dry
bones are made to live. (2.) The bringing in of the Gentiles as the
effect and consequence of this ([Act
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#017)): That the residue of men might
seek after the Lord; not the Jews only, who thought they had the
monopoly of the tabernacle of David, but the residue of men, such as had
hitherto been left out of the pale of the visible church; they must now,
upon this re-edifying of the tabernacle of David, be brought to seek
after the Lord, and to enquire how they may obtain his favour. When
David's tabernacle is set up, they shall seek the Lord their God, and
David their king, [Hos 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005); [Jer
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009). Then Israel shall possess the
remnant of Edom (so it is in the Hebrew); but the Jews called all the
Gentiles Edomites, and therefore the Septuagint leave out the particular
mention of Edom, and read it just as it is here, that the residue of men
might seek (James here adds, after the Lord), and all the Gentiles, or
heathen, upon whom my name is called. The Jews were for many ages so
peculiarly favoured that the residue of men seemed neglected; but now
God will have an eye to them, and his name shall be called upon by the
Gentiles; his name shall be declared and published among them, and they
shall be brought both to know his name and to call upon it: they shall
call themselves the people of God, and he shall call them so; and thus,
by consent of both parties, his name is called upon them. This promise
we may depend upon the fulfilling of in its season; and now it begins to
be fulfilled, for it is added, saith the Lord, who doeth this; who doeth
all these things (so the Seventy); and the apostle here: he saith it who
doeth it, who therefore said it because he was determined to do it; and
who therefore does it because he hath said it; for though with us saying
and doing are two things they are not so with God. The uniting of Jews
and Gentiles in one body, and all those things that were done in order
to it, which were here foretold, were, \[1.\] What God did: This was the
Lord's doing, whatever instruments were employed in it: and, \[2.\] It
was what God delighted in, and was well pleased with; for he is the God
of the Gentiles, as well as the Jews, and it is his honour to be rich in
mercy to all that call upon him.

4\. He resolves it into the purpose and counsel of God ([Act
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#018)): Known unto God are all his
works from the beginning of the world. He not only foretold the calling
of the Gentiles many ages ago by the prophets (and therefore it ought
not to be a surprise or stumbling-block to us), but he foresaw and
foreordained it in his eternal counsels, which are unquestionably wise
and unalterably firm. It is an excellent maxim here laid down concerning
all God's works, both of providence and grace, in the natural and
spiritual kingdom, that they were all known unto him from the beginning
of the world, from the time he first began to work, which supposes his
knowing them (as other scriptures speak) from before the foundation of
the world, and therefore from all eternity. Note, Whatever God does, he
did before design and determine to do; for he works all, not only
according to his will, but according to the counsel of his will: he not
only does whatever he determined ([Psa
135:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#006)), which is more than we can do
(our purposes are frequently broken off, and our measures broken), but
he determined whatever he does. Whatever he may say, to prove us, he
himself knows what he will do. We know not our works beforehand, but
must do as occasion shall serve, [Sa1
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#007). What we shall do in such or such
a case we cannot tell till it comes to the setting to; but known unto
God are all his works; in the volume of his book (called the scriptures
of truth, [Dan 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021)) they are all
written in order, without any erasure or interlining ([Psa
40:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#007)); and all God's works will, in
the day of review, be found to agree exactly with his counsels, without
the least error or variation. We are poor short-sighted creatures; the
wisest men can see but a little way before them, and not at all with any
certainty; but this is our comfort, that, whatever uncertainty we are
at, there is an infallible certainty in the divine prescience: known
unto God are all his works.

5\. He gives his advice what was to be done in the present case, as the
matter now stood with reference to the Gentiles ([Act
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#019)): My sentence is; egō krinō - I
give it as my opinion, or judgment; not as having authority over the
rest, but as being an adviser with them. Now his advice is,

(1.) That circumcision and the observance of the ceremonial law be by no
means imposed upon the Gentile converts; no, not so much as recommended
nor mentioned to them. "There are many from among the Gentiles that are
turned to God in Christ, and we hope there will be many more. Now I am
clearly for using them with all possible tenderness, and putting no
manner of hardship or discouragement upon them," mē parenochlein - "not
to give them any molestation nor disturbance, nor suggest any thing to
them that may be disquieting, or raise scruples in their minds, or
perplex them." Note, Great care must be taken not to discourage nor
disquiet young converts with matters of doubtful disputation. Let the
essentials of religion, which an awakened conscience will readily
receive, be first impressed deeply upon them, and these will satisfy
them and make them easy; and let not things foreign and circumstantial
be urged upon them, which will but trouble them. The kingdom of God, in
which they are to be trained up, is not meat and drink, neither the
opposition nor the imposition of indifferent things, which will but
trouble them; but it is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost, which we are sure will trouble nobody.

(2.) That yet it would be well that in some things, which gave most
offence to the Jews, the Gentiles should comply with them. Because they
must not humour them so far as to be circumcised, and keep the whole
law, it does not therefore follow that they must act in a continual
contradiction to them, and study how to provoke them. It will please the
Jews (and, if a little thing will oblige them, better do so than cross
them) if the Gentile converts abstain, \[1.\] From pollutions of idols,
and from fornication, which are two bad things, and always to be
abstained from; but writing to them particularly and expressly to
abstain from them (because in these things the Jews were jealous of the
Gentile converts, lest they should transgress) would very much gratify
the Jews; not but that the apostles, both in preaching and writing to
the Gentiles that embraced Christianity, were careful to warn against,
First, Pollutions of idols, that they should have no manner of
fellowship with idolaters in their idolatrous worships, and particularly
not in the feasts they held upon their sacrifices. See [Co1
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#014), etc.; [Co2
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014), etc. Secondly, Fornication, and
all manner of uncleanness. How large, how pressing, is Paul in his
cautions against this sin! [Co1
6:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009); [Eph
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#003), etc. But the Jews, who were
willing to think the worst of those they did not like, suggested that
these were things in which the Gentiles, even after conversion, allowed
themselves, and the apostle of the Gentiles connived at it. Now, to
obviate this suggestion, and to leave no room for this calumny, James
advises that, besides the private admonitions which were given them by
their ministers, they should be publicly warned to abstain from
pollutions of idols and from fornication - that herein they should be
very circumspect, and should avoid all appearances of these two evils,
which would be in so particular a manner offensive to the Jews. \[2.\]
From things strangled, and from blood, which, though not evil in
themselves, as the other two, nor designed to be always abstained fRom.
as those were, had been forbidden by the precepts of Noah ([Gen
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004).), before the giving of the law of
Moses; and the Jews had a great dislike to them, and to all those that
took a liberty to use them; and therefore, to avoid giving offence, let
the Gentile converts abridge themselves of their liberty herein, [Co1
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#009), [Co1
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#013). Thus we must become all things
to all men.

6\. He gives a reason for his advice - that great respect ought to be
shown to the Jews for they have been so long accustomed to the solemn
injunctions of the ceremonial law that they must be borne with, if they
cannot presently come off from them ([Act
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#021)): For Moses hath of old those
that preach him in every city, his writings (a considerable part of
which is the ceremonial law) being read in the synagogues every sabbath
day. "You cannot blame them if they have a great veneration for the law
of Moses; for besides that they are very sure God spoke to Moses," (1.)
"Moses is continually preached to them, and they are called upon to
remember the law of Moses," [Mal 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004).
Note, Even that word of God which is written to us should also be
preached: those that have the scriptures have still need of ministers to
help them to understand and apply the scriptures. (2.) "His writings are
read in a solemn religious manner, in their synagogues, and on the
sabbath day, in the place and at the time of their meetings for the
worship of God; so that from their childhood they have been trained up
in a regard to the law of Moses; the observance of it is a part of their
religion." (3.) "This has been done of old time; they have received from
their fathers an honour for Moses; they have antiquity for it." (4.)
"This had been done in every city, wherever there are any Jews, so that
none of them can be ignorant what stress that law laid upon these
things: and therefore, though the gospel has set us free from these
things, yet they cannot be blamed if they are loth to part with them,
and cannot of a sudden be persuaded to look upon those things as
needless and indifferent which they, and their fathers before them, had
been so long taught, and taught of God too, to place religion in. We
must therefore give them time, must meet them half-way; they must be
borne with awhile, and brought on gradually, and we must comply with
them as far as we can without betraying our gospel liberty." Thus does
this apostle show the spirit of a moderator, that is, a spirit of
moderation, being careful to give no offence either to Jew or Gentile,
and contriving, as much as may be, to please both sides and provoke
neither. Note, We are not to think it strange if people be wedded to
customs which they have had transmitted to them from their fathers, and
which they have been educated in an opinion of as sacred; and therefore
allowances must be made in such cases, and not rigour used.

[Acts 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 15:22</span></span>

We have here the result of the consultation that was held at Jerusalem
about the imposing of the ceremonial law upon the Gentiles. Much more,
it is likely, was said about it than is here recorded; but at length it
was brought to a head, and the advice which James gave was universally
approved and agreed to nemine contradicente - unanimously; and letters
were accordingly sent by messengers of their own to the Gentile
converts, acquainting them with their sentiments in this matter, which
would be a great confirmation to them against the false teachers. Now
observe here,

I. The choice of the delegates that were to be sent with Paul and
Barnabas on this errand; not as if they had any suspicion of the
fidelity of these great men, and could not trust them with their
letters, nor as if they thought that those to whom they sent them would
suspect them to have altered any thing in their letter; no, their
charity thought no such evil concerning men of such tried integrity;
but,

1\. They thought fit to send men of their own company to Antioch, with
Paul and Barnabas, [Act 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022). This
was agreed to by the apostles and elders, with the whole church, who, it
is likely, undertook to bear their charges, [Co1
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007). They sent these messengers, (1.)
To show their respect to the church at Antioch, as a sister-church,
though a younger sister, and that they looked upon it as upon the same
level with them; as also that they were desirous further to know their
state. (2.) To encourage Paul and Barnabas, and to make their journey
home the more pleasant (for it is likely they travelled on foot) by
sending such excellent men to bear them company; amicus pro vehiculo - a
friend instead of a carriage. (3.) To put a reputation upon the letters
they carried, that it might appear a solemn embassy, and so much the
more regard might be paid to the message, which was likely to meet with
opposition from some. (4.) To keep up the communion of the saints, and
cultivate an acquaintance between churches and ministers that were at a
distance from each other, and to show that, though they were many, yet
they were one.

2\. Those they sent were not inferior persons, who might serve to carry
the letters, and attest the receipt of them from the apostles; but they
were chosen men, and chief men among the brethren, men of eminent gifts,
graces, and usefulness; for these are the things which denominate men
chief among the brethren, and qualify them to be the messengers of the
churches. They are here named: Judas, who was called Barsabas (probably
the brother of that Joseph who was called Barsabas, that was a candidate
for the apostleship, [Act 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#023)), and
Silas. The character which these men had in the church at Jerusalem
would have some influence upon those that came from Judea, as those
false teachers did, and engage them to pay the more deference to the
message that was sent by them.

II\. The drawing up of the letters, circular letters, that were to be
sent to the churches, to notify the sense of the synod in this matter.

1\. Here is a very condescending obliging preamble to this decree, [Act
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023). There is nothing in it haughty
or assuming, but, (1.) That which intimates the humility of the
apostles, that they join the elders and brethren in commission with
them, the ministers, the ordinary Christians, whom they had advised with
in this case, as they used to do in other cases. Though never men were
so qualified as they were for a monarchical power and authority in the
church, nor had such a commission as they had, yet their decrees run
not, "We, the apostles, Christ's vicars upon earth, and pastors of all
the pastors of the churches" (as the pope styles himself), "and sole
judges in all matters of faith;" but the apostles, and elders, and
brethren, agree in their orders. Herein they remembered the instructions
their Master gave them ([Mat 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#008)): Be
not you called Rabbi; for you are all brethren. (2.) That which bespeaks
their respect to the churches they wrote to; they send to them greeting,
wish them health and happiness and joy, and call them brethren of the
Gentiles, thereby owning their admission into the church, and giving
them the right hand of fellowship: "You are our brethren, though
Gentiles; for we meet in Christ, the first born among many brethren, in
God our common Father." Now that the Gentiles are fellow-heirs and of
the same body, they are to be countenanced and encouraged, and called
brethren.

2\. Here is a just and severe rebuke to the judaizing teachers ([Act
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#024)): "We have heard that certain
who went out from us have troubled you with words, and we are very much
concerned to hear it; now this is to let them know that those who
preached this doctrine were false teachers, both as they produced a
false commission and as they taught a false doctrine." (1.) They did a
great deal of wrong to the apostles and ministers at Jerusalem, in
pretending that they had instructions from them to impose the ceremonial
law upon the Gentiles, when there was no colour for such a pretension.
"They went out from us indeed - they were such as belonged to our
church, of which, when they had a mind to travel, we gave them perhaps a
testimonial; but, as for their urging the law of Moses upon you, we gave
them no such commandment, nor had we ever thought of such a thing, nor
given them the least occasion to use our names in it." It is no new
thing for apostolical authority to be pleaded in defence of those
doctrines and practices for which yet the apostles gave neither command
nor encouragement. (2.) They did a great deal of wrong to the Gentile
converts, in saying, You must be circumcised, and must keep the law.
\[1.\] It perplexed them: "They have troubled you with words, have
occasioned disturbance and disquietment to you. You depended upon those
who told you, If you believe in the Lord Jesus Christ you shall be
saved; and now you are startled by those that tell you you must keep the
law of Moses or you cannot be saved, by which you see yourselves drawn
into a snare. They trouble you with words - words, and nothing else -
mere words - sound, but no substance." How has the church been troubled
with words, by the pride of men that loved to hear themselves talk!
\[2.\] It endangered them; they subverted their souls, put them into
disorder, and pulled down that which had been built up. They took them
off from pursuing pure Christianity, and minding the business of that,
by filling their heads with the necessity of circumcision, and the law
of Moses, which were nothing to the purpose.

3\. Here is an honourable testimony given of the messengers by whom
these letters were sent.

(1.) Of Paul and Barnabas, whom these judaizing teachers had opposed and
censured as having done their work by the halves, because they had
brought the Gentile converts to Christianity only, and not to Judaism.
Let them say what they will of these men, \[1.\] "They are men that are
dear to us; they are our beloved Barnabas and Paul - men whom we have a
value for, a kindness for, a concern for." Sometimes it is good for
those that are of eminence to express their esteem, not only for the
despised truth of Christ, but for the despised preachers and defenders
of that truth, to encourage them, and weaken the hands of their
opposers. \[2.\] "They are men that have signalized themselves in the
service of Christ, and therefore have deserved well of all the churches:
they are men that have hazarded their lives for the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ ([Act 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#026)), and
therefore are worthy of double honour, and cannot be suspected of having
sought any secular advantage to themselves; for they have ventured their
all for Christ, have engaged in the most dangerous services, as good
soldiers of Christ, and not only in laborious services." It is not
likely that such faithful confessors should be unfaithful preachers.
Those that urged circumcision did it to avoid persecution ([Gal
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#012), [Gal
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#013)); those that opposed it knew they
thereby exposed themselves to persecution; and which of these were most
likely to be in the right?

(2.) Of Judas and Silas: "They are chosen men ([Act
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#025)), and they are men that have
heard our debates, and are perfectly apprized of the matter, and will
tell you the same things by mouth," [Act
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#027). What is of use to us it is good
to have both in writing and by word of mouth, that we may have the
advantage both of reading and of hearing it. The apostles refer them to
the bearers for a further account of their judgment and their reasons,
and the bearers will refer them to their letters for the certainty of
the determination.

4\. Here is the direction given what to require from the Gentile
converts, where observe,

(1.) The matter of the injunction, which is according to the advice
given by James, that, to avoid giving offence to the Jews, \[1.\] They
should never eat any thing that they knew had been offered in sacrifice
to an idol, but look upon it as, though clean in itself, yet thereby
polluted to them. This prohibition was afterwards in part taken off, for
they were allowed to eat whatever was sold in the shambles, or set
before them at their friend's table, though it had been offered to
idols, except when there was danger of giving offence by it, that is, of
giving occasion either to a weak Christian to think the worse of our
Christianity, or to a wicked heathen to think the better of his
idolatry; and in these cases it is good to forbear, [Co1
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#025), etc. This to us is an
antiquated case. \[2.\] That they should not eat blood, nor drink it;
but avoid every thing that looked cruel and barbarous in that ceremony
which had been of so long standing. \[3.\] That they should not eat any
thing that was strangled, or died of itself, or had not the blood let
out. \[4.\] That they should be very strict in censuring those that were
guilty of fornication, or marrying within the degrees prohibited by the
Levitical law, which, some think, is principally intended here. See [Co1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001). Dr. Hammond states this matter
thus: The judaizing teachers would have the Gentile converts submit to
all that those submitted to whom they called the proselytes of
righteousness, to be circumcised and keep the whole law; but the
apostles required no more of them than what was required of the
proselytes of the gate, which was to observe the seven precepts of the
sons of Noah, which, he thinks, are here referred to. But the only
ground of this decree being in complaisance to the rigid Jews that had
embraced the Christian faith, and, except in that one case of scandal,
all meats being pronounced free and indifferent to all Christians as
soon as the reason of the decree ceased, which, at furthest, was after
the destruction of Jerusalem, the obligation of it ceased likewise.
"These things are in a particular manner offensive to the Jews, and
therefore do not disoblige them herein for the present; in a little time
the Jews will incorporate with the Gentiles, and then the danger is
over."

(2.) The manner in which it is worded. \[1.\] They express themselves
with something of authority, that what they wrote might be received with
respect, and deference paid to it: It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and
to us, that is, to us under the guidance of the Holy Ghost, and by
direction from him: not only the apostles, but others, were endued with
spiritual gifts extraordinary, and knew more of the mind of God than any
since those gifts ceased can pretend to; their infallibility gave an
incontestable authority to their decrees, and they would not order any
thing because it seemed good to them, but that they knew it first seemed
good to the Holy Ghost. Or it refers to what the Holy Ghost had
determined in this matter formerly. When the Holy Ghost descended upon
the apostles, he endued them with the gift of tongues, in order to their
preaching the gospel to the Gentiles, which was a plain indication of
God's purpose to call them in. When the Holy Ghost descended upon
Cornelius and his friends, upon Peter's preaching, it was plain that
Christ designed the taking down of the Jewish pale, within which they
fancied the spirit had been enclosed. \[2.\] They express themselves
with abundance of tenderness and fatherly concern. First, They are
afraid of burdening them: We will lay upon you no greater burden. So far
were they from delighting to impose upon them that they dreaded nothing
so much as imposing too far upon them, so as to discourage them at their
setting out. Secondly, They impose upon them no other than necessary
things. "The avoiding of fornication is necessary to all Christians at
all times; the avoiding of things strangled, and of blood, and of things
offered to idols, is necessary at this time, for the keeping up of a
good understanding between you and the Jews, and the preventing of
offence;" and as long as it continues necessary for that end, and no
longer, it is enjoined. Note, Church-rulers should impose only necessary
things, things which Christ has made our duty, which have a real
tendency to the edification of the church, and, as here, to the uniting
of good Christians. If they impose things only to show their own
authority, and to try people's obedience, they forget that they have not
authority to make new laws, but only to see that the laws of Christ be
duly executed, and to enforce the observance of them. Thirdly, They
enforce their order with a commendation of those that shall comply with
it, rather than with the condemnation of those that shall transgress it.
They do not conclude, "From which if you do not keep yourselves, you
shall be an anathema, you shall be cast out of the church, and
accursed," according to the style of after-councils, and particularly
that of Trent; but "From which if you keep yourselves, as we do not
question but you will, you will do well; it will be for the glory of
God, the furtherance of the gospel, the strengthening of the hands of
your brethren, and your own credit and comfort." It is all sweetness and
love and good humour, such as became the followers of him who, when he
called us to take his yoke upon us, assured us we should find him meek
and lowly in heart. The difference of the style of the true apostles
from that of the false is very observable. Those that were for imposing
the ceremonial laws were positive and imperious: Except you keep it, you
cannot be saved ([Act 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)), you are
excommunicated ipso facto - at once, and delivered to Satan. The
apostles of Christ, who only recommend necessary things, are mild and
gentle: "From which if you keep yourselves, you will do well, and as
becomes you. Fare ye well; we are hearty well-wishers to your honour and
peace."

III\. The delivering of the letters, and how the messengers disposed of
themselves.

1\. When they were dismissed, had had their audience of leave of the
apostles (it is probable that they were dismissed with prayer, and a
solemn blessing in the name of the Lord, and with instructions and
encouragements in their work), They then came to Antioch; they staid no
longer at Jerusalem than till their business was done, and then came
back, and perhaps were met at their return by those that brought them on
their way at their setting out; for those that have taken pains in
public service ought to be countenanced and encouraged.

2\. As soon as they came to Antioch, they gathered the multitude
together, and delivered the epistle to them ([Act
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#030), [Act
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#031)), that they might all know what
it was that was forbidden them, and might observe these orders, which
would be no difficulty for them to do, most of them having been, before
their conversion to Christ, proselytes of the gate, who had laid
themselves under these restrictions already. But this was not all; it
was that they might know that no more than this was forbidden them, that
it was no longer a sin to eat swine's flesh, no longer a pollution to
touch a grave or a dead body.

3\. The people were wonderfully pleased with the orders that came from
Jerusalem ([Act 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#031)): They rejoiced
for the consolation; and a great consolation it was to the multitude,
(1.) That they were confirmed in their freedom from the yoke of the
ceremonial law, and were not burdened with that, as those upstart
teachers would have had them to be. It was a comfort to them to hear
that the carnal ordinances were no longer imposed on them, which
perplexed the conscience, but could not purify nor pacify it. (2.) That
those who troubled their minds with an attempt to force circumcision
upon them were hereby for the present silenced and put to confusion, the
fraud of their pretensions to an apostolical warrant being now
discovered. (3.) That the Gentiles were hereby encouraged to receive the
gospel, and those that had received it to adhere to it. (4.) That the
peace of the church was hereby restored, and that removed which
threatened a division. All this was consolation which they rejoiced in,
and blessed God for.

4\. They got the strange ministers that came from Jerusalem to give them
each a sermon, and more, [Act 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#032).
Judas and Silas, being prophets also themselves, endued with the Holy
Ghost, and called to the work, and being likewise entrusted by the
apostles to deliver some things relating to this matter by word of
mouth, exhorted the brethren with many words, and confirmed them. Even
those that had the constant preaching of Paul and Barnabas, yet were
glad of the help of Judas and Silas; the diversity of the gifts of
ministers is of use to the church. Observe what is the work of ministers
with those that are in Christ. (1.) To confirm them, by bringing them to
see more reason both for their faith in Christ and their obedience to
him; to confirm their choice of Christ and their resolutions for Christ.
(2.) To exhort them to perseverance, and to the particular duties
required of them: to quicken them to that which is good, and direct them
in it. They comforted the brethren (so it may be rendered), and this
would contribute to the confirming of them; for the joy of the Lord will
be our strength. They exhorted them with many words; they used a very
great copiousness and variety of expression. One word would affect one,
and another another; and therefore, though what they had to say might
have been summed up in a few words, yet it was for the edification of
the church that they used many words, dia logou pollou - with much
speech, much reasoning; precept must be upon precept.

5\. The dismission of the Jerusalem ministers, [Act
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#033). When they had spent some time
among them (so it might be read), poiēsantes chronon - having made some
stay, and having made it to good purpose, not having trifled away time,
but having filled it up, they were let go in peace from the brethren at
Antioch, to the apostles at Jerusalem, with all possible expressions of
kindness and respect; they thanked them for their coming and pains, and
the good service they had done, wished them their health and a good
journey home, and committed them to the custody of the peace of God.

6\. The continuance of Silas, notwithstanding, together with Paul and
Barnabas, at Antioch. (1.) Silas, when it came to the setting to, would
not go back with Judas to Jerusalem, but let him go home by himself, and
chose rather to abide still at Antioch, [Act
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#034). And we have no reason at all to
blame him for it, though we know not the reason that moved him to it. I
am apt to think the congregations at Antioch were both more large and
more lively than those at Jerusalem, and that this tempted him to stay
there, and he did well: so did Judas, who, notwithstanding this,
returned to his post of service at Jerusalem. (2.) Paul and Barnabas,
though their work lay chiefly among the Gentiles, yet continued for some
time in Antioch, being pleased with the society of the ministers and
people there, which, it should seem by divers passages, was more than
ordinarily inviting. They continued there, not to take their pleasure,
but teaching and preaching the word of God. Antioch, being the chief
city of Syria, it is probable there was a great resort of Gentiles
thither from all parts upon one account or other, as there was of Jews
to Jerusalem; so that in preaching there they did in effect preach to
many nations, for they preached to those who would carry the report of
what they preached to many nations, and thereby prepare them for the
apostles' coming in person to preach to them. And thus they were not
only not idle at Antioch, but were serving their main intention. (3.)
There were many others also there, labouring at the same oar. The
multitude of workmen in Christ's vineyard does not give us a writ of
ease. Even where there are many others labouring in the word and
doctrine, yet there may be opportunity for us; the zeal and usefulness
of others should excite us, not lay us asleep.

[Acts 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 15:36</span></span>

We have seen one unhappy difference among the brethren, which was of a
public nature, brought to a good issue; but here we have a private
quarrel between two ministers, no less men than Paul and Barnabas, not
compromised indeed, yet ending well.

I. Here is a good proposal Paul made to Barnabas to go and review their
work among the Gentiles and renew it, to take a circuit among the
churches they had planted, and see what progress the gospel made among
them. Antioch was now a safe and quiet harbour for them: they had there
no adversary nor evil occurrent; but Paul remembered that they only put
in there to refit and refresh themselves, and therefore begins now to
think of putting to sea again; and, having been in winter quarters long
enough, he is for taking the field again, and making another campaign,
in a vigorous prosecution of this holy war against Satan's kingdom. Paul
remembered that the work appointed him was afar off among the Gentiles,
and therefore he is here meditating a second expedition among them to do
the same work, though to encounter the same difficulties; and this some
days after, for his active spirit could not bear to be long out of work;
no, nor his bold and daring spirit to be long out of danger. Observe, 1.
To whom he makes this proposal - to Barnabas, his old friend and
fellow-labourer; he invites his company and help in this work. We have
need one of another, and may be in many ways serviceable one to another;
and therefore should be forward both to borrow and lend assistance. Two
are better than one. Every soldier has his comrade. 2. For whom the
visit is designed: "Let us not presently begin new work, nor break up
new ground; but let us take a view of the fields we have sown. Come, and
let us get up early to the vineyards, let us see if the vine flourish,
[Sol 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#012). Let us go again and visit
our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the Lord."
Observe, He calls all the Christians brethren, and not ministers only;
for, Have we not all one Father? He has a concern for them in every
city, even where the brethren were fewest and poorest, and most
persecuted and despised; yet let us visit them. Wherever we have
preached the word of the Lord, let us go and water the seed sown. Note,
Those that have preached the gospel should visit those to whom them have
preached it. As we must look after our praying, and hear what answer God
gives to that; so we must look after our preaching, and see what success
that has. Faithful ministers cannot but have a particular tender concern
for those to whom they have preached the gospel, that they may not
bestow upon them labour in vain. See [Th1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#005), [Th1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#006). 3. What was intended in this
visit: "Let us see how they do," pōs echousi - how it is with them. It
was not merely a compliment that he designed, nor did he take such a
journey with a bare How do you do? No, he would visit them that he might
acquaint himself with their case, and impart unto them such spiritual
gifts as were suited to it; as the physician visits his recovering
patient, that he may prescribe what is proper for the perfecting of his
cure, and the preventing of a relapse. Let us see how they do, that is,
(1.) What spirit they are of, how they stand affected, and how they
behave themselves; it is probable that they frequently heard from them,
"But let us go and see them; let us go and see whether they hold fast
what we preached to them, and live up to it, that we may endeavour to
reduce them if we find them wandering, to confirm them if we find them
wavering, and to comfort them if we find them steady." (2.) What state
they are in, whether the churches have rest and liberty, or whether they
are not in trouble or distress, that we may rejoice with them if they
rejoice, and caution them against security, and may weep with them if
they weep, and comfort them under the cross, and may know the better how
to pray for them.

II\. The disagreement between Paul and Barnabas about an assistant; it
was convenient to have a young man with them that should attend on them
and minister to them, and be a witness of their doctrine, manner of
life, and patience, and that should be fitted and trained up for further
service, by being occasionally employed in the present service. Now, 1.
Barnabas would have his nephew John, whose surname was Mark, to go along
with them, [Act 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#037). He determined
to take him, because he was his relation, and, it is likely, was brought
up under him, and he had a kindness for him, and was solicitous for his
welfare. We should suspect ourselves of partiality, and guard against it
in preferring our relations. 2. Paul opposed it ([Act
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#038)): He thought not good to take
him with them, ouk ēxiou - he did not think him worthy of the honour,
nor fit for the service, who had departed from them, clandestinely as it
should seem, without their knowledge, or wilfully, without their
consent, from Pamphylia ([Act 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013)),
and went not with them to the work, because he was either lazy and would
not take the pains that must be taken, or cowardly and would not run the
hazard. He run his colours just as they were going to engage. It is
probable that he promised very fair now that he would not do so again.
But Paul thought it was not fit he should be thus honoured who had
forfeited his reputation, nor thus employed who had betrayed his trust;
at least, not till he had been longer tried. If a man deceive me once,
it is his fault; but, if twice, it is my own, for trusting him. Solomon
saith, Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a
broken tooth, and a foot out of joint, which will hardly be used again,
[Pro 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#019).

III\. The issue of this disagreement: it came to such a height that they
separated upon it. The contention, the paroxysm (so the word is), the
fit of passion which this threw them both into, was so sharp that they
departed asunder one from the other. Barnabas was peremptory that he
would not go with Paul unless they took John Mark with them; Paul was as
peremptory that he would not go if John did go with them. Neither would
yield, and therefore there is no remedy but they must part. Now here is
that which is very humbling, and just matter of lamentation, and yet
very instructive. For we see, 1. That the best of men are but men,
subject to like passions as we are, as these two good men had expressly
owned concerning themselves ([Act
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015)), and now it appeared too true.
I doubt there was (as usually there is in such contentions) a fault on
both sides; perhaps Paul was too severe upon the young man, and did not
allow his fault the extenuation it was capable of, did not consider what
a useful woman his mother was in Jerusalem ([Act
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012)), nor make the allowances he
might have made to Barnabas's natural affection. But it was Barnabas's
fault that he took this into consideration, in a case wherein the
interest of Christ's kingdom was concerned, and indulged it too much.
And they were certainly both in fault to be hot as to let the contention
be sharp (it is to be feared they gave one another some hard words), as
also to be so stiff as each to stick resolutely to his opinion, and
neither to yield. It is a pity that they did not refer the matter to a
third person, or that some friend did not interpose to prevent its
coming to an open rupture. Is there never a wise man among them to
interpose his good offices, and to accommodate the matter, and to put
them in mind of the Canaanite and the Perizzite that were now in the
land, and that not only Jews and heathens, but the false brethren among
themselves, would warm their hands at the flames of the contention
between Paul and Barnabas? We must own it was their infirmity, and is
recorded for our admonition; not that we must make use of it to excuse
our own intemperate heats and passions, or to rebate the edge of our
sorrow and shame for them; we must not say, "What if I was in a passion,
were not Paul and Barnabas so?" No; but it must check our censures of
others, and moderate them. If good men are soon put into a passion, we
must make the best of it, it was the infirmity once of two of the best
men that ever the world had. Repentance teaches us to be severe in
reflections upon ourselves; but charity teaches us to be candid in our
reflections upon others. It is only Christ's example that is a copy
without a blot. 2. That we are not to think it strange if there be
differences among wise and good men; we were told before that such
offences would come, and here is an instance of it. Even those that are
united to one and the same Jesus, and sanctified by one and the same
Spirit, have different apprehensions, different opinions, different
views, and different sentiments in points of prudence. It will be so
while we are in this state of darkness and imperfection; we shall never
be all of a mind till we come to heaven, where light and love are
perfect. That is charity which never fails. 3. That these differences
often prevail so far as to occasion separations. Paul and Barnabas, who
were not separated by the persecutions of the unbelieving Jews, nor the
impositions of the believing Jews, were yet separated by an unhappy
disagreement between themselves. O the mischief that even the poor and
weak remainders of pride and passion, that are found even in good men,
do in the world, do in the church! Now wonder the consequences are so
fatal where they reign.

IV\. The good that was brought out of this evil-meat out of the eater,
and sweetness out of the strong. It was strange that even the sufferings
of the apostles (as [Phi 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012)), but
much more strange that even the quarrels of the apostles, should tend to
the furtherance of the gospel of Christ; yet so it proved here. God
would not permit such things to be, if he knew not how to make them to
serve his own purposes. 1. More places are hereby visited. Barnabas went
one way; he sailed to Cyprus (v. 39), that famous island where they
began their work ([Act 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#004)), and
which was his own country, [Act 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036).
Paul went another way into Cilicia, which was his own country, [Act
21:39](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#039). Each seems to be influenced by
his affection to his native soil, as usual (Nescio qu natale solum
dulcedine cunctos ducit - There is something that attaches us all to our
native soil), and yet God served his own purposes by it, for the
diffusing of gospel light. 2. More hands are hereby employed in the
ministry of the gospel among the Gentiles; for, (1.) John Mark, who had
been an unfaithful hand, is not rejected, but is again made use of,
against Paul's mind, and, for aught we know, proves a very useful and
successful hand, though many think it was not the same with that Mark
that wrote the gospel, and founded the church at Alexandria, and whom
Peter calls his son, [Pe1 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#013). (2.)
Silas who was a new hand, and never yet employed in that work, nor
intended to be, but to return to the service of the church at Jerusalem,
had not God changed his mind ([Act
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#033), [Act
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#034)), he is brought in, and engaged
in that noble work.

V. We may further observe, 1. That the church at Antioch seem to
countenance Paul in what he did. Barnabas sailed with his nephew to
Cyprus, and no notice was taken of him, nor a bene discessit - a
recommendation given him. Note, Those that in their service of the
church are swayed by private affections and regards forfeit public
honours and respect. But, when Paul departed, he was recommended by the
brethren to the grace of God. They thought he was in the right in
refusing to make use of John Mark, and could not but blame Barnabas for
insisting upon it, though he was one who had deserved well of the church
([Act 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#022)) before they knew Paul;
and therefore they prayed publicly for Paul, and for the success of his
ministry, encouraged him to go on in his work, and, though they could do
nothing themselves to further him, they transferred the matter to the
grace of God, leaving it to that grace both to work upon him and to work
with him. Note, Those are happy at all times, and especially in times of
disagreement and contention, who are enabled so to carry themselves as
not to forfeit their interest in the love and prayers of good people. 2.
That yet Paul afterwards seems to have had, though not upon second
thoughts, yet upon further trial, a better opinion of John Mark than now
he had; for he writes to Timothy ([Ti2
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011)), Take Mark and bring him with
thee, for he is profitable to me for the ministry; and he writes to the
Colossians concerning Marcus, sister's son to Barnabas, that if he came
to them they should receive him, bid him welcome, and employ him ([Col
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010)), which teaches us, (1.) That
even those whom we justly condemn we should condemn moderately, and with
a great deal of temper, because we know not but afterwards we may see
cause to think better of them, and both to make use of them and make
friendship with them, and we should so regulate our resentments that if
it should prove so we may not afterwards be ashamed of them. (2.) That
even those whom we have justly condemned, if afterwards they prove more
faithful, we should cheerfully receive, forgive and forget, and put a
confidence in, and, as there is occasion, give a good word to. 3. That
Paul, though he wanted his old friend and companion in the kingdom and
patience of Jesus Christ, yet went on cheerfully in his work ([Act
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#041)): He went through Syria and
Cilicia, countries which lay next to Antioch, confirming the churches.
Though we change our colleagues, we do not change our principal
president. And observe, Ministers are well employed, and ought to think
themselves so, and be satisfied, when they are made use of confirming
those that believe, as well as in converting those that believe not.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 16](act016)

</div>
