<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act005)  [Next](act007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 6:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. The discontent that was among the disciples
about the distribution of the public charity ([Act
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001)). II. The election and ordination
of seven men, who should take care of that matter, and ease the apostles
of the burden ([Act 6:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002)). III. The
increase of the church, by the addition of many to it ([Act
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007)). IV. A particular account of
Stephen, one of the seven. 1. His great activity for Christ ([Act
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#008)). 2. The opposition he met with
from the enemies of Christianity, and his disputes with them ([Act
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#009), [Act
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#010)). 3. The convening of him before
the great sanhedrim, and the crimes laid to his charge ([Act
6:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#011)). 4. God's owning him upon his
trial ([Act 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#015)).

[Acts 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 6:1</span></span>

Having seen the church's struggles with her enemies, and triumphed with
her in her victories, we now come to take a view of the administration
of her affairs at home; and here we have,

I. An unhappy disagreement among some of the church-members, which might
have been of ill consequence, but was prudently accommodated and taken
up in time ([Act 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001)): When the number
of the disciples (for so Christians were at first called, learners of
Christ) was multiplied to many thousands in Jerusalem, there arose a
murmuring.

1\. It does our hearts good to find that the number of the disciples is
multiplied, as, no doubt, it vexed the priests and Sadducees to the
heart to see it. The opposition that the preaching of the gospel met
with, instead of checking its progress, contributed to the success of
it; and this infant Christian church, like the infant Jewish church in
Egypt, the more it was afflicted, the more it multiplied. The preachers
were beaten, threatened, and abused, and yet the people received their
doctrine, invited, no doubt, thereto by their wonderful patience and
cheerfulness under their trials, which convinced men that they were
borne up and carried on by a better spirit than their own.

2\. Yet it casts a damp upon us to find that the multiplying of the
disciples proves an occasion of discord. Hitherto they were all with one
accord. This had been often taken notice of to their honour; but now
that they were multiplied, they began to murmur; as in the old world,
when men began to multiply, they corrupted themselves. Thou hast
multiplied the nation, and not increased their joy, [Isa
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#003). When Abraham and Lot increased
their families, there was a strife between their herdsmen; so it was
here: There arose a murmuring, not an open falling out, but a secret
heart-burning.

(1.) The complainants were the Grecians, or Hellenists, against the
Hebrews - the Jews that were scattered in Greece, and other parts, who
ordinarily spoke the Greek tongue, and read the Old Testament in the
Greek version, and not the original Hebrew, many of whom being at
Jerusalem at the feast embraced the faith of Christ, and were added to
the church, and so continued there. These complained against the
Hebrews, the native Jews, that used the original Hebrew of the Old
Testament. Some of each of these became Christians, and, it seems, their
joint-embracing of the faith of Christ did not prevail, as it ought to
have done, to extinguish the little jealousies they had one of another
before their conversion, but they retained somewhat of that old leaven;
not understanding, or not remembering, that in Christ Jesus there is
neither Greek nor Jew, no distinction of Hebrew and Hellenist, but all
are alike welcome to Christ, and should be, for his sake, dear to one
another.

(2.) The complaint of these Grecians was that their widows were
neglected in the daily administration, that is in the distribution of
the public charity, and the Hebrew widows had more care taken of them.
Observe, The first contention in the Christian church was about a
money-matter; but it is a pity that the little things of this world
should be makebates among those that profess to be taken up with the
great things of another world. A great deal of money was gathered for
the relief of the poor, but, as often happens in such cases, it was
impossible to please every body in the laying of it out. The apostles,
at whose feet it was laid, did their best to dispose of it so as to
answer the intentions of the donors, and no doubt designed to do it with
the utmost impartiality, and were far from respecting the Hebrews more
than the Grecians; and yet here they are complained to, and tacitly
complained of, that the Grecian widows were neglected; though they were
as real objects of charity, yet they had not so much allowed them, or
not to so many, or not so duly paid them, as the Hebrews. Now, \[1.\]
Perhaps this complaint was groundless and unjust, and there was no cause
for it; but those who, upon any account, lie under disadvantages (as the
Grecian Jews did, in comparison with those that were Hebrews of the
Hebrews) are apt to be jealous that they are slighted when really they
are not so; and it is the common fault of poor people that, instead of
being thankful for what is given them, they are querulous and clamorous,
and apt to find fault that more is not given them, or that more is given
to others than to them; and there are envy and covetousness, those roots
of bitterness, to be found among the poor as well as among the rich,
notwithstanding the humbling providences they are under, and should
accommodate themselves to. But, \[2.\] We will suppose there might be
some occasion for their complaint. First, Some suggest that though their
other poor were well provided for, yet their widows were neglected,
because the managers governed themselves by an ancient rule which the
Hebrews observed, that a widow was to be maintained by her husband's
children. See [Ti1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004). But, Secondly,
I take it that the widows are here put for all the poor, because many of
those that were in the church-book, and received alms, were widows, who
were well provided for by the industry of their husbands while they
lived, but were reduced to straits when they were gone. As those that
have the administration of public justice ought in a particular manner
to protect widows from injury ([Isa
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017); [Luk
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#003)); so those that have the
administration of public charity ought in a particular manner to provide
for widows what is necessary. See [Ti1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#003). And observe, The widows here, and
the other poor, had a daily ministration; perhaps they wanted forecast,
and could not save for hereafter, and therefore the managers of the
fund, in kindness to them, gave them day by day their daily bread; they
lived from hand to mouth. Now, it seems, the Grecian widows were,
comparatively, neglected. Perhaps those that disposed of the money
considered that there was more brought into the fund by the rich Hebrews
than by the rich Grecians, who had not estates to sell, as the Hebrews
had, and therefore the poor Grecians should have less out of the fund;
this, though there was some tolerant reason for it, they thought hard
and unfair. Note, In the best-ordered church in the world there will be
something amiss, some mal - administration or other, some grievances, or
at least some complaints; those are the best that have the least and the
fewest.

II\. The happy accommodating of this matter, and the expedient pitched
upon for the taking away of the cause of this murmuring. The apostles
had hitherto the directing of the matter. Applications were made to
them, and appeals in cases of grievances. They were obliged to employ
persons under them, who did not take all the care they might have taken,
nor were so well fortified as they should have been against temptations
to partiality; and therefore some persons must be chosen to manage this
matter who have more leisure to attend to it than the apostles had, and
were better qualified for the trust than those whom the apostles
employed were. Now observe,

1\. How the method was proposed by the apostles: They called the
multitude of the disciples unto them, the heads of the congregations of
Christians in Jerusalem, the principal leading men. The twelve
themselves would not determine any thing without them, for in multitude
of counsellors there is safety; and in an affair of this nature those
might be best able to advise who were more conversant in the affairs of
this life than the apostles were.

(1.) The apostles urge that they could by no means admit so great a
diversion, as this would be, from their great work ([Act
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002)): It is not reasonable that we
should leave the word of God and serve tables. The receiving and paying
of money was serving tables, too like the tables of the money-changers
in the temple. This was foreign to the business which the apostles were
called to. They were to preach the word of God; and though they had not
such occasion to study for what they preached as we have (it being given
in that same hour what they should speak), yet they thought that was
work enough for a whole man, and to employ all their thoughts, and
cares, and time, though one man of them was more than ten of us, than
ten thousand. If they serve tables, they must, in some measure, leave
the word of God; they could not attend their preaching work so closely
as they ought. Pectora nostra duas non admittentia curas - These minds
of ours admit not of two distinct anxious employments. Though this
serving of tables was for pious uses, and serving the charity of rich
Christians and the necessity of poor Christians, and in both serving
Christ, yet the apostles would not take so much time from their
preaching as this would require. They will no more be drawn from their
preaching by the money laid at their feet than they will be driven from
it by the stripes laid on their backs. While the number of the disciples
was small, the apostles might manage this matter without making it any
considerable interruption to their main business; but, now that their
number was increased, they could not do it. It is not reason, ouk
areston estin - it is not fit, or commendable, that we should neglect
the business of feeding souls with the bread of life, to attend the
business of relieving the bodies of the poor. Note, Preaching the gospel
is the best work, and the most proper and needful that a minister can be
employed in, and that which he must give himself wholly to ([Ti1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#015)), which that he may do, he must
not entangle himself in the affairs of this life ([Ti2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#004)), no, not in the outward business
of the house of God, [Neh 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#016).

(2.) They therefore desire that seven men might be chosen, well
qualified for the purpose, whose business it should be to serve tables,
diakonein trapezais - to be deacons to the tables, [Act
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002). The business must be minded, must
be better minded than it had been, and than the apostles could mind it;
and therefore proper persons must be occasionally employed in the word,
and prayer, were not so entirely devoted to it as the apostles were; and
these must take care of the church's stock - must review, and pay, and
keep accounts - must buy those things which they had need of against the
feast ([Joh 13:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#029)), and attend to all
those things which are necessary in ordine ad spiritualia - in order to
spiritual exercises, that every thing might be done decently and in
order, and no person nor thing neglected. Now,

\[1.\] The persons must be duly qualified. The people are to choose, and
the apostles to ordain; but the people have no authority to choose, nor
the apostles to ordain, men utterly unfit for the office: Look out seven
men; so many they thought might suffice for the present, more might be
added afterwards if there were occasion. These must be, First, Of honest
report, men free from scandal, that were looked upon by their neighbours
as men of integrity, and faithful men, well attested, as men that might
be trusted, not under a blemish for any vice, but, on the contrary, well
spoken of for every thing that is virtuous and praiseworthy;
marturoumenous - men that can produce good testimonials concerning their
conversation. Note, Those that are employed in any office in the church
ought to be men of honest report, of a blameless, nay, of an admirable
character, which is requisite not only to the credit of their office,
but to the due discharge of it. Secondly, They must be full of the Holy
Ghost, must be filled with those gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost
which were necessary to the right management of this trust. They must
not only be honest men, but they must be men of ability and men of
courage; such as were to be made judges in Israel ([Exo
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#021)), able men, fearing God; men of
truth, and hating covetousness; and hereby appearing to be full of the
Holy Ghost. Thirdly, They must be full of wisdom. It was not enough that
they were honest, good men, but they must be discreet, judicious men,
that could not be imposed upon, and would order things for the best, and
with consideration: full of the Holy Ghost, and wisdom, that is, of the
Holy Ghost as a Spirit of wisdom. We find the word of wisdom given by
the Spirit, as distinct form the word of knowledge by the same Spirit,
[Co1 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008). Those must be full of
wisdom who are entrusted with public money, that it may be disposed of,
not only with fidelity, but with frugality.

\[2.\] The people must nominate the persons: "Look you out among
yourselves seven men; consider among yourselves who are the fittest for
such a trust, and whom you can with the most satisfaction confide in."
They might be presumed to know better, or at least were fitter to
enquire, what character men had, than the apostles; and therefore they
are entrusted with the choice.

\[3.\] They apostles will ordain them to the service, will give them
their charge, that they may know what they have to do and make
conscience of doing it, and give them their authority, that the persons
concerned may know whom they are to apply to, and submit to, in affairs
of that nature: Men, whom we may appoint. In many editions of our
English Bibles there has been an error of the press here; for they have
read it, whom ye may appoint, as if the power were in the people;
whereas it was certainly in the apostles: whom we may appoint over this
business, to take care of it, and to see that there be neither waste nor
want.

(3.) The apostles engage to addict themselves wholly to their work as
ministers, and the more closely if they can but get fairly quit of this
troublesome office ([Act 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#004)): We will
give ourselves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the word.
See here, \[1.\] What are the two great gospel ordinances - the word,
and prayer; by these two communion between God and his people is kept up
and maintained; by the word he speaks to them, and by prayer they speak
to him; and these have a mutual reference to each other. By these two
the kingdom of Christ must be advanced, and additions made to it; we
must prophesy upon the dry bones, and then pray for a spirit of life
from God to enter into them. By the word and prayer other ordinances are
sanctified to us, and sacraments have their efficacy. \[2.\] What is the
great business of gospel ministers - to give themselves continually to
prayer, and to the ministry of the word; they must still be either
fitting and furnishing themselves for those services, or employing
themselves in them; either publicly or privately; in the stated times,
or out of them. They must be God's mouth to the people in the ministry
of the word, and the people's mouth to God in prayer. In order to the
conviction and conversion of sinners, and the edification and
consolation of saints, we must not only offer up our prayers for them,
but we must minister the word to them, seconding our prayers with our
endeavours, in the use of appointed means. Nor must we only minister the
word to them, but we must pray for them, that it may be effectual; for
God's grace can do all without our preaching, but our preaching can do
nothing without God's grace. The apostles were endued with extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Ghost, tongues and miracles; and yet that to which
they gave themselves continually was preaching and praying, by which
they might edify the church: and those ministers, without doubt, are the
successors of the apostles (not in the plenitude of the apostolical
power - those are daring usurpers who pretend to this, but in the best
and most excellent of the apostolical works) who give themselves
continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the word; and such Christ
will always be with, even to the end of the world.

2\. How this proposal was agreed to, and presently put in execution, by
the disciples. It was not imposed upon them by an absolute power, though
they might have been bold in Christ to do this ([Plm
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#008)), but proposed, as that which was
highly convenient, and then the saying pleased the whole multitude, [Act
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005). It pleased them to see the
apostles so willing to have themselves discharged from intermeddling in
secular affairs, and to transmit them to others; it pleased them to hear
that they would give themselves to the word and prayer; and therefore
they neither disputed the matter nor deferred the execution of it.

(1.) They pitched upon the persons. It is not probable that they all
cast their eye upon the same men. Everyone had his friend, whom he
thought well of. But the majority of votes fell upon the persons here
named; and the rest both of the candidates and the electors acquiesced,
and made no disturbance, as the members of societies in such cases ought
to do. An apostle, who was an extraordinary officer, was chosen by lot,
which is more immediately the act of God; but the overseers of the poor
were chosen by the suffrage of the people, in which yet a regard is to
be had to the providence of God, who has all men's hearts and tongues in
his hand. We have a list of the persons chosen. Some think they were
such as were before of the seventy disciples; but this is not likely,
for they were ordained by Christ himself, long since, to preach the
gospel; and there was not more reason that they should leave the word of
God to serve tables than that the apostles should. It is therefore more
probable that they were of those that were converted since the pouring
out of the Spirit; for it was promised to all that would be baptized
that they should receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; and the gift,
according to that promise, is that fulness of the Holy Ghost which was
required in those that were to be chosen to this service. We may further
conjecture, concerning these seven, \[1.\] That they were such as had
sold their estates, and brought the money into the common stock; for
caeteris paribus - other things being equal, those were fittest to be
entrusted with the distribution of it who had been most generous in the
contribution to it. \[2.\] That these seven were all of the Grecian or
Hellenist Jews, for they have all Greek names, and this would be most
likely to silence the murmurings of the Grecians (which occasioned this
institution), to have the trust lodged in those that were foreigners,
like themselves, who would be sure not to neglect them. Nicolas, it is
plain, was one of them, for he was a proselyte of Antioch; and some
think the manner of expression intimates that they were all proselytes
of Jerusalem, as he was of Antioch. The first named is Stephen, the
glory of these septemviri, a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost; he
had a strong faith in the doctrine of Christ, and was full of it above
most; full of fidelity, full of courage (so some), for he was full of
the Holy Ghost, of his gifts and graces. He was an extraordinary man,
and excelled in every thing that was good; his name signifies a crown.
Phillip is put next, because he, having used this office of a deacon
well, thereby obtained a good degree, and was afterwards ordained to the
office of an evangelist, a companion and assistant to the apostles, for
so he is expressly called, [Act 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#008).
Compare [Eph 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011). And his preaching
and baptizing (which we read of [Act
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#012)) were certainly not as a deacon
(for it is plain that that office was serving tables, in opposition to
the ministry of the word), but as an evangelist; and, when he was
preferred to that office, we have reason to think he quitted this
office, as incompatible with that. As for Stephen, nothing we find done
by him proves him to be a preacher of the gospel; for he only disputes
in the schools, and pleads for his life at the bar, [Act
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#009), and [Act
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002). The last named is Nicolas, who,
some say, afterwards degenerated (as the Judas among these seven) and
was the founder of the sect of the Nicolaitans which we read of ([Rev
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006), [Rev
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015)), and which Christ there says,
once and again, was a thing he hated. But some of the ancients clear him
from this charge, and tell us that, though that vile impure sect
denominated themselves from him, yet it was unjustly, and because he
only insisted much upon it that those that had wives should be as though
they had none, thence they wickedly inferred that those that had wives
should have them in common, which therefore Tertullian, when he speaks
of the community of goods, particularly excepts: Omnia indiscreta apud
nos, praeter uxores - All things are common among us, except our wives.
- Apol. cap, 39.

(2.) The apostles appointed them to this work of serving tables for the
present, [Act 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#006). The people
presented them to the apostles, who approved their choice, and ordained
them. \[1.\] They prayed with them, and for them, that God would give
them more and more of the Holy Ghost and of wisdom - that he would
qualify them for the service to which they were called, and own them in
it, and make them thereby a blessing to the church, and particularly to
the poor of the flock. All that are employed in the service of the
church ought to be committed to the conduct of the divine grace by the
prayers of the church. \[2.\] They laid their hands on them, that is,
they blessed them in the name of the Lord, for laying on hands was used
in blessing; so Jacob blessed both the sons of Joseph; and, without
controversy, the less is blessed of the greater ([Heb
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#007)); the deacons are blessed by the
apostles, and the overseers of the poor by the pastors of the
congregation. Having by prayer implored a blessing upon them, they did
by the laying on of hands assure them that the blessing was conferred in
answer to the prayer; and this was giving them authority to execute that
office, and laying an obligation upon the people to be observant of them
therein.

III\. The advancement of the church hereupon. When things were thus put
into good order in the church (grievances were redressed and discontents
silenced) then religion got ground, [Act
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007). 1. The word of God increased. Now
that the apostles resolved to stick more closely than ever to their
preaching, it spread the gospel further, and brought it home with the
more power. Ministers disentangling themselves from secular employments,
and addicting themselves entirely and vigorously to their work, will
contribute very much, as a means, to the success of the gospel. The word
of God is said to increase as the seed sown increases when it comes up
again thirty, sixty, a hundred fold. 2. Christians became numerous: The
number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly. When Christ was
upon earth, his ministry had least success in Jerusalem; yet now that
city affords most converts. God has his remnant even in the worst of
places. 3. A great company of the priests were obedient to the faith.
Then is the word and grace of God greatly magnified when those are
wrought upon by it that were least likely, as the priests here, who
either had opposed it, or at least were linked in with those that had.
The priests, whose preferments arose from the law of Moses, were yet
willing to let them go for the gospel of Christ; and, it should seem,
they came in a body; many of them agreed together, for the keeping up of
one another's credit, and the strengthening of one another's hands, to
join at once in giving up their names to Christ: polis ochlos - a great
crowd of priests were, by the grace of God helped over their prejudices,
and were obedient to the faith, so their conversion is described. (1.)
They embraced the doctrine of the gospel; their understandings were
captivated to the power of the truths of Christ, and every opposing
objecting thought brought into obedience to him, [Co2
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004), [Co2
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005). The gospel is said to be made
known for the obedience of faith, [Rom
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#026). Faith is an act of obedience,
for this is God's commandment, that we believe, [Jo1
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#023). (2.) They envinced the sincerity
of their believing the gospel of Christ by a cheerful compliance with
all the rules and precepts of the gospel. The design of the gospel is to
refine and reform our hearts and lives; faith gives law to us, and we
must be obedient to it.

[Acts 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 6:8</span></span>

Stephen, no doubt was diligent and faithful in the discharge of his
office as distributor of the church's charity, and laid out himself to
put that affair in a good method, which he did to universal
satisfaction; and though it appears here that he was a man of uncommon
gifts, and fitted for a higher station, yet, being called to that
office, he did not think it below him to do the duty of it. And, being
faithful in a little, he was entrusted with more; and, though we do not
find him propagating the gospel by preaching and baptizing, yet we find
him here called out to very honourable services, and owned in them.

I. He proved the truth of the gospel, by working miracles in Christ's
name, [Act 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#008). 1. He was full of
faith and power, that is, of a strong faith, by which he was enabled to
do great things. Those that are full of faith are full of power, because
by faith the power of God is engaged for us. His faith did so fill him
that it left no room for unbelief and made room for the influences of
divine grace, so that, as the prophet speaks, he was full of power by
the Spirit of the Lord of hosts, [Mic
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#008). By faith we are emptied of self,
and so are filled with Christ, who is the wisdom of God and the power of
God. 2. Being so he did great wonders and miracles among the people,
openly, and in the sight of all; for Christ's miracles feared not the
strictest scrutiny. It is not strange that Stephen, though he was not a
preacher by office, did these great wonders, for we find that these were
distinct gifts of the Spirit, and divided severally, for to one was
given the working of miracles, and to another prophecy, [Co1
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010), [Co1
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011). And these signs followed not
only those that preached, but those that believed. [Mar
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#017)

II\. He pleaded the cause of Christianity against those that opposed it,
and argued against it ([Act 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#009), [Act
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#010)); he served the interests of
religion as a disputant, in the high places of the field, while others
were serving them as vinedressers and husbandmen.

1\. We are here told who were his opponents, [Act
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#009). They were Jews, but Hellenist
Jews, Jews of the dispersion, who seem to have been more zealous for
their religion than the native Jews; it was with difficulty that they
retained the practice and profession of it in the country where they
lived, where they were as speckled birds, and not without great expense
and toil that they kept up their attendance at Jerusalem, and this made
them more active sticklers for Judaism than those were whose profession
of their religion was cheap and easy. They were of the synagogue which
is called the synagogue of the Libertines; the Romans called those
Liberti, or Libertini, who either, being foreigners, were naturalized,
or, being slaves by birth, were manumitted, or made freemen. Some think
that these Libertines were such of the Jews as had obtained the Roman
freedom, as Paul had ([Act 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#027), [Act
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#028)); and it is probable that he was
the most forward man of this synagogue of the Libertines in disputing
with Stephen, and engaged others in the dispute, for we find him busy in
the stoning of Stephen, and consenting to his death. There were others
that belonged to the synagogue of the Cyrenians and Alexandrians, of
which synagogue the Jewish writers speak; and others that belonged to
their synagogue who were of Cilicia and Asia; and if Paul, as a freeman
of Rome, did not belong to the synagogue of the Libertines, he belonged
to this, as a native of Tarsus, a city of Cilicia: it is probable that
he might be a member of both. The Jews that were born in other
countries, and had concerns in them, had frequent occasion, not only to
resort to, but to reside in, Jerusalem. Each nation had its synagogue,
as in London there are French, and Dutch, and Danish churches: and those
synagogues were the schools to which the Jews of those nations sent
their youth to be educated in the Jewish learning. Now those that were
tutors and professors in these synagogues, seeing the gospel grow, and
the rulers conniving at the growth of it, and fearing what would be the
consequence of it to the Jewish religion, which they were jealous for,
being confident of the goodness of their cause, and their own
sufficiency to manage it, would undertake to run down Christianity by
force of argument. It was a fair and rational way of dealing with it,
and what religion is always ready to admit. Produce your cause, saith
the Lord, bring forth your strong reasons, [Isa
41:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#021). But why did they dispute with
Stephen? And why not with the apostles themselves? (1.) Some think
because they despised the apostles as unlearned and ignorant men, whom
they thought it below them to engage with; but Stephen was bred a
scholar, and they thought it their honour to meddle with their match.
(2.) Others think it was because they stood in awe of the apostles, and
could not be so free and familiar with them as they could be with
Stephen, who was in an inferior office. (3.) Perhaps, they having given
a public challenge, Stephen was chosen and appointed by the disciples to
be their champion; for it was not meet that the apostles should leave
the preaching of the word of God to engage in controversy. Stephen, who
was only a deacon in the church, and a very sharp young man, of bright
parts, and better qualified to deal with wrangling disputants than the
apostles themselves, was appointed to this service. Some historians say
that Stephen had been bred up at the feet of Gamaliel, and that Saul and
the rest of them set upon him as a deserter, and with a particular fury
made him their mark. (4.) It is probable that they disputed with Stephen
because he was zealous to argue with them and convince them, and this
was the service to which God had called him.

2\. We are here told how he carried the point in this dispute ([Act
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#010)): They were not able to resist
the wisdom and the Spirit by which he spoke. They could neither support
their own arguments nor answer his. He proved by such irresistible
arguments that Jesus is the Christ, and delivered himself with so much
clearness and fulness that they had nothing to object against what he
said; though they were not convinced, yet they were confounded. It is
not said, They were not able to resist him, but, They were not able to
resist the wisdom and the Spirit by which he spoke, that Spirit of
wisdom which spoke by him. Now was fulfilled that promise, I will give
you a mouth and wisdom which all your adversaries shall not be able to
gainsay nor resist, [Luk 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#015). They
thought they had only disputed with Stephen, and could make their part
good with him; but they were disputing with the Spirit of God in him,
for whom they were an unequal match.

III\. At length, he sealed it with his blood; so we shall find he did in
the next chapter; here we have some steps taken by his enemies towards
it. When they could not answer his arguments as a disputant, they
prosecuted him as a criminal, and suborned witnesses against him, to
swear blasphemy upon him. "On such terms (saith Mr. Baxter here) do we
dispute with malignant men. And it is next to a miracle of providence
that no greater number of religious persons have been murdered in the
world, by the way of perjury and pretence of law, when so many thousands
hate them who make no conscience of false oaths." They suborned men,
that is, instructed them what to say, and then hired them to swear it.
They were the more enraged against him because he had proved them to be
in the wrong, and shown them the right way; for which they ought to have
given him their best thanks. Was he therefore become their enemy,
because he told them the truth, and proved it to be so? Now let us
observe here,

1\. How with all possible art and industry they incensed both the
government and the mob against him, that, if they could not prevail by
the one, they might by the other ([Act
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#012)): They stirred up the people
against him, that, if the sanhedrim should still think fit (according to
Gamaliel's advice) to let him alone, yet they might run him down by a
popular rage and tumult; they also found means to stir up the elders and
scribes against him, that, if the people should countenance and protect
him, they might prevail by authority. Thus they doubted not but to gain
their point, when then had two strings to their bow.

2\. How they got him to the bar: They came upon him, when he little
thought of it, and caught him and brought him to the council. They came
upon him in a body, and flew upon him as a lion upon his prey; so the
word signifies. By their rude and violent treatment of him, they would
represent him, both to the people, and to the government, as a dangerous
man, that would either flee from justice if he were not watched, or
fight with it if he were not put under a force. Having caught him, they
brought him triumphantly into the council, and, as it should seem, so
hastily that he had none of his friends with him. They had found, when
they brought many together, that they emboldened one another, and
strengthened one another's hands; and therefore they will try how to
deal with them singly.

3\. How they were prepared with evidence ready to produce against him.
They were resolved that they would not be run a-ground, as they were
when they brought our Saviour upon his trial, and then had to seek for
witnesses. These were got ready beforehand, and were instructed to make
oath that they had heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and
against God ([Act 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#011)) - against this
holy place and the law ([Act 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013));
for they heard him say what Jesus would do to their place and their
customs, [Act 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#014). It is probable
that he had said something to that purport; and yet those who swore it
against him are called false witnesses, because, though there was
something of truth in their testimony, yet they put a wrong and
malicious construction upon what he had said, and perverted it. Observe,

(1.) What was the general charge exhibited against him - that he spoke
blasphemous words; and, to aggravate the matter, "He ceases not to speak
blasphemous words; it is his common talk, his discourse in all
companies; wheresoever he comes, he makes it his business to instil his
notions into all he converses with." It intimates likewise something of
contumacy and contempt of admonition. "He has been warned against it,
and yet ceases not to talk at this rate." Blasphemy is justly reckoned a
heinous crime (to speak contemptibly and reproachfully of God our
Maker), and therefore Stephen's persecutors would be thought to have a
deep concern upon them for the honour of God's name, and to do this in a
jealousy for that. As it was with the confessors and martyrs of the Old
Testament, so it was with those of the New - their brethren that hated
them, and cast them out, said, Let the Lord be glorified; and pretended
they did him service in it. He is said to have spoken blasphemous words
against Moses and against God. Thus far they were right, that those who
blaspheme Moses (if they meant the writings of Moses, which were given
by inspiration of God) blaspheme God himself. Those that speak
reproachfully of the scriptures, and ridicule them, reflect upon God
himself, and do despite to him. His great intention is to magnify the
law and make it honourable; those therefore that vilify the law, and
make it contemptible, blaspheme his name; for he has magnified his word
above all his name. But did Stephen blaspheme Moses? By no means, he was
far from it. Christ, and the preachers of his gospel, never said any
thing that looked like blaspheming Moses; they always quoted his
writings with respect, appealed to them, and said no other things than
what Moses said should come; very unjustly therefore is Stephen indicted
for blaspheming Moses. But,

(2.) Let us see how this charge is supported and made out; why, truly,
when the thing was to be proved, all they can charge him with is that he
hath spoken blasphemous words against this holy place and the law; and
this must be deemed and taken as blasphemy against Moses and against God
himself. Thus does the charge dwindle when it comes to the evidence.
\[1.\] He is charged with blaspheming this holy place. Some understand
this of the city of Jerusalem, which was the holy city, and which they
had a mighty jealousy for. But it is rather meant of the temple, that
holy house. Christ was condemned as a blasphemer for words which were
thought to reflect upon the temple, which they seemed concerned for the
honour of, even when they by their wickedness had profaned it. \[2.\] He
is charged with blaspheming the law, of which they made their boast, and
in which they put their trust, when through breaking the law they
dishonoured God, [Rom 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#023). Well, but
how can they make this out? Why, here the charge dwindles again; for all
they can accuse him of is that they had themselves heard him say (but
how it came in, or what explication he gave to if, they think not
themselves bound to give account) that this Jesus of Nazareth, who was
so much talked of, shall destroy this place, and change the customs
which Moses delivered to us. He could not be charged with having said
any thing to the disparagement either of the temple or of the law. The
priests had themselves profaned the temple, by making it not only a
house of merchandise, but a den of thieves; yet they would be thought
zealous for the honour of it, against one that had never said any thing
amiss of it, but had attended it more as a house of prayer, according to
the true intention of it, than they had. Nor had he ever reproached the
law as they had. But, First, He had said, Jesus of Nazareth shall
destroy this place, destroy the temple, destroy Jerusalem. It is
probable that he might say so; and what blasphemy was it against the
holy place to say that it should not be perpetual any more than Shiloh
was, and that the just and holy God would not continue the privileges of
his sanctuary to those that abused them? Had not the prophets given the
same warning to their fathers of the destruction of that holy place by
the Chaldeans? Nay, when the temple was first built, had not God himself
given the same warning: This house, which is high, shall be an
astonishment, [Ch2 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#021). And is he a
blasphemer, then, who tells them that Jesus of Nazareth, if they
continue their opposition to him, will bring a just destruction upon
their place and nation, and they may thank themselves? Those wickedly
abuse their profession of religion who, under colour of that, call the
reproofs given them for their disagreeable conversations blasphemous
reflections upon their religion. Secondly, He had said, This Jesus shall
change the customs which Moses delivered to us. And it was expected that
in the days of the Messiah they should be changed, and that the shadows
should be done away when the substance was come; yet this was no
essential change of the law, but the perfecting of it. Christ came, not
to destroy, but to fulfil, the law; and, if he changed some customs that
Moses delivered, it was to introduce and establish those that were much
better; and if the Jewish church had not obstinately refused to come
into this new establishment, and adhered to the ceremonial law, for
aught I know their place had not been destroyed; so that for putting
them into a certain way to prevent their destruction, and for giving
them certain notice of their destruction if they did not take that way,
he is accused as a blasphemer.

IV\. We are here told how God owned him when he was brought before the
council, and made it to appear that he stood by him ([Act
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#015)): All that sat in the council,
the priests, scribes, and elders, looking stedfastly on him, being a
stranger, and one they had not yet had before them, saw his face as it
had been the face of an angel. It is usual for judges to observe the
countenance of the prisoner, which sometimes is an indication either of
guilt or innocence. Now Stephen appeared at the bar with the countenance
as of an angel. 1. Perhaps it intimates no more than that he had an
extraordinarily pleasant, cheerful countenance, and there was not in it
the least sign either of fear for himself or anger at his persecutors.
He looked as if he had never been better pleased in his life than he was
now when he was called out to bear his testimony to the gospel of
Christ, thus publicly, and stood fair for the crown of martyrdom. Such
an undisturbed serenity, such an undaunted courage, and such an
unaccountable mixture of mildness and majesty, there was in his
countenance, that every one said he looked like an angel; enough surely
to convince the Sadducees that there are angels, when they saw before
their eyes an incarnate angel. 2. It should rather seem that there was a
miraculous splendour and brightness upon his countenance, like that of
our Saviour when he was transfigured - or, at least, that of Moses when
he came down from the mount - God designing thereby to put honour upon
his faithful witness and confusion upon his persecutors and judges,
whose sin would be highly aggravated, and would be indeed a rebellion
against the light, if, notwithstanding this, they proceeded against him.
Whether he himself knew that the skin of his face shone or no we are not
told; but all that sat in the council saw it, and probably took notice
of it to one another, and an arrant shame it was that when they saw, and
could not but see by it that he was owned of God, they did not call him
from standing at the bar to sit in the chief seat upon the bench. Wisdom
and holiness make a man's face to shine, and yet these will not secure
men from the greatest indignities; and no wonder, when the shining of
Stephen's face could not be his protection; though it had been easy to
prove that if he had been guilty of putting any dishonour upon Moses God
would not thus have put Moses's honour upon him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 7](act007)

</div>
