<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1.md)  
  [Previous](ch1003)  [Next](ch1005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#001.md)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 4:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. A further account of the genealogies of the
tribe of Judah, the most numerous and most famous of all the tribes. The
posterity of Shobal the son of Hur ([Ch1
4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#001).md), of Ashur the posthumous son of
Hezron (who was mentioned, [Ch1 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#024).md),
with something particular concerning Jabez ([Ch1
4:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#005).md), of Chelub and others ([Ch1
4:11-20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#011).md), of Shelah ([Ch1
4:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#021).md). II. An account of the
posterity and cities of Simeon, their conquest of Gedon, and of the
Amalekites in Mount Seir (v. 24-43).

[1 Chronicles 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 4:1</span></span>

One reason, no doubt, why Ezra is here most particular in the register
of the tribe of Judah is because it was that tribe which, with its
appendages, Simeon, Benjamin, and Levi, made up the kingdom of Judah,
which not only long survived the other tribes in Canaan, but in process
of time, now when this was written, returned out of captivity, when the
generality of the other tribes were lost in the kingdom of Assyria. The
most remarkable person in this paragraph is Jabez. It is not said whose
son he was, nor does it appear in what age he lived; but, it should
seem, he was the founder of one of the families of Aharhel, mentioned
[Ch1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#008.md). Here is,

I. The reason of his name: his mother gave him the name with this
reason, Because I bore him with sorrow, [Ch1
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#009.md). All children are borne with
sorrow (for the sentence upon the woman is, In sorrow shalt thou bring
forth children), but some with much more sorrow than others. Usually the
sorrow in bearing is afterwards forgotten for joy that the child is
born; but here it seems it was so extraordinary that it was remembered
when the child came to be circumcised, and care was taken to perpetuate
the remembrance of it while he lived. Perhaps the mother called Habez,
as Rachel called her son Benoni, when she was dying of the sorrow. Or,
if she recovered it, yet thus she recorded it, 1. That it might be a
continual memorandum to herself, to be thankful to God as long as she
lived for supporting her under and bringing her through that sorrow. It
may be of use to be often reminded of our sorrows, that we may always
have such thoughts of things as we had in the day of our affliction, and
may learn to rejoice with trembling. 2. That it might likewise be a
memorandum to him what this world is into which she bore him, a vale of
tears, in which he must expect few days and full of trouble. The sorrow
he carried in his name might help to put a seriousness upon his spirit.
It might also remind him to love and honour his mother, and labour, in
every thing, to be a comfort to her who brought him into the world with
so much sorrow. It is piety in children thus to requite their parents,
[Ti1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004.md).

II\. The eminence of his character: He was more honourable than his
brethren, qualified above them by the divine grace and dignified above
them by the divine providence; they did virtuously, but he excelled them
all. Now the sorrow with which his mother bore him was abundantly
recompensed. That son which of all her children cost her most dear she
was most happy in, and was made glad in proportion to the affliction,
[Psa 90:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#015.md). We are not told upon what
account he was more honourable than his brethren, whether because he
raised a greater estate, or was preferred to the magistracy, or
signalized himself in war; we have most reason to think it was upon the
account of his learning and piety, not only because these, above any
thing, put honour upon a man, but because we have reason to think that
in these Jabez was eminent. 1. In learning, because we find that the
families of the scribes dwelt at Jabez ([Ch1
2:55](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#055).md), a city which, it is likely,
took its name from him. The Jews say that he was a famous doctor of the
law and left many disciples behind him. And it should seem, by the
mentioning of him so abruptly here, that his name was well known when
Ezra wrote this. 2. In piety, because we find here that he was a praying
man. His inclination to devotion made him truly honourable, and by
prayer he obtained those blessings from God which added much to his
honour. The way to be truly great is to be truly good and to pray much.

III\. The prayer he made, probably like Solomon's prayer for wisdom,
just when he was setting out in the world. He set himself to acknowledge
God in all his ways, put himself under the divine blessing and
protection, and prospered accordingly. Perhaps these were the heads on
which he enlarged in his daily prayers; for this purpose it was his
constant practice to pray alone, and with his family, as Daniel. Some
think that it was upon some particular occasion, when he was straitened
and threatened by his enemies, that he prayed this prayer. Observe,

1\. To whom he prayed, not to any of the gods of the Gentiles; no, he
called on the God of Israel, the living and true God, who alone can hear
and answer prayer, and in prayer had an eye to him as the God of Israel,
a God in covenant with his people, the God with whom Jacob wrestled and
prevailed and was thence called Israel.

2\. What was the nature of his prayer. (1.) As the margin reads it, it
was a solemn vow - If thou wilt bless me indeed, etc. and then the sense
is imperfect, but may easily be filled up from Jacob's vow, or some such
like - then thou shalt be my God. He did not express his promise, but
left it to be understood, either because he was afraid to promise in his
own strength or because he resolved to devote himself entirely to God.
He does, as it were, give God a blank paper, let him write what he
pleases: "Lord, if thou wilt bless me and keep me, do what thou wilt
with me, I will be at thy command and disposal for ever." (2.) As the
text reads it, it was the language of a most ardent and affectionate
desire: O that thou wouldst bless me!

3\. What was the matter of his prayer. Four things he prayed for: - (1.)
That God would bless him indeed: "That, blessing, thou wilt bless me,
bless me greatly with manifold and abundant blessings." Perhaps he had
an eye to the promise God made to Abraham ([Gen
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017).md), In blessing, I will bless
thee. "Let that blessing of Abraham come upon me." Spiritual blessings
are the best blessings, and those are blessed indeed who are blessed
with them. God's blessings are real things and produce real effects. We
can but wish a blessing: he commands it. Those whom he blesses are
blessed indeed. (2.) That he would enlarge his coast, that he would
prosper his endeavours for the increase of what fell to his lot either
by work or war. That God would enlarge our hearts, and so enlarge our
portion in himself and in the heavenly Canaan, ought to be our desire
and prayer. (3.) That God's hand might be with him. The prayer of Moses
for this tribe of Judah was, That his own hands might be sufficient for
him, [Deu 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#007.md); but Jabez expects not
that this can be the case, unless he have God's hand with him and the
presence of his power. God's hand with us, to lead us, protect us,
strengthen us, and to work all our works in us and for us, is indeed a
hand sufficient for us, all-sufficient. (4.) That he would keep him from
evil, the evil of sin, the evil of trouble, all the evil designs of his
enemies, that they might not hurt him, nor grieve him, nor make him a
Jabez indeed, a man of sorrow: in the original there is an allusion to
his name. Father in heaven, deliver me from evil.

4\. What was the success of his prayer: God granted him that which he
requested, prospered him remarkably, and gave him success in his
undertakings, in his studies, in his worldly business, in his conflicts
with the Canaanites, and so he became more honourable than his brethren.
God was of old always ready to hear prayer, and his ear is not yet
heavy.

[1 Chronicles 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch1 4:11</span></span>

We may observe in these verses, 1. That here is a whole family of
craftsmen, handicraft tradesmen, that applied themselves to all sorts of
manufactures, in which they were ingenious and industrious above their
neighbours, [Ch1 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#014.md). There was a
valley where they lived which was, from them, called the valley of
craftsmen. Those that are craftsmen are not therefore to be looked upon
as mean men. These craftsmen, though two of a trade often disagree, yet
chose to live together, for the improving of arts by comparing notes,
and that they might support one another's reputation. 2. That one of
these married the daughter of Pharaoh ([Ch1
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#018).md), which was the common name of
the kings of Egypt. If an Israelite in Egypt before the bondage began,
while Joseph's merits were yet fresh in mind, was preferred to be the
king's son-in-law, it is not to be thought strange: few Israelites
could, like Moses, refuse an alliance with the court. 3. That another is
said to be the father of the house of those that wrought fine linen,
[Ch1 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#021.md). It is inserted in their
genealogy as their honour that they were the best weavers in the
kingdom, and they brought up their children, from one generation to
another, to the same business, not aiming to make them gentlemen. This
Laadah is said to be the father of those that wrought fine linen, as
before the flood Jubal is said to be the father of musicians and Jabal
of shepherds, etc. His posterity inhabited the city of Mareshah, the
manufacture or staple commodity of which place was linen-cloth, with
which their kings and priests were clothed. 4. That another family had
had dominion in Moab, but were now in servitude in Babylon, [Ch1
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#022.md), [Ch1
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#023). (1..md) It was found among the
ancient things that they had the dominion in Moab. Probably in David's
time, when that country was conquered, they transplanted themselves
thither, and were put in places of power there, which they held for
several generations; but this was a great while ago, time out of mind.
(2.) Their posterity were now potters and gardeners, as is supposed in
Babylon, where they dwelt with the king for his work, got a good
livelihood by their industry, and therefore cared not for returning with
their brethren to their own land, after the years of captivity had
expired. Those that now have dominion know not what their posterity may
be reduced to, nor what mean employments they may be glad to take up
with. But those were unworthy the name of Israelites that would dwell
among plants and hedges rather than be at the pains to return to Canaan.

[1 Chronicles 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ch1 4:24</span></span>

We have here some of the genealogies of the tribe of Simeon (though it
was not a tribe of great note), especially the princes of that tribe,
[Ch1 4:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#038.md). Of this tribe it is said
that they increased greatly, but not like the children of Judah, [Ch1
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#027.md). Those whom God increases ought
to be thankful, though they see others that are more increased. Here
observe, 1. The cities allotted them ([Ch1
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#028).md), of which see [Jos
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001.md), etc. When it is said that they
were theirs unto the reign of David ([Ch1
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#031).md) intimation is given that when
the ten tribes revolted from the house of David many of the Simeonites
quitted these cities, because they lay within Judah, and seated
themselves elsewhere. 2. The ground they got elsewhere. When those of
this tribe that revolted from the house of David were carried captive
with the rest into Assyria those that adhered to Judah were remarkably
owned of God and prospered in their endeavours to enlarge their coasts.
It was in the days of Hezekiah that a generation of Simeonites, whose
tribe had long crouched and truckled, was animated to make these bold
efforts. (1.) Some of them attacked a place in Arabia, as it should
seem, called the entrance of Gedor, inhabited by the posterity of
accursed Ham ([Ch1 4:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#040).md), made
themselves masters of it, and dwelt there. This adds to the glory of
Hezekiah's pious reign, that, as his kingdom in general prospered, so
did particular families. It is said that they found fat pastures, and
yet the land was quiet; even when the kings of Assyria were giving
disturbance to all their neighbours this land escaped their alarms. The
inhabitants being shepherds, who molested none, were not themselves
molested, till the Simeonites came and drove them out and succeeded
them, not only in the plenty, but in the peace, of their land. Those who
dwell (as we do) in a fruitful country, and whose land is wide, and
quiet, and peaceable, have reason to own themselves indebted to that God
who appoints the bounds of our habitation. (2.) Others of them, to the
number of 500, under the command of four brethren here named, made a
descent upon Mount Seir, and smote the remainder of the devoted
Amalekites, and took possession of their country, [Ch1
4:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#042.md), [Ch1
4:43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#043.md). Now the curses on Ham and Amalek
had a further accomplishment, when they seemed dormant, if not dead; as
had also the curse on Simeon, that he should be divided and scattered
([Gen 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#007).md): yet to him it was turned
into a blessing, for the families of Simeon, which thus transplanted
themselves into those distant countries, are said to dwell there unto
this day ([Ch1 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#043).md), by which it
should seem they escaped the calamities of the captivity. Providence
sometimes sends those out of trouble that are designed for preservation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 5](ch1005.md)

</div>
