<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1005)  [Next](ch1007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 6:0</span></span>

Though Joseph and Judah shared between them the forfeited honours of the
birthright, yet Levi was first of all the tribes, dignified and
distinguished with an honour more valuable than either the precedency or
the double portion, and that was the priesthood. That tribe God set
apart for himself; it was Moses's tribe, and perhaps for his sake was
thus favoured. Of that tribe we have an account in this chapter. I.
Their pedigree, the first fathers of the tribe ([Ch1
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#001)), the line of the priests, from
Aaron to the captivity ([Ch1 6:4-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#004)),
and of some other of their families ([Ch1
6:16-30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#016)). II. Their work, the work of
the Levites (v. 31-48), of the priests ([Ch1
6:49-53](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#049)). III. The cities appointed
them in the land of Canaan (v. 54-81).

[1 Chronicles 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 6:1</span></span>

The priests and Levites were more concerned than any other Israelites to
preserve their pedigree clear and to be able to prove it, because all
the honours and privileges of their office depended upon their descent.
And we read of those who, though perhaps they really were children of
the priests, yet, because they could not find the register of their
genealogies, nor make out their descent by any authentic record, were,
as polluted, put from the priesthood, and forbidden to eat of the holy
things, [Ezr 2:62](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#062), [Ezr
2:63](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#063). It is but very little that is
here recorded of the genealogies of this sacred tribe. I. The first
fathers of it are here named twice, [Ch1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#001), [Ch1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#016). Gershom, Kohath, and Merari, are
three names which we were very conversant with in the book of Numbers,
when the families of the Levites were marshalled and had their work
assigned to them. Aaron, and Moses, and Miriam, we have known much more
of than their names, and cannot pass them over here without remembering
that this was that Moses and Aaron whom God honoured in making them
instruments of Israel's deliverance and settlement and figures of him
that was to come, Moses as a prophet and Aaron as a priest. And the
mention of Nadab and Abihu (though, having no children, there was no
occasion to bring them into the genealogy) cannot but remind us of the
terrors of that divine justice which they were made monuments of for
offering strange fire, that we may always fear before him. 2. The line
of Eleazar, the successor of Aaron, is here drawn down to the time of
the captivity, [Ch1 6:4-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#004). It begins
with Eleazar, who came out of the house of bondage in Egypt, and ends
with Jehozadak, who went into the house of bondage in Babylon. Thus, for
their sins, they were left as they were found, which might also intimate
that the Levitical priesthood did not make anything perfect, but this
was to be done by the bringing in of a better hope. All these here named
were not high priests; for, in the time of the judges, that dignity was,
upon some occasion or other, brought into the family of Ithamar, of
which Eli was; but in Zadok it returned again to the right line. Of
Azariah it is here said (v. 10), He it is that executed the priest's
office in the temple that Solomon built. It is supposed that this was
that Azariah who bravely opposed the presumption of king Uzziah when he
invaded the priest's office ([Ch2
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#017), [Ch2
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#018)), though he ventured his neck by
so doing. This was done like a priest, like one that was truly zealous
for his God. He that thus boldly maintained and defended the priest's
office, and made good its barriers against such a daring insult, might
well be said to execute it; and this honour is put upon him for it;
while Urijah, one of his successors, for a base compliance with King
Ahaz, in building him an idolatrous altar, has the disgrace put upon him
of being left out of this genealogy, as perhaps some others are. But
some think that this remark upon this Azariah should have been added to
his grandfather of the same name ([Ch1
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#009)), who was the son of Ahimaaz, and
that he was the priest who first officiated in Solomon's temple. 3. Some
other of the families of the Levites are here accounted for. One of the
families of Gershom (that of Libni) is here drawn down as far as Samuel,
who had the honour of a prophet added to that of a Levite. One of the
families of Merari (that of Mahli) is likewise drawn down for several
descents, [Ch1 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#029), [Ch1
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#030).

[1 Chronicles 6:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">ch1 6:31</span></span>

When the Levites were first ordained in the wilderness much of the work
then appointed them lay in carrying and taking care of the tabernacle
and the utensils of it, while they were in their march through the
wilderness. In David's time their number was increased; and, though the
greater part of them was dispersed all the nation over, to teach the
people the good knowledge of the Lord, yet those that attended the house
of God were so numerous that there was not constant work for them all;
and therefore David, by special commission and direction from God,
new-modelled the Levites, as we shall find in the latter part of this
book. Here we are told what the work was which he assigned them.

I. Singing-work, [Ch1 6:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#031). David was
raised up on high to be the sweet psalmist of Israel ([Sa2
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001)), not only to pen psalms, but to
appoint the singing of them in the house of the Lord (not so much
because he was musical as because he was devout), and this he did after
that the ark had rest. While that was in captivity, obscure, and
unsettled, the harps were hung upon the willow-trees: singing was then
thought unseasonable (when the bridegroom is taken away they shall
fast); but the harps being resumed, and the songs revived, at the
bringing up of the ark, they were continued afterwards. For we should
rejoice as much in the prolonging of our spiritual privileges as in the
restoring of them. When the service of the ark was much superseded by
its rest they had other work cut out for them (for Levites should never
be idle) and were employed in the service of song. Thus when the people
of God come to the rest which remains for them above they shall take
leave of all their burdens and be employed in everlasting songs. These
singers kept up that service in the tabernacle till the temple was
built, and then they waited on their office there, [Ch1
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#032). When they came to that stately
magnificent house they kept as close both to their office and to their
order as they had done in the tabernacle. It is a pity that the
preferment of the Levites should ever make them remiss in their
business. We have here an account of the three great masters who were
employed in the service of the sacred song, with their respective
families; for they waited with their children, that is, such as
descended from them or were allied to them, [Ch1
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#033). Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, were
the three that were appointed to this service, one of each of the three
houses of the Levites, that there might be an equality in the
distribution of this work and honour, and that every one might know his
post, such an admirable order was there in this choir service. 1. Of the
house of Kohath was Heman with his family ([Ch1
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#033)), a man of a sorrowful spirit, if
it be the same Heman that penned the 88th psalm, and yet a singer. He
was the grandson of Samuel the prophet, the son of Joel, of whom it is
said that he walked not in the ways of Samuel ([Sa1
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#002), [Sa1
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#003)); but it seems, though the son did
not, the grandson did. Thus does the blessing entailed on the seed of
the upright sometimes pass over one generation and fasten upon the next.
And this Heman, though the grandson of that mighty prince, did not think
it below him to be a precentor in the house of God. David himself was
willing to be a door-keeper. Rather we may look upon this preferment of
the grandson in the church as a recompense for the humble modest
resignation which the grandfather made of his authority in the state.
Many such ways God has of making up his people's losses and balancing
their disgraces. Perhaps David, in making Heman the chief, had some
respect to his old friend Samuel. 2. Of the house of Gershom was Asaph,
called his brother, because in the same office and of the same tribe,
though of another family. He was posted on Heman's right hand in the
choir, [Ch1 6:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#039). Several of the
psalms bear his name, being either penned by him or tuned by him as the
chief musician. It is plain that he was the penman of some psalms; for
we read of those that praised the Lord in the words of David and of
Asaph. He was a seer as well as a singer, [Ch2
29:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#030). His pedigree is traced up here,
through names utterly unknown, as high as Levi, [Ch1
6:39-43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#039). 3. Of the house of Merari was
Ethan ([Ch1 6:44](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#044)), who was appointed
to Heman's left hand. His pedigree is also traced up to Levi, [Ch1
6:47](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#047). If these were the Heman and
Ethan that penned the 88th and 89th psalms, there appears no reason here
why they should be called Ezrahites (see the titles of those psalms), as
there does why those should be called so who are mentioned [Ch1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#006), and who were the sons of Zerah.

II\. There was serving-work, abundance of service to be done in the
tabernacle of the house of God ([Ch1
6:48](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#048)), to provide water and fuel, - to
wash and sweep, and carry out ashes, - to kill, and flay, and boil the
sacrifices; and to all such services there were Levites appointed, those
of other families, or perhaps those that were not fit to be singers,
that had either no good voice or no good ear. As every one has received
the gift, so let him minister. Those that could not sing must not
therefore be laid aside as good for nothing; though they were not fit
for that service, there was other service they might be useful in.

III\. There was sacrificing-work, and that was to be done by the priests
only, [Ch1 6:49](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#049). They only were to
sprinkle the blood and burn the incense; as for the work of the most
holy place, that was to be done by the high priest only. Each had his
work, and they both needed one another and both helped one another in
it. Concerning the work of the priests we are here told, 1. What was the
end they were to have in their eye. They were to make an atonement for
Israel, to mediate between the people and God; not to magnify and enrich
themselves, but to serve the public. They were ordained for men. 2. What
was the rule they were to have in their eye. They presided in God's
house, yet must do as they were bidden, according to all that God
commanded. That law the highest are subject to.

[1 Chronicles 6:54](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">ch1 6:54</span></span>

We have here an account of the Levites' cities. They are here called
their castles ([Ch1 6:54](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#054)), not only
because walled and fortified, and well guarded by the country (for it is
the interest of every nation to protect its ministers), but because they
and their possessions were, in a particular manner, the care of the
divine providence: as God was their portion, so God was their
protection; and a cottage will be a castle to those that abide under the
shadow of the Almighty. This account is much the same with that which we
had, Jos. 21. We need not be critical in comparing them (what good will
it do us?) nor will it do any hurt to the credit of the holy scripture
if the names of some of the places be not spelt just the same here as
they were there. We know it is common for cities to have several names.
Sarum and Salisbury, Salop and Shrewsbury, are more unlike than Hilen
([Ch1 6:58](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#058)) and Holon ([Jos
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#015)), Ashan ([Ch1
6:59](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#059)) and Ain ([Jos
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#016)), Alemeth ([Ch1
6:60](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#060)) and Almon ([Jos
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#018)); and time changes names. We are
only to observe that in this appointment of cities for the Levites God
took care, 1. For the accomplishment of dying Jacob's prediction
concerning this tribe, that it should be scattered in Israel, [Gen
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#007). 2. For the diffusing of the
knowledge of himself and his law to all parts of the land of Israel.
Every tribe had Levites' cities in it; and so every room was furnished
with a candle, so that none could be ignorant of his duty but it was
either his own fault or the Levites'. 3. For a comfortable maintenance
for those that ministered in holy things. Besides their tithes and
offerings, they had glebe-lands and cities of their own to dwell in.
Some of the most considerable cities of Israel fell to the Levites' lot.
Every tribe had benefit by the Levites, and therefore every tribe must
contribute to their support. Let him that is taught in the word
communicate to him that teacheth, and do it cheerfully.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 7](ch1007)

</div>
