<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1016)  [Next](ch1018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 17:0</span></span>

This excellent chapter is the same with 2 Sa. 7. It will be worth while
to look back upon what was there said upon it. Two things in general we
have in it: - I. God's gracious acceptance of David's purpose to build
him a house, and the promise he made thereupon ([Ch1
17:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#001)). II. David's gracious
acceptance of God's good promise to build him a house, and the prayer he
made thereupon ([Ch1 17:16-27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#016)).

[1 Chronicles 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 17:1</span></span>

Let us observe here,

I. How desirous and solicitous good people should be to serve the
interests of God's kingdom in the world, to the utmost of their
capacity. David could not be easy in a house of cedar while the ark was
lodged within curtains, [Ch1 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#001). The
concerns of the public should always be near our hearts. What pleasure
can we take in our own prosperity if we see not the good of Jerusalem?
When David is advanced to wealth and power see what his cares and
projects are. Not, "What shall I do for my children to get portions for
them? What shall I do to fill my coffers and enlarge my dominions?" But,
"What shall I do for God, to serve and honour him?" Those that are
contriving where to bestow their fruits and their good would do well to
enquire what condition the ark is in, and whether some may not be well
bestowed upon it.

II\. How ready God's prophets should be to encourage every good purpose.
Nathan was no sooner aware of David's good design than he bade him go
and do all that was within his heart ([Ch1
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#002)), for he had no reason to doubt
but that God was with him in it. Ministers should stir up the gifts and
graces that are in others as well as in themselves.

III\. How little God affects external pomp and splendour in his service.
His ark was content with a tabernacle ([Ch1
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#005)) and he never so much as
mentioned the building of a house for it; no, not when he had fixed his
people in great and goodly cities which they builded not, [Deu
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#010). He commanded the judges to feed
his people, but never bade them build him a house, [Ch1
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#006). We may well be content awhile
with mean accommodations; God's ark was so.

IV\. How graciously God accepts his people's good purposes, yea, though
he himself prevents the performance of them. David must not build this
house, [Ch1 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#004). He must prepare for
it, but not do it; as Moses must bring Israel within sight of Canaan,
but must them leave it to Joshua to put them in possession of it. It is
the prerogative of Christ to be both the author and finisher of his
work. Yet David must not think that, because he was not permitted to
build the temple, 1. His preferment was in vain; no, "I took thee from
the sheep-cote, though not to be a builder of the temple, yet to be
ruler over my people Israel; that is honour enough for thee; leave the
other to one that shall come after thee," [Ch1
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#007). Why should one man think to
engross all the business and to bring every good work to perfection? Let
something be left for those that succeed. God had given him victories,
and made him a name ([Ch1 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#008)), and,
further, intended by him to establish his people Israel and secure them
against their enemies, [Ch1 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#009). That
must be his work, who is a man of war and fit for it, and he must let
the building of churches be left to one that was never cut out for a
soldier. Nor, 2. Must he think that his good purpose was in vain, and
that he should lose the reward of it; no, it being God's act to prevent
the execution of it, he shall be as fully recompensed as if he had done
it; "The Lord will build thee a house, and annex the crown of Israel to
it," [Ch1 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#010). If there be a willing
mind, it shall not only be accepted, but thus rewarded. Nor, 3. Must he
think that because he might not do this good work therefore it would
never be done, and that it was in vain to think of it; no, I will raise
up thy seed, and he shall build me a house, [Ch1
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#011), [Ch1
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#012). God's temple shall be built in
the time appointed, though we may not have the honour of helping to
build it or the satisfaction of seeing it built. Nor, 4. Must he confine
his thoughts to the temporal prosperity of his family, but must
entertain himself with the prospect of the kingdom of the Messiah, who
should descend from his loins, and whose throne should be established
for evermore, [Ch1 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#014). Solomon was
not himself so settled in God's house as he should have been, nor was
his family settled in the kingdom: "But there shall one descend from
thee whom I will settle in my house and in my kingdom," which intimates
that he should be both a high priest over the house of God and should
have the sole administration of the affairs of God's kingdom among men,
all power both in heaven and in earth, in the house and in the kingdom,
in the church and in the world. He shall be a priest upon his throne,
and the counsel of peace shall be between them both, and he shall build
the temple of the Lord, [Zac 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012),
[Zac 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013).

[1 Chronicles 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ch1 17:16</span></span>

We have here David's solemn address to God, in answer to the gracious
message he had now received from him. By faith he receives the promises,
embraces them, and is persuaded of them, as the patriarchs, Heb, [Ch1
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#013). How humbly does he here abase
himself, and acknowledge his own unworthiness! How highly does he
advance the name of God and admire his condescending grace and favour!
With what devout affections does he magnify the God of Israel and what a
value has he for the Israel of God! With what assurance does he build
upon the promise, and with what a lively faith does he put it in suit!
What an example is this to us of humble, believing, fervent prayer! The
Lord enable us all thus to seek him! These things were largely observed,
2 Sa. 7. We shall therefore here observe only those few expressions in
which the prayer, as we find it here, differs from the record of it
there, and has something added to it.

I. That which is there expressed by way of question (Is this the manner
of men, O Lord God?) is here an acknowledgment: "Thou hast regarded me
according to the estate of a man of high degree. Thou hast made me a
great man, and then treated me accordingly." God, by the
covenant-relations into which he admits believers, the titles he gives
them, the favours he bestows on them, and the preparations he has made
for them, regards them according to the estate of men of high degree,
though they are mean and vile. Having himself distinguished them, he
treats them as persons of distinction, according to the quality he has
been pleased to put upon them. Some give these words here another
reading: "Thou hast looked upon me in the form of a man who art in the
highest, the Lord God; or, Thou hast made me to see according to the
form of a man the majesty of the Lord God." And so it points at the
Messiah; for, as Abraham, so David, saw his day and was glad, saw it by
faith, saw it in fashion as a man, the Word made flesh, and yet saw his
glory as that of the only-begotten of the Father. And this was that
which God spoke concerning his house for a great while to come, the
foresight of which affected him more than any thing. And let it not be
thought strange that David should speak so plainly of the two natures of
Christ who in spirit called him Lord, though he knew he was to be his
Son ([Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)), and foresaw him
lower than the angels for a little while, but afterwards crowned with
glory and honour, [Heb 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#006), [Heb
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#007).

II\. After the words What can David say more unto thee, it is here
added, for the honour of they servant? [Ch1
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#018). Note, The honour God puts upon
his servants, by taking them into covenant and communion with himself,
is so great that they need not, they cannot, desire to be more highly
honoured. Were they to sit down and wish, they could not speak more for
their own honour than the word of God has spoken.

III\. It is very observable that what in Samuel is said to be for thy
word's sake is here said to be for thy servant's sake, [Ch1
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#019). Jesus Christ is both the Word
of God ([Rev 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#013)) and the servant of
God ([Isa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)), and it is for his
sake, upon the score of his meditation, that the promises are both made
and made good to all believers; it is in him that they are yea and amen.
For his sake is all kindness done, for his sake it is made known; to him
we owe all this greatness and from him we are to expect all these great
things; they are the unsearchable riches of Christ, which, if by faith
we see in themselves and see in the hand of the Lord Jesus, we cannot
but magnify as great things, the only true greatness, and speak
honourably of accordingly.

IV\. In Samuel, the Lord of hosts is said to be the God over Israel;
here he is said to be the God of Israel, even a God to Israel, [Ch1
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#024). His being the God of Israel
bespeaks his having the name of their God and so calling himself; his
being a God to Israel bespeaks his answering to the name, his filling up
the relation, and doing all that to them which might be expected from
him. There were those that were called gods of such and such nations,
gods of Assyria and Egypt, gods of Hamad and Arpad; but they were no
gods to them, for they stood them in no stead at all, were mere ciphers,
nothing but a name. But the God of Israel is a God to Israel; all his
attributes and perfections redound to their real benefit and advantage.
Happy therefore, thrice happy, is the people whose God is Jehovah; for
he will be a God to them, a God all-sufficient.

V. The closing words in Samuel are, With thy blessing let the house of
thy servant be blessed forever. That is the language of a holy desire.
But the closing words here are the language of a most holy faith: For
thou blessest, O Lord! and it shall be blessed for ever, [Ch1
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#027). 1. He was encouraged to beg a
blessing because God had intimated to him that he had blessings in store
for him and his family: "Thou blessest, O Lord! and therefore unto thee
shall all flesh come for a blessing; unto thee do I come for the
blessing promised to me." Promises are intended to direct and excite
prayer. Has God said, I will bless? Let our hearts answer, Lord, bless
me, 2. He was earnest for the blessing because he believed that those
whom God blesses are truly and eternally blessed: Thou blessest, and it
shall be blessed. Men can but beg the blessing; it is God that commands
it. What he designs he effects; what he promises he performs; saying and
doing are not two things with him. Nay, it shall be blessed for ever.
His blessings shall not be revoked, cannot be opposed, and the benefits
conferred by them are such as will survive time and days. David's prayer
concludes as God's promise did ([Ch1
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#014)) with that which is for ever.
God's word looks at things eternal, and so should our desires and hopes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 18](ch1018)

</div>
