<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1000)  [Next](ch1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

This chapter and many that follow it repeat the genealogies we have
hitherto met with in the sacred history, and put them all together, with
considerable additions. We may be tempted, it may be, to think it would
have been well if they had not been written, because, when they come to
be compared with other parallel places, there are differences found,
which we can scarcely accommodate to our satisfaction; yet we must not
therefore stumble at the word, but bless God that the things necessary
to salvation are plain enough. And since the wise God has thought fit to
write these things to us, we should not pass them over unread. All
scripture is profitable, though not all alike profitable; and we may
take occasion for good thoughts and meditations even from those parts of
scripture that do not furnish so much matter for profitable remarks as
some other parts. These genealogies, 1. Were then of great use, when
they were here preserved, and put into the hands of the Jews after their
return from Babylon; for the captivity, like the deluge, had put all
into confusion, and they, in that dispersion and despair, would be in
danger of losing the distinctions of their tribes and families. This
therefore revives the ancient landmarks even of some of the tribes that
were carried captive into Assyria. Perhaps it might invite the Jews to
study the sacred writings which had been neglected, to find the names of
their ancestors, and the rise of their families in them. 2. They are
still of some use for the illustrating of the scripture-story, and
especially for the clearing of the pedigrees of the Messiah, that it
might appear that our blessed Saviour was, according to the prophecies
which went before of him, the son of David, the son of Judah, the son of
Abraham, the son of Adam. And, now that he has come for whose sake these
registers were preserved, the Jews since have so lost all their
genealogies that even that of the priests, the most sacred of all, is
forgotten, and they know not of any one man in the world that can prove
himself of the house of Aaron. When the building is reared the scaffolds
are removed. When the promised Seed has come the line that was to lead
to him is broken off. In this chapter we have an abstract of all the
genealogies in the book of Genesis, till we come to Jacob. I. The
descents from Adam to Noah and his sons, out of Gen. 5, ([Ch1
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)). II. The posterity of Noah's
sons, by which the earth was repeopled, out of Gen. 10, (v. 5-23). III.
The descents from Shem to Abraham, out of Gen. 11, ([Ch1
1:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#024)). IV. The posterity of
Ishmael, and of Abraham's sons by Keturah, out of Gen. 25, ([Ch1
1:29-35](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#029)). V. The posterity of Esau,
out of Gen. 36, (v. 36-54). These, it is likely, were passed over
lightly in Genesis; and therefore, according to the law of the school,
we are made to go over that lesson again which we did not learn well.

[1 Chronicles 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 1:1</span></span>

This paragraph has Adam for its first word and Abraham for its last.
Between the creation of the former and the birth of the latter were 2000
years, almost the one-half of which time Adam himself lived. Adam was
the common father of our flesh, Abraham the common father of the
faithful. By the breach which the former made of the covenant of
innocency, we were all made miserable; by the covenant of grace made
with the latter, we all are, or may be, made happy. We all are, by
nature, the seed of Adam, branches of that wild olive. Let us see to it
that, by faith, we become the seed of Abraham ([Rom
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011), [Rom
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#012)), that we be grafted into the
good olive and partake of its root and fatness.

I. The first four verses of this paragraph, and the last four, which are
linked together by Shem ([Ch1 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#004),
[Ch1 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#024)), contain the sacred line of
Christ from Adam to Abraham, and are inserted in his pedigree, [Luk
3:34-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#034), the order ascending as here
it descends. This genealogy proves the falsehood of that reproach, As
for this man, we know not whence he is. Bishop Patrick well observes
here that, a genealogy being to be drawn of the families of the Jews,
this appears as the peculiar glory of the Jewish nation, that they alone
were able to derive their pedigree from the first man that God created,
which no other nation pretended to, but abused themselves and their
posterity with fabulous accounts of their originals, the Arcadians
fancying that they were before the moon, the people of Thessaly that
they sprang from stones, the Athenians that they grew out of the earth,
much like the vain imaginations which some of the philosophers had of
the origin of the universe. The account which the holy scripture gives
both of the creation of the world and of the rise of nations carries
with it as clear evidences of its own truth as those idle traditions do
of their own vanity and falsehood.

II\. All the verses between repeat the account of the replenishing of
the earth by the sons of Noah after the flood. 1. The historian begins
with those who were strangers to the church, the sons of Japhet, who
were planted in the isles of the Gentiles, those western parts of the
world, the countries of Europe. Of these he gives a short account ([Ch1
1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#005)), because with these the Jews
had hitherto had little or no dealings. 2. He proceeds to those who had
many of them been enemies to the church, the sons of Ham, who moved
southward towards Africa and those parts of Asia which lay that way.
Nimrod the son of Cush began to be an oppressor, probably to the people
of God in his time. But Mizraim, from whom came the Egyptians, and
Canaan, from whom came the Canaanites, are both of them names of great
note in the Jewish story; for with their descendants the Israel of God
had severe struggles to get out of the land of Egypt and into the land
of Canaan; and therefore the branches of Mizraim are particularly
recorded ([Ch1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#011), [Ch1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#012)), and of Canaan, [Ch1
1:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#013). See at what a rate God valued
Israel when he gave Egypt for their ransom ([Isa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003)), and cast out all these nations
before them, [Psa 80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008). 3. He then
gives an account of those that were the ancestors and allies of the
church, the posterity of Shem, [Ch1
1:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#017). These peopled Asia, and
spread themselves eastward. The Assyrians, Syrians, Chaldeans, Persians,
and Arabians, descended from these. At first the originals of the
respective nations were known; but at this day, we have reason to think,
the nations are so mingled with one another, by the enlargement of
commerce and dominion, the transplanting of colonies, the carrying away
of captives, and many other circumstances, that no one nation, no, nor
the greatest part of any, is descended entire from any one of these
fountains. Only this we are sure of, that God has created of one blood
all nations of men; they have all descended from one Adam, one Noah.
Have we not all one father? Has not one God created us? [Mal
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010). Our register hastens to the line
of Abraham, breaking off abruptly from all the other families of the
sons of Noah but that of Arphaxad, from whom Christ was to come. The
great promise of the Messiah (says bishop Patrick) was translated from
Adam to Seth, from him to Shem, from him to Eber, and so to the Hebrew
nation, who were entrusted, above all nations, with that sacred
treasure, till the promise was performed and the Messiah had come, and
then that nation was made not a people.

[1 Chronicles 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">ch1 1:28</span></span>

All nations but the seed of Abraham are already shaken off from this
genealogy: they have no part nor lot in this matter. The Lord's portion
is his people. Of them he keeps an account, knows them by name; but
those who are strangers to him he beholds afar off. Not that we are to
conclude that therefore no particular persons of any other nation but
the seed of Abraham found favour with God. It was a truth, before Peter
perceived it, that in every nation he that feared God and wrought
righteousness was accepted of him. Multitudes will be brought to heaven
out of all nations ([Rev 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009)), and we
are willing to hope there were many, very many, good people in the
world, that lay out of the pale of God's covenant of peculiarity with
Abraham, whose names were in the book of life, though not descended from
any of the following families written in this book. The Lord knows those
that are his. But Israel was a chosen nation, elect in type; and no
other nation, in its national capacity, was so dignified and privileged
as the Jewish nation was. That is the holy nation which is the subject
of the sacred story; and therefore we are next to shake off all the seed
of Abraham but the posterity of Jacob only, which were all incorporated
into one nation and joined to the Lord, while the other descendants from
Abraham, for aught that appears, were estranged both from God and from
one another.

I. We shall have little to say of the Ishmaelites. They were the sons of
the bondwoman, that were to be cast out and not to be heirs with the
child of the promise; and their case was to represent that of the
unbelieving Jews, who were rejected ([Gal
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#022), etc.), and therefore there is
little notice taken of that nation. Ishmael's twelve sons are just named
here ([Ch1 1:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#029)), to show the
performance of the promise God made to Abraham, in answer to his prayer
for him, that, for Abraham's sake, he should become a great nation, and
particularly that he should beget twelve princes, [Gen
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#020).

II\. We shall have little to say of the Midianites, who descended from
Abraham's children by Keturah. They were children of the east (probably
Job was one of them), and were separated from Isaac, the heir of the
promise ([Gen 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#006)), and therefore
they are only named here, [Ch1 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#032).
The sons of Jokshan, the son of Keturah, are named also, and the sons of
Midian ([Ch1 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#032), [Ch1
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#033)), who became most eminent, and
perhaps gave denomination to all these families, as Judah to the Jews.

III\. We shall not have much to say of the Edomites. They had an
inveterate enmity to God's Israel; yet because they descended from Esau,
the son of Isaac, we have here an account of their families, and the
names of some of their famous men, [Ch1
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#035) to the end. Some slight
differences there are between some of the names here, and as we had them
in Gen. 36, whence this whole account is taken. Three of four names that
were written with a Vau there are written with a Jod here, probably the
pronunciation being altered, as is usual in other languages. we now
write many words very differently from what they were written but 200
years ago. Let us take occasion, from the reading of these genealogies,
to think, 1. Of the multitudes that have gone through this world, have
acted their part in it, and then quitted it. Job, even in his early day,
saw not only every man drawing after him, but innumerable before him,
[Job 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#033). All these, and all theirs,
had their day; many of them made a mighty noise and figure in the world;
but their day came to fall, and their place knew them no more. The paths
of death are trodden paths, but vestigia nulla retrorsum - none can
retrace their steps. 2. Of the providence of God, which keeps up the
generations of men, and so preserves that degenerate race, though guilty
and obnoxious, in being upon earth. How easily could he cut it off
without either a deluge or a conflagration! Write but all the children
of men childless, as some are, and in a few years the earth will be
eased of the burden under which it groans; but the divine patience lets
the trees that cumber the ground not only grow, but propagate. As one
generation, even of sinful men, passes away, another comes ([Ecc
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#004); [Num
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#014)), and will do so while the earth
remains. Destroy it not, for a blessing is in it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 2](ch1002)

</div>
