<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1028)  [Next](ch2000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 29:0</span></span>

David has said what he had to say to Solomon. But he had something more
to say to the congregation before he parted with them. I. He pressed
them to contribute, according to their ability, towards the building and
furnishing of the temple ([Ch1
29:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#001)). II. They made their presents
accordingly with great generosity ([Ch1
29:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#006)). III. David offered up solemn
prayers and praises to God upon that occasion ([Ch1
29:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#010)), with sacrifices ([Ch1
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#021), [Ch1
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#022)). IV. Solomon was hereupon
enthroned, with great joy and magnificence ([Ch1
29:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#023)). V. David, soon after this
finished his course ([Ch1 29:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#026)).
And it is hard to say which shines brighter here, the setting sun or the
rising sun.

[1 Chronicles 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 29:1</span></span>

We may here observe,

I. How handsomely David spoke to the great men of Israel, to engage them
to contribute towards the building of the temple. It is our duty to
provoke one another to love and to good works, not only to do good
ourselves, but to draw in others to do good too as much as we can. There
were many very rich men in Israel; they were all to share in the benefit
of the temple, and of those peaceable days which were to befriend the
building of it; and therefore, though David would not impose on them, as
a tax, what they should give towards it, he would recommend the present
as a fair occasion for a free-will offering, because what is done in
works of piety and charity should be done willingly and not by
constraint; for God loves a cheerful giver. 1. He would have them
consider that Solomon was young and tender, and needed help; but that he
was the person whom God had chosen to do this work, and therefore was
well worthy their assistance. It is good service to encourage those in
the work of God that are as yet young and tender. 2. That the world was
great, and all hands should contribute to the carrying of it on. The
palace to be built was not for man, but for the Lord God; and the more
was contributed towards the building the more magnificent it would be,
and therefore the better would it answer the intention. 3. He tells them
what great preparations had been made for this work. He did not intend
to throw all the burden upon them, nor that it should be built wholly by
contributions, but that they should show their good will, by adding to
what was done ([Ch1 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#002)): I have
prepared with all my might, that is, "I have made it my business." Work
for God must be done with all our might, or we shall bring nothing to
pass in it. 4. He sets them a good example. Besides what was dedicated
to this service out of the spoils and presents of the neighbouring
nations, which was for the building of the house (of which before, [Ch1
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#014)), he had, out of his own share,
offered largely for the beautifying and enriching of it, 3000 talents of
gold and 7000 talents of silver ([Ch1
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#004), [Ch1
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#005)), and this because he had set his
affection on the house of his God. He gave all this, not as Papists
build churches, in commutation of penance, or to make atonement for sin,
nor as Pharisees give alms, to be seen of men; but purely because he
loved the habitation of God's house; so he professed ([Psa
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008)) and here he proved it. Those who
set their affection upon the service of God will think no pains nor cost
too much to bestow upon it; and then our offerings are pleasing to God
when they come from love. Those that set their affection on things above
will set their affection on the house of God, through which our way to
heaven lies. Now this he gives them an account of, to stir them up to do
likewise. Note, Those who would draw others to do that which is good
must themselves lead. Those especially who are advanced above others in
place and dignity should particularly contrive how to make their light
shine before men, because the influence of their example is more
powerful and extensive than that of other people. 5. He stirs them up to
do as he had done ([Ch1 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#005)): And who
then is willing to concentrate his service this day unto the Lord? (1.)
We must each of us, in our several places, serve the Lord, and
consecrate our service to him, separate it from other things that are
foreign and interfere with it, and direct and design it for the honour
and glory of God. (2.) We must make the service of God our business,
must fill our hands to the Lord, so the Hebrew phrase is. Those who
engage themselves in the service of God will have their hands full;
there is work enough for the whole man in that service. The filling of
our hands with the service of God intimates that we must serve him only,
serve him liberally, and serve him in the strength of grace derived from
him. (3.) We must be free herein, do it willingly and speedily, do it
this day, when we are in a good mind. Who is willing? Now let him show
it.

II\. How handsomely they all contributed towards the building of the
temple when they were thus stirred up to it. Though they were persuaded
to it, yet it is said, They offered willingly, [Ch1
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#006). So he said who knew their
hearts. Nay, they offered with a perfect heart, from a good principle
and with a sincere respect to the glory of God, [Ch1
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#009). How generous they were appears
by the sum total of the contributions, [Ch1
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#007), [Ch1
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#008). They gave like themselves, like
princes, like princes of Israel. And a pleasant day's work it was; for,
1. The people rejoiced, which may be meant of the people themselves that
offered: they were glad of the opportunity of honouring God thus with
their substance, and glad of the prospect of bringing this good work to
perfection. Or the common people rejoiced in the generosity of their
princes, that they had such rulers over them as were forward to this
good work. Every Israelite is glad to see temple work carried on with
vigour. 2. David rejoiced with great joy to see the good effects of his
psalms and the other helps of devotion he had furnished them with,
rejoiced that his son and successor would have those about him that were
so well affected to the house of God, and that this work, upon which his
heart was so much set, was likely to go on. Note, It is a great reviving
to good men, when they are leaving the world, to see those they leave
behind zealous for religion and likely to keep it up. Lord, now let thou
thy servant depart in peace.

[1 Chronicles 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch1 29:10</span></span>

We have here,

I. The solemn address which David made to God upon occasion of the noble
subscriptions of the princes towards the building of the temple ([Ch1
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#010)): Wherefore David blessed the
Lord, not only alone in his closet, but before all the congregation.
This I expected when we read ([Ch1
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#009)) that David rejoiced with great
joy; for such a devout man as he would no doubt make that the matter of
his thanksgiving which was so much the matter of his rejoicing. He that
looked round with comfort would certainly look up with praise. David was
now old and looked upon himself as near his end; and it well becomes
aged saints, and dying saints, to have their hearts much enlarged in
praise and thanksgiving. This will silence their complaints of their
bodily infirmities, and help to make the prospect of death itself less
gloomy. David's psalms, toward the latter end of the book, are most of
them psalms of praise. The nearer we come to the world of everlasting
praise the more we should speak the language and do the work of that
world. In this address,

1\. He adores God, and ascribes glory to him as the God of Israel,
blessed for ever and ever. Our Lord's prayer ends with a doxology much
like this which David here begins with - for thine is the kingdom, the
power, and the glory. This is properly praising God - with holy awe and
reverence, and agreeable affection, acknowledging, (1.) His infinite
perfections; not only that he is great, powerful, glorious, etc., but
that his is the greatness, power, and glory, that is, he has them in and
of himself, [Ch1 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#011). He is the
fountain and centre of every thing that is bright and blessed. All that
we can, in our most exalted praises, attribute to him he has an
unquestionable title to. His is the greatness; his greatness is immense
and incomprehensible; and all others are little, are nothing, in
comparison of him. His is the power, and it is almighty and
irresistible; power belongs to him, and all the power of all the
creatures is derived from him and depends upon him. His is the glory;
for his glory is his own end and the end of the whole creation. All the
glory we can give him with our hearts, lips, and lives, comes infinitely
short of what is his due. His is the victory; he transcends and
surpasses all, and is able to conquer and subdue all things to himself;
and his victories are incontestable and uncontrollable. And his is the
majesty, real and personal; with him is terrible majesty, inexpressible
and inconceivable. (2.) His sovereign dominion, as rightful owner and
possessor of all: "All that is in the heaven, and in the earth, is
thine, and at thy disposal, by the indisputable right of creation, and
as supreme ruler and commander of all: thine is the kingdom, and all
kings are thy subjects; for thou art head, and art to be exalted and
worshipped as head above all." (3.) His universal influence and agency.
All that are rich and honourable among the children of men have their
riches and honours from God. This acknowledgment he would have the
princes take notice of and join in, that they might not think they had
merited any thing of God by their generosity; for from God they had
their riches and honour, and what they had returned to him was but a
small part of what they had received from him. Whoever are great among
men, it is God's hand that makes them so; and, whatever strength we
have, it is God that gives it to us, as the God of Israel our father,
[Ch1 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#010). [Psa
68:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#035).

2\. He acknowledges with thankfulness the grace of God enabling them to
contribute so cheerfully towards the building of the temple ([Ch1
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#013), [Ch1
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#014)): Now therefore, our God, we
thank thee. Note, The more we do for God the more we are indebted to him
for the honour of being employed in his service, and for grace enabling
us, in any measure, to serve him. Does he therefore thank that servant?
[Luk 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#009). No: but that servant has a
great deal of reason to thank him. He thanks God that they were able to
offer so willingly. Note, (1.) It is a great instance of the power of
God's grace in us to be able to do the work of God willingly. He works
both to will and to do; and it is in the day of his power that his
people are made willing, [Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003).
(2.) We must give God all the glory of all the good that is at any time
done by ourselves or others. Our own good works must not be the matter
of our pride, nor the good works of others the matter of our flattery,
but both the matter of our praise; for certainly it is the greatest
honour and pleasure in the world faithfully to serve God.

3\. He speaks very humbly of himself, and his people, and the offerings
they had now presented to God. (1.) For himself, and those that joined
with him, though they were princes, he wondered that God should take
such notice of them and do so much for them ([Ch1
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#014)): Who am I, and what is my
people? David was the most honourable person, and Israel the most
honourable person, then in the world; yet thus does he speak of himself
and them, as unworthy the divine cognizance and favour. David now looks
very great, presiding in an august assembly, appointing his successor,
and making a noble present to the honour of God; and yet he is little
and low in his own eyes: Who am I, O Lord? for ([Ch1
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#015)) we are strangers before thee,
and sojourners, poor despicable creatures. Angels in heaven are at home
there; saints on earth are but strangers here: Our days on the earth are
as a shadow. David's days had as much of substance in them as most
men's; for he was a great man, a good man, a useful man, and now an old
man, one that lived long and lived to good purpose: and yet he puts
himself not only into the number, but in the front, of those who must
acknowledge that their days on the earth are as a shadow, which
intimates that our life is a vain life, a dark life, a transient life,
and a life that will have its periods either in perfect light or perfect
darkness. The next words explain it: There is no abiding, Heb. no
expectation. We cannot expect any great matters from it, nor can we
expect any long continuance of it. This is mentioned here as that which
forbids us to boast of the service we do to God. Alas! it is confined to
a scantling of time, it is the service of a frail and short life, and
therefore what can we pretend to merit by it? (2.) As to their
offerings, Lord, says he, of thy own have we given thee ([Ch1
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#014)), and again ([Ch1
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#016)), It cometh of thy hand, and is
all thy own. "We have it from thee as a free gift, and therefore are
bound to use it for thee; and what we present to thee is but rent or
interest from thy own." "In like manner" (says bishop Patrick) "we ought
to acknowledge God in all spiritual things, referring every good
thought, good purpose, good work, to his grace, from whom we receive
it." Let him that glories therefore glory in the Lord.

4\. He appeals to God concerning his own sincerity in what he did, [Ch1
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#017). It is a great satisfaction to a
good man to think that God tries the heart and has pleasure in
uprightness, that, whoever may misinterpret or contemn it, he is
acquainted with and approves of the way of the righteous. It was David's
comfort that God knew with what pleasure he both offered his own and saw
the people's offering. He was neither proud of his own good work nor
envious of the good works of others.

5\. He prays to God both for the people and for Solomon, that both might
hold on as they began. In this prayer he addresses God as the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, a God in covenant with them and with us for
their sakes. Lord, give us grace to make good our part of the covenant,
that we may not forfeit the benefit of it. Or thus: they were kept in
their integrity by the grace of God establishing their way; let the same
grace that was sufficient for them be so for us. (1.) For the people he
prays ([Ch1 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#018)) that what good God
had put into their minds he would always keep there, that they might
never be worse than they were now, might never lose the convictions they
were now under, nor cool in their affections to the house of God, but
always have the same thoughts of things as they now seemed to have.
Great consequences depend upon what is innermost, and what uppermost, in
the imagination of the thoughts of our heart, what we aim at and what we
love to think of. If any good have got possession of our hearts, or the
hearts of our friends, it is good by prayer to commit the custody of it
to the grace of God: "Lord, keep it there, keep it for ever there. David
has prepared materials for the temple; but, Lord, do thou prepare their
hearts for such a privilege;" establish their hearts, so the margin.
"Confirm their resolutions. They are in a good mind; keep them so when I
am gone, them and theirs for ever." (2.) For Solomon he prays ([Ch1
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#019)), Give him a perfect heart. He
had charged him ([Ch1 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#009)) to serve
God with a perfect heart; now here he prays to God to give him such a
heart. He does not pray, "Lord, make him a rich man, a great man, a
learned man;" but, "Lord, make him an honest man;" for that is better
than all. "Lord, give him a perfect heart, not only in general to keep
thy commandments, but in particular to build the palace, that he may do
that service with a single eye." Yet his building the house would not
prove him to have a perfect heart unless he made conscience of keeping
God's commandments. It is not helping to build churches that will save
us if we live in disobedience to God's law.

II\. The cheerful concurrence of this great assembly in this great
solemnity. 1. They joined with David in the adoration of God. When he
had done his prayer he called to them to testify their concurrence (Now
bless the Lord your God, [Ch1 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#020)),
which accordingly they did, by bowing down their heads, a gesture of
adoration. Whoever is the mouth of the congregation, those only have the
benefit who join with him, not by bowing down the head so much as by
lifting up the soul. 2. They paid their respects to the king, looking
upon him as an instrument in God's hand of much good to them; and, in
honouring him, they honoured God. 3. The next day they offered abundance
of sacrifices to God ([Ch1 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#021)),
both burnt-offerings, which were wholly consumed, and peace-offerings,
which the offerer had the greatest part of to himself. Hereby they
testified a generous gratitude to God for the good posture their public
affairs were in, though David was going the way of all the earth. 4.
They feasted and rejoiced before God, [Ch1
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#022). In token of their joy in God,
and communion with him, they feasted upon their peace-offerings in a
religious manner before the Lord. What had been offered to God they
feasted upon, by which was intimated to them that they should be never
the poorer for their late liberal contributions to the service of the
temple; they themselves should feast upon the comfort of it. 5. They
made Solomon king the second time. He having been before anointed in
haste, upon occasion of Adonijah's rebellion, it was thought fit to
repeat the ceremony, for the greater satisfaction of the people. They
anointed him to the Lord. Magistrates must look upon themselves as set
apart for God, to be his ministers, and must rule accordingly in the
fear of God. Zadok also was anointed to be priest in the room of
Abiathar, who had lately forfeited his honour. Happy art thou, O Israel!
under such a prince and such a pontiff.

[1 Chronicles 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ch1 29:23</span></span>

These verses bring king Solomon to his throne and king David to his
grave. Thus the rising generation thrusts out that which went before,
and says, "Make room for us." Every one has his day.

I. Here is Solomon rising ([Ch1
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#023)): Solomon sat on the throne of
the Lord. Not his throne which he prepared in the heavens, but the
throne of Israel is called the throne of the Lord because not only is he
King of all nations, and all kings rule under him, but he was in a
peculiar manner King of Israel, [Sa1
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#012). He had the founding, he had the
filling, of their throne, by immediate direction. The municipal laws of
their kingdom were divine. Urim and prophets were the privy counsellors
of their princes; therefore is their throne called the throne of the
Lord. Solomon's kingdom typified the kingdom of the Messiah, and his is
indeed the throne of the Lord; for the Father judgeth no man, but hath
committed all judgment to him; hence he calls him his King, [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006). Being set on the throne of the
Lord, the throne to which God called him, he prospered. Those that
follow the divine guidance may expect success by the divine blessing.
Solomon prospered; for, 1. His people paid honour to him, as one to whom
honour is due: All Israel obeyed him, that is, were ready to swear
allegiance to him ([Ch1 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#023)), the
princes and mighty men, and even the sons of David, though by seniority
their title to the crown was prior to his, and they might think
themselves wronged by his advancement. God thought fit to make him king,
and made him fit to be so, and therefore they all submitted themselves
to him. God inclined their hearts to do so, that his reign might, from
the first, be peaceable. His father was a better man than he, and yet
came to the crown with much difficulty, after long delay, and by many
and slow steps. David had more faith, and therefore had it more tried.
They submitted themselves (Heb. They gave the hand under Solomon), that
is, bound themselves by oath to be true to him (putting the hand under
the thigh was a ceremony anciently used in swearing); or they were so
entirely devoted that they would put their hand under his feet to serve
him. 2. God put honour upon him; for those that honour him he will
honour: The Lord magnified Solomon exceedingly, [Ch1
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#025). His very countenance and
presence, I am apt to think, had something in them very great and awful.
All he said and all he did commanded respect. None of all the judges or
kings of Israel, his predecessors, made such a figure as he did nor
lived in such splendour.

II\. Here is David's setting, that great man going off the stage. The
historian here brings him to the end of his day, leaves him asleep, and
draws the curtains about him.

1\. He gives a summary account of the years of his reign, [Ch1
29:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#026), [Ch1
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#027). He reigned forty years, as did
Moses, Othniel, Deborah, Gideon, Eli, Samuel, and Saul, who were before
him, and Solomon after him.

2\. He gives a short account of his death ([Ch1
29:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#028)), that he died full of days,
riches, and honour; that is, (1.) Loaded with them. He was very old, and
very rich, and very much honoured both of God and man. He had been a man
of war from his youth, and, as such, had his soul continually in his
hand; yet he was not cut off in the midst of his days, but was preserved
through all dangers of a military life, lived to a good old age, and
died in peace, died in his bed, and yet in the bed of honour. (2.)
Satiated with them. He was full of days, riches, and honour; that is, he
had enough of this world and of the riches and honours of it, and knew
when he had enough, for he was very willing to die and leave it, having
said ([Psa 49:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015)), God shall receive
me, and ([Psa 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)), Thou art with me.
A good man will soon be full of days, riches, and honour, but will never
be satisfied with them; no satisfaction but in God's loving kindness.

3\. For a fuller account of David's life and reign he refers to the
histories or records of those times, which were written by Samuel while
he lived, and continued, after his death, by Nathan and Gad, [Ch1
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#029). There was related what was
observable in his government at home and his wars abroad, the times,
that is, the events of the times, that went over him, [Ch1
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#029), [Ch1
29:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#030). These registers were then in
being, but are now lost. Note, Good use may be made of those histories
of the church which are authentic though not sacred or of divine
inspiration.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Introduction](ch2000)

</div>
