<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2030)  [Next](ch2032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 31:0</span></span>

We have here a further account of that blessed reformation of which
Hezekiah was a glorious instrument, and of the happy advances he made in
it. I. All the remnants of idolatry were destroyed and abolished ([Ch2
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#001)). II. The priests and Levites
were set to work again, every man in his place ([Ch2
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#002)). III. Care was taken for their
maintenance. 1. The royal bounty to the clergy, and for the support of
the temple service, was duly paid ([Ch2
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#003)). 2. Orders were given for the
raising of the people's quota ([Ch2
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#004)). 3. The people, thereupon,
brought in their dues abundantly ([Ch2
31:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#005)). 4. Commissioners were
appointed for the due distribution of what was brought in ([Ch2
31:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#011)). Lastly, Here is the general
praise of Hezekiah's sincerity in all his undertakings ([Ch2
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#020), [Ch2
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#021)).

[2 Chronicles 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 31:1</span></span>

We have here an account of what was done after the passover. What was
wanting in the solemnities of preparation for it before was made up in
that which is better, a due improvement of it after. When the religious
exercises of a Lord's day or a communion are finished we must not think
that then the work is done. No, then the hardest part of our work
begins, which is to exemplify the impressions of the ordinance upon our
minds in all the instances of a holy conversation. So it was here; when
all this was finished there was more to be done.

I. They applied themselves with vigour to destroy all the monuments of
idolatry, [Ch2 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#001). The king had done
what he could of this kind ([Kg2
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004)), but the people could discover
those profane relics which escaped the eye of the king's officers, and
therefore they went out to see what they could do, [Ch2
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#001). This was done immediately after
the passover. Note, The comfort of communion with God should kindle in
us a holy zeal and indignation against sin, against every thing that is
offensive to God. If our hearts have been made to burn within us at an
ordinance, that spirit of burning will consume the dross of corruption.
What have I now to do any more with idols? Their zeal here in destroying
the images and groves, the high places and altars, appeared, 1. In that
they did this, not only in the cities of Judah and Benjamin, but in
those of Ephraim and Manasseh. Some think that those cities are meant
which had come under the protection and the jurisdiction of the kings of
Judah. Others think that, Hoshea king of Israel not forbidding it, their
zeal carried them out to the destruction of idolatry even in many parts
of his kingdom. At least those that came out of Ephraim and Manasseh to
keep the passover (as many did, [Ch2
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#018)) destroyed all their own images
and groves, and did the like for as many more as they had influence upon
or could make interest in for leave to do it. We should not only reform
ourselves, but do all we can to reform others too. 2. They destroyed
all: they utterly destroyed all; they spared none through favour or
affection either to the images or to their worshippers; though ever so
ancient, ever so costly, ever so beautiful, and ever so well patronised,
yet they must all be destroyed. Note, Those that sincerely set
themselves against sin will set themselves against all sin. 3. They
would not return to their houses, though they had been long absent, till
this was done. They could not be easy, nor think themselves safe, in
their cities, as long as the images and groves, those betrayers and
destroyers of their country, were left standing. Perhaps the prophet
Isaiah pointed to this when, a little before, he spoke of a day in which
men should cast away the very idols that they themselves had made. So
surprising was this blessed change, [Isa
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020); [Isa
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#006), [Isa
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#007).

II\. Hezekiah revived and restored the courses of the priests and
Levites, which David had appointed and which had of late been put out of
course, [Ch2 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#002). The temple service
was put into its proper method again, to run in the old channel. Every
man was made to know his work, his place, his time, and what was
expected from him. Note, Good order contributes much to the carrying on
of a good work. The priests were appointed in their courses for
burnt-offerings and peace-offerings; the Levites in their courses were
some to minister to the priests, others to give thanks and praise. See
[Ch1 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#004), [Ch1
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#005). And all this in the gates or
courts of the tents of the Lord. The temple is here called a tent
because the temple privileges are movable things and this temple was
shortly to be removed.

III\. He appropriated a branch of the revenue of his crown to the
maintenance and support of the altar. Though the people were to be at
the charge of the daily offerings, and those on the sabbaths, new moons,
and feasts, yet, rather than they should be burdened with the expense,
he allowed out of his own estate, or out of his exchequer, for all those
offerings, [Ch2 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#003). It was a
generous act of piety, wherein he consulted both God's honour and his
people's ease, as a faithful servant to him and a tender father to them.
Let princes and great men reckon that well bestowed, and set out to the
best interest, which they give for the support and encouragement of
religion in their country.

IV\. He issued out an order to the inhabitants of Jerusalem first, [Ch2
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#004) (that those who were nearest the
temple, and both saved and got by being so, might give a good example to
others), but which was afterwards extended to, or at least admitted by,
the cities of Judah, that they should carefully pay in their dues,
according to the law, to the priests and Levites. This had been long
neglected, which made the work to be neglected (for a scandalous
maintenance makes a scandalous ministry); but Hezekiah, having himself
been liberal, might with a good grace require his subjects to be just to
the temple service. And observe the end he aims at in recovering and
restoring to the priests and Levites their portion, that they might be
encouraged in the law of the Lord, in the study of it, and in doing
their duty according to it. Observe here, 1. It is fit that ministers
should be not only maintained, but encouraged, that they should not only
be kept to do their work, but that they should also have wherewith to
live comfortably, that they may do it with cheerfulness. 2. Yet they are
to be maintained, not in idleness, pride, and luxury, but in the law of
the Lord, in their observance of it themselves and in teaching others
the good knowledge of it.

V. The people thereupon brought in their tithes very readily. They
wanted nothing but to be called upon; and therefore, as soon as the
commandment came abroad, the first-fruits and all the holy things were
duly brought in, [Ch2 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#005), [Ch2
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#006). What the priests had occasion
for, for themselves and their families, they made use of, and the
overplus was laid in heaps, [Ch2 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#006).
All harvest-time they were increasing these heaps, as the fruits of the
earth were gathered in; for God was to have his dues out of them all.
Though a prescription may be pleaded for a modus decimandi - tenth
proportion, yet it cannot be pleaded pro non decminado - for the
omission of the tenth. When harvest ended they finished their heaps,
[Ch2 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#007). Now here we have, 1. The
account given to Hezekiah concerning those heaps. He questioned the
priests and Levites concerning them, why they did not use what was paid
in, but hoarded it up thus, ([Ch2
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#009)), to which it was answered that
they had made use of all they had occasion for, for the maintenance of
themselves and their families and for their winter store, and that this
was that which was left over and above, [Ch2
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#010). They did not hoard these heaps
for covetousness, but to show what plentiful provision God by his law
had made for them, if they could but have it collected and brought in,
and that those who conscientiously give God his dues out of their
estates bring a blessing upon all they have: Since they began to bring
in the offerings the Lord has blessed his people. See for this [Hag
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#019). "Try me," says God, "if you will
not otherwise trust me, whether, upon your bringing the tithes into the
store-house, you have not a blessing poured out upon you," [Mal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#010), [Mal
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#011); [Eze
44:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#030). 2. The acknowledgment which the
king and princes made of it, [Ch2
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#008). They gave thanks to God for his
good providence, which gave them something to bring, and his good grace,
which gave them hearts to bring it. And they also blessed the people,
that is, commended them for their doing well now, without reproaching
them for their former neglects. It is observable that after they had
tasted the sweetness of God's ordinance, in the late comfortable
passover, they were thus free in maintaining the temple service. Those
that experience the benefit of a settled ministry will not grudge the
expense of it.

[2 Chronicles 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch2 31:11</span></span>

Here we have,

I. Two particular instances of the care of Hezekiah concerning church
matters, having put them into good order, to keep them so. The tithes
and other holy things being brought in, he provided, 1. That they should
be carefully laid up, and not left exposed in loose heaps, liable to be
wasted and embezzled. He ordered chambers to be made ready in some of
the courts of the temple for store-chambers ([Ch2
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#011)), and into them the offerings
were brought and there kept under lock and key, [Ch2
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#012), [Ch2
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#013). Treasures or store-keepers were
appointed, who had the oversight of them, to see that moth and rust did
not corrupt them nor thieves break through to steal. This wisdom of
laying up the surplus in days of plenty we may learn from the ant, who
provideth meat in summer. The laying up in store what was brought in was
an encouragement to people to pay in their contributions. That will be
given cheerfully by the public which appears to be well husbanded. 2.
That they should be faithfully laid out, according to the uses they were
intended for. Church treasures are not to be hoarded any longer than
till there is occasion for them, lest even the rust should be a witness
against those who hoard them. Officers were appointed, men (no doubt) of
approved wisdom and faithfulness, to distribute the oblations of the
Lord and the most holy things among the priests ([Ch2
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#014)), and to see that they all had a
competent maintenance for themselves and their families. The law
provided sufficient for them all, and therefore, if some had too little,
it must be because others had too much; to prevent such inequality these
officers were to go by some certain rule of proportion in the disposal
of the incomes of the temple. It is said of the priests here ([Ch2
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#018)) that in their set office they
sanctified themselves; in faith they sanctified themselves (so the word
is), that is, as bishop Patrick explains it, they attended their
ministry at the house of God, not doubting but they should be provided
with all things necessary. Now, because they served God in that
confidence, care was taken that they should not be made ashamed of their
hope. Note, Those that sanctify themselves to God and his service in
faith, believing that he will see them want for nothing that is good for
them, shall certainly be fed. Out of the offerings of the Lord
distribution was made, (1.) To the priests in the cities ([Ch2
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#015)), who staid at home while their
brethren went to Jerusalem, and did good there in teaching the good
knowledge of the Lord. The preaching priests were maintained as well as
the sacrificing priests, and those that abode by the stuff as well as
those that warred the warfare. (2.) To those that entered into the house
of the Lord, all the males from three years old and upwards; for the
male children even at that tender age, it seems, were allowed to come
into the temple with their parents, and shared with them in this
distribution, [Ch2 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#016). (3.) Even
the Levites from twenty years old and upwards had their share, [Ch2
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#017). (4.) The wives and children of
the priests and Levites had a comfortable maintenance out of those
offerings, [Ch2 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#018). In maintaining
ministers, regard must be had to their families, that not they only, but
theirs, may have food convenient. In some countries where ministers have
their salary paid them by the state an addition is made to it upon the
birth of a child. (5.) The priests in the country, that lived in the
fields of the suburbs, were not overlooked in this ministration, [Ch2
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#019). Those also had their share who
were inhabitants of the villages, though they might be supposed to live
at a less expense.

II\. A general character of Hezekiah's services for the support of
religion, [Ch2 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#020), [Ch2
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#021). 1. His pious zeal reached to
all the parts of his kingdom: Thus he did throughout all Judah; every
part of the country, and not those only that lay next him, shared in the
good fruits of his government. 2. He sincerely designed to please God,
and approved himself to him in all he did: He wrought that which was
good before the Lord his God; all his care was to do that which should
be accepted of God, which was right (that is, agreeable to natural
equity), and truth (that is, agreeable to divine revelation and his
covenant with God), before the Lord; to do according to that law which
is holy, just, and good. 3. What he began he went through with,
prosecuted it with vigour, and did it with all his heart. 4. All his
good intentions were brought to a good issue; whatever he did in the
service of the house of God, and in the government of his kingdom, he
prospered in it. Note, What is undertaken with a sincere regard to the
glory of God will succeed to our own honour and comfort at last.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 32](ch2032)

</div>
