<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2013)  [Next](ch2015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 14:0</span></span>

In this and the two following chapters we have the history of the reign
of Asa, a good reign and a long one. In this chapter we have, I. His
piety ([Ch2 14:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001)). II. His policy
([Ch2 14:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#006)). III. His prosperity,
and particularly a glorious victory he obtained over a great army of
Ethiopians that came out against him ([Ch2
14:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#009)).

[2 Chronicles 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 14:1</span></span>

Here is, I. Asa's general character ([Ch2
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#002)): He did that which was good and
right in the eyes of the Lord his God. 1. He aimed at pleasing God,
studied to approve himself to him. Happy are those that walk by this
rule, to do that which is right, not in their own eyes, or in the eye of
the world, but in the eyes of God. 2. He saw God's eye always upon him,
and that helped much to keep him to what was good and right. 3. God
graciously accepted him in what he did, and approved his conduct as good
and right.

II\. A blessed work of reformation which he set on foot immediately upon
his accession to the crown. 1. He removed and abolished idolatry. Since
Solomon admitted idolatry, in the latter end of his reign, nothing had
been done to suppress it, and so, we presume, it had got ground. Strange
gods were worshipped and had their altars, images, and groves; and the
temple service, though kept up by the priests ([Ch2
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#010)), was neglected by many of the
people. Asa, as soon as he had power in his hands, made it his business
to destroy all those idolatrous altars and images ([Ch2
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#003), [Ch2
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#005)), they being a great provocation
to a jealous God and a great temptation to a careless unthinking people.
He hoped by destroying the idols to reform the idolaters, which he aimed
at, rather than to ruin them. 2. He revived and established the pure
worship of God; and, since the priests did their part in attending God's
altars, he obliged the people to do theirs ([Ch2
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#004)): He commanded Judah to seek the
Lord God of their fathers, and not the gods of the heathen, and to do
the law and the commandments, that is, to observe all divine
institutions, which many had utterly neglected. In doing this, the land
was quiet before him, [Ch2 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#005).
Though they were much in love with their idols, and very loth to leave
them, yet the convictions of their consciences sided with the commands
of Asa, and they could not, for shame, refuse to comply with them. Note,
Those that have power in their hands, and will use it vigorously for the
suppression of profaneness and the reformation of manners, will not meet
with so much difficulty and opposition therein as perhaps they feared.
Vice is a sneaking thing, and virtue has reason enough on its side to
make all iniquity stop her mouth, [Psa
107:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#042).

III\. The tranquillity of his kingdom, after constant alarms of war
during the last two reigns: In his days the land was quiet ten years (
[Ch2 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001)), no war with the kingdom of
Israel, who did not recover the blow given them in the last reign for a
great while. Abijah's victory, which was owing, under God, to his
courage and bravery, laid a foundation for Asa's peace, which was the
reward of his piety and reformation. Though Abijah had little religion
himself, he was instrumental to prepare the way for one that had much.
If Abijah had not done what he did to quiet the land, Asa could not have
done what he did to reform it; for inter arma silent leges - amidst the
din of arms the voice of law is unheard.

IV\. The prudent improvement he made of that tranquillity: The land had
rest, for the Lord had given him rest. Note, If God give quietness, who
then can make trouble? [Job 34:29](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#029).
Those have rest indeed to whom God gives rest, peace indeed to whom
Christ gives peace, not as the world giveth, [Joh
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027). Now, 1. Asa takes notice of the
rest they had as the gift of God (He hath given us rest on every side.
Note, God must be acknowledged with thankfulness in the rest we are
blessed with, of body and mind, family and country), and as the reward
of the reformation begun: Because we have sought the Lord our God, he
has given us rest. Note, As the frowns and rebukes of Providence should
be observed for a check to us in an evil way, so the smiles of
Providence should be taken notice of for our encouragement in that which
is good. See [Hag 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#018), [Hag
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#019); [Mal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#010). We find by experience that it is
good to seek the Lord; it gives us rest. While we pursue the world we
meet with nothing but vexation. 2. He consults with his people, by their
representatives, how to make a good use of the present gleams of peace
they enjoyed, and concludes with them, (1.) That they must not be idle,
but busy. Times of rest from war should be employed in work, for we must
always find ourselves something to do. In the years when he had no war
he said, "Let us build; still let us be doing." When the churches had
rest they were built up, [Act 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#031).
When the sword is sheathed take up the trowel. (2.) That they must not
be secure, but prepare for wars. In times of peace we must be getting
ready for trouble, expect it and lay up in store for it. \[1.\] He
fortified his principle cities with walls, towers, gates, and bars, [Ch2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#007). "This let us do," says he,
"while the land is yet before us," that is, "while we have opportunity
and advantage for it and have nothing to hinder us." He speaks as if he
expected that, some way or other, trouble would arise, when it would be
too late to fortify, and when they would wish they had done it. So they
built and prospered. \[2.\] He had a good army ready to bring into the
field ([Ch2 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#008)), not a standing
army, but the militia or trained-bands of the country. Judah and
Benjamin were mustered severally; and Benjamin (which not long ago was
called little Benjamin, [Psa 68:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#027))
had almost as many soldiers as Judah, came as near as 28 to 30, so
strangely had that tribe increased of late. The blessing of God can make
a little one to become a thousand. It should seem, these two tribes were
differently armed, both offensively and defensively. The men of Judah
guarded themselves with targets, the men of Benjamin with shields, the
former of which were much larger than the latter, [Kg1
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#016), [Kg1
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#017). The men of Judah fought with
spears when they closed in with the enemy; the men of Benjamin drew
bows, to reach the enemy at a distance. Both did good service, and
neither could say to the other, I have no need of thee. Different gifts
and employments are for the common good.

[2 Chronicles 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 14:9</span></span>

Here is, I. Disturbance given to the peace of Asa's kingdom by a
formidable army of Ethiopians that invaded them, [Ch2
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#009), [Ch2
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#010). Though still they sought God,
yet this fear came upon them, that their faith in God might be tried,
and that God might have an opportunity of doing great things for them.
It was a vast number that the Ethiopians brought against him: 1,000,000
men; and now he found the benefit of having an army ready raised against
such a time of need. That provision which we thought needless may soon
appear to be of great advantage.

II\. The application Asa made to God on occasion of the threatening
cloud which now hung over his head, [Ch2
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#011). He that sought God in the day
of his peace and prosperity could with holy boldness cry to God in the
day of his trouble, and call him his God. His prayer is short, but has
much in it. 1. He gives to God the glory of his infinite power and
sovereignty: It is nothing with thee to help and save by many or few, by
those that are mighty or by those that have no power. See [Sa1
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#006). God works in his own strength,
not in the strength of instruments ([Psa
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#013)), nay, it is his glory to help
the weakest and to perfect strength out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings. "We do not say, Lord, take our part, for we have a good army
for thee to work by; but, take our part, for without thee we have no
power." 2. He takes hold of their covenant-relation to God as theirs. O
Lord, our God! and again, "Thou art our God, whom we have chosen and
cleave to as ours, and who hast promised to be ours." 3. He pleads their
dependence upon God, and the eye they had to him in this expedition. he
was well prepared for it, yet trusted not to his preparations; but,
"Lord, we rest on thee, and in thy name we go against this multitude, by
warrant from thee, aiming at thy glory, and trusting to thy strength."
4. He interests God in their cause: "Let not man" (mortal man, so the
word is) "prevail against thee. If he prevail against us, it will be
said that he prevails against thee, because thou art our God, and we
rest on thee and go forth in thy name, which thou hast encouraged us to
do. The enemy is a mortal man; make it to appear what an unequal match
he is for an immortal God. Lord, maintain thy own honour; hallowed by
thy name."

III\. The glorious victory God gave him over his enemies. 1. God
defeated the enemy, and put their forces into disorder ([Ch2
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#012)): The Lord smote the Ethiopians,
smote them with terror, and an unaccountable consternation, so that they
fled, and knew neither why nor whither. 2. Asa and his soldiers took the
advantage God gave them against the enemy. (1.) They destroyed them.
They fell before the Lord (for who can stand before him?) and before his
host, either an invisible host of angels that were employed to destroy
them or the host of Israel, called God's host because owned by him. (2.)
They took the plunder of their camp, carried away very much spoil from
the slain and from the baggage. (3.) They smote the cities that were in
league with them, to which they fled for shelter, and carried off the
spoil of them ([Ch2 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#014)); and they
were not able to make any resistance, for the fear of the Lord came upon
them, that is, a fear which God struck them with to such a degree that
they had no heart to withstand the conquerors. (4.) They fetched away
the cattle out of the enemy's country, in vast numbers, [Ch2
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#015). Thus the wealth of the sinner
is laid up for the just.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 15](ch2015)

</div>
