<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2.md)  
  [Previous](ch2026)  [Next](ch2028.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#001.md)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 27:0</span></span>

Here is a very short account of the reign of Jotham, a pious prosperous
prince, of whom one would wish to have known more: but we may better
dispense with the brevity of his story because that which lengthened the
history of the last three kings was their degeneracy in their latter
end, of which we have had a faithful account; but there was no occasion
for such a melancholy conclusion of the history of this reign, which is
only an account, I. Of the date and continuance of this reign ([Ch2
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#001.md), [Ch2
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#008).md). II. The general good character
of it ([Ch2 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#002.md), [Ch2
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#006).md). III. The prosperity of it ([Ch2
27:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#003).md). IV. The period of it ([Ch2
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#007.md), [Ch2
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#009).md).

[2 Chronicles 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 27:1</span></span>

There is not much more related here concerning Jotham than we had
before, [Kg2 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#032.md), etc.

I. He reigned well. He did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord; the course of his reign was good, and pleasing to God, whose
favour he made his end, and his word his rule, and (which shows that he
acted from a good principle) he prepared his ways before the Lord his
God ([Ch2 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#006).md), that is, he walked
circumspectly and with much caution, contrived how to shun that which
was evil and compass that which was good. He looked before him, and cast
his affairs into such a posture and method as made the regular
management of them the more easy. Or he established or fixed his ways
before the Lord, that is, he walked steadily and constantly in the way
of his duty, was uniform and resolute in it: not like some of those that
went before him, who, though they had some good in them, lost their
credit by their inconstancy and inconsistency with themselves. They had
run well, but something hindered them. It was not so with Jotham. Two
things are observed here in his character: - 1. What was amiss in his
father he amended in himself ([Ch2
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#002).md): He did according to all that
his father did well and wisely; howbeit he would not imitate him in
which he did amiss; for he entered not into the temple of the Lord to
burn incense as his father did, but took warning by his fate not to dare
so presumptuous a thing. Note, We must not imitate the best men, and
those we have the greatest veneration for, any further than they did
well; but, on the contrary, their falls, and the injurious consequences
of them, must be warnings to us to walk the more circumspectly, that we
stumble not at the same stone that they stumbled at. 2. What was amiss
in his people he could not prevail to amend: The people did yet
corruptly. Perhaps it reflects some blame upon him, that he was wanting
in his part towards the reformation of the land. Men may be very good
themselves, and yet not have courage and zeal to do what they might do
towards the reforming of others. however it certainly reflects a great
deal of blame upon the people, that they did not do what they might have
done to improve the advantages of so good a reign: they had good
instructions given them and a good example set before them, but they
would not be reformed; so that even in the reign of their good kings, as
well as in that of the bad ones, they were treasuring up wrath against
the day of wrath; for they still did corruptly, and the founder melted
in vain.

II\. He prospered, and became truly reputable. 1. He built. He began
with the gate of the house of the Lord, which he repaired, beautified,
and raised. He then fortified the wall of Ophel, and built cities in the
mountains of Judah ([Ch2 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#003.md), [Ch2
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#004).md), took all possible care for the
fortifying of his country and the replenishing of it. 2. He conquered.
He prevailed against the Ammonites, who had invaded Judah in
Jehoshaphat's time, [Ch2 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#001.md). He
triumphed over them, and exacted great contributions from them, [Ch2
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#005.md). He became mighty ([Ch2
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#006).md) in wealth and power, and
influence upon the neighbouring nations, who courted his friendship and
feared his displeasure; and this he got by preparing his ways before the
Lord his God. The more stedfast we are in religion the more mighty we
are both for the resistance of that which is evil and for the
performance of that which is good.

III\. He finished his course too soon, but finished it with honour. He
had the unhappiness to die in the midst of his days; but, to balance
that, the happiness not to out-live his reputation, as the last three of
his predecessors did. He died when he was but forty-one years of age
([Ch2 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#008).md); but his wars and his
ways, his wars abroad and his ways at home, were so glorious that they
were recorded in the book of the kings of Israel, as well as of the
kings of Judah, [Ch2 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#007.md). The last
words of the chapter are the most melancholy, as they inform us that
Ahaz his son, whose character, in all respects, was the reverse of his,
reigned in his stead. When the wealth and power with which wise men have
done good devolve upon fools, that will do hurt with them, it is a
lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 28](ch2028.md)

</div>
