<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2006)  [Next](ch2008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 7:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have God's answer to Solomon's prayer. I. His public
answer by fire from heaven, which consumed the sacrifices ([Ch2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001)), with which the priests and
people were much affected ([Ch2 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#002),
[Ch2 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#003)). By that token of God's
acceptance they were encouraged to continue the solemnities of the feast
for fourteen days, and Solomon was encouraged to pursue all his designs
for the honour of God ([Ch2 7:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#004)).
II. His private answer by word of mouth, in a dream or vision of the
night ([Ch2 7:12-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#012)). Most of these
things we had before, 1 Kings 8 and 9.

[2 Chronicles 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 7:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The gracious answer which God immediately made to Solomon's
prayer: The fire came down from heaven and consumed the sacrifice, [Ch2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001). In this way God testified his
acceptance of Moses ([Lev 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024)), of
Gideon ([Jdg 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#021)), of David ([Ch1
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#026)), of Elijah ([Kg1
18:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#038)); and, in general, to accept the
burnt-sacrifice is, in the Hebrew phrase, to turn it to ashes, [Psa
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#003). The fire came down here, not
upon the killing of the sacrifices, but the praying of the prayer.

1\. This fire intimated that God was, (1.) Glorious in himself; for our
God is a consuming fire, terrible even in his holy places. This fire,
breaking forth (as it is probable) out of the thick darkness, made it
the more terrible, as on Mount Sinai, [Exo
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#016), [Exo
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#017). The sinners in Sion had reason
to be afraid at that sight, and to say, Who among us shall dwell near
this devouring fire? [Isa 33:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#014). And
yet, (2.) Gracious to Israel; for this fire, which might justly have
consumed them, fastened upon the sacrifice which was offered in their
stead, and consumed that, by which God signified to them that he
accepted their offerings and that his anger was turned away from them.

2\. Let us apply this, (1.) To the suffering of Christ. When it pleased
the Lord to bruise him, and put him to grief, in that he showed his
good-will to men, having laid on him the iniquity of us all. His death
was our life, and he was made sin and a curse that we might inherit
righteousness and a blessing. That sacrifice was consumed that we might
escape. Here am I, let these go their way. (2.) To the sanctification of
the Spirit, who descends like fire, burning up our lusts and
corruptions, those beasts that must be sacrificed or we are undone, and
kindling in our souls a holy fire of pious and devout affections, always
to be kept burning on the altar of the heart. The surest evidence of
God's acceptance of our prayers is the descent of the holy fire upon us.
Did not our hearts burn within us? [Luk
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#032). As a further evidence that God
accepted Solomon's prayer, still the glory of the Lord filled the house.
The heart that is thus filled with a holy awe and reverence of the
divine glory, the heart to which God manifests himself in his greatness,
and (which is no less his glory) in his goodness, is thereby owned as a
living temple.

II\. The grateful return made to God for this gracious token of his
favour.

1\. The people worshipped and praised God, [Ch2
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#003). When they saw the fire of God
come down from heaven thus they did not run away affrighted, but kept
their ground in the courts of the Lord, and took occasion from it, (1.)
With reverence to adore the glory of God: They bowed their faces to the
ground and worshipped, thus expressing their awful dread of the divine
majesty, their cheerful submission to the divine authority, and the
sense they had of their unworthiness to come into God's presence and
their inability to stand before the power of his wrath. (2.) With
thankfulness to acknowledge the goodness of God; even when the fire of
the Lord came down they praised him, saying, He is good, for his mercy
endureth for ever. This is a song never out of season, and for which our
hearts and tongues should be never out of tune. However it be, yet God
is good. When he manifests himself as a consuming fire to sinners, his
people can rejoice in him as their light. Nay, they had reason to say
that in this God was good. "It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not
consumed, but the sacrifice in our stead, for which we are bound to be
very thankful."

2\. The king and all the people offered sacrifices in abundance, [Ch2
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#004), [Ch2
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#005). With these they feasted this holy
fire, and bade it welcome to the altar. They had offered sacrifices
before, but now they increased them. Note, The tokens of God's favour to
us should enlarge our hearts in his service, and make us to abound
therein more and more. The king's example stirred up the people. Good
work is then likely to go on when the leaders of a people lead in it.
The sacrifices were so numerous that the altar could not contain them
all; but, rather than any of them should be turned back (though we may
suppose the blood of them all was sprinkled upon the altar), the flesh
of the burnt-offerings and the fat of the peace-offerings were burnt in
the midst of the court ([Ch2 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#007)),
which Solomon either hallowed for that service or hallowed by it. In
case of necessity the pavement might be an altar.

3\. The priests did their part; they waited on their offices, and the
singers and musicians on theirs ([Ch2
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#006)), with the instruments that David
made, and the hymn that David had put into their hand, as some think it
may be read (meaning that [Ch1 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#007)),
or, as we read it, when David praised by their ministry. He employed,
directed, and encouraged them in this work of praising God; and
therefore their performances were accepted as his act, and he is said to
praise by their ministry.

4\. The whole congregation expressed the greatest joy and satisfaction
imaginable. They kept the feast of the dedication of the altar seven
days, from the second to the ninth; the tenth day was the day of
atonement, when they were to afflict their souls for sin, and that was
not unseasonable in the midst of their rejoicings; on the fifteenth day
began the feast of tabernacles, which continued to the twenty-second,
and they did not separate till the twenty-third. We must never grudge
the time that we spend in the worship of God and communion with him, nor
think it long, or grow weary of it.

5\. Solomon went on in his work, and prosperously effected all he
designed for the adorning both of God's house and his own, [Ch2
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#011). Those that begin with the
service of God are likely to go on successfully in their own affairs. It
was Solomon's praise that what he undertook he went through with, and it
was by the grace of God that he prospered in it.

[2 Chronicles 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 7:12</span></span>

That God accepted Solomon's prayer appeared by the fire from heaven. But
a prayer may be accepted and yet not answered in the letter of it; and
therefore God appeared to him in the night, as he did once before ([Ch2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#007)), and after a day of sacrifice
too, as then, and gave him a peculiar answer to his prayer. We had the
substance of it before, [Kg1 9:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#002).

I. He promised to own this house for a house of sacrifice to Israel and
a house of prayer for all people ([Isa
56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007)): My name shall be there for ever
([Ch2 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#012), [Ch2
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#016)), that is, "There will I make
myself known, and there will I be called upon."

II\. He promised to answer the prayers of his people that should at any
time be made in that place, [Ch2
7:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#013). National judgments are here
supposed ([Ch2 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#013)), famine, and
pestilence, and perhaps war, for by the locusts devouring the land meant
enemies as greedy as locusts, and laying all waste. 2. National
repentance, prayer, and reformation, are required, [Ch2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#014). God expects that his people who
are called by his name, if they have dishonoured his name by their
iniquity, should honour it by accepting the punishment of their
iniquity. They must be humble themselves under his hand, must pray for
the removal of the judgment, must seek the face and favour of God; and
yet all this will not do unless they turn from their wicked ways, and
return to the God from whom they have revolted. 3. National mercy is
then promised, that God will forgive their sin, which brought the
judgment upon them, and then heal their land, redress all their
grievances. Pardoning mercy makes ways for healing mercy, [Psa
103:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#003); [Mat
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002).

III\. He promised to perpetuate Solomon's kingdom, upon condition that
he persevered in his duty, [Ch2 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#017),
[Ch2 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#018). If he hoped for the benefit
of God's covenant with David, he must imitate the example of David. But
he set before him death as well as life, the curse as well as the
blessing. 1. He supposed it possible that though they had this temple
built to the honour of God, yet they might be drawn aside to worship
other gods, [Ch2 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#019). He knew their
proneness to backslide into that sin. 2. He threatened it as certain
that, if they did so, it would certainly be the ruin of both church and
state. (1.) It would be the ruin of their state, [Ch2
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#020). "Though they have taken deep
root, and taken root long, in this good land, yet I will pluck them up
by the roots, extirpate the whole nation, pluck them up as men pluck up
weeds out of their garden, which are thrown to the dunghill." (2.) It
would be the ruin of their church. This sanctuary would be no sanctuary
to them, to protect them from the judgment of God, as they imagined,
saying, The temple of the Lord are we, [Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004). "This house which is high, not
only for the magnificence of its structure, but for the designed ends
and uses of it, shall be an astonishment, it shall come down wonderfully
([Lam 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#009)), to the amazement of all
the neighbours."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 8](ch2008)

</div>
