<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2024)  [Next](ch2026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 25:0</span></span>

Amaziah's reign, recorded in this chapter, was not one of the worse and
yet for from good. Most of the passages in this chapter we had before
more briefly related, 2 Kings 14. Here we find Amaziah, I. A just
revenger of his father's death ([Ch2
25:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#001)). II. An obedient observer of
the command of God ([Ch2 25:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#005)).
III. A cruel conqueror of the Edomites ([Ch2
25:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#011)). IV. a foolish worshipper of
the gods of Edom and impatient of reproof for it ([Ch2
25:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#014)). V. Rashly challenging the
king of Israel, and smarting for his rashness ([Ch2
25:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#017)). And, lastly, ending his
days ingloriously ([Ch2 25:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#025)).

[2 Chronicles 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 25:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The general character of Amaziah: He did that which was
right in the eyes of the Lord, worshipped the true God, kept the temple
service a going, and countenanced religion in his kingdom; but he did
not do it with a perfect heart ([Ch2
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#002)), that is, he was not a man of
serious piety or devotion himself, nor had he any zeal for the exercises
of religion. He was no enemy to it, but a cool and indifferent friend.
Such is the character of too many in this Laodicean age: they do that
which is good, but not with the heart, not with a perfect heart.

II\. A necessary piece of justice which he did upon the traitors that
murdered his father: he put them to death, [Ch2
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#003). Though we should suppose they
intended to avenge on their king the death of the prophet (as was
intimated, [Ch2 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#025)), yet this would
by no means justify their wickedness; for they were not the avengers,
but presumptuously took God's work out of his hands: and therefore
Amaziah did what became him in calling them to an account for it, but
forbade the putting of the children to death for the parents' sin, [Ch2
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#004).

III\. An expedition of his against the Edomites, who, some time ago, had
revolted from under the dominion of Judah, to which he attempted to
reduce them. Observe,

1\. The great preparation he made for this expedition. (1.) He mustered
his own forces, and marshalled them ([Ch2
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#005)), and found Judah and Benjamin in
all but 300,000 men that were fit for war, whereas, in Jehoshaphat's
time, fifty or sixty years before, they were four times as many. Sin
weakens a people, diminishes them, dispirits them, and lessens their
number and figure. (2.) He hired auxiliary troops out of the kingdom of
Israel, [Ch2 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#006). Finding his own
kingdom defective in men, he thought to make up the deficiency with his
money, and therefore took into his pay 100,000 Israelites. If he had
advised with any of his prophets before he did this, or had but
considered how little any of his ancestors got by their alliances with
Israel, he would not have had this to undo again. But rashness makes
work for repentance.

2\. The command which God sent him by a prophet to dismiss out of his
service the forces of Israel, [Ch2
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#007), [Ch2
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#008). He would not have him call in
any assistance at all: it looked like distrust of God. If he made sure
of God's presence, the army he had of his own was sufficient. But
particularly he must not take in their assistance: For the Lord is not
with the children of Ephraim, because they are not with him, but worship
the calves. This was a good reason why he should not make use of them,
because he could not depend upon them to do him any service. What good
could be expected from those that had not God with them, nor his
blessings upon their undertakings? It is comfortable to employ those
who, we have reason to hope, have an interest in heaven, and dangerous
to associate with those from whom the Lord has departed. The prophet
assured him that if he persisted in his resolution to take these
idolatrous apostate Israelites with him, in hopes thereby to make
himself strong for the battle, it was at his peril; they would prove a
dead weight to his army, would sink and betray it: "God shall make thee
fall before the enemy, and these Israelites will be the ruin of thy
cause; for God has power to help thee without them, and to cast thee
down though thou hast them with thee."

3\. The objection which Amaziah made against this command, and the
satisfactory answer which the prophet gave to that objection, [Ch2
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#009). The king had remitted 100
talents to the men of Israel for advance-money. "Now," says he, "if I
send them back, I shall lose that: But what shall we do for the 100
talents?" This is an objection men often make against their duty: they
are afraid of losing by it. "Regard not that," says the prophet: "The
Lord is able to give thee much more than this; and, thou mayest depend
upon it, he will not see thee lose by him. What are 100 talents between
thee and him? He has ways enough to make up the loss to thee; it is
below thee to speak of it." Note, A firm belief of God's all-sufficiency
to bear us out in our duty, and to make up all the loss and damage we
sustain in his service abundantly to our advantage, will make his yoke
very easy and his burden very light. What is it to trust in God, but to
be willing to venture the loss of any thing for him, in confidence of
the goodness of the security he gives us that we shall not lose by him,
but that whatever we part with for his sake shall be made up to us in
kind or kindness. When we grudge to part with any thing for God and our
religion, this should satisfy us, that God is able to give us much more
than this. He is just, and he is good, and he is solvent. The king lost
100 talents by his obedience; and we find just that sum given to his
grandson Jotham as a present ([Ch2
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#005)); then the principal was repaid,
and, for interest, 10,000 measures of wheat and as many of barley.

4\. His obedience to the command of God, which is upon record to his
honour. He would rather lose his money, disoblige his allies, and
dismiss a fourth part of his army just as they were going to take the
field, than offend God: He separated the army of Ephraim, to go home
again, [Ch2 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#010). And they went home
in great anger, taking it as a great affront thus to be made fools of,
and to be cashiered as men not fit to be employed, and being perhaps
disappointed of the advantages they promised themselves in spoil and
plunder by joining with Judah against Edom. Men are apt to resent that
which touches them in their profit or reputation, though it frees them
from trouble.

5\. His triumphs over the Edomites, [Ch2
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#011), [Ch2
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#012). He left dead upon the spot, in
the field of battle, 10,000 men; 10,000 more he took prisoners, and
barbarously killed them all by throwing them down some steep and craggy
precipice. What provocation he had to exercise this cruelty towards them
we are not told; but it was certainly very severe.

6\. The mischief which the disbanded soldiers of Israel did to the
cities of Judah, either in their return or soon after, [Ch2
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#013). They were so enraged at being
sent home that, if they might not go to share with Judah in the spoil of
Edom, they would make a prey of Judah. Several cities that lay upon the
borders they plundered, killing 3000 men that made resistance. But why
should God suffer this to be done? Was it not in obedience to him that
they were sent home, and yet shall the country thus suffer by it? Surely
God's way is in the sea! Did not the prophet say that God was not with
the children of Ephraim, and yet they are suffered to prevail against
Judah? Doubtless God intended hereby to chastise those cities of Judah
for their idolatries, which were found most in those parts that lay next
to Israel. The men of Israel had corrupted them, and now they were made
a plague to them. Satan both tempts and torments.

[2 Chronicles 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch2 25:14</span></span>

Here is, I. The revolt of Amaziah from the God of Israel to the gods of
the Edomites. Egregious folly! Ahaz worshipped the gods of those that
had conquered him, for which he had some little colour, [Ch2
28:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#023). But to worship the gods of
those whom he had conquered, who could not protect their own
worshippers, was the greatest absurdity that could be. What did he see
in the gods of the children of Seir that could tempt him to set them up
for his gods and bow himself down before them? [Ch2
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#014). If he had cast the idols down
from the rock and broken them to pieces, instead of the prisoners, he
would have manifested more of the piety as well as more of the pity of
an Israelite; but perhaps for that barbarous inhumanity he was given up
to this ridiculous idolatry.

II\. The reproof which God sent to him, by a prophet, for this sin. The
anger of the Lord was kindled against him, and justly; yet, before he
sent to destroy him, he sent to convince and reclaim him, and so to
prevent his destruction. The prophet reasoned with him very fairly and
very mildly: Why hast thou sought the favour of those gods which could
not deliver their own people? [Ch2
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#015). If men would but duly consider
the inability of all those things to help them to which they have
recourse when they forsake God, they would not be such enemies to
themselves.

III\. The check he gave to the reprover, [Ch2
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#016). He could say nothing in excuse
of his own folly; the reproof was too just to be answered. But he fell
into a passion with the reprover. 1. He taunted him as saucy and
impertinent, and meddling with that which did not belong to him: Art
thou made of the king's counsel? Could not a man speak reasonably to
him, but he must be upbraided as usurping the place of a
privy-counsellor? But, as a prophet, he really was made of the king's
counsel by the King of kings, in duty to whom the king was bound not
only to hear, but to ask and take his counsel. 2. He silenced him, bade
him forbear and say not a word more to him. He said to the seer, See
not, [Isa 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#010). Men would gladly have
their prophets thus under their girdles, as we say, to speak just when
and what they would have them speak, and not otherwise. 3. He threatened
him: "Why shouldst thou be smitten? It is at thy peril if thou sayest a
word more of this matter." He seems to remind him of Zechariah's fate in
the last reign, who was put to death for making bold with the king; and
bids him take warning by him. Thus he justifies the killing of that
prophet by menacing this, and so, in effect, makes himself guilty of the
blood of both. He had hearkened to the prophet who ordered him to send
back the army of Israel, and was ruled by him, though he contradicted
his politics and lost him 100 talents, [Ch2
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#010). But this prophet, who dissuaded
him from worshipping the gods of the Edomites, he ran upon with an
unaccountable rage, which must be attributed to the witchcraft of
idolatry. He was easily persuaded to part with his talents of silver,
but by no means with his gods of silver.

IV\. The doom which the prophet passed upon him for this. He had more to
say to him by way of instruction and advice; but, finding him obstinate
in his iniquity, he forbore. He is joined to idols; let him alone, [Hos
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#017). Miserable is the condition of
that man with whom the blessed Spirit, by ministers and conscience,
forbears to strive, [Gen 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003). And both
the reprovers in the gate and that in the bosom, if long brow-beaten and
baffled, will at length forbear. So I gave them up to their own hearts'
lusts. The secure sinner perhaps values himself upon it as a noble and
happy achievement to have silenced his reprovers and monitors, and to
get clear of them; but what comes of it? "I know that God has determined
to destroy thee; it is a plain indication that thou art marked for ruin
that thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened to my counsel." Those
that are deaf to reproof are ripening apace for destruction, [Pro
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#001).

[2 Chronicles 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ch2 25:17</span></span>

We have here this degenerate prince mortified by his neighbour and
murdered by his own subjects.

I. Never was proud prince more thoroughly mortified than Amaziah was by
Joash king of Israel.

1\. This part of the story (which was as fully related [Kg2
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#008), etc., as it is here) - embracing
the foolish challenge which Amaziah sent to Joash ([Ch2
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#017)), his haughty scornful answer to
it ([Ch2 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#018)), with the friendly
advice he gave him to sit still and know when he was well off, ([Ch2
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#019)), - his wilfully persisting in
his challenge ([Ch2 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#020), [Ch2
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#021)), the defeat that was given him
([Ch2 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#022)), and the calamity he
brought upon himself and his city thereby ([Ch2
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#023), [Ch2
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#024)), - verifies two of Solomon's
proverbs: - (1.) That a man's pride will bring him low, [Pro
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#023). It goes before his destruction;
not only procures it meritoriously, but is often the immediate occasion
of it. He that exalteth himself shall be abased. (2.) That he that goes
forth hastily to strive will probably not know what to do in the end
thereof, when his neighbour has put him to shame, [Pro
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#008). He that is fond of contention
may have enough of it sooner than he thinks of.

2\. But there are two passages in this story which we had not before in
the Kings. (1.) That Amaziah took advice before he challenged the king
of Israel, [Ch2 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#017). But of whom?
Not of the prophet - he was not made of the king's counsel; but of his
statesmen that would flatter him and bid him go up and prosper. It is
good to take advice, but then it must be of those that are fit to advise
us. Those that will not take advice from the word of God, which would
guide them aright, will justly be left to the bad advice of those that
will counsel them to their destruction. Let those be made fools that
will not be made wise. (2.) Amaziah's imprudence is here made the
punishment of his impiety ([Ch2
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#020)): It was of the Lord; he left
him to himself to act thus foolishly, that he and his people might be
delivered into the hands of their enemies, because they had forsaken God
and sought after the gods of Edom. Those that will not persuaded to do
well for their souls will justly be given up to their own counsels to do
ill for themselves even in their outward affairs.

II\. Never was poor prince more violently pursued by his own subjects.
From the time that he departed from the Lord (so it may be read, [Ch2
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#027)) the hearts of his subjects
departed from him, and they began to form a design against him in
Jerusalem. It is probable they were exasperated against him more for his
rashly engaging in a war against Israel than for his worshipping the
gods of Edom. But at length the ferment grew so high, and he perceived
the plot to be laid so deeply, that he thought fit to quit his royal
city and flee to Lachish, either as a private place where he might be
hid or as a strong place where he might be guarded; but they sent after
him thither, and slew him there. By this the putting of him to death
seems to have been done deliberately, and to have been the act, not of a
disgusted servant or two, but of a considerable body that durst avow it.
How unrighteous soever they were herein, God was righteous.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 26](ch2026)

</div>
