<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2001)  [Next](ch2003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 2:0</span></span>

Solomon's trading, which we read of in the close of the foregoing
chapter, and the encouragement he gave both to merchandise and
manufacturers, were very commendable. But building was the work he was
designed for, and to that business he is here applying himself. Here is,
I. Solomon's determination to build the temple and a royal palace, and
his appointing labourers to be employed herein ([Ch2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#001), [Ch2
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#002), [Ch2
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#017), [Ch2
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#018)). II. His request to Huram king
of Tyre to furnish him both with artists and materials ([Ch2
2:3-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#003)). III. Huram's obliging answer
to, and compliance with, his request ([Ch2
2:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#011)).

[2 Chronicles 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 2:1</span></span>

Solomon's wisdom was given him, not merely for speculation, to entertain
himself (though it is indeed a princely entertainment), nor merely for
conversation, to entertain his friends, but for action; and therefore to
action he immediately applies himself. Observe,

I. His resolution within himself concerning his business ([Ch2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#001)): He determined to build, in the
first place, a house for the name of the Lord. It is fit that he who is
the first should be served - first a temple and then a palace, a house
not so much for himself, or his own convenience and magnitude, as for
the kingdom, for the honour of it among its neighbours and for the
decent reception of the people whenever they had occasion to apply to
their prince; so that in both he aimed at the public good. Those are the
wisest men that lay out themselves most for the honour of the name of
the Lord and the welfare of communities. We are not born for ourselves,
but for God and our country.

II\. His embassy to Huram, king of Tyre, to engage his assistance in the
prosecution of his designs. The purport of his errand to him is much the
same here as we had it [Kg1 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#002), etc.,
only here it is more largely set forth.

1\. The reasons why he makes this application to Huram are here more
fully represented, for information to Huram as well as for inducement.
(1.) He pleads his father's interest in Huram, and the kindness he had
received from him ([Ch2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#003)): As thou
didst deal with David, so deal with me. As we must show kindness to, so
we may expect kindness from, our fathers' friends, and with them should
cultivate a correspondence. (2.) He represents his design in building
the temple: he intended it for a place of religious worship ([Ch2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#004)), that all the offerings which God
had appointed for the honour of his name might be offered up there. The
house was built that it might be dedicated to God and used in his
service. This we should aim at in all our business, that our havings and
doings may be all to the glory of God. He mentions various particular
services that were there to be performed, for the instruction of Huram.
The mysteries of the true religion, unlike those of the Gentile
superstition, coveted not concealment. (3.) He endeavors to inspire
Huram with very great and high thoughts of the God of Israel, by
expressing the mighty veneration he had for his holy name: Great is our
God above all gods, above all idols, above all princes. Idols are
nothing, princes are little, and both under the control of the God of
Israel; and therefore, \[1.\] "The house must be great; not in
proportion to the greatness of that God to whom it is to be dedicated
(for between finite and infinite there can be no proportion), but in
some proportion to the great value and esteem we have for this God."
\[2.\] "Yet, be it ever so great, it cannot be a habitation for the
great God. Let not Huram think that the God of Israel, like the gods of
the nations, dwells in temples made with hands, [Act
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#024). No, the heaven of heavens
cannot contain him. It is intended only for the convenience of his
priests and worshippers, that they may have a fit place wherein to burn
sacrifice before him." \[3.\] He looked upon himself, though a mighty
prince, as unworthy the honour of being employed in this great work: Who
am I that I should build him a house? It becomes us to go about every
work for God with a due sense of our utter insufficiency for it and our
incapacity to do any thing adequate to the divine perfections. It is
part of the wisdom wherein we ought to walk towards those that are
without carefully to guard against all misapprehension which any thing
we say or do may occasion concerning God; so Solomon does here in his
treaty with Huram.

2\. The requests he makes to him are more particularly set down here.
(1.) He desired Huram would furnish him with a good hand to work ([Ch2
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#007)): Send me a man. He had cunning
men with him in Jerusalem and Judah, whom David provided, [Ch1
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#015). Let them not think but that
Jews had some among them that were artists. But "send me a man to direct
them. There are ingenious men in Jerusalem, but not such engravers as
are in Tyre; and therefore, since temple-work must be the best in its
kind, let me have the best workmen that can be got." (2.) With good
materials to work on ([Ch2 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#008)), cedar
and other timber in abundance ([Ch2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#008), [Ch2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#009)); for the house must be
wonderfully great, that is, very stately and magnificent, no cost must
be spared, nor any contrivance wanting in it.

3\. Here is Solomon's engagement to maintain the workmen ([Ch2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#010)), to give them so much wheat and
barley, so much wine and oil. He did not feed his workmen with bread and
water, but with plenty, and every thing of the best. Those that employ
labourers ought to take care they be not only well paid, but well
provided for with sufficient of that which is wholesome and fit for
them. Let the rich masters do for their poor workmen as they would be
done by if the tables were turned.

[2 Chronicles 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch2 2:11</span></span>

Here we have, I. The return which Huram made to Solomon's embassy, in
which he shows a great respect for Solomon and a readiness to serve him.
Meaner people may learn of these great ones to be neighbourly and
complaisant. 1. He congratulates Israel on having such a king as Solomon
was ([Ch2 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#011)): Because the Lord
loved his people, he has made thee king. Note, A wise and good
government is a great blessing to a people, and may well be accounted a
singular token of God's favour. He does not say, Because he loved thee
(though that was true, [Sa2 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#024)) he
made thee king, but because he loved his people. Princes must look upon
themselves as preferred for the public good, not for their own personal
satisfaction, and should rule so as to prove that they were given in
love and not in anger. 2. He blesses God for raising up such a successor
to David, [Ch2 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#012). It should seem
that Huram was not only very well affected to the Jewish nation, and
well pleased with their prosperity, but that he was proselyted to the
Jewish religion, and worshipped Jehovah, the God of Israel (who was now
known by that name to the neighbouring nations), as the God that made
heaven and earth, and as the fountain of power as well as being; for he
sets up kings. Now that the people of Israel kept close to the law and
worship of God, and so preserved their honour, the neighbouring nations
were as willing to be instructed by them in the true religion as Israel
had been, in the days of their apostasy, to be infected with the
idolatries and superstitions of their neighbours. This made them high,
that they lent to many nations and did not borrow, lent truth to them,
and did not borrow error from them; as when they did the contrary it was
their shame. 3. He sent him a very ingenious curious workman, that would
not fail to answer his expectations in every thing, one that had both
Jewish and Gentile blood meeting in him; for his mother was an Israelite
(Huram though she was of the tribe of Dan, and therefore says so here,
[Ch2 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#014), but it seems she was of the
tribe of Naphtali, [Kg1 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#014)), but his
father was a Tyrian - a good omen of uniting Jew and Gentile in the
gospel temple, as it was afterwards when the building of the second
temple was greatly furthered by Darius (Ezra 6), who is supposed to have
been the son of Esther - an Israelite by the mother's side. 4. He
engaged for the timber, as much as he would have occasion for, and
undertook to deliver it at Joppa, and withal signified his dependence
upon Solomon for the maintenance of the workmen as he had promised, v.
15, 16. This agreement we had, [Kg1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#008), [Kg1
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#009).

II\. The orders which Solomon gave about the workmen. He would not
employ the free-born Israelites in the drudgery work of the temple
itself, not so much as to be overseers of it. In this he employed the
strangers who were proselyted to the Jewish religion, who had not lands
of inheritance in Canaan as the Israelites had, and therefore applied to
trades, and got their living by their ingenuity and industry. There
were, at this time, vast numbers of them in the land ([Ch2
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#017)), who, if they were of any of the
devoted nations, perhaps fell within the case, and therefore fell under
the law, of the Gibeonites, to be hewers of wood for the congregation:
if not, yet being in many respects well provided for by the law of
Moses, and put upon an equal footing with the native Israelites, they
were bound in gratitude to do what they could for the service of the
temple. Yet, no doubt, they were well paid in money or money's worth:
the law was, Thou shalt not oppress a stranger. The distribution of them
we have here ([Ch2 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#002), and again [Ch2
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#018)), in all 150,000. Canaan was a
fruitful land, that found meat for so many mouths more than the numerous
natives; and the temple was a vast building, that found work for so many
bands. Mr. Fuller suggests that the expedient peculiar to this
structure, of framing all beforehand, must needs increase the work. I
think it rather left so much the more room for this vast multitude of
hands to be employed in it; for in the forest of Lebanon they might all
be at work together, without crowding one another, which they could not
have been upon Mount Sion. And, if there had not been such vast numbers
employed, so large and curious a fabric, which was begun and ended in
seven years, might, for aught I know, have been as long in building as
St. Paul's.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 3](ch2003)

</div>
