<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1000)  [Next](co1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

In this chapter we have, I. The preface or introduction to the whole
epistle ([Co1 1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)). II. One
principal occasion of writing it hinted, namely, their divisions and the
origin of them ([Co1 1:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)). III. An
account of Paul's ministry among them, which was principally preaching
the gospel ([Co1 1:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014)). IV. The
manner wherein he preached the gospel, and the different success of it,
with an account how admirably it was fitted to bring glory to God and
beat down the pride and vanity of men ([Co1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017) to the end).

[1 Corinthians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 1:1</span></span>

We have here the apostle's preface to his whole epistle, in which we may
take notice,

I. Of the inscription, in which, according to the custom of writing
letters then, the name of the person by whom it was written and the
persons to whom it was written are both inserted. 1. It is an epistle
from Paul, the apostle of the Gentiles, to the church of Corinth, which
he himself had planted, though there were some among them that now
questioned his apostleship ([Co1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001),
[Co1 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#002)), and vilified his person and
ministry, [Co2 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010). The most
faithful and useful ministers are not secure from this contempt. He
begins with challenging this character: Paul, called to be an apostle of
Jesus Christ, through the will of God. He had not taken this honour to
himself, but had a divine commission for it. It was proper at any time,
but necessary at this time, to assert his character, and magnify his
office, when false teachers made a merit of running him down, and their
giddy and deluded followers were so apt to set them up in competition
with him. It was not pride in Paul, but faithfulness to his trust, in
this juncture, to maintain his apostolical character and authority. And,
to make this more fully appear, he joins Sosthenes with him in writing,
who was a minister of a lower rank. Paul, and Sosthenes his brother, not
a fellow-apostle, but a fellow-minister, once a ruler of the Jewish
synagogue, afterwards a convert to Christianity, a Corinthian by birth,
as is most probable, and dear to this people, for which reason Paul, to
ingratiate himself with them, joins them with himself in his first
salutations. There is no reason to suppose he was made a partaker of the
apostle's inspiration, for which reasons he speaks, through the rest of
the epistle, in his own name, and in the singular number. Paul did not
in any case lessen his apostolical authority, and yet he was ready upon
all occasions to do a kind and condescending thing for their good to
whom he ministered. The persons to whom this epistle was directed were
the church of God that was at Corinth, sanctified in Christ Jesus, and
called to be saints. All Christians are thus far sanctified in Christ
Jesus, that they are by baptism dedicated and devoted to him, they are
under strict obligations to be holy, and they make profession of real
sanctity. If they be not truly holy, it is their own fault and reproach.
Note, It is the design of Christianity to sanctify us in Christ. He gave
himself for us, to redeem us from all iniquity, and purify us to himself
a peculiar people, zealous of good works. In conjunction with the church
at Corinth, he directs the epistle to all that in every place call on
the name of Christ Jesus our Lord, both theirs and ours. Hereby
Christians are distinguished from the profane and atheistical, that they
dare not live without prayer; and hereby they are distinguished from
Jews and Pagans, that they call on the name of Christ. He is their
common head and Lord. Observe, In every place in the Christian world
there are some that call on the name of Christ. God hath a remnant in
all places; and we should have a common concern for and hold communion
with all that call on Christ's name.

II\. Of the apostolical benediction. Grace be to you, and peace, from
God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. An apostle of the prince
of peace must be a messenger and minister of peace. This blessing the
gospel brings with it, and this blessing every preacher of the gospel
should heartily wish and pray may be the lot of all among whom he
ministers. Grace and peace - the favour of God, and reconciliation to
him. It is indeed the summary of all blessings. The Lord lift up his
countenance upon thee, and give thee peace, was the form of benediction
under the Old Testament ([Num 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#026)),
but this advantage we have by the gospel, 1. That we are directed how to
obtain that peace from God: it is in and by Christ. Sinners can have no
peace with God, nor any good from him, but through Christ. 2. We are
told what must qualify us for this peace; namely, grace: first grace,
then peace. God first reconciles sinners to himself, before he bestows
his peace upon them.

III\. Of the apostle's thanksgiving to God on their behalf. Paul begins
most of his epistles with thanksgiving to God for his friends and prayer
for them. Note, The best way of manifesting our affection to our friends
is by praying and giving thanks for them. It is one branch of the
communion of saints to give thanks to God mutually for our gifts,
graces, and comforts. He gives thanks, 1. For their conversion to the
faith of Christ: For the grace which was given you through Jesus Christ,
[Co1 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004). He is the great procurer and
disposer of the favours of God. Those who are united to him by faith,
and made to partake of his Spirit and merits, are the objects of divine
favour. God loves them, bears them hearty good-will, and bestows on them
his fatherly smiles and blessings. 2. For the abundance of their
spiritual gifts. This the church of Corinth was famous for. They did not
come behind any of the churches in any gift, [Co1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007). He specifies utterance and
knowledge, [Co1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005). Where God has
given these two gifts, he has given great capacity for usefulness. Many
have the flower of utterance that have not the root of knowledge, and
their converse is barren. Many have the treasure of knowledge, and want
utterance to employ it for the good of others, and then it is in a
manner wrapped up in a napkin. But, where God gives both, a man is
qualified for eminent usefulness. When the church of Corinth was
enriched with all utterance and all knowledge, it was fit that a large
tribute of praise should be rendered to God, especially when these gifts
were a testimony to the truth of the Christian doctrine, a confirmation
of the testimony of Christ among them, [Co1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#006). They were signs and wonders and
gifts of the Holy Ghost, by which God did bear witness to the apostles,
both to their mission and doctrine ([Heb
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#004)), so that the more plentifully
they were poured forth on any church the more full attestation was given
to that doctrine which was delivered by the apostles, the more
confirming evidence they had of their divine mission. And it is no
wonder that when they had such a foundation for their faith they should
live in expectation of the coming of their Lord Jesus Christ, [Co1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007). It is the character of Christians
that they wait for Christ's second coming; all our religion has regard
to this: we believe it, and hope for it, and it is the business of our
lives to prepare for it, if we are Christians indeed. And the more
confirmed we are in the Christian faith the more firm is our belief of
our Lord's second coming, and the more earnest our expectation of it.

IV\. Of the encouraging hopes the apostle had of them for the time to
come, founded on the power and love of Christ, and the faithfulness of
God, [Co1 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#008), [Co1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009). He who had begun a good work in
them, and carried it on thus far, would not leave it unfinished. Those
that wait for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ will be kept by him,
and confirmed to the end; and those that are so will be blameless in the
day of Christ: not upon the principle of strict justice, but gracious
absolution; not in rigour of law, but from rich and free grace. How
desirable is it to be confirmed and kept of Christ for such a purpose as
this! How glorious are the hopes of such a privilege, whether for
ourselves or others! To be kept by the power of Christ from the power of
our own corruption and Satan's temptation, that we may appear without
blame in the great day! O glorious expectation, especially when the
faithfulness of God comes in to support our hopes! He who hath called us
into the fellowship of his Son is faithful, and will do it, [Th1
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#024). He who hath brought us into near
and dear relation to Christ, into sweet and intimate communion with
Christ, is faithful; he may be trusted with our dearest concerns. Those
that come at his call shall never be disappointed in their hopes in him.
If we approve ourselves faithful to God, we shall never find him
unfaithful to us. He will not suffer his faithfulness to fail, [Psa
89:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#033).

[1 Corinthians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 1:10</span></span>

Here the apostle enters on his subject.

I. He extorts them to unity and brotherly love, and reproves them for
their divisions. He had received an account from some that wished them
well of some unhappy differences among them. It was neither ill-will to
the church, nor to their ministers, that prompted them to give this
account; but a kind and prudent concern to have these heats qualified by
Paul's interposition. He writes to them in a very engaging way: "I
beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; if you have
any regard to that dear and worthy name by which you are called, be
unanimous. Speak all the same thing; avoid divisions or schisms" (as the
original is), "that is, all alienation of affection from each other. Be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, as far as you can. In the
great things of religion be of a mind: but, when there is not a unity of
sentiment, let there be a union of affections. The consideration of
being agreed in greater things should extinguish all feuds and divisions
about minor ones."

II\. He hints at the origin of these contentions. Pride lay at the
bottom, and this made them factious. Only of pride cometh contention,
[Pro 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#010). They quarrelled about
their ministers. Paul and Apollos were both faithful ministers of Jesus
Christ, and helpers of their faith and joy: but those who were disposed
to be contentious broke into parties, and set their ministers at the
head of their several factions: some cried up Paul, perhaps as the most
sublime and spiritual teacher; others cried up Apollos, perhaps as the
most eloquent speaker; some Cephas, or Peter, perhaps for the authority
of his age, or because he was the apostle of the circumcision; and some
were for none of them, but Christ only. So liable are the best things in
the world to be corrupted, and the gospel and its institutions, which
are at perfect harmony with themselves and one another, to be made the
engines of variance, discord, and contention. This is no reproach to our
religion, but a very melancholy evidence of the corruption and depravity
of human nature. Note, How far will pride carry Christians in opposition
to one another! Even so far as to set Christ and his own apostles at
variance, and make them rivals and competitors.

III\. He expostulates with them upon their discord and quarrels: "Is
Christ divided? No, there is but one Christ, and therefore Christians
should be on one heart. Was Paul crucified for you? Was he your
sacrifice and atonement? Did I ever pretend to be your saviour, or any
more than his minister? Or, were you baptized in the name of Paul? Were
you devoted to my service, or engaged to be my disciples, by that sacred
rite? Did I challenge that right in you, or dependence from you, which
is the proper claim of your God and Redeemer?" No; ministers, however
instrumental they are of good to us, are not to be put in Christ's
stead. They are not to usurp Christ's authority, nor encourage any thing
in the people that looks like transferring his authority to them. He is
our Saviour and sacrifice, he is our Lord and guide. And happy were it
for the churches if there were no name of distinction among them, as
Christ is not divided.

[1 Corinthians 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 1:14</span></span>

Here the apostle gives an account of his ministry among them. He thanks
God he had baptized but a few among them, Crispus, who had been a ruler
of a synagogue at Corinth ([Act 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#008)),
Gaius, and the household of Stephanas, besides whom, he says, he did not
remember that he had baptized any. But how was this a proper matter for
thankfulness? Was it not a part of the apostolical commission to baptize
all nations? And could Paul give thanks to God for his own neglect of
duty? He is not to be understood in such a sense as if he were thankful
for not having baptized at all, but for not having done it in present
circumstances, lest it should have had this very bad construction put
upon it - that he had baptized in his own name, made disciples for
himself, or set himself up as the head of a sect. He left it to other
ministers to baptize, while he set himself to more useful work, and
filled up his time with preaching the gospel. This, he thought, was more
his business, because the more important business of the two. He had
assistants that could baptize, when none could discharge the other part
of his office so well as himself. In this sense he says, Christ sent him
not to baptize, but to preach the gospel - not so much to baptize as to
preach. Note, Ministers should consider themselves sent and set apart
more especially to that service in which Christ will be most honoured
and the salvation of souls promoted, and for which they are best fitted,
though no part of their duty is to be neglected. The principal business
Paul did among them was to preach the gospel ([Co1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017)), the cross ([Co1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018)), Christ crucified, [Co1
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023). Ministers are the soldiers of
Christ, and are to erect and display the banner of the cross. He did not
preach his own fancy, but the gospel - the glad tidings of peace, and
reconciliation to God, through the mediation of a crucified Redeemer.
This is the sum and substance of the gospel. Christ crucified is the
foundation of all our joys. By his death we live. This is what Paul
preached, what all ministers should preach, and what all the saints live
upon.

[1 Corinthians 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 1:17</span></span>

We have here,

I. The manner in which Paul preached the gospel, and the cross of
Christ: Not with the wisdom of words ([Co1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017)), the enticing words of man's
wisdom ([Co1 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#004)), the flourish of
oratory, or the accuracies of philosophical language, upon which the
Greeks so much prided themselves, and which seem to have been the
peculiar recommendations of some of the heads of the faction in this
church that most opposed this apostle. He did not preach the gospel in
this manner, lest the cross of Christ should be of no effect, lest the
success should be ascribed to the force of art, and not of truth; not to
the plain doctrine of a crucified Jesus, but to the powerful oratory of
those who spread it, and hereby the honour of the cross be diminished or
eclipsed. Paul had been bred up himself in Jewish learning at the feet
of Gamaliel, but in preaching the cross of Christ he laid his learning
aside. He preached a crucified Jesus in plain language, and told the
people that that Jesus who was crucified at Jerusalem was the Son of God
and Saviour of men, and that all who would be saved must repent of their
sins, and believe in him, and submit to his government and laws. This
truth needed no artificial dress; it shone out with the greatest majesty
in its own light, and prevailed in the world by its divine authority,
and the demonstration of the Spirit, without any human helps. The plain
preaching of a crucified Jesus was more powerful than all the oratory
and philosophy of the heathen world.

II\. We have the different effects of this preaching: To those who
perish it is foolishness, but to those who are saved it is the power of
God, [Co1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018). It is to the Jews a
stumbling-block, and to the Greeks foolishness; but unto those who are
called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of
God, [Co1 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023), [Co1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024). 1. Christ crucified is a
stumbling-block to the Jews. They could not get over it. They had a
conceit that their expected Messiah was to be a great temporal prince,
and therefore would never own one who made so mean an appearance in
life, and died so accursed a death, for their deliverer and king. They
despised him, and looked upon him as execrable, because he was hanged on
a tree, and because he did not gratify them with a sign to their mind,
though his divine power shone out in innumerable miracles. The Jews
require a sign, [Co1 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#022). See [Mat
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038). 2. He was to the Greeks
foolishness. They laughed at the story of a crucified Saviour, and
despised the apostles' way of telling it. They sought for wisdom. They
were men of wit and reading, men that had cultivated arts and sciences,
and had, for some ages, been in a manner the very mint of knowledge and
learning. There was nothing in the plain doctrine of the cross to suit
their taste, nor humour their vanity, nor gratify a curious and
wrangling temper: they entertained it therefore with scorn and contempt.
What, hope to be saved by one that could not save himself! And trust in
one who was condemned and crucified as a malefactor, a man of mean birth
and poor condition in life, and cut off by so vile and opprobrious a
death! This was what the pride of human reason and learning could not
relish. The Greeks thought it little better than stupidity to receive
such a doctrine, and pay this high regard to such a person: and thus
were they justly left to perish in their pride and obstinacy. Note, It
is just with God to leave those to themselves who pour such proud
contempt on divine wisdom and grace. 3. To those who are called and
saved he is the wisdom of God, and the power of God. Those who are
called and sanctified, who receive the gospel, and are enlightened by
the Spirit of God, discern more glorious discoveries of God's wisdom and
power in the doctrine of Christ crucified than in all his other works.
Note, Those who are saved are reconciled to the doctrine of the cross,
and led into an experimental acquaintance with the mysteries of Christ
crucified.

III\. We have here the triumphs of the cross over human wisdom,
according to the ancient prophecy ([Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014)): I will destroy the wisdom of
the wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Where
is the wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the disputer of this world?
Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? [Co1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019), [Co1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020), All the valued learning of this
world was confounded, baffled, and eclipsed, by the Christian revelation
and the glorious triumphs of the cross. The heathen politicians and
philosophers, the Jewish rabbis and doctors, the curious searchers into
the secrets of nature, were all posed and put to a nonplus. This scheme
lay out of the reach of the deepest statesmen and philosophers, and the
greatest pretenders to learning both among the Jews and Greeks. When God
would save the world, he took a way by himself; and good reason, for the
world by wisdom knew not God, [Co1
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021). All the boasted science of the
heathen world did not, could not, effectually bring home the world to
God. In spite of all their wisdom, ignorance still prevailed, iniquity
still abounded. Men were puffed up by their imaginary knowledge, and
rather further alienated from God; and therefore it pleased him, by the
foolishness of preaching, to save those that believe. By the foolishness
of preaching - not such in truth, but in vulgar reckoning.

1\. The thing preached was foolishness in the eyes of worldly-wise men.
Our living through one who died, our being blessed by one who was made a
curse, our being justified by one who was himself condemned, was all
folly and inconsistency to men blinded with self-conceit and wedded to
their own prejudices and the boasted discoveries of their reason and
philosophy.

2\. The manner of preaching the gospel was foolishness to them too. None
of the famous men for wisdom or eloquence were employed to plant the
church or propagate the gospel. A few fishermen were called out, and
sent upon this errand. These were commissioned to disciple the nations:
these vessels chosen to convey the treasure of saving knowledge to the
world. There was nothing in them that at first view looked grand or
august enough to come from God; and the proud pretenders to learning and
wisdom despised the doctrine for the sake of those who dispensed it. And
yet the foolishness of God is wiser than men, [Co1
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025). Those methods of divine conduct
that vain men are apt to censure as unwise and weak have more true,
solid, and successful wisdom in them, than all the learning and wisdom
that are among men: "You see your calling, brethren, how that not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called,
[Co1 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026), etc. You see the state of
Christianity; not many men of learning, or authority, or honourable
extraction, are called." There is a great deal of meanness and weakness
in the outward appearance of our religion. For, (1.) Few of
distinguished character in any of these respects were chosen for the
work of the ministry. God did not choose philosophers, nor orators, nor
statesmen, nor men of wealth and power and interest in the world, to
publish the gospel of grace and peace. Not the wise men after the flesh,
though men would apt to think that a reputation for wisdom and learning
might have contributed much to the success of the gospel. Not the mighty
and noble, however men might be apt to imagine that secular pomp and
power would make way for its reception in the world. But God seeth not
as man seeth. He hath chosen the foolish things of the world, the weak
things of the world, the base and despicable things of the world, men of
mean birth, of low rank, of no liberal education, to be the preachers of
the gospel and planters of the church. His thoughts are not as our
thoughts, nor his ways as our ways. He is a better judge than we what
instruments and measures will best serve the purposes of his glory. (2.)
Few of distinguished rank and character were called to be Christians. As
the teachers were poor and mean, so generally were the converts. Few of
the wise, and mighty, and noble, embraced the doctrine of the cross. The
first Christians, both among Jews and Greeks, were weak, and foolish,
and base; men of mean furniture as to their mental improvements, and
very mean rank and condition as to their outward estate; and yet what
glorious discoveries are there of divine wisdom in the whole scheme of
the gospel, and in this particular circumstance of its success!

IV\. We have an account how admirably all is fitted, 1. To beat down the
pride and vanity of men. God hath chosen the foolish things of the world
to confound the wise - men of no learning to confound the most learned;
the weak things of the world to confound the might - men of mean rank
and circumstances to confound and prevail against all the power and
authority of earthly kings; and base things, and things which are
despised - things which men have in the lowest esteem, or in the utmost
contempt, to pour contempt and disgrace on all they value and have in
veneration; and things which are not, to bring to nought (to abolish)
things that are - the conversion of the Gentiles (of whom the Jews had
the most contemptuous and vilifying thoughts) was to open a way to the
abolishing of that constitution of which they were so fond, and upon
which they valued themselves so much as for the sake of it to despise
the rest of the world. It is common for the Jews to speak of the
Gentiles under this character, as things that are not. Thus, in the
apocryphal book of Esther, she is brought in praying that God would not
give his sceptre to those who are not, Esth. 14:11. Esdras, in one of
the apocryphal books under his name, speaks to God of the heathen as
those who are reputed as nothing, 2 Esdras 6:56, 57. And the apostle
Paul seems to have this common language of the Jews in his view when he
calls Abraham the father of us all before him whom he believed, God, who
calleth those things that are not as though they were, [Rom
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017). The gospel is fitted to bring
down the pride of both Jews and Greeks, to shame the boasted science and
learning of the Greeks, and to take down that constitution on which the
Jews valued themselves and despised all the world besides, that no flesh
should glory in his presence ([Co1
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#029)), that there might be no pretence
for boasting. Divine wisdom alone had the contrivance of the method of
redemption; divine grace alone revealed it, and made it known. It lay,
in both respects, out of human reach. And the doctrine and discovery
prevailed, in spite of all the opposition it met with from human art or
authority: so effectually did God veil the glory and disgrace the pride
of man in all. The gospel dispensation is a contrivance to humble man.
But, 2. It is as admirably fitted to glorify God. There is a great deal
of power and glory in the substance and life of Christianity. Though the
ministers were poor and unlearned, and the converts generally of the
meanest rank, yet the hand of the Lord went along with the preachers,
and was mighty in the hearts of the hearers; and Jesus Christ was made
both to ministers and Christians what was truly great and honourable.
All we have we have from God as the fountain, and in and through Christ
as the channel of conveyance. He is made of God to us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption ([Co1
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)): all we need, or can desire. We
are foolishness, ignorant and blind in the things of God, with all our
boasted knowledge; and he is made wisdom to us. We are guilty, obnoxious
to justice; and he is made righteousness, our great atonement and
sacrifice. We are depraved and corrupt; and he is made sanctification,
the spring of our spiritual life; from him, the head, it is communicated
to all the members of his mystical body by his Holy Spirit. We are in
bonds, and he is made redemption to us, our Saviour and deliverer.
Observe, Where Christ is made righteousness to any soul, he is also made
sanctification. He never discharges from the guilt of sin, without
delivering from the power of it; and he is made righteousness and
sanctification, that he may in the end be made complete redemption, may
free the soul from the very being of sin, and loose the body from the
bonds of the grave: and what is designed in all is that all flesh may
glory in the Lord, [Co1 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031). Observe,
It is the will of God that all our glorifying should be in the Lord:
and, our salvation being only through Christ, it is thereby effectually
provided that it should be so. Man is humbled, and God glorified and
exalted, by the whole scheme.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 2](co1002)

</div>
