<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1.md)  
  [Previous](co1011)  [Next](co1013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001.md)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 12:0</span></span>

In this chapter the apostle, I. Considers the case of spiritual gifts,
which were very plentifully poured out on the Corinthian church. He
considers their original, that they are from God; their variety and use,
that they were all intended for one and the same general end, the
advancement of Christianity and the church's edification ([Co1
12:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001).md). II. He illustrates this by
an allusion to a human body, in which all the members have a mutual
relation and subserviency, and each has its proper place and use ([Co1
12:12-26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012).md). III. He tells us that the
church is the body of Christ, and the members are variously gifted for
the benefit of the whole body, and each particular member ([Co1
12:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027).md). And them, IV. Closes with
an exhortation to seek somewhat more beneficial than these gifts ([Co1
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031).md).

[1 Corinthians 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 12:1</span></span>

The apostle comes now to treat of spiritual gifts, which abounded in the
church of Corinth, but were greatly abused. What these gifts were is at
large told us in the body of the chapter; namely, extraordinary offices
and powers, bestowed on ministers and Christians in the first ages, for
conviction of unbelievers, and propagation of the gospel. Gifts and
graces, charismata and charis, greatly differ. Both indeed were freely
given of God. But where grace is given it is for the salvation of those
who have it. Gifts are bestowed for the advantage and salvation of
others. And there may be great gifts where there is not a dram of grace,
but persons possessed of them are utterly out of the divine favour. They
are great instances of divine benignity to men, but do not by themselves
prove those who have them to be the objects of divine complacency. This
church was rich in gifts, but there were many things scandalously out of
order in it. Now concerning these spiritual gifts, that is, the
extraordinary powers they had received from the Spirit,

I. The apostle tells them he would not have them ignorant either of
their original or use. They came from God, and were to be used for him.
It would lead them far astray if they were ignorant of one or the other
of these. Note, Right information is of great use as to all religious
practice. It is wretched work which gifted men make who either do not
know or do not advert to the nature and right use of the gifts with
which they are endowed.

II\. He puts them in the mind of the sad state out of which they had
been recovered: You were Gentiles, carried away to dumb idols, even as
you were led, [Co1 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#002.md). While they
were so, they could have no pretensions to be spiritual men, nor to have
spiritual gifts. While they were under the conduct of the spirit of
Gentilism, they could not be influenced by the Spirit of Christ. If they
well understood their former condition, they could not but know that all
true spiritual gifts were from God. Now concerning this observe, 1.
Their former character: they were Gentiles. Not God's peculiar people,
but of the nations whom he had in a manner abandoned. The Jews were,
before, his chosen people, distinguished from the rest of the world by
his favour. To them the knowledge and worship of the true God were in a
manner confined. The rest of the world were strangers to the covenant of
promise, aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and in a manner without
God, [Eph 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012.md). Such Gentiles were the
body of the Corinthians, before their conversion to Christianity. What a
change was here! Christian Corinthians were once Gentiles. Note, It is
of great use to the Christian, and a proper consideration to stir him up
both to duty and thankfulness, to think what once he was: You were
Gentiles. 2. The conduct they were under: Carried away to these dumb
idols, even as you were led. They were hurried upon the grossest
idolatry, the worship even of stocks and stones, through the force of a
vain imagination, and the fraud of their priests practising on their
ignorance, for, whatever were the sentiments of their philosophers, this
was the practice of the herd. The body of the people paid their homage
and worship to dumb idols, that had ears but could not hear, and mouths
but could not speak, [Psa 115:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#005.md), [Psa
115:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#006.md). Miserable abjectness of mind!
And those who despised these gross conceptions of the vulgar yet
countenanced them by their practice. O dismal state of Gentilism! Could
the Spirit of God be among such stupid idolators, or they be influenced
by it? How did the prince of this world triumph in the blindness of
mankind! How thick a mist had he cast over their minds!

III\. He shows them how they might discern those gifts that were from
the Spirit of God, true spiritual gifts: No man, speaking by the Spirit,
calls Jesus accursed. Thus did both Jews and Gentiles: they blasphemed
him as an impostor, and execrated his name, and deemed it abominable.
And yet many Jews, who were exorcists and magicians, went about,
pretending to work wonders by the Spirit of God (vid. Lightfoot's Horae
in loc.), and many among the Gentiles pretended to inspiration. Now the
apostle tells them none could act under the influence, nor by the power,
of the Spirit of God, who disowned and blasphemed Christ: for the Spirit
of God bore uncontrollable witness to Christ by prophecy, miracles, his
resurrection from the dead, the success of his doctrine among men, and
its effect upon them; and could never so far contradict itself as to
declare him accursed. And on the other hand no man could say Jesus was
the Lord (that is, live by this faith, and work miracles to prove it),
but it must be by the Holy Ghost. To own this truth before men, and
maintain it to the death, and live under the influence of it, could not
be done without the sanctification of the Holy Ghost. No man can call
Christ Lord, with a believing subjection to him and dependence upon him,
unless that faith be wrought by the Holy Ghost. No man can confess this
truth in the day of trial but by the Holy Ghost animating and
encouraging him. Note, We have as necessary a dependence on the Spirit's
operation and influence for our sanctification and perseverance as on
the mediation of Christ for our reconciliation and acceptance with God:
and no man could confirm this truth with a miracle but by the Holy
Ghost. No evil spirit would lend assistance, if it were in his power, to
spread a doctrine and religion so ruinous to the devil's kingdom. The
substance of what the apostle asserts and argues here is that whatever
pretences there were to inspiration or miracles, among those who were
enemies to Christianity, they could not be from the Spirit of God; but
no man could believe this with his heart, nor prove with a miracle that
Jesus was Christ, but by the Holy Ghost: so that the extraordinary
operations and powers among them did all proceed from the Spirit of God.
He adds,

IV\. These spiritual gifts, though proceeding from the same Spirit, are
yet various. They have one author and original, but are themselves of
various kinds. A free cause may produce variety of effects; and the same
giver may bestow various gifts, [Co1
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004.md). There are diversities of gifts,
such as revelations, tongues, prophecy, interpretations of tongues; but
the same Spirit. There are differences of administrations, or different
offices, and officers to discharge them, different ordinances and
institutions (see [Co1 12:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028).md), but
the same Lord, who appointed all, [Co1
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006.md). There are diversities of
operations, or miraculous powers, called energēmata dunameōn ([Co1
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010).md), as here energēmata, but it is
the same God that worketh all in all. There are various gifts,
administrations, and operations, but all proceed from one God, one Lord,
one Spirit; that is, from Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the spring and
origin of all spiritual blessings and bequests: all issue from the same
fountain; all have the same author. However different they may be in
themselves, in this they agree; all are from God. And several of the
kinds are here specified, [Co1
12:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008.md). Several persons had their
several gifts, some one, some another, all from and by the same Spirit.
To one was given the word of wisdom; that is, say some, a knowledge of
the mysteries of the gospel, and ability to explain them, an exact
understanding of the design, nature, and doctrines, of the Christian
religion. Others say an uttering of grave sentences, like Solomon's
proverbs. Some confine this word of wisdom to the revelations made to
and by the apostles. - To another the word of knowledge, by the same
Spirit; that is, say some, the knowledge of mysteries ([Co1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#013).md): wrapped up in the prophecies,
types, and histories of the Old Testament: say others, a skill and
readiness to give advice and counsel in perplexed cases. - To another
faith, by the same Spirit; that is, the faith of miracles, or a faith in
the divine power and promise, whereby they were enabled to trust God in
any emergency, and go on in the way of their duty, and own and profess
the truths of Christ, whatever was the difficulty or danger. - To
another the gift of healing, by the same Spirit; that is, healing the
sick, either by laying on of hands, or anointing with oil, or with a
bare word. - To another the working of miracles; the efficacies of
powers, energēmata dunameōn, such as raising the dead, restoring the
blind to sight, giving speech to the dumb, hearing to the deaf, and the
use of limbs to the lame. - To another prophecy, that is, ability to
foretel future events, which is the more usual sense of prophecy; or to
explain scripture by a peculiar gift of the Spirit. See [Co1
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024.md). - To another the discerning of
Spirits, power to distinguish between true and false prophets, or to
discern the real and internal qualifications of any person for an
office, or to discover the inward workings of the mind by the Holy
Ghost, as Peter did those of Ananias, [Act
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#003.md). - To another divers kinds of
tongues, or ability to speak languages by inspiration. - To another the
interpretation of tongues, or ability to render foreign languages
readily and properly into their own. With such variety of spiritual
gifts were the first ministers and churches blessed.

V. The end for which these gifts were bestowed: The manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man to profit withal, [Co1
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#007.md). The Spirit was manifested by the
exercise of these gifts; his influence and interest appeared in them.
But they were not distributed for the mere honour and advantage of those
who had them, but for the benefit of the church, to edify the body, and
spread and advance the gospel. Note, Whatever gifts God confers on any
man, he confers them that he may do good with them, whether they be
common or spiritual. The outward gifts of his bounty are to be improved
for his glory, and employed in doing good to others. No man has them
merely for himself. They are a trust put into his hands, to profit
withal; and the more he profits others with them, the more abundantly
will they turn to his account in the end, [Phi
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#017.md). Spiritual gifts are bestowed,
that men may with them profit the church and promote Christianity. They
are not given for show, but for service; not for pomp and ostentation,
but for edification; not to magnify those that have them, but to edify
others.

VI\. The measure and proportion in which they are given: All these
worketh one and the same Spirit, dividing to every man as he will. It is
according to the sovereign pleasure of the donor. What more free than a
gift? And shall not the Spirit of God do what he will with his own? May
he not give to what persons he pleases, and in what proportion he
pleases; one gift to one man, and another to another; to one more, and
another fewer, as he thinks fit? Is he not the best judge how his own
purpose shall be served, and his own donatives bestowed? It is not as
men will, nor as they may think fit, but as the Spirit pleases. Note,
The Holy Ghost is a divine person. He works divine effects and divides
divine gifts a he will, by his own power, and according to his own
pleasure, without dependence or control. But though he distributes these
gifts freely and uncontrollably, they are intended by him, not for
private honour and advantage, but for public benefit, for the
edification of the body, the church.

[1 Corinthians 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 12:12</span></span>

The apostle here makes out the truth of what was above asserted, and
puts the gifted men among the Corinthians in mind of their duty, by
comparing the church of Christ to a human body.

I. By telling us that one body may have many members, and that the many
members of the same body make but one body ([Co1
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012).md): As the body is one, and hath
many members, and all members of that one body, being many, are one
body, so also is Christ; that is, Christ mystical, as divines commonly
speak. Christ and his church making one body, as head and members, this
body is made up of many parts or members, yet but one body; for all the
members are baptized into the same body, and made to drink of the same
Spirit, [Co1 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013.md). Jews and Gentiles,
bond and free, are upon a level in this: all are baptized into the same
body, and made partakers of the same Spirit. Christians become members
of this body by baptism: they are baptized into one body. The outward
rite is of divine institution, significant of the new birth, called
therefore the washing of regeneration, [Tit
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005.md). But it is by the Spirit, by the
renewing of the Holy Ghost, that we are made members of Christ's body.
It is the Spirit's operation, signified by the outward administration,
that makes us members. And by communion at the other ordinance we are
sustained; but then it is not merely by drinking the wine, but by
drinking into one Spirit. The outward administration is a means
appointed of God for our participation in this great benefit; but it is
baptism by the Spirit, it is internal renovation and drinking into one
Spirit, partaking of his sanctifying influence from time to time, that
makes us true members of Christ's body, and maintains our union with
him. Being animated by one Spirit makes Christians one body. Note, All
who have the spirit of Christ, without difference, are the members of
Christ, whether Jew or Gentile, bond or free; and none but such. And all
the members of Christ make up one body; the members many, but the body
one. They are one body, because they have one principle of life; all are
quickened and animated by the same Spirit.

II\. Each member has its particular form, place, and use. 1. The meanest
member makes a part of the body. The foot and ear are less useful,
perhaps, than the hand and eye; but because one is not a hand, and the
other an eye, shall they say, therefore, that they do not belong to the
body? [Co1 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#015.md), [Co1
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#016.md). So every member of the body
mystical cannot have the same place and office; but what then? Shall it
hereupon disown relation to the body? Because it is not fixed in the
same station, or favoured with the same gifts as others, shall it say,
"I do not belong to Christ?" No, the meanest member of his body is as
much a member as the noblest, and as truly regarded by him. All his
members are dear to him. 2. There must be a distinction of members in
the body: Were the whole body eye, where were the hearing? Were the
whole ear, where were the smelling? [Co1
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#017.md). If all were one member, where
were the body? [Co1 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#019.md). They are
many members, and for that reason must have distinction among them, and
yet are but one body, [Co1 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#020.md). One
member of a body is not a body; this is made up of many; and among these
many there must be a distinction, difference of situation, shape, use,
etc. So it is in the body of Christ; its members must have different
uses, and therefore have different powers, and be in different places,
some having one gift, and others a different one. Variety in the members
of the body contributes to the beauty of it. What a monster would a body
be if it were all ear, or eye, or arm! So it is for the beauty and good
appearance of the church that there should be diversity of gifts and
offices in it. 3. The disposal of members in a natural body, and their
situation, are as God pleases: But now hath God set the members, every
one of them, in the body, as it hath pleased him, [Co1
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#018.md). We may plainly perceive the
divine wisdom in the distribution of the members; but it was made
according to the counsel of his will; he distinguished and distributed
them as he pleased. So is it also in the members of Christ's body: they
are chosen out to such stations, and endued with such gifts, as God
pleases. He who is sovereign Lord of all disposes his favours and gifts
as he will. And who should gainsay his pleasure? What foundation is here
for repining in ourselves, or envying others? We should be doing the
duties of our own place, and not murmuring in ourselves, nor quarrelling
with others, that we are not in theirs. 4. All the members of the body
are, in some respect, useful and necessary to each other: The eye cannot
say to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor the head to the feet, I
have no need of your: nay, those members of the body which seem to be
more feeble (the bowels, etc.) are necessary ([Co1
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#021.md), [Co1
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#022).md); God has so fitted and tempered
them together that they are all necessary to one another, and to the
whole body; there is no part redundant and unnecessary. Every member
serves some good purpose or other: it is useful to its fellow-members,
and necessary to the good state of the whole body. Nor is there a member
of the body of Christ but may and ought to be useful to his
fellow-members, and at some times, and in some cases, is needful to
them. None should despise and envy another, seeing God has made the
distinction between them as he pleased, yet so as to keep them all in
some degree of mutual dependence, and make them valuable to each other,
and concerned for each other, because of their mutual usefulness. Those
who excel in any gift cannot say that they have no need of those who in
that gift are their inferiors, while perhaps, in other gifts, they
exceed them. Nay, the lowest members of all have their use, and the
highest cannot do well without them. The eye has need of the hand, and
the head of the feet. 5. Such is the man's concern for his whole body
that on the less honourable members more abundant honour is bestowed,
and our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness. Those parts which
are not fit, like the rest, to be exposed to view, which are either
deformed or shameful, we most carefully clothe and cover; whereas the
comely parts have no such need. The wisdom of Providence has so
contrived and tempered things that the most abundant regard and honour
should be paid to that which most wanted it, [Co1
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#024.md). So should the members of
Christ's body behave towards their fellow-members: instead of despising
them, or reproaching them, for their infirmities, they should endeavour
to cover and conceal them, and put the best face upon them that they
can. 6. Divine wisdom has contrived and ordered things in this manner
that the members of the body should not be schismatics, divided from
each other and acting upon separate interests, but well affected to each
other, tenderly concerned for each other, having a fellow-feeling of
each other's griefs and a communion in each other's pleasures and joys,
[Co1 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#025.md), [Co1
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#026.md). God has tempered the members of
the body natural in the manner mentioned, that there might be no schism
in the body ([Co1 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#025).md), no rupture
nor disunion among the members, nor so much as the least mutual
disregard. This should be avoided also in the spiritual body of Christ.
There should be no schism in this body, but the members should be
closely united by the strongest bonds of love. All decays of this
affection are the seeds of schism. Where Christians grow cold towards
each other, they will be careless and unconcerned for each other. And
this mutual disregard is a schism begun. The members of the natural body
are made to have a care and concern for each other, to prevent a schism
in it. So should it be in Christ's body; the members should sympathize
with each other. As in the natural body the pain of the one part
afflicts the whole, the ease and pleasure of one part affects the whole,
so should Christians reckon themselves honoured in the honours of their
fellow-christians, and should suffer in their sufferings. Note,
Christian sympathy is a great branch of Christian duty. We should be so
far from slighting our brethren's sufferings that we should suffer with
them, so far from envying their honours that we should rejoice with them
and reckon ourselves honoured in them.

[1 Corinthians 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 12:27</span></span>

I. Here the apostle sums up the argument, and applies this similitude to
the church of Christ, concerning which observe,

1\. The relation wherein Christians stand to Christ and one another. The
church, or whole collective body of Christians, in all ages, is his
body. Every Christian is a member of his body, and every other Christian
stands related to him as a fellow-member ([Co1
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027).md): Now you are the body of
Christ, and members in particular, or particular members. Each is a
member of the body, not the whole body; each stands related to the body
as a part of it, and all have a common relation to one another,
dependence upon one another, and should have a mutual care and concern.
Thus are the members of the natural body, thus should the members of the
mystical body be, disposed. Note, Mutual indifference, and much more
contempt, and hatred, and envy, and strife, are very unnatural in
Christians. It is like the members of the same body being destitute of
all concern for one another, or quarrelling with each other. This is the
apostle's scope in this argument. He endeavours in it to suppress the
proud, vaunting, and contentious spirit, that had prevailed among the
Corinthians, by reason of their spiritual gifts.

2\. The variety of offices instituted by Christ, and gifts or favours
dispensed by him ([Co1 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028).md): God
hath set some in the church; first, apostles, the chief ministers
entrusted with all the powers necessary to found a church, and make an
entire revelation of God's will. Secondarily, prophets, or persons
enabled by inspiration, as the evangelists did. Thirdly, teachers, those
who labour in word and doctrine, whether with pastoral charge or without
it. After that, miracles, or miracle-workers. The gifts of healing, or
those who had power to heal diseases; helps, or such as had compassion
on the sick and weak, and ministered to them; governments, or such as
had the disposal of the charitable contributions of the church, and
dealt them out to the poor; diversities of tongues, or such as could
speak divers languages. Concerning all these observe, (1.) The plenteous
variety of these gifts and offices. What a multitude are they! A good
God was free in his communications to the primitive church; he was no
niggard of his benefits and favours. No, he provided richly for them.
They had no want, but a store - all that was necessary, and even more;
what was convenient for them too. (2.) Observe the order of these
offices and gifts. They are here placed in their proper ranks. Those of
most value have the first place. Apostles, prophets, and teachers, were
all intended to instruct the people, to inform them well in the things
of God, and promote their spiritual edification: without them, neither
evangelical knowledge nor holiness could have been promoted. But the
rest, however fitted to answer the great intentions of Christianity, had
no such immediate regard to religion, strictly so called. Note, God
does, and we should, value things according to their real worth: and the
use of things is the best criterion of their real worth. Those are most
valuable that best answer the highest purposes. Such were apostolical
powers, compared with theirs who had only the gift of healing and
miracles. What holds the last and lowest rank in this enumeration is
diversity of tongues. It is by itself the most useless and insignificant
of all these gifts. Healing diseases, relieving the poor, helping the
sick, have their use: but how vain a thing is it to speak languages, if
a man does it merely to amuse or boast himself! This may indeed raise
the admiration, but cannot promote the edification, of the hearers, nor
do them any good. And yet it is manifest from ch. 14 that the
Corinthians valued themselves exceedingly on this gift. Note, How proper
a method it is to beat down pride to let persons know the true value of
what they pride themselves in! It is but too common a thing for men to
value themselves most on what is least worth: and it is of great use to
bring them to a sober mind by letting them know how much they are
mistaken. (3.) The various distribution of these gifts, not all to one,
nor to every one alike. All members and officers had not the same rank
in the church, nor the same endowments ([Co1
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#029.md), [Co1
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#030).md): Are all apostles? Are all
prophets? This were to make the church a monster: all one as if the body
were all ear or all eye. Some are fit for one office and employment, and
some for another; and the Spirit distributes to every one as he will. We
must be content with our own rank and share, if they be lower and less
than those of others. We must not be conceited of ourselves, and despise
others, if we are in the higher rank and have greater gifts. Every
member of the body is to preserve its own rank, and do its own office;
and all are to minister to one another, and promote the good of the body
in general, without envying, or despising, or neglecting, or ill-using,
any one particular member. How blessed a constitution were the Christian
church, if all the members did their duty!

II\. He closes this chapter with an advice (as the generality read it)
and a hint. 1. An advice to covet the best gifts, charismata ta
kreittona - dona potiora, praestantiora, either the most valuable in
themselves or the most serviceable to others; and these are, in truth,
most valuable in themselves, though men may be apt to esteem those most
that will raise their fame and esteem highest. Those are truly best by
which God will be most honoured and his church edified. Such gifts
should be most earnestly coveted. Note, We should desire that most which
is best, and most worth. Grace is therefore to be preferred before
gifts; and, of gifts, those are to be preferred which are of greatest
use. But some read this passage, not as an advice, but a charge:
zēloute, You are envious at each other's gifts. In [Co1
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004.md), the same word is thus
translated. You quarrel and contend about them. This they certainly did.
And this behaviour the apostle here reprehends, and labours to rectify.
Only of pride cometh contention. These contests in the church of Corinth
sprang from this original. It was a quarrel about precedency (as most
quarrels among Christians are, with whatever pretences they are gilded
over); and it is no wonder that a quarrel about precedence should
extinguish charity. When all would stand in the first rank, no wonder if
they jostle, or throw down, or thrust back, their brethren. Gifts may be
valued for their use, but they are mischievous when made the fuel of
pride and contention. This therefore the apostle endeavours to prevent.
2. By giving them the hint of a more excellent way, namely, of charity,
of mutual love and good-will. This was the only right way to quiet and
cement them, and make their gifts turn to the advantage and edification
of the church. This would render them kind to each other, and concerned
for each other, and therefore calm their spirits, and put an end to
their little piques and contests, their disputes about precedency. Those
would appear to be in the foremost rank, according to the apostle, who
had most of true Christian love. Note, True charity is greatly to be
preferred to the most glorious gifts. To have the heart glow with mutual
love is vastly better than to glare with the most pompous titles,
offices, or powers.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 13](co1013.md)

</div>
