<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1015)  [Next](co2000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 16:0</span></span>

In this chapter the apostle, I. Gives directions about some charitable
collection to be made in this church, for the afflicted and impoverished
churches in Judea ([Co1 16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001)). II.
He talks of paying them a visit ([Co1
16:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005)). III. He recommends Timothy to
them, and tells them Apollos intended to come to them ([Co1
16:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010)). IV. He presses them to
watchfulness, constancy, charity, and to pay a due regard to all who
helped him and his fellow-labourers in their work ([Co1
16:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013)). V. After salutations from
others, and his own, he closes the epistle with a solemn admonition to
them, and his good wishes for them ([Co1
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#020) to the end).

[1 Corinthians 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 16:1</span></span>

In this chapter Paul closes this long epistle with some particular
matters of less moment; but, as all was written by divine inspiration,
it is all profitable for our instruction. He begins with directing them
about a charitable collection on a particular occasion, the distresses
and poverty of Christians in Judea, which at this time were
extraordinary, partly through the general calamities of that nation and
partly through the particular sufferings to which they were exposed. Now
concerning this observe,

I. How he introduces his direction. It was not a peculiar service which
he required of them; he had given similar orders to the churches of
Galatia, [Co1 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001). He desired them
only to conform to the same rules which he had given to other churches
on a similar occasion. He did not desire that others should be eased and
they burdened, [Co2 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#013). He also
prudently mentions these orders of his to the churches of Galatia, to
excite emulation, and stir them up to be liberal, according to their
circumstances, and the occasion. Those who exceeded most churches in
spiritual gifts, and, as it is probable, in worldly wealth (see the
argument), surely would not suffer themselves to come behind any in
their bounty to their afflicted brethren. Note, The good examples of
other Christians and churches should excite in us a holy emulation. It
is becoming a Christian not to bear to be outdone by a fellow-christian
in any thing virtuous and praise-worthy, provided this consideration
only makes him exert himself, not envy others; and the more advantages
we have above others the more should we endeavour to exceed them. The
church of Corinth should not be outdone in this service of love by the
churches of Galatia, which do not appear to have been enriched with
equal spiritual gifts nor outward ability.

II\. The direction itself, concerning which observe,

1\. The manner in which the collection was to be made: Every one was to
lay by in store ([Co1 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002)), have a
treasury, or fund, with himself, for this purpose. The meaning is that
he should lay by as he could spare from time to time, and by this means
make up a sum for this charitable purpose. Note, It is a good thing to
lay up in store for good uses. Those who are rich in this world should
be rich in good works, [Ti1 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017), [Ti1
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#018). The best way to be so is to
appropriate of their income, and have a treasury for this purpose, a
stock for the poor as well as for themselves. By this means they will be
ready to every good work as the opportunity offers; and many who labour
with their own hands for a livelihood should so work that they may have
to give to him that needeth, [Eph
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028). Indeed their treasury for good
works can never be very large (though, according to circumstances, it
may considerably vary); but the best way in the world for them to get a
treasury for this purpose is to lay by from time to time, as they can
afford. Some of the Greek fathers rightly observe here that this advice
was given for the sake of the poorer among them. They were to lay by
from week to week, and not bring in to the common treasury, that by this
means their contributions might be easy to themselves, and yet grow into
a fund for the relief of their brethren. "Every little," as the proverb
says, "would make a mickle." Indeed all our charity and benevolence
should be free and cheerful, and for that reason should be made as easy
to ourselves as may be. And what more likely way to make us easy in this
matter than thus to lay by? We may cheerfully give when we know that we
can spare, and that we have been laying by in store that we may.

2\. Here is the measure in which they are to lay by: As God hath
prospered them; ti an euodōtai, as he has been prospered, namely, by
divine Providence, as God has been pleased to bless and succeed his
labours and business. Note, All our business and labour are that to us
which God is pleased to make them. It is not the diligent hand that will
make rich by itself, without the divine blessing, [Pro
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#004), [Pro
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#022). Our prosperity and success are
from God and not from ourselves; and he is to be owned in all and
honoured with all. It is his bounty and blessing to which we owe all we
have; and whatever we have is to be used, and employed, and improved,
for him. His right to ourselves and all that is ours is to be owned and
yielded to him. And what argument more proper to excite us to charity to
the people and children of God than to consider all we have as his gift,
as coming from him? Note, When God blesses and prospers us, we should be
ready to relieve and comfort his needy servants; when his bounty flows
forth upon us, we should not confine it to ourselves, but let it stream
out to others. The good we receive from him should stir us up to do good
to others, to resemble him in our beneficence; and therefore the more
good we receive from God the more we should do good to others. They were
to lay by as God had blessed them, in that proportion. The more they
had, through God's blessing, gained by their business or labour, their
traffic or work, the more they were to lay by. Note, God expects that
our beneficence to others should hold some proportion to his bounty to
us. All we have is from God; the more he gives (circumstances being
considered), the more he enables us to give, and the more he expects we
should give, that we should give more than others who are less able,
that we should give more than ourselves when we were less able. And, on
the other hand, from him to whom God gives less he expects less. He is
no tyrant nor cruel taskmaster, to exact brick without straw, or expect
men shall do more good than he gives ability. Note, Where there is a
willing mind he accepts according to what a man hath, and not according
to what he hath not ([Co2 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#012)); but
as he prospers and blesses us, and puts us in a capacity to do good, he
expects we should. The greater ability he gives, the more enlarged
should our hearts be, and the more open our hands; but, where the
ability is less, the hands cannot be as open, however willing the mind
and however large the heart; nor does God expect it.

3\. Here is the time when this is to be done: The first day of the week,
kata mian sabbatōn ([Luk 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001)), the
Lord's day, the Christian holiday, when public assemblies were held and
public worship was celebrated, and the Christian institutions and
mysteries (as the ancients called them) were attended upon; then let
every one lay by him. It is a day of holy rest; and the more vacation
the mind has from worldly cares and toils the more disposition has it to
show mercy: and the other duties of the day should stir us up to the
performance of this; works of charity should always accompany works of
piety. True piety towards God will beget kind and friendly dispositions
towards men. This commandment have we from him that he who loveth God
love his brother also, [Jo1 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#021).
Works of mercy are the genuine fruits of true love to God, and therefore
are a proper service on his own day. Note, God's day is a proper season
on which to lay up for charitable uses, or lay out in them, according as
he has prospered us; it is paying tribute for the blessings of the past
week, and it is a proper way to procure his blessing on the work of our
hands for the next.

4\. We have here the disposal of the collections thus made: the apostle
would have every thing ready against he came, and therefore gave
direction as before: That there be no gatherings when I come, [Co1
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002). But, when he came, as to the
disposal of it, he would leave it much to themselves. The charity was
theirs, and it was fit they should dispose of it in their own way, so it
answered its end, and was applied to the right use. Paul no more
pretended to lord it over the purses of his hearers than over their
faith; he would not meddle with their contributions without their
consent. (1.) He tells them that they should give letters of credence,
and send messengers of their own with their liberality, [Co1
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#003). This would be a proper testimony
of their respect and brotherly love to their distressed brethren, to
send their gift by members of their own body, trusty and tenderhearted,
who would have compassion on their suffering brethren, and a Christian
concern for them, and not defraud them. It would argue that they were
very hearty in this service, when they should send some of their own
body on so long and hazardous a journey or voyage, to convey their
liberality. Note, We should not only charitably relieve our poor
fellow-christians but do it in such a way as will best signify our
compassion to them and care of them. (2.) He offers to go with their
messengers, if they think proper, [Co1
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#004). His business, as an apostle, was
not to serve tables, but to give himself to the word and prayer; yet he
was never wanting to set on foot, or help forward, a work of charity,
when an opportunity offered. He would go to Jerusalem, to carry the
contributions of the church at Corinth to their suffering brethren,
rather than they should go without them, or the charity of the
Corinthians fail of a due effect. It was no hindrance to his preaching
work, but a great furtherance to the success of it, to show such a
tender and benign disposition of mind. Note, Ministers are doing their
proper business when they are promoting or helping in works of charity.
Paul stirs up the Corinthians to gather for the relief of the churches
in Judea, and he is ready to go with their messengers, to convey what is
gathered; and he is still in the way of his duty, in the business of his
office.

[1 Corinthians 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 16:5</span></span>

In this passage the apostle notifies and explains his purpose of
visiting them, concerning which, observe, 1. His purpose: he intended to
pass out of Asia, where he now was (vide [Co1
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#008), [Co1
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019)) and to go through Macedonia
into Achaia, where Corinth was, and to stay some time with them, and
perhaps the winter, [Co1 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005), [Co1
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#006). He had long laboured in this
church, and done much good among them, and had his heart set upon doing
much more (if God saw fit), and therefore he had it in his thoughts to
see them, and stay with them. Note, The heart of a truly Christian
minister must be much towards that people among whom he has long
laboured, and with remarkable success. No wonder that Paul was willing
to see Corinth and stay with them as long as the other duties of his
office would permit. Though some among this people despised him, and
made a faction against him, doubtless there were many who loved him
tenderly, and paid him all the respect due to an apostle and their
spiritual father. And is it any wonder that he should be willing to
visit them, and stay with them? And as to the rest, who now manifested
great disrespect, he might hope to reduce them to a better temper, and
thereby rectify what was out of order in the church, by staying among
them for some time. It is plain that he hoped for some good effect,
because he says he intended to stay, that they might bring him on his
journey whithersoever he went ([Co1
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#006)); not that they might accompany
him a little way on the road, but expedite and furnish him for his
journey, help and encourage him to it, and provide him for it. He is to
be understood of being brought forward in his journey after a godly sort
(as it is expressed, [Jo3 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#006)), so
that nothing might be wanting to him, as he himself speaks, [Tit
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#013). His stay among them, he hoped,
would cure their factious humour, and reconcile them to himself and
their duty. Note, It was a just reason for an apostle to make his abode
in a place that he had a prospect of doing good. 2. His excuse for not
seeing them now, because it would be only by the way ([Co1
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#007)), en parodō - in transitu - en
passant: it would only be a transient visit. He would not see them
because he could not stay with them. Such a visit would give neither him
nor them any satisfaction or advantage; it would rather raise the
appetite than regale it, rather heighten their desires of being together
than satisfy them. He loved them so much that he longed for an
opportunity to stay with them, take up his abode among them for some
length of time. This would be more pleasing to himself, and more
serviceable to them, than a cursory visit in his way; and therefore he
would not see them now, but another time, when he could tarry longer. 3.
We have the limitation of this purpose: I trust to tarry awhile with
you, if the Lord permit, [Co1 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#007).
Though the apostles wrote under inspiration, they did not know thereby
how God would dispose of them. Paul had a purpose of coming to Corinth,
and staying there, and hoped to do good thereby. This was not a purpose
proceeding from any extraordinary motion or impulse of the Spirit of
God; it was not the effect of inspiration; for had it been such he could
not have spoken of it in this manner. A purpose formed thus in him must
have been the purpose of God, signified to him by his Spirit; and could
he say he would come to Corinth upon this view only, if God permit, that
is, that he would execute God's own purpose concerning himself, with
God's permission? It is to be understood then of a common purpose,
formed in his own spirit. And concerning all our purposes it is fit we
should say, "We will execute them if the Lord permit." Note, All our
purposes must be made with submission to the divine providence. We
should say, If the Lord will, we shall live, and do this and that, [Jam
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#015). It is not in us to effect our
own designs, without the divine leave. It is by God's power and
permission, and under his direction, that we must do every thing.
Heathens have concurred in acknowledging this concern of Providence in
all our actions and concerns; surely we should readily own it, and
frequently and seriously attend to it. 4. We have his purpose expressed
of staying at Ephesus for the present. He says he would stay there till
pentecost, [Co1 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#008). It is very
probable that at the time of writing this epistle he was in Ephesus,
from this passage, compared with [Co1
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019), where he says, The churches of
Asia salute you. A proper salutation from Ephesus, but hardly so proper
had he been at Philippi, as the subscription to this epistle in our
common copies has it. "The churches of Macedonia salute you" had been
much more properly inserted in the close of a letter from Philippi, than
the other. But, 5. We have the reason given for his staying at Ephesus
for the present: Because a great door, and effectual, was opened to him,
and there were many adversaries, [Co1
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#009). A great door and effectual was
opened to him; many were prepared to receive the gospel at Ephesus, and
God gave him great success among them; he had brought over many to
Christ, and he had great hope of bringing over many more. For this
reason he determined to stay awhile at Ephesus. Note, Success, and a
fair prospect of more, was a just reason to determine an apostle to stay
and labour in a particular place. And there were many adversaries,
because a great door, and an effectual, was opened. Note, Great success
in the work of the gospel commonly creates many enemies. The devil
opposes those most, and makes them most trouble, who most heartily and
successfully set themselves to destroy his kingdom. There were many
adversaries; and therefore the apostle determined to stay. Some think he
alludes in this passage to the custom of the Roman Circus, and the doors
of it, at which the charioteers were to enter, as their antagonists did
at the opposite doors. True courage is whetted by opposition; and it is
no wonder that the Christian courage of the apostle should be animated
by the zeal of his adversaries. They were bent to ruin him, and prevent
the effect of his ministry at Ephesus; and should he at this time desert
his station, and disgrace his character and doctrine? No, the opposition
of adversaries only animated his zeal. He was in nothing daunted by his
adversaries; but the more they raged and opposed the more he exerted
himself. Should such a man as he flee? Note, Adversaries and opposition
do not break the spirits of faithful and successful ministers, but only
enkindle their zeal, and inspire them with fresh courage. Indeed, to
labour in vain is heartless and discouraging. This damps the spirits,
and breaks the heart. But success will give life and vigour to a
minister, though enemies rage, and blaspheme, and persecute. It is not
the opposition of enemies, but the hardness and obstinacy of his
hearers, and the backslidings and revolt of professors, that damp a
faithful minister, and break his heart.

[1 Corinthians 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 16:10</span></span>

In this passage,

I. He recommends Timothy to them, in several particulars. As, 1. He bids
them take care that he should be among them without feat, [Co1
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010). Timothy was sent by the apostle
to correct the abuses which had crept in among them; and not only to
direct, but to blame, and censure, and reprove, those who were culpable.
They were all in factions, and no doubt the mutual strife and hatred ran
very high among them. There were some very rich, as it is probable; and
many very proud, upon account both of their outward wealth and spiritual
gifts. Proud spirits cannot easily bear reproof. It was reasonable
therefore to think young Timothy might be roughly used; hence the
apostle warns them against using him ill. Not but that he was prepared
for the worst; but, whatever his firmness and prudence might be, it was
their duty to behave themselves well towards him, and not discourage and
dishearten him in his Lord's work. They should not fly out into
resentment at his reproof. Note, Christians should bear faithful
reproofs from their ministers, and not terrify and discourage them from
doing their duty. 2. He warns them against despising him, [Co1
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#011). He was but a young man, and
alone, as Ecumenius observes. He had no one to back him, and his own
youthful face and years commanded but little reverence; and therefore
the great pretenders to wisdom among them might be apt to entertain
contemptuous thoughts of him. "Now," says the apostle, "guard against
this." Not that he distrusted Timothy; he knew that Timothy would do
nothing to bring contempt on his character, nothing to make his youth
despicable. But pride was a reigning sin among the Corinthians, and such
a caution was but too necessary. Note, Christians should be very careful
not to pour contempt on any, but especially on ministers, the faithful
ministers of Christ. These, whether young or old, are to be had in high
esteem for their works sake. 3. He tells them they should give him all
due encouragement, use him well while he was with them; and, as an
evidence of this, they should send him away in friendship, and well
prepared for his journey back again to Paul. This, as I have before
observed, is the meaning of bringing him on his journey in peace, [Co1
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#011). Note, Faithful ministers are
not only to be well received by a people among whom they may for a
season minister, but are to be sent away with due respect.

II\. He assigns the reasons why they should behave thus towards Timothy.
1. Because he was employed in the same work as Paul, and acted in it by
the same authority, [Co1 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010). He did
not come on Paul's errand among them, nor to do his work, but the work
of the Lord. Though he was not an apostle, he was assistant to one, and
was sent upon this very business by a divine commission. And therefore
to vex his spirit would be to grieve the Holy Spirit; to despise him
would be to despise him that sent him, not Paul, but Paul's Lord and
theirs. Note, Those who work the work of the Lord should be neither
terrified nor despised, but treated with all tenderness and respect.
Such are all the faithful ministers of the word, though not all in the
same rank and degree. Pastors and teachers, as well as apostles and
evangelists, while they are doing their duty, are to be treated with
honour and respect. 2. Another reason is implied; as they were to esteem
him for his work's sake, so also for Paul's sake, who had sent him to
Corinth; not of his own errand indeed, but to work the work of the Lord:
Conduct him forth in peace, that he may come to me, for I look for him
with the brethren ([Co1 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#011)); or I
with the brethren look for him (the original will bear either),
ekdechomai gar auton meta tōn adelphōn - "I am expecting his return, and
his report concerning you; and shall judge by your conduct towards him
what your regard and respect for me will be. Look to it that you send
him back with no evil report." Paul might expect from the Corinthians,
that a messenger from him, upon such an errand, should be regarded, and
well treated. His services and success among them, his authority with
them as an apostle, would challenge this at their hands. They would
hardly dare to send back Timothy with a report that would grieve or
provoke the apostle. "I and the brethren expect his return, wait for the
report he is to make; and therefore do not use him ill, but respect him,
regard his message, and let him return in peace."

III\. He informs them of Apollos's purpose to see them. 1. He himself
had greatly desired him to come to them, [Co1
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#012). Though one party among them had
declared for Apollos against Paul (if that passage is to be understood
literally, vide [Co1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#006)), yet Paul
did not hinder Apollos from going to Corinth in his own absence, nay, he
pressed him to go thither. He had no suspicions of Apollos, as if he
would lessen Paul's interest and respect among them, to the advancement
of his own. Note, Faithful ministers are not apt to entertain jealousies
of each other, nor suspect of such selfish designs. True charity and
brotherly love think no evil. And where should these reign, if not in
the breasts of the ministers of Christ? 2. Apollos could not be
prevailed on for the present to come, but would at a more convenient
season. Perhaps their feuds and factions might render the present season
improper. He would not go to be set at the head of a party and
countenance the dividing and contentious humour. When this had subsided,
through Paul's epistle to them and Timothy's ministry among them, he
might conclude a visit would be more proper. Apostles did not vie with
each other, but consulted each other's comfort and usefulness. Paul
intimates his great regard to the church of Corinth, when they had used
him ill, by entreating Apollos to go to them; and Apollos shows his
respect to Paul, and his concern to keep up his character and authority,
by declining the journey till the Corinthians were in better temper.
Note, It is very becoming the ministers of the gospel to have and
manifest a concern for each other's reputation and usefulness.

[1 Corinthians 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 16:13</span></span>

In this passage the apostle gives,

I. Some general advices; as, 1. That they should watch ([Co1
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013)), be wakeful and upon their
guard. A Christian is always in danger, and therefore should ever be on
the watch; but the danger is greater at some times and under some
circumstances. The Corinthians were in manifest danger upon many
accounts: their feuds ran high, the irregularities among them were very
great, there were deceivers got among them, who endeavoured to corrupt
their faith in the most important articles, those without which the
practice of virtue and piety could never subsist. And surely in such
dangerous circumstances it was their concern to watch. Note, If a
Christian would be secure, he must be on his guard; and the more his
danger the greater vigilance is needful for his security. 2. He advises
them to stand fast in the faith, to keep their ground, adhere to the
revelation of God, and not give it up for the wisdom of the world, nor
suffer it to be corrupted by it - stand for the faith of the gospel, and
maintain it even to death; and stand in it, so as to abide in the
profession of it, and feel and yield to its influence. Note, A Christian
should be fixed in the faith of the gospel, and never desert nor
renounce it. It is by this faith alone that he will be able to keep his
ground in an hour of temptation; it is by faith that we stand ([Co2
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#024)); it is by this that we must
overcome the world ([Jo1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004)), both
when it fawns and when it frowns, when it tempts and when it terrifies.
We must stand therefore in the faith of the gospel, if we would maintain
our integrity. 3. He advises them to act like men, and be strong: "Act
the manly, firm, and resolved part: behave strenuously, in opposition to
the bad men who would divide and corrupt you, those who would split you
into factions or seduce you from the faith: be not terrified nor
inveigled by them; but show yourselves men in Christ, by your
steadiness, by your sound judgment and firm resolution." Note,
Christians should be manly and firm in all their contests with their
enemies, in defending their faith, and maintaining their integrity. They
should, in an especial manner, be so in those points of faith that lie
at the foundation of sound and practical religion, such as were attacked
among the Corinthians: these must be maintained with solid judgment and
strong resolution. 4. He advises them to do every thing in charity, [Co1
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#014). Our zeal and constancy must be
consistent with charity. When the apostle would have us play the man for
our faith or religion, he puts in a caution against playing the devil
for it. We may defend our faith, but we must, at the same time, maintain
our innocence, and not devour and destroy, and think with ourselves that
the wrath of man will work the righteousness of God, [Jam
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#024). Note, Christians should be
careful that charity not only reign in their hearts, but shine out in
their lives, nay, in their most manly defences of the faith of the
gospel. There is a great difference between constancy and cruelty,
between Christian firmness and feverish wrath and transport.
Christianity never appears to so much advantage as when the charity of
Christians is most conspicuous when they can bear with their mistaken
brethren, and oppose the open enemies of their holy faith in love, when
every thing is done in charity, when they behave towards one another,
and towards all men, with a spirit of meekness and good will.

II\. Some particular directions how they should behave towards some that
had been eminently serviceable to the cause of Christ among them.

1\. He gives us their character (1.) The household of Stephanas is
mentioned by him, and their character is, that they were the
first-fruits of Achaia, the first converts to Christianity in that
region of Greece in which Corinth was. Note, It is an honourable
character to any man to be early a Christian, betimes in Christ. But
they had moreover addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints, to
serve the saints. They have disposed and devoted themselves - etaxan
heautous, to serve the saints, to do service to the saints. It is not
meant of the ministry of the word properly, but of serving them in other
respects, supplying their wants, helping and assisting them upon all
occasions, both in their temporal and spiritual concerns. The family of
Stephanas seems to have been a family of rank and importance in those
parts, and yet they willingly offered themselves to this service. Note,
It is an honour to persons of the highest rank to devote themselves to
the service of the saints. I do not mean to change ranks, and become
proper servants to the inferiors, but freely and voluntarily to help
them, and do good to them in all their concerns. (2.) He mentions
Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus, as coming to him from the
church of Corinth. The account he gives of them is that they supplied
the deficiencies of the church towards him, and by so doing refreshed
his spirit and theirs, [Co1 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#017),
[Co1 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#018). They gave him a more
perfect account of the state of the church by word of mouth than he
could acquire by their letter, and by that means much quieted his mind,
and upon their return from him would quiet the minds of the Corinthians.
Report had made their cause much worse than it was in fact, and their
letters had not explained it sufficiently to give the apostle
satisfaction; but he had been made more easy by converse with them. It
was a very good office they did, by truly stating facts, and removing
the ill opinion Paul had received by common fame. They came to him with
a truly Christian intention, to set the apostle right, and give him as
favourable sentiments of the church as they could, as peace-makers.
Note, It is a great refreshment to the spirit of a faithful minister to
hear better of a people by wise and good men of their own body than by
common report, to find himself misinformed concerning them, that matters
are not so bad as they had been represented. It is a grief to him to
hear ill of those he loves; it gladdens his heart to hear the report
thereof is false. And the greater value he has for those who give him
this information, and the more he can depend upon their veracity, the
greater is his joy.

2\. Upon this account of the men, he directs how they should behave
towards them; and, (1.) He would have them acknowledged ([Co1
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#011)), that is, owned and respected.
They deserve it for their good offices. Those who serve the saints,
those who consult the honour and good esteem of the churches, and are
concerned to wipe off reproaches from them, and take off from the ill
opinion fame had propagated, are to be valued, and esteemed, and loved.
Those who discover so good a spirit cannot easily be over-valued. (2.)
He advises that they should submit themselves to such, and to all who
helped with the apostles, and laboured, [Co1
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#016). This is not to be understood of
subjection to proper superiors, but of a voluntary acknowledgment of
their worth. They were persons to whom they owed peculiar respect, and
whom they should have in veneration. Note, It is a venerable character
which those bear who serve the saints and labour hard to help the
success of the gospel, who countenance and encourage the faithful
ministers of Christ, and endeavour to promote their usefulness. Such
should be had in honourable esteem.

[1 Corinthians 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 16:19</span></span>

The apostle closes his epistle,

I. With salutations to the church of Corinth, first from those of Asia,
from Priscilla and Aquila (who seem to have been at this time
inhabitants of Ephesus, vid. [Act
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026)), with the church in their house
([Co1 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019)), and from all the
brethren ([Co1 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#020)) at Ephesus,
where, it is highly probable at least, he then was. All these saluted
the church at Corinth, by Paul. Note, Christianity does by no means
destroy civility and good manners. Paul could find room in an epistle
treating of very important matters to send the salutations of friends.
Religion should promote a courteous and obliging temper towards all.
Those misrepresent and reproach it who would take any encouragement from
it to be sour and morose. Some of these salute them much in the Lord.
Note, Christian salutations are not empty compliments; they carry in
them real expressions of good-will, and are attended with hearty
recommendations to the divine grace and blessing. Those who salute in
the Lord wish their brethren all good from the Lord, and breathe out
their good wishes in fervent prayers. We read also of a church in a
private family, [Co1 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019). It is very
probable that the family itself is called the church in their house.
Note, Every Christian family should in some respects be a Christian
church. In some cases (as, for instance, were they cast away on a
foreign shore, where there are no other Christians), they should be a
church themselves, if large enough, and live in the use of all
ordinances; but in common cases they should live under the direction of
Christian rules, and daily offer up Christian worship. Wherever two or
three are gathered together, and Christ is among them, there is a
church. To these salutations he subjoins, 1. An advice, that they should
greet one another with a holy kiss ([Co1
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#020)), or with sincere good-will, a
tacit reproof of their feuds and factions. When the churches of Asia,
and the Christian brethren so remote, did so heartily salute them in the
Lord, and own and love them as brethren, and expressed so much good-will
to them, it would be a shame for them not to own and love one another as
brethren. Note, The love of the brethren should be a powerful incentive
to mutual love. When the other churches of Christ love us all, we are
very culpable if we do not love one another. 2. He subjoins his own
salutation: The salutation of me Paul with my own hand, [Co1
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#021). His amanuensis, it is
reasonable to think, wrote the rest of his epistle from his mouth, but
at the close it was fit that himself should sign it, that they might
know it to be genuine; and therefore it is added ([Th2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017)), Which is my token in every
epistle, the mark of its being genuine; so he wrote in every epistle
which he did not wholly pen, as he did that to the Galatians, [Gal
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#011). Note, Those churches to whom
apostolical letters were sent were duly certified of their being
authentic and divine. Nor would Paul be behind the rest of the brethren
in respect to the Corinthians; and therefore, after he has given their
salutations, he adds his own.

II\. With a very solemn warning to them: If any man love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maran-atha, [Co1
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022). We sometimes need words of
threatening, that we may fear. Blessed is he, says the wise man, who
feareth always. Holy fear is a very good friend both to holy faith and
holy living. An how much reason have all Christians to fear falling
under this doom! If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema, Maran-atha. Here observe, 1. The person described, who is
liable to this doom: He that loveth not the Lord Jesus Christ. A
meiōsis, as some think; he who blasphemes Christ disowns his doctrine,
slights and contemns his institutions, or, through pride of human
knowledge and learning, despises his revelations. It stands here as a
warning to the Corinthians and a rebuke of their criminal behaviour. It
is an admonition to them not to be led away from the simplicity of the
gospel, or those principles of it which were the great motives to purity
of life, by pretenders to science, by the wisdom of the world, which
would call their religion folly, and its most important doctrines absurd
and ridiculous. Those men had a spite at Christ; and, if the Corinthians
give ear to their seducing speeches, they were in danger of apostatizing
from him. Against this he gives them here a very solemn caution. "Do not
give into such conduct, if you would escape the severest vengeance."
Note, Professed Christians will, by contempt of Christ, and revolt from
him, bring upon themselves the most dreadful destruction. Some
understand the words as they lie, in their plain and obvious meaning,
for such as are without holy and sincere affection for the Lord Jesus
Christ. Many who have his name much in their mouths have no true love to
him in their hearts, will not have him to rule over them ([Luk
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#027)), no, not though they have very
towering hopes of being saved by him. And none love him in truth who do
not love his laws and keep his commandments. Note, There are many
Christians in name who do not love Christ Jesus the Lord in sincerity.
But can any thing be more criminal or provoking? What, not love the most
glorious lover in the world! Him who loved us, and gave himself for us,
who shed his blood for us, to testify his love to us, and that after
heinous wrong and provocation! What had we a power of loving for, if we
are unmoved with such love as this, and without affection to such a
Saviour? But, 2. We have here the doom of the person described: "Let him
be Anathema, Maran-atha, lie under the heaviest and most dreadful curse.
Let him be separated from the people of God, from the favour of God, and
delivered up to his final, irrevocable, and inexorable vengeance"
Maran-atha is a Syriac phrase, and signifies The Lord cometh. That very
Lord whom they do not love, to whom they are inwardly and really
disaffected whatever outward profession they make, is coming to execute
judgment. And to be exposed to his wrath, to be divided to his left
hand, to be condemned by him, how dreadful! If he will destroy, who can
save? Those who fall under his condemning sentence must perish, and that
for ever. Note, Those who love not the Lord Jesus Christ must perish
without remedy. The wrath of God abides on every one who believes not on
the Son, [Joh 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036). And true faith in
Christ will evermore be productive of sincere love to him. Those who
love him not cannot be believers in him.

III\. With his good wishes for them and expressions of good-will to
them. 1. With his good wishes: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you, [Co1 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#023). As much as if he
had said, "Though I warn you against falling under his displeasure, I
heartily wish you an interest in his dearest love and his eternal
favour." The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ comprehends in it all that
is good, for time or eternity. To wish our friends may have this grace
with them is wishing them the utmost good. And this we should wish all
our friends and brethren in Christ. We can wish them nothing more, and
we should wish them nothing less. We should heartily pray that they may
value, and seek, and obtain, and secure, the grace and good-will of
their Lord and Judge. Note, The most solemn warnings are the result of
the tenderest affection and the greatest good-will. We may tell our
brethren and friends with great plainness and pathos that, if they love
not the Lord Jesus Christ, they must perish, while we heartily wish the
grace of Christ may be with them. Nay, we may give them this warning
that they may prize and lay hold of this grace. Note also, How much true
Christianity enlarges our hearts; it makes us wish those whom we love
the blessings of both worlds; for this is implied in wishing the grace
of Christ to be with them. And therefore it is no wonder that the
apostle should close all, 2. With the declaration of his love to them in
Christ Jesus: My love be with you all, in Christ Jesus, Amen, [Co1
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#024). He had dealt very plainly with
them in this epistle, and told them of their faults with just severity;
but, to show that he was not transported with passion, he parts with
them in love, makes solemn profession of his love to them, nay, to them
all in Christ Jesus, that is, for Christ's sake. He tells them that his
heart was with them, that he truly loved them; but lest this, after all,
should be deemed flattery and insinuation, he adds that his affection
was the result of his religion, and would be guided by the rules of it.
His heart would be with them, and he would bear them dear affection as
long as their hearts were with Christ, and they bore true affection to
his cause and interest. Note, We should be cordial lovers of all who are
in Christ, and who love him in sincerity. Not but we should love all
men, and wish them well, and do them what good is in our power; but
those must have our dearest affection who are dear to Christ, and lovers
of him. May our love be with all those who are in Christ Jesus! Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Introduction](co2000)

</div>
