<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2003)  [Next](co2005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 4:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have an account, I. Of the constancy of the apostle
and his fellow-labourers in their work. Their constancy in declared
([Co2 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#001)), their sincerity is vouched
([Co2 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#002)), an objection is obviated
([Co2 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003), [Co2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)), and their integrity proved ([Co2
4:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005)). II. Of their courage and
patience under their sufferings. Where see what their sufferings were,
together with their allays ([Co2
4:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008)), and what it was that kept
them from sinking and fainting under them ([Co2
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#013) to the end).

[2 Corinthians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 4:1</span></span>

The apostle had, in the foregoing chapter, been magnifying his office,
upon the consideration of the excellency or glory of that gospel about
which he did officiate; and now in this chapter his design is to
vindicate their ministry from the accusation of false teachers, who
charged them as deceitful workers, or endeavoured to prejudice the minds
of the people against them on account of their sufferings. He tells
them, therefore, how they believed, and how they showed their value for
their office as ministers of the gospel. They were not puffed up with
pride, but spurred on to great diligence: "Seeing we have this ministry,
are so much distinguished and dignified, we do not take state upon
ourselves, nor indulge in idleness, but are excited to the better
performance of our duty."

I. Two things in general we have an account of: - Their constancy and
sincerity in their work and labour, concerning which observe, 1. Their
constancy and perseverance in their work are declared: "We faint not
([Co2 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#001)) under the difficulty of our
work, nor do we desist from our labour." And this their stedfastness was
owing to the mercy of God. From the same mercy and grace from which they
received the apostleship ([Rom 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005)),
they received strength to persevere in the work of that office. Note, As
it is great mercy and grace to be called to be saints, and especially to
be counted faithful, and be put into the ministry ([Ti1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#012)), so it is owing to the mercy and
grace of God if we continue faithful and persevere in our work with
diligence. The best men in the world would faint in their work, and
under their burdens, if they did not receive mercy from God. By the
grace of God I am what I am, said this great apostle in his former
epistle to these Corinthians, [Co1
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010). And that mercy which has helped
us out, and helped us on, hitherto, we may rely upon to help us even to
the end. 2. Their sincerity in their work is avouched ([Co2
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#002)) in several expressions: We have
renounced the hidden things of dishonesty. The things of dishonesty are
hidden things, that will not bear the light; and those who practise them
are, or should be, ashamed of them, especially when they are known. Such
things the apostle did not allow of, but did renounce and avoid with
indignation: Not walking in craftiness, or in disguise, acting with art
and cunning, but in great simplicity, and with open freedom. They had no
base and wicked designs covered with fair and specious pretences of
something that was good. Nor did they in their preaching handle the word
of God deceitfully; but, as he said before, they used great plainness of
speech, and did not make their ministry serve a turn, or truckle to base
designs. They had not cheated the people with falsehood instead of
truth. Some think the apostle alludes to the deceit which treacherous
gamesters use, or that of hucksters in the market, who mix bad wares
with good. The apostles acted not like such persons, but they manifested
the truth to every man's conscience, declaring nothing but what in their
own conscience they believed to be true, and what might serve for the
conviction of their consciences who heard them, who were to judge for
themselves, and to give an account for themselves. And all this they did
as in the sight of God, desirous thus to commend themselves to God, and
to the consciences of men, by their undisguised sincerity. Note, A
stedfast adherence to the truths of the gospel will commend ministers
and people; and sincerity or uprightness will preserve a man's
reputation, and the good opinion of wise and good men concerning him.

II\. An objection is obviated, which might be thus formed: "If it be
thus, how then does it come to pass, that the gospel is hid, and proves
ineffectual, as to some who hear it?" To which the apostle answers, by
showing that this was not the fault of the gospel, nor of the preachers
thereof. But the true reasons of this are, 1. Those are lost souls to
whom the gospel is hid, or is ineffectual, [Co2
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003). Christ came to save that which
was lost ([Mat 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#011)), and the gospel
of Christ is sent to save such; and, if this do not find and save them,
they are lost for ever; they must never expect any thing else to save
them, for there is no other method or means of salvation. The hiding of
the gospel therefore from souls is both an evidence and cause of their
ruin. 2. The god of this world hath blinded their minds, [Co2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004). They are under the influence and
power of the devil, who is here called the god of this world, and
elsewhere the prince of this world, because of the great interest he has
in this world, the homage that is paid to him by multitudes in this
world, and the great sway that, by divine permission, he bears in the
world, and in the hearts of his subjects, or rather slaves. And as he is
the prince of darkness, and ruler of the darkness of this world, so he
darkens the understandings of men, and increases their prejudices, and
supports his interest by keeping them in the dark, blinding their minds
with ignorance, and error, and prejudices, that they should not behold
the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God.
Observe, (1.) Christ's design by his gospel is to make a glorious
discovery of God to the minds of men. Thus, as the image of God, he
demonstrates the power and wisdom of God, and the grace and mercy of God
for their salvation. But, (2.) The design of the devil is to keep men in
ignorance; and, when he cannot keep the light of the gospel out of the
world, he makes it his great business to keep it out of the hearts of
men.

III\. A proof of their integrity is given, [Co2
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005). They made it their business to
preach Christ, and not themselves: We preach not ourselves. Self was not
the matter nor the end of the apostles' preaching: they did not give
their own notions and private opinions, nor their passions and
prejudices, for the word and will of God; nor did they seek themselves,
to advance their own secular interest or glory. But they preached Christ
Jesus the Lord; and thus it did become them and behove them to do, as
being Christ's servants. Their business was to make their Master known
to the world as the Messiah, or the Christ of God, and as Jesus, the
only Saviour of men, and as the rightful Lord, and to advance his honour
and glory. Note, All the lines of Christian doctrine centre in Christ;
and in preaching Christ we preach all we should preach. "As to
ourselves," says the apostle, "we preach, or declare, that we are your
servants for Jesus' sake." This was no compliment, but a real profession
of a readiness to do good to their souls, and to promote their spiritual
and eternal interest, and that for Jesus' sake; not for their own sake
or their own advantage, but for Christ's sake, that they might imitate
his great example, and advance his glory. Note, Ministers should not be
of proud spirits, lording it over God's heritage, who are servants to
the souls of men: yet, at the same time, they must avoid the meanness of
spirit implied in becoming the servants of the humours or the lusts of
men; if they should thus seek to please men, they would not be the
servants of Christ, [Gal 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010). And
there was good reason, 1. Why they should preach Christ. For by gospel
light we have the knowledge of the glory of God, which shines in the
face of Jesus Christ, [Co2 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006). And
the light of this Sun of righteousness is more glorious than that light
which God commanded to shine out of darkness. It is a pleasant thing for
the eye to behold the sun in the firmament; but it is more pleasant and
profitable when the gospel shines in the heart. Note, As light was the
first-born of the first creation, so it is in the new creation: the
illumination of the Spirit is his first work upon the soul. The grace of
God created such a light in the soul that those who were sometimes
darkness are made light in the Lord, [Eph
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008). 2. Why they should not preach
themselves: because they were but earthen vessels, things of little or
no worth or value. Here seems to be an allusion to the lamps which
Gideon's soldiers carried in earthen pitchers, [Jdg
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#016). The treasure of gospel light and
grace is put into earthen vessels. The ministers of the gospel are weak
and frail creatures, and subject to like passions and infirmities as
other men; they are mortal, and soon broken in pieces. And God has so
ordered it that the weaker the vessels are the stronger his power may
appear to be, that the treasure itself should be valued the more. Note,
There is an excellency of power in the gospel of Christ, to enlighten
the mind, to convince the conscience, to convert the soul, and to
rejoice the heart; but all this power is from God the author, and not
from men, who are but instruments, so that God in all things must be
glorified.

[2 Corinthians 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 4:8</span></span>

In these verses the apostle gives an account of their courage and
patience under all their sufferings, where observe,

I. How their sufferings, and patience under them, are declared, [Co2
4:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008). The apostles were great
sufferers; therein they followed their Master: Christ had told them that
in the world they should have tribulation, and so they had; yet they met
with wonderful support, great relief, and many allays of their sorrows.
"We are," says the apostle, "troubled on every side, afflicted many
ways, and we meet with almost all sorts of troubles; yet not distressed,
[Co2 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008). We are not hedged in nor
cooped up, because we can see help in God, and help from God, and have
liberty of access to God." Again, "We are perplexed, often uncertain,
and in doubt what will become of us, and not always without anxiety in
our minds on this account; yet not in despair ([Co2
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008)), even in our greatest
perplexities, knowing that God is able to support us, and to deliver us,
and in him we always place our trust and hope." Again, "We are
persecuted by men, pursued with hatred and violence from place to place,
as men not worthy to live; yet not forsaken of God," [Co2
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#009). Good men may be sometimes
forsaken of their friends, as well as persecuted by their enemies; but
God will never leave them nor forsake them. Again, "We are sometimes
dejected, or cast down; the enemy may in a great measure prevail, and
our spirits begin to fail us; there may be fears within, as well as
fightings without; yet we are not destroyed," [Co2
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#009). Still they were preserved, and
kept their heads above water. Note, Whatever condition the children of
God may be in, in this world, they have a "but not" to comfort
themselves with; their case sometimes is bad, yea very bad, but not so
bad as it might be. The apostle speaks of their sufferings as constant,
and as a counterpart of the sufferings of Christ, [Co2
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010). The sufferings of Christ were,
after a sort, re-acted in the sufferings of Christians; thus did they
bear about the dying of the Lord Jesus in their body, setting before the
world the great example of a suffering Christ, that the life of Jesus
might also be made manifest, that is, that people might see the power of
Christ's resurrection, and the efficacy of grace in and from the living
Jesus, manifested in and towards them, who did yet live, though they
were always delivered to death ([Co2
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#011)), and though death worked in them
([Co2 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#012)), they being exposed to
death, and ready to be swallowed up by death continually. So great were
the sufferings of the apostles that, in comparison with them, other
Christians were, even at this time, in prosperous circumstances: Death
worketh in us; but life in you, [Co2
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#012).

II\. What it was that kept them from sinking and fainting under their
sufferings, [Co2 4:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#013). Whatever the
burdens and troubles of good men may be, they have cause enough not to
faint.

1\. Faith kept them from fainting: We have the same spirit of faith
([Co2 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#013)), that faith which is of
the operation of the Spirit; the same faith by which the saints of old
did and suffered such great things. Note, The grace of faith is a
sovereign cordial, and an effectual antidote against fainting-fits in
troublous times. The spirit of faith will go far to bear up the spirit
of a man under his infirmities; and as the apostle had David's example
to imitate, who said ([Psa 116:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#010)), I
have believed, and therefore have I spoken, so he leaves us his example
to imitate: We also believe, says he, and therefore speak. Note, As we
receive help and encouragement from the good words and examples of
others, so we should be careful to give a good example to others.

2\. Hope of the resurrection kept them from sinking, [Co2
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#014). They knew that Christ was
raised, and that his resurrection was an earnest and assurance of
theirs. This he had treated of largely in his former epistle to these
Corinthians, [Co1 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001). And therefore
their hope was firm, being well grounded, that he who raised up Christ
the head will also raise up all his members. Note, The hope of the
resurrection will encourage us in a suffering day, and set us above the
fear of death; for what reason has a good Christian to fear death, that
dies in hope of a joyful resurrection?

3\. The consideration of the glory of God and the benefit of the church,
by means of their sufferings, kept them from fainting, [Co2
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#015). Their sufferings were for the
church's advantage ([Co2 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#006)), and
thus did redound to God's glory. For, when the church is edified, then
God is glorified; and we may well afford to bear sufferings patiently
and cheerfully when we see others are the better for them - if they are
instructed and edified, if they are confirmed and comforted. Note, The
sufferings of Christ's ministers, as well as their preaching and
conversation, are intended for the good of the church and the glory of
God.

4\. The thoughts of the advantage their souls would reap by the
sufferings of their bodies kept them from fainting: Though our outward
man perish, our inward man is renewed day by day, [Co2
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016). Here note, (1.) We have every
one of us an outward and an inward man, a body and a soul. (2.) If the
outward man perish, there is no remedy, it must and will be so, it was
made to perish. (3.) It is our happiness if the decays of the outward
man do contribute to the renewing of the inward man, if afflictions
outwardly are gain to us inwardly, if when the body is sick, and weak,
and perishing, the soul is vigorous and prosperous. The best of men have
need of further renewing of the inward man, even day by day. Where the
good work is begun there is more work to be done, for carrying it
forward. And as in wicked men things grow every day worse and worse, so
in godly men they grow better and better.

5\. The prospect of eternal life and happiness kept them from fainting,
and was a mighty support and comfort. As to this observe, (1.) The
apostle and his fellow-sufferers saw their afflictions working towards
heaven, and that they would end at last ([Co2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017)), whereupon they weighed things
aright in the balance of the sanctuary; they did as it were put the
heavenly glory in one scale and their earthly sufferings in the other;
and, pondering things in their thoughts, they found afflictions to be
light, and the glory of heaven to be a far more exceeding weight. That
which sense was ready to pronounce heavy and long, grievous and tedious,
faith perceived to be light and short, and but for a moment. On the
other hand, the worth and weight of the crown of glory, as they are
exceedingly great in themselves, so they are esteemed to be by the
believing soul - far exceeding all his expressions and thoughts; and it
will be a special support in our sufferings when we can perceive them
appointed as the way and preparing us for the enjoyment of the future
glory. (2.) Their faith enabled them to make this right judgment of
things: We look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen, [Co2 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018). It is
by faith that we see God, who is invisible ([Heb
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#027)), and by this we look to an
unseen heaven and hell, and faith is the evidence of things not seen.
Note, \[1.\] There are unseen things, as well as things that are seen.
\[2.\] There is this vast difference between them: unseen things are
eternal, seen things but temporal, or temporary only. \[3.\] By faith we
not only discern these things, and the great difference between them,
but by this also we take our aim at unseen things, and chiefly regard
them, and make it our end and scope, not to escape present evils, and
obtain present good, both of which are temporal and transitory, but to
escape future evil and obtain future good things, which though unseen,
are real, and certain, and eternal; and faith is the substance of things
hoped for, as well as the evidence of things not seen, [Heb
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 5](co2005)

</div>
