<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2005)  [Next](co2007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 6:0</span></span>

In this chapter the apostle gives an account of his general errand to
all to whom he preached; with the several arguments and methods he used
([Co2 6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001)). Then he addresses
himself particularly to the Corinthians, giving them good cautions with
great affection and strong arguments ([Co2
6:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011)).

[2 Corinthians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 6:1</span></span>

In these verses we have an account of the apostle's general errand and
exhortation to all to whom he preached in every place where he came,
with the several arguments and methods he used. Observe,

I. The errand or exhortation itself, namely, to comply with the gospel
offers of reconciliation - that, being favoured with the gospel, they
would not receive this grace of God in vain, [Co2
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001). The gospel is a word of grace
sounding in our ears; but it will be in vain for us to hear it, unless
we believe it, and comply with the end and design of it. And as it is
the duty of the ministers of the gospel to exhort and persuade their
hearers to accept of grace and mercy which are offered to them, so they
are honoured with this high title of co-workers with God. Note, 1. They
must work; and must work for God and his glory, for souls and their
good: and they are workers with God, yet under him, as instruments only;
however, if they be faithful, they may hope to find God working with
them, and their labour will be effectual. 2. Observe the language and
way of the spirit of the gospel: it is not with roughness and severity,
but with all mildness and gentleness, to beseech and entreat, to use
exhortations and arguments, in order to prevail with sinners and
overcome their natural unwillingness to be reconciled to God and to be
happy for ever.

II\. The arguments and method which the apostle used. And here he tells
them,

1\. The present time is the only proper season to accept of the grace
that is offered, and improve that grace which is afforded: NOW is the
accepted time, NOW is the day of salvation, [Co2
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002). The gospel day is a day of
salvation, the means of grace the means of salvation, the offers of the
gospel the offers of salvation, and the present time the only proper
time to accept of these offers: Today, while it is called today. The
morrow is none of ours: we know not what will be on the morrow, nor
where we shall be; and we should remember that present seasons of grace
are short and uncertain, and cannot be recalled when they are past. It
is therefore our duty and interest to improve them while we have them,
and no less than our salvation depends upon our so doing.

2\. What caution they used not to give offence that might hinder the
success of their preaching: Giving no offence in any thing, [Co2
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#003). The apostle had great difficulty
to behave prudently and inoffensively towards the Jews and Gentiles, for
many of both sorts watched for his halting, and sought occasion to blame
him and his ministry, or his conversation; therefore he was very
cautious not to give offence to those who were so apt to take offence,
that he might not offend the Jews by unnecessary zeal against the law,
nor the Gentiles by unnecessary compliances with such as were zealous
for the law. He was careful, in all his words and actions, not to give
offence, or occasion of guilt or grief. Note, When others are too apt to
take offence, we should be cautious lest we give offence; and ministers
especially should be careful lest they do any thing that may bring blame
on their ministry or render that unsuccessful.

3\. Their constant aim and endeavor in all things to approve themselves
faithful, as became the ministers of God, [Co2
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#004). We see how much stress the
apostle upon all occasions lays on fidelity in our work, because much of
our success depends upon that. His eye was single, and his heart
upright, in all his ministrations; and his great desire was to be the
servant of God, and to approve himself so. Note, Ministers of the gospel
should look upon themselves as God's servants or ministers, and act in
every thing suitably to that character. So did the apostle, (1.) By much
patience in afflictions. He was a great sufferer, and met with many
afflictions, was often in necessities, and wanted the conveniences, if
not the necessaries, of life; in distresses, being straitened on every
side, hardly knowing what to do; in stripes often ([Co2
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024)); in imprisonments; in tumults
raised by the Jews and Gentiles against him; in labours, not only in
preaching the gospel, but in travelling from place to place for that
end, and working with his hands to supply his necessities; in watchings
and in fastings, either voluntary or upon a religious account, or
involuntary for the sake of religion: but he exercised much patience in
all, [Co2 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#004), [Co2
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#005). Note, \[1.\] It is the lot of
faithful ministers often to be reduced to great difficulties, and to
stand in need of much patience. \[2.\] Those who would approve
themselves to God must approve themselves faithful in trouble as well as
in peace, not only in doing the work of God diligently, but also in
bearing the will of God patiently. (2.) By acting from good principles.
The apostle went by a good principle in all he did, and tells them what
his principles were ([Co2 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#006), [Co2
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#007)); namely, pureness; and there is
no piety without purity. A care to keep ourselves unspotted from the
world is necessary in order to our acceptance with God. Knowledge was
another principle; and zeal without this is but madness. He also acted
with long-suffering and kindness, being not easily provoked, but bearing
with the hardness of men's hearts, and hard treatment from their hands,
to whom he kindly endeavoured to do good. He acted under the influence
of the Holy Ghost, from the noble principle of unfeigned love, according
to the rule of the word of truth, under the supports and assistances of
the power of God, having on the armour of righteousness (a consciousness
of universal righteousness and holiness), which is the best defence
against the temptations of prosperity on the right hand, and of
adversity on the left. (3.) By a due temper and behaviour under all the
variety of conditions in this world, [Co2
6:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#008). We must expect to meet with
many alterations of our circumstances and conditions in this world; and
it will be a great evidence of our integrity if we preserve a right
temper of mind, and duly behave ourselves, under them all. The apostles
met with honour and dishonour, good report and evil report: good men in
this world must expect to meet with some dishonour and reproaches, to
balance their honour and esteem; and we stand in need of the grace of
God to arm us against the temptations of honour on the one hand, so as
to bear good report without pride, and of dishonour on the other hand,
so as to bear reproaches without impatience or recrimination. It should
seem that persons differently represented the apostles in their reports;
that some represented them as the best, and others as the worst, of men:
by some they were counted deceivers, and run down as such; by others as
true, preaching the gospel of truth, and men who were true to the trust
reposed in them. They were slighted by the men of the world as unknown,
men of no figure or account, not worth taking notice of; yet in all the
churches of Christ they were well known, and of great account: they were
looked upon as dying, being killed all the day long, and their interest
was thought to be a dying interest; "and yet behold," says the apostle,
"we live, and live comfortably, and bear up cheerfully under all our
hardships, and go on conquering and to conquer." They were chastened,
and often fell under the lash of the law, yet not killed: and though it
was thought that they were sorrowful, a company of mopish and melancholy
men, always sighing and mourning, yet they were always rejoicing in God,
and had the greatest reason to rejoice always. They were despised as
poor, upon the account of their poverty in this world; and yet they made
many rich, by preaching the unsearchable riches of Christ. They were
thought to have nothing, and silver and gold they had none, houses and
lands they had none; yet they possessed all things: they had nothing in
this world, but they had a treasure in heaven. Their effects lay in
another country, in another world. They had nothing in themselves, but
possessed all things in Christ. Such a paradox is a Christian's life,
and through such a variety of conditions and reports lies our way to
heaven; and we should be careful in all these things to approve
ourselves to God.

[2 Corinthians 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 6:11</span></span>

The apostle proceeds to address himself more particularly to the
Corinthians, and cautions them against mingling with unbelievers. Here
observe,

I. How the caution is introduced with a profession, in a very pathetic
manner, of the most tender affection to them, even like that of a father
to his children, [Co2 6:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011). Though
the apostle was happy in a great fluency of expressions, yet he seemed
to want words to express the warm affections he had for these
Corinthians. As if he had said, "O ye Corinthians, to whom I am now
writing, I would fain convince you how well I love you: we are desirous
to promote the spiritual and eternal welfare of all to whom we preach,
yet our mouth is open unto you, and our heart is enlarged unto you, in a
special manner." And, because his heart was thus enlarged with love to
them, therefore he opened his mouth so freely to them in kind
admonitions and exhortations: "You are not," says he, "straitened in us;
we would gladly do you all the service we can, and promote your comfort,
as helpers of your faith and your joy; and, if it be otherwise, the
fault is in yourselves; it is because you are straitened in yourselves,
and fail in suitable returns to us, through some misapprehensions
concerning us; and all we desire as a recompense is only that you would
be proportionably affected towards us, as children should love their
father." Note, It is desirable that there should be a mutual good
affection between ministers and their people, and this would greatly
tend to their mutual comfort and advantage.

II\. The caution or exhortation itself, not to mingle with unbelievers,
not to be unequally yoked with them, [Co2
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014). Either,

1\. In stated relations. It is wrong for good people to join in affinity
with the wicked and profane; these will draw different ways, and that
will be galling and grievous. Those relations that are our choice must
be chosen by rule; and it is good for those who are themselves the
children of God to join with those who are so likewise; for there is
more danger that the bad will damage the good than hope that the good
will benefit the bad.

2\. In common conversation. We should not yoke ourselves in friendship
and acquaintance with wicked men and unbelievers. Though we cannot
wholly avoid seeing, and hearing, and being with such, yet we should
never choose them for our bosom-friends.

3\. Much less should we join in religious communion with them; we must
not join with them in their idolatrous services, nor concur with them in
their false worship, nor any abominations; we must not confound together
the table of the Lord and the table of devils, the house of God and the
house of Rimmon. The apostle gives several good reasons against this
corrupt mixture. (1.) It is a very great absurdity, [Co2
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014), [Co2
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015). It is an unequal yoking of
things together that will not agree together; as bad as for the Jews to
have ploughed with an ox and an ass or to have sown divers sorts of
grain intermixed. What an absurdity is it to think of joining
righteousness and unrighteousness, or mingling light and darkness, fire
and water, together! Believers are, and should be, righteous; but
unbelievers are unrighteous. Believers are made light in the Lord, but
unbelievers are in darkness; and what comfortable communion can these
have together? Christ and Belial are contrary one to the other; they
have opposite interests and designs, so that it is impossible there
should be any concord or agreement between them. It is absurd,
therefore, to think of enlisting under both; and, if the believer has
part with an infidel, he does what in him lies to bring Christ and
Belial together. (2.) It is a dishonour to the Christian's profession
([Co2 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016)); for Christians are by
profession, and should be in reality, the temples of the living God -
dedicated to, and employed for, the service of God, who has promised to
reside in them, to dwell and walk in them, to stand in a special
relation to them, and take a special care of them, that he will be their
God and they shall be his people. Now there can be no agreement between
the temple of God and idols. Idols are rivals with God for his honour,
and God is a jealous God, and will not give his glory to another. (3.)
There is a great deal of danger in communicating with unbelievers and
idolators, danger of being defiled and of being rejected; therefore the
exhortation is ([Co2 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017)) to come out
from among them, and keep at a due distance, to be separate, as one
would avoid the society of those who have the leprosy or the plague, for
fear of taking infection, and not to touch the unclean thing, lest we be
defiled. Who can touch pitch, and not be defiled by it? We must take
care not to defile ourselves by converse with those who defile
themselves with sin; so is the will of God, as we ever hope to be
received, and not rejected, by him. (4.) It is base ingratitude to God
for all the favours he has bestowed upon believers and promised to them,
[Co2 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#018). God has promised to be a
Father to them, and that they shall be his sons and his daughters; and
is there a greater honour or happiness than this? How ungrateful a thing
then must it be if those who have this dignity and felicity should
degrade and debase themselves by mingling with unbelievers! Do we thus
requite the Lord, O foolish and unwise?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 7](co2007)

</div>
