<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Colossians Index](col)  
  [Previous](col000)  [Next](col002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Colossians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001)

We have here, I. The inscription, as usual ([Col
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001), [Col
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#002)). II. His thanksgiving to God for
what he had heard concerning them - their faith, love, and hope ([Col
1:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#003)). III. His prayer for their
knowledge, fruitfulness, and strength ([Col
1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#009)). IV. An admirable summary of
the Christian doctrine concerning the operation of the Spirit, the
person of the Redeemer, the work of redemption, and the preaching of it
in the gospel (v. 12-29).

[Colossians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">col 1:1</span></span>

I. The inscription of this epistle is much the same with the rest; only
it is observable that, 1. He calls himself an apostle of Jesus Christ by
the will of God. An apostle is a prime-minister in the kingdom of
Christ, immediately called by Christ, and extraordinarily qualified; his
work was peculiarly to plant the Christian church, and confirm the
Christian doctrine. He attributes this not to his own merit, strength,
or sufficiency; but to the free grace and good-will of God. He thought
himself engaged to do his utmost, as an apostle, because he was made so
by the will of God. 2. He joins Timothy in commission with himself,
which is another instance of his humility; and, though he elsewhere
calls him his son ([Ti2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#001)), yet here
he calls him his brother, which is an example to the elder and more
eminent ministers to look upon the younger and more obscure as their
brethren, and to treat them accordingly with kindness and respect. 3. He
calls the Christians at Colosse saints, and faithful brethren in Christ.
As all good ministers, so all good Christians, are brethren one to
another, who stand in a near relation and owe a mutual love. Towards God
they must be saints, consecrated to his honour and sanctified by his
grace, bearing his image and aiming at his glory. And in both these, as
saints to God and as brethren to one another, they must be faithful.
Faithfulness runs through every character and relation of the Christian
life, and is the crown and glory of them all.

II\. The apostolical benediction is the same as usual: Grace be unto
you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. He
wishes them grace and peace, the free favour of God and all the blessed
fruits of it; every kind of spiritual blessings, and that from God our
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ; jointly from both, and distinctly
from each; as in the former epistle.

[Colossians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">col 1:3</span></span>

Here he proceeds to the body of the epistle, and begins with
thanksgiving to God for what he had heard concerning them, though he had
no personal acquaintance with them, and knew their state and character
only by the reports of others.

I. He gave thanks to God for them, that they had embraced the gospel of
Christ, and given proofs of their fidelity to him. Observe, In his
prayers for them he gave thanks for them. Thanksgiving ought to be a
part of every prayer; and whatever is the matter of our rejoicing ought
to be the matter of our thanksgiving. Observe, 1. Whom he gives thanks
to: To God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. In our
thanksgiving we must have an eye to God as God (he is the object of
thanksgiving as well as prayer), and is the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, in and through whom all good comes to us. He is the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ as well as our Father; and it is a matter of
encouragement, in all our addresses to God, that we can look to him as
Christ's Father and our Father, as his God and our God, [Joh
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017). Observe, 2. What he gives
thanks to God for - for the graces of God in them, which were evidences
of the grace of God towards them: Since we heard of your faith in Christ
Jesus, and of the love you have to all the saints; for the hope which is
laid up for you in heaven, [Col 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#004),
[Col 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005). Faith, hope, and love, are
the three principal graces in the Christian life, and proper matter of
our prayer and thanksgiving. (1.) He gives thanks for their faith in
Christ Jesus, that they were brought to believe in him, and take upon
them the profession of his religion, and venture their souls upon his
undertaking. (2.) For their love. Besides the general love which is due
to all men, there is a particular love owing to the saints, or those who
are of the Christian brotherhood, [Pe1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017). We must love all the saints,
bear an extensive kindness and good-will to good men, notwithstanding
smaller points of difference, and many real weaknesses. Some understand
it of their charity to the saints in necessity, which is one branch and
evidence of Christian love. (3.) For their hope: The hope which is laid
up for you in heaven, [Col 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005). The
happiness of heaven is called their hope, because it is the thing hoped
for, looking for the blessed hope, [Tit
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013). What is laid out upon believers
in this world is much; but what is laid up for them in heaven is much
more. And we have reason to give thanks to God for the hope of heaven
which good Christians have, or their well-grounded expectation of the
future glory. Their faith in Christ, and love to the saints, had an eye
to the hope laid up for them in heaven. The more we fix our hopes on the
recompence of reward in the other world, the more free and liberal shall
we be of our earthly treasure upon all occasions of doing good.

II\. Having blessed God for these graces, he blesses God for the means
of grace which they enjoyed: Wherein you heard before in the word of the
truth of the gospel. They had heard in the word of the truth of the
gospel concerning this hope laid up for them in heaven. Observe, 1. The
gospel is the word of truth, and what we may safely venture our immortal
souls upon: it proceeds from the God of truth and the Spirit of truth,
and is a faithful saying. He calls it the grace of God in truth, [Col
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006). 2. It is a great mercy to hear
this word of truth; for the great thing we learn from it is the
happiness of heaven. Eternal life is brought to light by the gospel,
[Ti2 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#010). They heard of the hope laid
up in heaven in the word of the truth of the gospel. "Which has come
unto you, as it hath to all the world, and bringeth forth fruit, as it
doth also in you, [Col 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006). This
gospel is preached and brings forth fruit in other nations; it has come
to you, as it hath to all the world, according to the commission, Go
preach the gospel in all the nations, and to every creature." Observe,
(1.) All who hear the word of the gospel ought to bring forth the fruit
of the gospel, that is, be obedient to it, and have their principles and
lives formed according to it. This was the doctrine first preached:
Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance, [Mat
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#008). And our Lord says, If you know
these things, happy are you if you do them, [Joh
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#017). Observe, (2.) Wherever the
gospel comes, it will bring forth fruit to the honour and glory of God:
It bringeth forth fruit, as it doth also in you. We mistake, if we think
to monopolize the comforts and benefits of the gospel to ourselves. Does
the gospel bring forth fruit in us? So it does in others.

III\. He takes this occasion to mention the minister by whom they
believed ([Col 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#007), [Col
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#008)): As you also learned of Epaphras,
our dear fellow-servant, who is for you a faithful minister of Christ.
He mentions him with great respect, to engage their love to him. 1. He
calls him his fellow-servant, to signify not only that they served the
same Master, but that they were engaged in the same work. They were
fellow-labourers in the work of the Lord, though one was an apostle and
the other an ordinary minister. 2. He calls him his dear fellow-servant:
all the servants of Christ ought to love one another, and it is an
endearing consideration that they are engaged in the same service. 3. He
represents him as one who was a faithful minister of Christ to them, who
discharged his trust and fulfilled his ministry among them. Observe,
Christ is our proper Master, and we are his ministers. He does not say
who is your minister; but who is the minister of Christ for you. It is
by his authority and appointment, though for the people's service. 4. He
represents him as one who gave them a good word: Who also declared unto
us your love in the Spirit, [Col 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#008).
He recommends him to their affection, from the good report he made of
their sincere love to Christ and all his members, which was wrought in
them by the Spirit, and is agreeable to the spirit of the gospel.
Faithful ministers are glad to be able to speak well of their people.

[Colossians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">col 1:9</span></span>

The apostle proceeds in these verses to pray for them. He heard that
they were good, and he prayed that they might be better. He was constant
in this prayer: We do not cease to pray for you. It may be he could hear
of them but seldom, but he constantly prayed for them. - And desire that
you may be filled with the knowledge, etc. Observe what it is that he
begs of God for them,

I. That they might be knowing intelligent Christians: filled with the
knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding.
Observe, 1. The knowledge of our duty is the best knowledge. A mere
empty notion of the greatest truths is insignificant. Our knowledge of
the will of God must be always practical: we must know it, in order to
do it. 2. Our knowledge is then a blessing indeed when it is in wisdom,
when we know how to apply our general knowledge to our particular
occasions, and to suit it to all emergencies. 3. Christians should
endeavour to be filled with knowledge; not only to know the will of God,
but to know more of it, and to increase in the knowledge of God (as it
is [Col 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#010)), and to grow in grace,
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour, [Pe2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#018).

II\. That their conversation might be good. Good knowledge without a
good life will not profit. Our understanding is then a spiritual
understanding when we exemplify it in our way of living: That you may
walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing ([Col
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#010)), that is, as becomes the
relation we stand in to him and the profession we make of him. The
agreeableness of our conversation to our religion is pleasing to God as
well as to good men. We walk unto all well-pleasing when we walk in all
things according to the will of God. Being fruitful in every good work.
This is what we should aim at. Good words will not do without good
works. We must abound in good works, and in every good work: not in some
only, which are more easy, and suitable, and safe, but in all, and every
instance of them. There must be a regular uniform regard to all the will
of God. And the more fruitful we are in good works the more we shall
increase in the knowledge of God. He who doeth his will shall know of
the doctrine whether it be of God, [Joh
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#017).

III\. That they might be strengthened: Strengthened with all might
according to his glorious power ([Col
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#011)), fortified against the
temptations of Satan and furnished for all their duty. It is a great
comfort to us that he who undertakes to give strength to his people is a
God of power and of glorious power. Where there is spiritual life there
is still need of spiritual strength, strength for all the actions of the
spiritual life. To be strengthened is to be furnished by the grace of
God for every good work, and fortified by that grace against every evil
one: it is to be enabled to do our duty, and still to hold fast our
integrity. The blessed Spirit is the author of this strength; for we are
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inward man, [Eph
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#016). The word of God is the means of
it, by which he conveys it; and it must be fetched in by prayer. It was
in answer to earnest prayer that the apostle obtained sufficient grace.
In praying for spiritual strength we are not straitened in the promises,
and therefore should not be straitened in our own hopes and desires.
Observe, 1. He prayed that they might be strengthened with might: this
seems a tautology; but he means, that they might be mightily
strengthened, or strengthened with might derived from another. 2. It is
with all might. It seems unreasonable that a creature should be
strengthened with all might, for that is to make him almighty; but he
means, with all that might which we have occasion for, to enable us to
discharge our duty or preserve our innocence, that grace which is
sufficient for us in all the trials of life and able to help us in time
of need. 3. It is according to his glorious power. He means, according
to the grace of God: but the grace of God in the hearts of believers is
the power of God; and there is a glory in this power; it is an excellent
and sufficient power. And the communications of strength are not
according to our weakness, to whom the strength is communicated, but
according to his power, from whom it is received. When God gives he
gives like himself, and when he strengthens he strengthens like himself.
4. The special use of this strength was for suffering work: That you may
be strengthened unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness. He
prays not only that they may be supported under their troubles, but
strengthened for them: the reason is there is work to be done even when
we are suffering. And those who are strengthened according to his
glorious power are strengthened, (1.) To all patience. When patience
hath its perfect work ([Jam 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#004)) then
we are strengthened to all patience - when we not only bear our troubles
patiently, but receive them as gifts from God, and are thankful for
them. To you it is given to suffer, [Phi
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#029). When we bear our troubles well,
though ever so many, and the circumstances of them ever so aggravating,
then we bear them with all patience. And the same reason for bearing one
trouble will hold for bearing another, if it be a good reason. All
patience includes all the kinds of it; not only bearing patience, but
waiting patience. (2.) This is even unto long-suffering, that is, drawn
out to a great length: not only to bear trouble awhile, but to bear it
as long as God pleases to continue it. (3.) It is with joyfulness, to
rejoice in tribulation, to take joyfully the spoiling of our goods, and
rejoice that we are counted worthy to suffer for his name, to have joy
as well as patience in the troubles of life. This we could never do by
any strength of our own, but as we are strengthened by the grace of God.

[Colossians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">col 1:12</span></span>

Here is a summary of the doctrine of the gospel concerning the great
work of our redemption by Christ. It comes in here not as the matter of
a sermon, but as the matter of a thanksgiving; for our salvation by
Christ furnishes us with abundant matter of thanksgiving in every view
of it: Giving thanks unto the Father, [Col
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012). He does not discourse of the
work of redemption in the natural order of it; for then he would speak
of the purchase of it first, and afterwards of the application of it.
But here he inverts the order, because, in our sense and feeling of it,
the application goes before the purchase. We first find the benefits of
redemption in our hearts, and then are led by those streams to the
original and fountain-head. The order and connection of the apostle's
discourse may be considered in the following manner: -

I. He speaks concerning the operations of the Spirit of grace upon us.
We must give thanks for them, because by these we are qualified for an
interest in the mediation of the Son: Giving thanks to the Father, etc.,
[Col 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012), [Col
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013). It is spoken of as the work of
the Father, because the Spirit of grace is the Spirit of the Father, and
the Father works in us by his Spirit. Those in whom the work of grace is
wrought must give thanks unto the Father. If we have the comfort of it,
he must have the glory of it. Now what is it which is wrought for us in
the application of redemption? 1. "He hath delivered us from the power
of darkness, [Col 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013). He has rescued
us from the state of heathenish darkness and wickedness. He hath saved
us from the dominion of sin, which is darkness ([Jo1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#006)), from the dominion of Satan, who
is the prince of darkness ([Eph 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)),
and from the damnation of hell, which is utter darkness," [Mat
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#030). They are called out of
darkness, [Pe1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009). 2. "He hath
translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son, brought us into the
gospel-state, and made us members of the church of Christ, which is a
state of light and purity." You were once darkness, but now are you
light in the Lord, [Eph 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008). Who hath
called you out of darkness into his marvellous light, [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009). Those were made willing subjects
of Christ who were the slaves of Satan. The conversion of a sinner is
the translation of a soul into the kingdom of Christ out of the kingdom
of the devil. The power of sin is shaken off, and the power of Christ
submitted to. The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus makes them
free from the law of sin and death; and it is the kingdom of his dear
Son, or the Son of his peculiar love, his beloved Son ([Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)), and eminently the beloved, [Eph
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#006). 3. "He hath not only done this,
but hath made us meet to partake of the inheritance of the saints in
light, [Col 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012). He hath prepared us
for the eternal happiness of heaven, as the Israelites divided the
promised land by lot; and has given us the earnest and assurance of it."
This he mentions first because it is the first indication of the future
blessedness, that by the grace of God we find ourselves in some measure
prepared for it. God gives grace and glory, and we are here told what
they both are. (1.) What that glory is. It is the inheritance of the
saints in light. It is an inheritance, and belongs to them as children,
which is the best security and the sweetest tenure: If children, then
heirs, [Rom 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017). And it is an
inheritance of the saints-proper to sanctified souls. Those who are not
saints on earth will never be saints in heaven. And it is an inheritance
in light; the perfection of knowledge, holiness, and joy, by communion
with God, who is light, and the Father of lights, [Jam
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017); [Joh
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005). (2.) What this grace is. It is a
meetness for the inheritance: "He hath made us meet to be partakers,
that is, suited and fitted us for the heavenly state by a proper temper
and habit of soul; and he makes us meet by the powerful influence of his
Spirit." It is the effect of the divine power to change the heart, and
make it heavenly. Observe, All who are designed for heaven hereafter are
prepared for heaven now. As those who live and die unsanctified go out
of the world with their hell about them, so those who are sanctified and
renewed go out of the world with their heaven about them. Those who have
the inheritance of sons have the education of sons and the disposition
of sons: they have the Spirit of adoption, whereby they cry, Abba,
Father. [Rom 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015). And, because you
are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts,
crying, Abba, Father, [Gal 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006). This
meetness for heaven is the earnest of the Spirit in our heart, which is
part of payment, and assures the full payment. Those who are sanctified
shall be glorified ([Rom 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030)), and
will be for ever indebted to the grace of God, which hath sanctified
them.

II\. Concerning the person of the Redeemer. Glorious things are here
said of him; for blessed Paul was full of Christ, and took all occasions
to speak honourably of him. He speaks of him distinctly as God, and as
Mediator. 1. As God he speaks of him, [Col
1:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015). (1.) He is the image of the
invisible God. Not as man was made in the image of God ([Gen
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)), in his natural faculties and
dominion over the creatures: no, he is the express image of his person,
[Heb 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003). He is so the image of God as
the son is the image of his father, who has a natural likeness to him;
so that he who has seen him has seen the Father, and his glory was the
glory of the only-begotten of the Father, [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014); [Joh
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009). (2.) He is the first-born of
every creature. Not that he is himself a creature; for it is prōtotokos
pasēs ktiseōs - born or begotten before all the creation, or before any
creature was made, which is the scripture-way of representing eternity,
and by which the eternity of God is represented to us: I was set up from
everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was; when there was
no depth, before the mountains were settled, while as yet he had not
made the earth, [Pro 8:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#023). It
signifies his dominion over all things, as the first-born in a family is
heir and lord of all, so he is the heir of all things, [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002). The word, with only the change of
the accent, prōtotokos, signifies actively the first begetter or
producer of all things, and so it well agrees with the following clause.
Vid. Isidor. Peleus. epist. 30 lib. 3. (3.) He is so far from beginning
himself a creature that he is the Creator: For by him were all things
created, which are in heaven and earth, visible and invisible, [Col
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016). He made all things out of
nothing, the highest angel in heaven, as well as men upon earth. He made
the world, the upper and lower world, with all the inhabitants of both.
All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made
which was made, [Joh 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003). He speaks
here as if there were several orders of angels: Whether thrones, or
dominions, or principalities, or powers, which must signify either
different degrees of excellence or different offices and employments.
Angels, authorities, and powers, [Pe1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022). Christ is the eternal wisdom of
the Father, and the world was made in wisdom. He is the eternal Word,
and the world was made by the word of God. He is the arm of the Lord,
and the world was made by that arm. All things are created by him and
for him; di' autou kai eis auton. Being created by him, they were
created for him; being made by his power, they were made according to
his pleasure and for his praise. He is the end, as well as the cause of
all things. To him are all things, [Rom
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036); eis auton ta panta. (4.) He was
before all things. He had a being before the world was made, before the
beginning of time, and therefore from all eternity. Wisdom was with the
Father, and possessed by him in the beginning of his ways, before his
works of old, [Pro 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022). And in the
beginning the Word was with God and was God, [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001). He not only had a being before he
was born of the virgin, but he had a being before all time. (5.) By him
all things consist. They not only subsist in their beings, but consist
in their order and dependences. He not only created them all at first,
but it is by the word of his power that they are still upheld, [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003). The whole creation is kept
together by the power of the Son of God, and made to consist in its
proper frame. It is preserved from disbanding and running into
confusion.

2\. The apostle next shows what he is as Mediator, [Col
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018), [Col
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019). (1.) He is the head of the body
the church: not only a head of government and direction, as the king is
the head of the state and has right to prescribe laws, but a head of
vital influence, as the head in the natural body: for all grace and
strength are derived from him: and the church is his body, the fulness
of him who filleth all in all, [Eph
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022), [Eph
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023). (2.) He is the beginning, the
first-born from the dead, archē, prōtotokos - the principle, the
first-born from the dead; the principle of our resurrection, as well as
the first-born himself. All our hopes and joys take their rise from him
who is the author of our salvation. Not that he was the first who ever
rose from the dead, but the first and only one who rose by his own
power, and was declared to be the Son of God, and Lord of all things.
And he is the head of the resurrection, and has given us an example and
evidence of our resurrection from the dead. He rose as the first-fruits,
[Co1 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020). (3.) He hath in all things
the pre-eminence. It was the will of the Father that he should have all
power in heaven and earth, that he might be preferred above angels and
all the powers in heaven (he has obtained a more excellent name than
they, [Heb 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004)), and that in all the
affairs of the kingdom of God among men he should have the pre-eminence.
He has the pre-eminence in the hearts of his people above the world and
the flesh; and by giving him the pre-eminence we comply with the
Father's will, That all men should honour the Son even as they honour
the Father, [Joh 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023). (4.) All
fulness dwells in him, and it pleased the Father it should do so ([Col
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019)), not only a fulness of abundance
for himself, but redundance for us, a fulness of merit and
righteousness, of strength and grace. As the head is the seat and source
of the animal spirits, so is Christ of all graces to his people. It
pleased the Father that all fulness should dwell in him; and we may have
free resort to him for all that grace for which we have occasion. He not
only intercedes for it, but is the trustee in whose hands it is lodged
to dispense to us: Of his fulness we receive, and grace for grace, grace
in us answering to that grace which is in him ([Joh
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)), and he fills all in all, [Eph
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023).

III\. Concerning the work of redemption. He speaks of the nature of it,
or wherein it consists; and of the means of it, by which it was
procured.

1\. Wherein it consists. It is made to lie in two things: - (1.) In the
remission of sin: In whom we have redemption, even the forgiveness of
sins, [Col 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014). It was sin which sold
us, sin which enslaved us: if we are redeemed, we must be redeemed from
sin; and this is by forgiveness, or remitting the obligation to
punishment. So [Eph 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007), In whom we
have redemption, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his
grace. (2.) In reconciliation to God. God by him reconciled all things
to himself, [Col 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020). He is the
Mediator of reconciliation, who procures peace as well as pardon for
sinners, who brings them into a state of friendship and favour at
present, and will bring all holy creatures, angels as well as men, into
one glorious and blessed society at last: things in earth, or things in
heaven. So [Eph 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010), He will gather
together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which
are on earth. The word is anakephalaiōsasthai - he will bring them all
under one head. The Gentiles, who were alienated, and enemies in their
minds by wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled, [Col
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#021). Here see what was their
condition by nature, and in their Gentile state-estranged from God, and
at enmity with God: and yet this enmity is slain, and, notwithstanding
this distance, we are now reconciled. Christ has laid the foundation for
our reconciliation; for he has paid the price of it, has purchased the
proffer and promise of it, proclaims it as a prophet, applies it as a
king. Observe, The greatest enemies to God, who have stood at the
greatest distance and bidden him defiance, may be reconciled, if it by
not their own fault.

2\. How the redemption is procured: it is through his blood ([Col
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014)); he has made peace through the
blood of his cross ([Col 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020)), and it
is in the body of his flesh through death, [Col
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#022). It was the blood which made an
atonement, for the blood is the life; and without the shedding of blood
there is no remission, [Heb 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022).
There was such a value in the blood of Christ that, on account of
Christ's shedding it, God was willing to deal with men upon new terms to
bring them under a covenant of grace, and for his sake, and in
consideration of his death upon the cross, to pardon and accept to
favour all who comply with them.

IV\. Concerning the preaching of this redemption. Here observe,

1\. To whom it was preached: To every creature under heaven ([Col
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023)), that is, it was ordered to be
preached to every creature, [Mar
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015). It may be preached to every
creature; for the gospel excludes none who do not exclude themselves.
More or less it has been or will be preached to every nation, though
many have sinned away the light of it and perhaps some have never yet
enjoyed it.

2\. By whom it was preached: Whereof I Paul am made a minister. Paul was
a great apostle; but he looks upon it as the highest of his titles of
honour to be a minister of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Paul takes all
occasions to speak of his office; for he magnified his office, [Rom
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#013). And again in [Col
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#025), Whereof I am made a minister.
Observe here,

(1.) Whence Paul had his ministry: it was according to the dispensation
of God which was given to him ([Col
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#025)), the economy or wise disposition
of things in the house of God. He was steward and master-builder, and
this was given to him: he did not usurp it, nor take it to himself; and
he could not challenge it as a debt. He received it from God as a gift,
and took it as a favour.

(2.) For whose sake he had his ministry: "It is for you, for your
benefit: ourselves your servants for Jesus' sake, [Co2
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005). We are Christ's ministers for the
good of his people, to fulfil the word of God (that is, fully to preach
it), of which you will have the greater advantage. The more we fulfil
our ministry, or fill up all the parts of it, the greater will be the
benefit of the people; they will be the more filled with knowledge, and
furnished for service."

(3.) What kind of preacher Paul was. This is particularly represented.

\[1.\] He was a suffering preacher: Who now rejoice in my sufferings for
you, [Col 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024). He suffered in the
cause of Christ, and for the good of the church. He suffered for
preaching the gospel to them. And, while he suffered in so good a cause,
he could rejoice in his sufferings, rejoice that he was counted worthy
to suffer, and esteem it an honour to him. And fill up that which is
behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh. Not that the
afflictions of Paul, or any other, were expiations for sin, as the
sufferings of Christ were. There was nothing wanting in them, nothing
which needed to be filled up. They were perfectly sufficient to answer
the intention of them, the satisfaction of God's justice, in order to
the salvation of his people. But the sufferings of Paul and other good
ministers made them conformable to Christ; and they followed him in his
suffering state: so they are said to fill up what was behind of the
sufferings of Christ, as the wax fills up the vacuities of the seal,
when it receives the impression of it. Or it may be meant not of
Christ's sufferings, but of his suffering for Christ. He filled that
which was behind. He had a certain rate and measure of suffering for
Christ assigned him; and, as his sufferings were agreeable to that
appointment, so he was still filling up more and more what was behind,
or remained of them to his share.

\[2.\] He was a close preacher: he preached not only in public, but from
house to house, from person to person. Whom we preach, warning every
man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, [Col
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#028). Every man has need to be warned
and taught, and therefore let every man have his share. Observe, First,
When we warn people of what they do amiss, we must teach them to do
better: warning and teaching must go together. Secondly, Men must be
warned and taught in all wisdom. We must choose the fittest seasons, and
use the likeliest means, and accommodate ourselves to the different
circumstances and capacities of those we have to do with, and teach them
as they are able to bear. That which he aimed at was to present every
man perfect in Christ Jesus, teleios, either perfect in the knowledge of
the Christian doctrine (Let us therefore, as many as are perfect, be
thus minded, [Phi 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015); [Ti2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#017)), or else crowned with a glorious
reward hereafter, when he will present to himself a glorious church
([Eph 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)), and bring them to the
spirits of just men made perfect, [Heb
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023). Observe, Ministers ought to aim
at the improvement and salvation of every particular person who hears
them. Thirdly, He was a laborious preacher, and one who took pains: he
was no loiter, and did not do his work negligently ([Col
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#029)): Whereunto I also labour,
striving according to his working, which worketh in me mightily. He
laboured and strove, used great diligence and contended with many
difficulties, according to the measure of grace afforded to him and the
extraordinary presence of Christ which was with him. Observe, As Paul
laid out himself to do much good, so he had this favour, that the power
of God wrought in him the more effectually. The more we labour in the
work of the Lord the greater measures of help we may expect from him in
it ([Eph 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#007)): According to the gift
of the grace of God given unto me, by the effectual working of his
power.

3\. The gospel which was preached. We have an account of this: Even the
mystery which hath been hid from ages, and from generations, but is now
made manifest to his saints, [Col
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#026), [Col
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#027). Observe, (1.) The mystery of the
gospel was long hidden: it was concealed from ages and generations, the
several ages of the church under the Old Testament dispensation. They
were in a state of minority, and training up for a more perfect state of
things, and could not look to the end of those things which were
ordained, [Co2 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013). (2.) This mystery
now, in the fulness of time, is made manifest to the saints, or clearly
revealed and made apparent. The veil which was over Moses's face is done
away in Christ, [Co2 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014). The meanest
saint under the gospel understands more than the greatest prophets under
the law. He who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than they.
The mystery of Christ, which in other ages was not made known unto the
sons of men, is now revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets by the
Spirit, [Eph 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#004), [Eph
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#005). And what is this mystery? It is
the riches of God's glory among the Gentiles. The peculiar doctrine of
the gospel was a mystery which was before hidden, and is now made
manifest and made known. But the great mystery here referred to is the
breaking down of the partition-wall between the Jew and Gentile, and
preaching the gospel to the Gentile world, and making those partakers of
the privileges of the gospel state who before lay in ignorance and
idolatry: That the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same
body, and partakers together of his promise in Christ by the gospel,
[Eph 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#006). This mystery, thus made
known, is Christ in you (or among you) the hope of glory. Observe,
Christ is the hope of glory. The ground of our hope is Christ in the
word, or the gospel revelation, declaring the nature and methods of
obtaining it. The evidence of our hope is Christ in the heart, or the
sanctification of the soul, and its preparation for the heavenly glory.

4\. The duty of those who are interested in this redemption: If you
continue in the faith, grounded and settled, and be not moved away from
the hope of the gospel which you have heard, [Col
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023). We must continue in the faith
grounded and settled, and not be moved away from the hope of the gospel;
that is, we must be so well fixed in our minds as not to be moved from
it by any temptations. We must be stedfast and immovable ([Co1
15:58](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#058)) and hold fast the profession of
our faith without wavering, [Heb
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#023). Observe, We can expect the
happy end of our faith only when we continue in the faith, and are so
far grounded and settled in it as not to be moved from it. We must not
draw back unto perdition, but believe unto the saving of the soul, [Heb
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#039). We must be faithful to death,
through all trials, that we may receive the crown of life, and receive
the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls, [Pe1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#009).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Chapter 2](col002)

</div>
