<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Colossians Index](col)  
  [Previous](col001)  [Next](col003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Colossians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001)

[Colossians](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">col 2:0</span></span>

I. The apostle expresses concern for the Colossians ([Col
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001)). II. He repeats it again ([Col
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#005)). III. He cautions them against
false teachers among the Jews ([Col
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#004), [Col
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#006), [Col
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#007)), and against the Gentile
philosophy ([Col 2:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)). IV. He
represents the privileges of Christians ([Col
2:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013)). And, V. Concludes with a
caution against the judaizing teachers, and those who would introduce
the worship of angels ([Col 2:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016)).

[Colossians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">col 2:1</span></span>

We may observe here the great concern which Paul had for these
Colossians and the other churches which he had not any personal
knowledge of. The apostle had never been at Colosse, and the church
planted there was not of his planting; and yet he had as tender a care
of it as if it had been the only people of his charge ([Col
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001)): For I would that you knew what
great conflict I have for you, and for those at Laodicea, and for as
many as have not seen my face in the flesh. Observe, 1. Paul's care of
the church was such as amounted to a conflict. He was in a sort of
agony, and had a constant fear respecting what would become of them.
Herein he was a follower of his Master, who was in an agony for us, and
was heard in that he feared. (2.) We may keep up a communion by faith,
hope, and holy love, even with those churches and fellow-christians of
whom we have no personal knowledge, and with whom we have no
conversation. We can think, and pray, and be concerned for one another,
at the greatest distance; and those we never saw in the flesh we may
hope to meet in heaven. But,

I. What was it that the apostle desired for them? That their hearts may
be comforted, being knit together in love, etc., [Col
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#002). It was their spiritual welfare
about which he was solicitous. He does not say that they may be healthy,
and merry, and rich, and great, and prosperous; but that their hearts
may be comforted. Note, The prosperity of the soul is the best
prosperity, and what we should be most solicitous about for ourselves
and others. We have here a description of soul-prosperity.

1\. When our knowledge grows to an understanding of the mystery of God,
and of the Father, and of Christ, - when we come to have a more clear,
distinct, methodical knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus, then the
soul prospers: To understand the mystery, either what was before
concealed, but is now made known concerning the Father and Christ, or
the mystery before mentioned, of calling the Gentiles into the Christian
church, as the Father and Christ have revealed it in the gospel; and not
barely to speak of it by rote, or as we have been taught it by our
catechisms, but to be led into it, and enter into the meaning and design
of it. This is what we should labour after, and then the soul prospers.

2\. When our faith grows to a full assurance and bold acknowledgment of
this mystery. (1.) To a full assurance, or a well-settled judgment, upon
their proper evidence, of the great truths of the gospel, without
doubting, or calling them in question, but embracing them with the
highest satisfaction, as faithful sayings and worthy of all acceptation.
(2.) When it comes to a free acknowledgment, and we not only believe
with the heart, but are ready, when called to it, to make confession
with our mouth, and are not ashamed of our Master and our holy religion,
under the frowns and violence of their enemies. This is called the
riches of the full assurance of understanding. Great knowledge and
strong faith make a soul rich. This is being rich towards God, and rich
in faith, and having the true riches, [Luk
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#021); [Luk
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#011); [Jam
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005).

3\. It consists in the abundance of comfort in our souls: That their
hearts might be comforted. The soul prospers when it is filled with joy
and peace ([Rom 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#013)), and has a
satisfaction within which all the troubles without cannot disturb, and
is able to joy in the Lord when all other comforts fail, [Hab
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017), [Hab
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#018).

4\. The more intimate communion we have with our fellow-christians the
more the soul prospers: Being knit together in love. Holy love knits the
hearts of Christians one to another; and faith and love both contribute
to our comfort. The stronger our faith is, and the warmer our love, the
greater will our comfort be. Having occasion to mention Christ ([Col
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#002)), according to his usual way, he
makes this remark to his honour ([Col
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)): In whom are hidden all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. He had said ([Col
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019)) that all fulness dwells in him:
here he mentions particularly the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
There is a fulness of wisdom in him, as he has perfectly revealed the
will of God to mankind. Observe, The treasures of wisdom are hidden not
from us, but for us, in Christ. Those who would be wise and knowing must
make application to Christ. We must spend upon the stock which is laid
up for us in him, and draw from the treasures which are hidden in him.
He is the wisdom of God, and is of God made unto us wisdom, etc., [Co1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024), [Co1
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030).

II\. His concern for them is repeated ([Col
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#005)): Though I am absent in the flesh,
yet am I with you in the spirit, joying, and beholding your order, and
the stedfastness of your faith in Christ. Observe, 1. We may be present
in spirit with those churches and Christians from whom we are absent in
body; for the communion of saints is a spiritual thing. Paul had heard
concerning the Colossians that they were orderly and regular; and though
he had never seen them, nor was present with them, he tells them he
could easily think himself among them, and look with pleasure upon their
good behaviour. 2. The order and stedfastness of Christians are matter
of joy to ministers; they joy when they behold their order, their
regular behaviour and stedfast adherence to the Christian doctrine. 3.
The more stedfast our faith in Christ is, the better order there will be
in our whole conversation; for we live and walk by faith, [Co2
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007); [Heb
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#038).

[Colossians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">col 2:4</span></span>

The apostle cautions the Colossians against deceivers ([Col
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#004)): And this I say lest any man
beguile you with enticing words; and [Col
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008), Lest any man spoil you. He
insists so much upon the perfection of Christ and the gospel revelation,
to preserve them from the ensnaring insinuations of those who would
corrupt their principles. Note, 1. The way in which Satan spoils souls
is by beguiling them. He deceives them, and by this means slays them. He
is the old serpent who beguiled Eve through his subtlety, [Co2
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003). He could not ruin us if he did
not cheat us; and he could not cheat us but by our own fault and folly.
2. Satan's agents, who aim to spoil them, beguile them with enticing
words. See the danger of enticing words; how many are ruined by the
flattery of those who lie in wait to deceive, and by the false disguises
and fair appearances of evil principles and wicked practices. By good
words, and fair speeches, they deceive the hearts of the simple, [Rom
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018). "You ought to stand upon your
guard against enticing words, and be aware and afraid of those who would
entice you to any evil; for that which they aim at is to spoil you." If
sinners entice thee, consent thou not, [Pro
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#010). Observe,

I. A sovereign antidote against seducers ([Col
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#006), [Col
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#007)): As you have therefore received
Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk you in him, rooted and built up, etc.
Here note, 1. All Christians have, in profession at least, received
Jesus Christ the Lord, received him as Christ, the great prophet of the
church, anointed by God to reveal his will; as Jesus the great high
priest, and Saviour from sin and wrath, by the expiatory sacrifice of
himself; and as Lord, or sovereign and king, whom we are to obey and be
subject to. - Received him, consented to him, taken him for ours in
every relation and every capacity, and for all the purposes and uses of
them. 2. The great concern of those who have received Christ is to walk
in him - to make their practices conformable to their principles and
their conversation agreeable to their engagements. As we have received
Christ, or consented to be his, so we must walk with him in our daily
course and keep up our communion with him. 3. The more closely we walk
with Christ the more we are rooted and established in the faith. A good
conversation is the best establishment of a good faith. If we walk in
him, we shall be rooted in him; and the more firmly we are rooted in him
the more closely we shall walk in him: Rooted and built up. Observe, We
cannot be built up in Christ, unless we be first rooted in him. We must
be united to him by a lively faith, and heartily consent to his
covenant, and then we shall grow up in him in all things. - As you have
been taught - "according to the rule of the Christian doctrine, in which
you have been instructed." Observe, A good education has a good
influence upon our establishment. We must be established in the faith,
as we have been taught, abounding therein. Observe, Being established in
the faith, we must abound therein, and improve in it more and more; and
this with thanksgiving. The way to have the benefit and comfort of God's
grace is to be much in giving thanks for it. We must join thanksgiving
to all our improvements, and be sensible of the mercy of all our
privileges and attainments. Observe,

II\. The fair warning given us of our danger: Beware lest any man spoil
you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men,
after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, [Col
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008). There is a philosophy which is a
noble exercise of our reasonable faculties, and highly serviceable to
religion, such a study of the works of God as leads us to the knowledge
of God and confirms our faith in him. But there is a philosophy which is
vain and deceitful, which is prejudicial to religion, and sets up the
wisdom of man in competition with the wisdom of God, and while it
pleases men's fancies ruins their faith; as nice and curious
speculations about things above us, or of no use and concern to us; or a
care of words and terms of art, which have only an empty and often a
cheating appearance of knowledge. After the tradition of men, after the
rudiments of the world: this plainly reflects upon the Jewish pedagogy
or economy, as well as the Pagan learning. The Jews governed themselves
by the traditions of their elders and the rudiments or elements of the
world, the rites and observances which were only preparatory and
introductory to the gospel state; the Gentiles mixed their maxims of
philosophy with their Christian principles; and both alienated their
minds from Christ. Those who pin their faith on other men's sleeves, and
walk in the way of the world, have turned away from following after
Christ. The deceivers were especially the Jewish teachers, who
endeavoured to keep up the law of Moses in conjunction with the gospel
of Christ, but really in competition with it and contradiction to it.
Now here the apostle shows,

1\. That we have in Christ the substance of all the shadows of the
ceremonial law; for example, (1.) Had they then the Shechinah, or
special presence of God, called the glory, from the visible token of it?
So have we now in Jesus Christ ([Col
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)): For in him dwelleth all the
fulness of the Godhead bodily. Under the law, the presence of God dwelt
between the cherubim, in a cloud which covered the mercy-seat; but now
it dwells in the person of our Redeemer, who partakes of our nature, and
is bone of our bone and flesh of our flesh, and has more clearly
declared the Father to us. It dwells in him bodily; not as the body is
opposed to the spirit, but as the body is opposed to the shadow. The
fulness of the Godhead dwells in the Christ really, and not
figuratively; for he is both God and man. (2.) Had they circumcision,
which was the seal of the covenant? In Christ we are circumcised with
the circumcision made without hands ([Col
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011)), by the work of regeneration in
us, which is the spiritual or Christian circumcision. He is a Jew who is
one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, [Rom
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029). This is owing to Christ, and
belongs to the Christian dispensation. It is made without hands; not by
the power of any creature, but by the power of the blessed Spirit of
God. We are born of the Spirit, [Joh
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005). And it is the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Spirit, [Tit
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005). It consists in putting off the
body of the sins of the flesh, in renouncing sin and reforming our
lives, not in mere external rites. It is not the putting away of the
filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience towards God,
[Pe1 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021). And it is not enough to put
away some one particular sin, but we must put off the whole body of sin.
The old man must be crucified, and the body of sin destroyed, [Rom
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006). Christ was circumcised, and, by
virtue of our union to him, we partake of that effectual grace which
puts off the body of the sins of the flesh. Again, The Jews thought
themselves complete in the ceremonial law; but we are complete in
Christ, [Col 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#010). That was imperfect
and defective; if the first covenant had been faultless, there would no
place have been sought for the second ([Heb
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#007)), and the law was but a shadow of
good things, and could never, by those sacrifices, make the comers
thereunto perfect, [Heb 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001). But all
the defects of it are made up in the gospel of Christ, by the complete
sacrifice for sin and revelation of the will of God. Which is the head
of all principality and power. As the Old Testament priesthood had its
perfection in Christ, so likewise had the kingdom of David, which was
the eminent principality and power under the Old Testament, and which
the Jews valued themselves so much upon. And he is the Lord and head of
all the powers in heaven and earth, of angels and men. Angels, and
authorities, and powers are subject to him, [Pe1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022).

2\. We have communion with Christ in his whole undertaking ([Col
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012)): Buried with him in baptism,
wherein also you have risen with him. We are both buried and rise with
him, and both are signified by our baptism; not that there is anything
in the sign or ceremony of baptism which represents this burying and
rising, any more than the crucifixion of Christ is represented by any
visible resemblance in the Lord's supper: and he is speaking of the
circumcision made without hands; and says it is through the faith of the
operation of God. But the thing signified by our baptism is that we are
buried with Christ, as baptism is the seal of the covenant and an
obligation to our dying to sin; and that we are raised with Christ, as
it is a seal and obligation to our living to righteousness, or newness
of life. God in baptism engages to be to us a God, and we become engaged
to be his people, and by his grace to die to sin and to live to
righteousness, or put off the old man and put on the new.

[Colossians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">col 2:13</span></span>

The apostle here represents the privileges we Christians have above the
Jews, which are very great.

I. Christ's death is our life: And you, being dead in your sins and the
uncircumcision of your flesh, hath he quickened together with him, [Col
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013). A state of sin is a state of
spiritual death. Those who are in sin are dead in sin. As the death of
the body consists in its separation from the soul, so the death of the
soul consists in its separation from God and the divine favour. As the
death of the body is the corruption and putrefaction of it, so sin is
the corruption or depravation of the soul. As a man who is dead is
unable to help himself by any power of his own, so an habitual sinner is
morally impotent: though he has a natural power, or the power of a
reasonable creature, he has not a spiritual power, till he has the
divine life or a renewed nature. It is principally to be understood of
the Gentile world, who lay in wickedness. They were dead in the
uncircumcision of their flesh, being aliens to the covenant of promise,
and without God in the world, [Eph
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011), [Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012). By reason of their
uncircumcision they were dead in their sins. It may be understood of the
spiritual uncircumcision or corruption of nature; and so it shows that
we are dead in law, and dead in state. Dead in law, as a condemned
malefactor is called a dead man because he is under a sentence of death;
so sinners by the guilt of sin are under the sentence of the law and
condemned already, [Joh 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018). And dead
in state, by reason of the uncircumcision of our flesh. An unsanctified
heart is called an uncircumcised heart: this is our state. Now through
Christ we, who were dead in sins, are quickened; that is, effectual
provision is made for taking away the guilt of sin, and breaking the
power and dominion of it. Quickened together with him - by virtue of our
union to him, and in conformity to him. Christ's death was the death of
our sins; Christ's resurrection is the quickening of our souls.

II\. Through him we have the remission of sin: Having forgiven you all
trespasses. This is our quickening. The pardon of the crime is the life
of the criminal: and this is owing to the resurrection of Christ, as
well as his death; for, as he died for our sins, so he rose again for
our justification, [Rom 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025).

III\. Whatever was in force against us is taken out of the way. He has
obtained for us a legal discharge from the hand-writing of ordinances,
which was against us ([Col 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)),
which may be understood, 1. Of that obligation to punishment in which
consists the guilt of sin. The curse of the law is the hand-writing
against us, like the hand-writing on Belshazzar's wall. Cursed is every
one who continues not in every thing. This was a hand-writing which was
against us, and contrary to us; for it threatened our eternal ruin. This
was removed when he redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a
curse for us, [Gal 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013). He cancelled
the obligation for all who repent and believe. "Upon me be the curse, my
father." He vacated and disannulled the judgment which was against us.
When he was nailed to the cross, the curse was as it were nailed to the
cross. And our indwelling corruption is crucified with Christ, and by
virtue of his cross. When we remember the dying of the Lord Jesus, and
see him nailed to the cross, we should see the hand-writing against us
taken out of the way. Or rather, 2. It must be understood of the
ceremonial law, the hand-writing of ordinances, the ceremonial
institutions or the law of commandments contained in ordinances ([Eph
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015)), which was a yoke to the Jews
and a partition-wall to the Gentiles. The Lord Jesus took it out of the
way, nailed it to his cross; that is, disannulled the obligation of it,
that all might see and be satisfied that it was no more binding. When
the substance came, the shadows fled away. It is abolished ([Co2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013)), and that which decayeth and
waxeth old is ready to vanish away, [Heb
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013). The expressions are in allusion
to the ancient methods of cancelling a bond, either by crossing the
writing or striking it through with a nail.

IV\. He has obtained a glorious victory for us over the powers of
darkness: And, having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show
of them openly, triumphing over them in it, [Col
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015). As the curse of the law was
against us, so the power of Satan was against us. He treated with God as
the Judge, and redeemed us out of the hands of his justice by a price;
but out of the hands of Satan the executioner he redeemed us by power
and with a high hand. He led captivity captive. The devil and all the
powers of hell were conquered and disarmed by the dying Redeemer. The
first promise pointed at this; the bruising of the heel of Christ in his
sufferings was the breaking of the serpent's head, [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015). The expressions are lofty and
magnificent: let us turn aside and see this great sight. The Redeemer
conquered by dying. See his crown of thorns turned into a crown of
laurels. He spoiled them, broke the devil's power, and conquered and
disabled him, and made a show of them openly - exposed them to public
shame, and made a show of them to angels and men. Never had the devil's
kingdom such a mortal blow given to it as was given by the Lord Jesus.
He tied them to his chariot-wheels, and rode forth conquering and to
conquer - alluding to the custom of a general's triumph, who returned
victorious. - Triumphing over them in it; that is, either in his cross
and by his death; or, as some read it, in himself, by his own power; for
he trod the wine-press alone, and of the people there was none with him.

[Colossians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">col 2:16</span></span>

The apostle concludes the chapter with exhortations to proper duty,
which he infers from the foregoing discourse.

I. Here is a caution to take heed of judaizing teachers, or those who
would impose upon Christians the yoke of the ceremonial law: Let no man
therefore judge you in meat nor drink, etc., [Col
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016). Much of the ceremonies of the
law of Moses consisted in the distinction of meats and days. It appears
by Rom. 14 that there were those who were for keeping up those
distinctions: but here the apostle shows that since Christ has come, and
has cancelled the ceremonial law, we ought not to keep it up. "Let no
man impose those things upon you, for God has not imposed them: if God
has made you free, be not you again entangled in that yoke of bondage."
And this the rather because these things were shadows of things to come
([Col 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#017)), intimating that they had
no intrinsic worth in them and that they are now done away. But the body
is of Christ: the body, of which they were shadows, has come; and to
continue the ceremonial observances, which were only types and shadows
of Christ and the gospel, carries an intimation that Christ has not yet
come and the gospel state has not yet commenced. Observe the advantages
we have under the gospel, above what they had under the law: they had
the shadows, we have the substance.

II\. He cautions them to take heed of those who would introduce the
worship of angels as mediators between God and them, as the Gentile
philosophers did: Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary
humility and worshipping of angels, [Col
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018). It looked like a piece of
modesty to make use of the mediation of angels, as conscious to
ourselves of our unworthiness to speak immediately to God; but, though
it has a show of humility, it is a voluntary, not a commanded humility;
and therefore it is not acceptable, yea, it is not warrantable: it is
taking that honour which is due to Christ only and giving it to a
creature. Besides, the notions upon which this practice was grounded
were merely the inventions of men and not by divine revelation, - the
proud conceits of human reason, which make a man presume to dive into
things, and determine them, without sufficient knowledge and warrant:
Intruding into those things which he hath not seen, vainly puffed up by
his fleshly mind - pretending to describe the order of angels, and their
respective ministries, which God has hidden from us; and therefore,
though there was a show of humility in the practice, there was a real
pride in the principle. They advanced those notions to gratify their own
carnal fancy, and were fond of being thought wiser than other people.
Pride is at the bottom of a great many errors and corruptions, and even
of many evil practices, which have great show and appearance of
humility. Those who do so do not hold the head, [Col
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#019). They do in effect disclaim
Christ, who is the only Mediator between God and man. It is the highest
disparagement to Christ, who is the head of the church, for any of the
members of it to make use of any intercessors with God but him. When men
let go their hold of Christ, they catch at that which is next them and
will stand them in no stead. - From which all the body, by joints and
bands, having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increaseth with
the increase of God. Observe, 1. Jesus Christ is not only a head of
government over the church, but a head of vital influence to it. They
are knit to him by joints and bands, as the several members of the body
are united to the head, and receive life and nourishment from him. 2.
The body of Christ is a growing body: it increaseth with the increase of
God. The new man is increasing, and the nature of grace is to grow,
where there is not an accidental hindrance. - With the increase of God,
with an increase of grace which is from God as its author; or, in a
usual Hebraism, with a large and abundant increase. - That you may be
filled with all the fulness of God, [Eph
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#019). See a parallel expression, Which
is the head, even Christ, from whom the whole body, fitly joined
together, maketh increase of the body, [Eph
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015), [Eph
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016).

III\. He takes occasion hence to warn them again: "Wherefore, if you be
dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as though living
in the world, are you subject to ordinances? [Col
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#020). If as Christians you are dead to
the observances of the ceremonial law, why are you subject to them? Such
observances as, Touch not, taste not, handle not," [Col
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#021), [Col
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#022). Under the law there was a
ceremonial pollution contracted by touching a dead body, or any thing
offered to an idol; or by tasting any forbidden meats, etc., which all
are to perish with the using, having no intrinsic worth in themselves to
support them, and those who used them saw them perishing and passing
away; or, which tend to corrupt the Christian faith, having no other
authority than the traditions and injunctions of men. - Which things
have indeed a show of wisdom in will-worship and humility. They thought
themselves wiser than their neighbours, in observing the law of Moses
together with the gospel of Christ, that they might be sure in the one,
at least, to be in the right; but, alas! it was but a show of wisdom, a
mere invention and pretence. So they seem to neglect the body, by
abstaining from such and such meats, and mortifying their bodily
pleasures and appetites; but there is nothing of true devotion in these
things, for the gospel teaches us to worship God in spirit and truth and
not by ritual observances, and through the mediation of Christ alone and
not of any angels. Observe, 1. Christians are freed by Christ from the
ritual observances of Moses's law, and delivered from that yoke of
bondage which God himself had laid upon them. 2. Subjection to
ordinances, or human appointments in the worship of God, is highly
blamable, and contrary to the freedom and liberty of the gospel. The
apostle requires Christians to stand fast in the liberty with which
Christ hath made them free, and not to be entangled again with the yoke
of bondage, [Gal 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001). And the
imposition of them is invading the authority of Christ, the head of the
church, and introducing another law of commandments contained in
ordinances, when Christ has abolished the old one, [Eph
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015). 3. Such things have only a show
of wisdom, but are really folly. It is true wisdom to keep close to the
appointments of the gospel, and an entire subjection to Christ, the only
head of the church.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Chapter 3](col003)

</div>
