<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](eze048)  [Next](dan001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Book of the Prophet
Daniel

The book of Ezekiel left the affairs of Jerusalem under a doleful
aspect, all in ruins, but with a joyful prospect of all in glory again.
This of Daniel fitly follows. Ezekiel told us what was seen, and what
was foreseen, by him in the former years of the captivity: Daniel tells
us what was seen, and foreseen, in the latter years of the captivity.
When God employs different hands, yet it is about the same work. And it
was a comfort to the poor captives that they had first one prophet among
them and then another, to show them how long, and a sign that God had
not quite cast them off. Let us enquire, I. Concerning this prophet His
Hebrew name was Daniel, which signifies the judgment of God; his
Chaldean name was Belteshazzar. He was of the tribe of Judah, and, as it
should seem, of the royal family. He was betimes eminent for wisdom and
piety. Ezekiel, his contemporary, but much his senior, speaks of him as
an oracle when thus he upbraids the king of Tyre with his conceitedness
of himself: Thou art wiser then Daniel, [Eze
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#003). He is likewise there celebrated
for success in prayer, when Noah, Daniel, and Job are reckoned as three
men that had the greatest interest in heaven of any, [Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014). He began betimes to be famous,
and continued long so. Some of the Jewish rabbin are loth to acknowledge
him to be a prophet of the higher form, and therefore rank his book
among the Hagiographa, not among the prophecies, and would not have
their disciples pay much regard to it. One reason they pretend is
because he did not live such a mean mortified life as Jeremiah and some
other of the prophets did, but lived like a prince, and was a
prime-minister of state; whereas we find him persecuted as other
prophets were (ch. 6), and mortifying himself as other prophets did,
when he ate no pleasant bread ([Dan
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#003)), and fainting sick when he was
under the power of the Spirit of prophecy, [Dan
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027). Another reason they pretend is
because he wrote his book in a heathen country, and there had his
visions, and not in the land of Israel; but, for the same reason,
Ezekiel also must be expunged out of the roll of prophets. But the true
reason is that he speaks so plainly of the time of the Messiah's coming
that the Jews cannot avoid the conviction of it and therefore do not
care to hear of it. But Josephus calls him one of the greatest of the
prophets, nay, the angel Gabriel calls him a man greatly beloved. He
lived long an active life in the courts and councils of some of the
greatest monarchs the world ever had, Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Darius; for
we mistake of we confine the privilege of an intercourse with heaven to
speculative men, or those that spend their time in contemplation; no,
who was more intimately acquainted with the mind of God than Daniel, a
courtier, a statesman, and a man of business? The Spirit, as the wind,
blows where it lists. And, if those that have much to do in the world
plead that as an excuse for the infrequency and slightness of their
converse with God, Daniel will condemn them. Some have thought that he
returned to Jerusalem, and was one of the masters of the Greek
synagogue; but nothing of that appears in scripture; it is therefore
generally concluded that he died in Persia at Susan, where he lived to
be very old. II. Concerning this book. The first six chapters of it are
historical, and are plain and easy; the last six are prophetical, and in
them are many things dark, and hard to be understood, which yet would be
more intelligible if we had a more complete history of the nations, and
especially the Jewish nation, from Daniel's time to the coming of the
Messiah. Our Saviour intimates the difficulty of apprehending the sense
of Daniel's prophecies when, speaking of them, he says, Let him that
readeth understand, [Mat 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015). The
first chapter, and the first three verses of the second chapter, are in
Hebrew; thence to the eighth chapter is in the Chaldee dialect; and
thence to the end is in Hebrew. Mr. Broughton observes that, as the
Chaldeans were kind to Daniel, and gave cups of cold water to him when
he requested it, rather than the king's wine, God would not have them
lose their reward, but made that language which they taught him to have
honour in his writings through all the world, unto this day. Daniel,
according to his computation, continues the holy story from the first
surprising of Jerusalem by the Chaldean Babel, when he himself was
carried away captive, until the last destruction of it by Rome, the
mystical Babel, for so far forward his predictions look, [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027). The fables of Susannah, and of
Bel and the Dragon, in both which Daniel is made a party, are apocryphal
stories, which we think we have no reason to give any credit to, they
being never found in the Hebrew or Chaldee, but only in the Greek, nor
ever admitted by the Jewish church. There are some both of the histories
and of the prophecies of this book that bear date in the latter end of
the Chaldean monarchy, and others of both that are dated in the
beginning of the Persian monarchy. But both Nebuchadnezzar's dream,
which Daniel interpreted, and his own visions, point at the Grecian and
Roman monarchies, and very particularly at the Jews' troubles under
Antiochus, which it would be of great use to them to prepare for; as his
fixing the very time for the coming of the Messiah was of use to all
those that waited for the consolation of Israel, and is to us, for the
confirming of our belief, That this is he who should come, and we are to
look for no other.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 1](dan001)

</div>
