<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan006)  [Next](dan008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 7:0</span></span>

The six former chapters of this book were historical; we now enter with
fear and trembling upon the six latter, which are prophetical, wherein
are many things dark and hard to be understood, which we dare not
positively determine the sense of, and yet many things plain and
profitable, which I trust God will enable us to make a good use of. In
this chapter we have, I. Daniel's vision of the four beasts ([Dan
7:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001)). II. His vision of God's throne
of government and judgment ([Dan
7:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009)). III. The interpretation of
these visions, given him by an angel that stood by ([Dan
7:15-28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#015)). Whether those visions look
as far forward as the end of time, or whether they were to have a speedy
accomplishment, is hard to say, nor are the most judicious interpreters
agreed concerning it.

[Daniel 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 7:1</span></span>

The date of this chapter places it before ch. 5, which was in the last
year of Belshazzar, and ch. 6, which was in the first of Darius; for
Daniel had those visions in the first year of Belshazzar, when the
captivity of the Jews in Babylon was drawing near a period. Belshazzar's
name here is, in the original, spelt differently from what it used to
be; before it was Bel-she-azar - Bel is he that treasures up riches. But
this is Bel-eshe-zar - Bel is on fire by the enemy. Bel was the god of
the Chaldeans; he had prospered, but is now to be consumed.

We have, in these verses, Daniel's vision of the four monarchies that
were oppressive to the Jews. Observe,

I. The circumstances of this vision. Daniel had interpreted
Nebuchadnezzar's dream, and now he is himself honoured with similar
divine discoveries ([Dan 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001)): He had
visions of his head upon his bed, when he was asleep; so God sometimes
revealed himself and his mind to the children of men, when deep sleep
fell upon them ([Job 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#015)); for when
we are most retired from the world, and taken off from the things of
sense, we are most fit for communion with God. But when he was awake he
wrote the dream for his own use, lest he should forget it as a dream
which passes away; and he told the sum of the matters to his brethren
the Jews for their use, and gave it to them in writing, that it might be
communicated to those at a distance and preserved for their children
after them, who shall see these things accomplished. The Jews,
misunderstanding some of the prophecies of Jeremiah and Ezekiel,
flattered themselves with hopes that, after their return to their own
land, they should enjoy a complete and uninterrupted tranquility; but
that they might not so deceive themselves, and their calamities be made
doubly grievous by the disappointment, God by this prophet lets them
know that they shall have tribulation: those promises of their
prosperity were to be accomplished in the spiritual blessings of the
kingdom of grace; as Christ has told his disciples they must expect
persecution, and the promises they depend upon will be accomplished in
the eternal blessings of the kingdom of glory. Daniel both wrote these
things and spoke them, to intimate that the church should be taught both
by the scriptures and by ministers' preaching, both by the written word
and by word of mouth; and ministers in their preaching are to tell the
sum of the matters that are written.

II\. The vision itself, which foretels the revolutions of government in
those nations which the church of the Jews, for the following ages, was
to be under the influence of. 1. He observed the four winds to strive
upon the great sea, [Dan 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002). They
strove which should blow strongest, and, at length, blow alone. This
represents the contests among princes for empire, and the shakings of
the nations by these contests, to which those mighty monarchies, which
he was now to have a prospect of, owed their rise. One wind from any
point of the compass, if it blow hard, will cause a great commotion in
the sea; but what a tumult must needs be raised when the four winds
strive for mastery! This is it which the kings of the nations are
contending for in their wars, which are as noisy and violent as the
battle of the winds; but how is the poor sea tossed and torn, how
terrible are its concussions, and how violent its convulsions, while the
winds are at strife which shall have the sole power of troubling it!
Note, This world is like a stormy tempestuous sea; thanks to the proud
ambitious winds that vex it. 2. He saw four great beasts come up from
the sea, from the troubled waters, in which aspiring minds love to fish.
The monarchs and monarchies are represented by beasts, because too often
it is by brutish rage and tyranny that they are raised and supported.
These beasts were diverse one from another ([Dan
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#003)), of different shapes, to denote
the different genius and complexion of the nations in whose hands they
were lodged. (1.) The first beast was like a lion, [Dan
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004). This was the Chaldean monarchy,
that was fierce and strong, and made the kings absolute. This lion had
eagle's wings, with which to fly upon the prey, denoting the wonderful
speed that Nebuchadnezzar made in his conquest of kingdoms. But Daniel
soon sees the wings plucked, a full stop put to the career of their
victorious arms. Divers countries that had been tributaries to them
revolt from them, and make head against them; so that this monstrous
animal, this winged lion, is made to stand upon the feet as a man, and a
man's heart is given to it. It has lost the heart of a lion, which it
had been famous for (one of our English kings was called Caeur de Lion -
Lion-heart), has lost its courage and become feeble and faint, dreading
every thing and daring nothing; they are put in fear, and made to know
themselves to be but men. Sometimes the valour of a nation strangely
sinks, and it becomes cowardly and effeminate, so that what was the head
of the nations in an age or two becomes the tail. (2.) The second beast
was like a bear, [Dan 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#005). This was
the Persian monarchy, less strong and generous than the former, but no
less ravenous. This bear raised up itself on one side against the lion,
and soon mastered it. It raised up one dominion; so some read it. Persia
and Media, which in Nebuchadnezzar's image were the two arms in one
breast, now set up a joint government. This bear had three ribs in the
mouth of it between the teeth, the remains of those nations it had
devoured, which were the marks of its voraciousness, and yet an
indication that though it had devoured much it could not devour all;
some ribs still stuck in the teeth of it, which it could not conquer.
Whereupon it was said to it, "Arise, devour much flesh; let alone the
bones, the ribs, that cannot be conquered, and set upon that which will
be an easier prey." The princes will stir up both the kings and the
people to push on their conquests, and let nothing stand before them.
Note, Conquests, unjustly made, are but like those of the beasts of
prey, and in this much worse, that the beasts prey not upon those of
their own kind, as wicked and unreasonable men do. (3.) The third beast
was like a leopard, [Dan 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#006). This was
the Grecian monarchy, founded by Alexander the Great, active, crafty,
and cruel, like a leopard. He had four wings of a fowl; the lion seems
to have had but two wings; but the leopard had four, for though
Nebuchadnezzar made great despatch in his conquests Alexander made much
greater. In six years' time he gained the whole empire of Persia, a
great part besides of Asia, made himself master of Syria, Egypt, India,
and other nations. This beast had four heads; upon Alexander's death his
conquests were divided among his four chief captains; Seleucus Nicanor
had Asia the Great; Perdiccas, and after him Antigonus, had Asia the
Less; Cassander had Macedonia; and Ptolemeus had Egypt. Dominion was
given to this beast; it was given of God, from whom alone promotion
comes. (4.) The fourth beast was more fierce, and formidable, and
mischievous, than any of them, unlike any of the other, nor is there any
among the beasts of prey to which it might be compared, [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007). The learned are not agreed
concerning this anonymous beast; some make it to be the Roman empire,
which, when it was in its glory, comprehended ten kingdoms, Italy,
France, Spain, Germany, Britain, Sarmatia, Pannonia, Asia, Greece, and
Egypt; and then the little horn which rose by the fall of three of the
other horns ([Dan 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008)) they make to be
the Turkish empire, which rose in the room of Asia, Greece, and Egypt.
Others make this fourth beast to be the kingdom of Syria, the family of
the Seleucidae, which was very cruel and oppressive to the people of the
Jews, as we find in Josephus and the history of the Maccabees. And
herein that empire was diverse from those which went before, that none
of the preceding powers compelled the Jews to renounce their religion,
but the kings of Syria did, and used them barbarously. Their armies and
commanders were the great iron teeth with which they devoured and broke
in pieces the people of God, and they trampled upon the residue of them.
The ten horns are then supposed to be ten kings that reigned
successively in Syria; and then the little horn is Antiochus Epiphanes,
the last of the ten, who by one means or other undermined three of the
kings, and got the government. He was a man of great ingenuity, and
therefore is said to have eyes like the eyes of a man; and he was very
bold and daring, had a mouth speaking great things. We shall meet with
him again in these prophecies.

[Daniel 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 7:9</span></span>

Whether we understand the fourth beast to signify the Syrian empire, or
the Roman, or the former as the figure of the latter, it is plain that
these verses are intended for the comfort and support of the people of
God in reference to the persecutions they were likely to sustain both
from the one and from the other, and from all their proud enemies in
every age; for it is written for their learning on whom the ends of the
world have come, that they also, through patience and comfort of this
scripture, might have hope. Three things are here discovered that are
very encouraging: -

I. That there is a judgment to come, and God is the Judge. Now men have
their day, and every pretender thinks he should have his day, and
struggles for it. But he that sits in heaven laughs at them, for he sees
that his day is coming, [Psa 37:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#013). I
beheld ([Dan 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009)) till the thrones
were cast down, not only the thrones of these beasts, but all rule,
authority, power, that are set up in opposition to the kingdom of God
among men ([Co1 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024)): such are the
thrones of the kingdoms of the world, in comparison with God's kingdom;
those that see them set up need but wait awhile, and they will see them
cast down. I beheld till thrones were set up (so it may as well be
read), Christ's throne and the throne of his Father. One of the rabbin
confesses that these thrones are set up, one for God, another for the
Son of David. It is the judgment that is here set, [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010). Now, 1. This is intended to
proclaim God's wise and righteous government of the world by his
providence; and an unspeakable satisfaction it gives to all good men, in
the midst of the convulsions and revolutions of states and kingdoms,
that the Lord has prepared his throne in the heavens and his kingdom
rules over all ([Psa 103:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#019)), that
verily there is a God that judges in the earth, [Psa
58:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011). 2. Perhaps it points at the
destruction brought by the providence of God upon the empire of Syria,
or that of Rome, for their tyrannizing over the people of God. But, 3.
It seems principally designed to describe the last judgment, for though
it follow not immediately upon the dominion of the fourth beast, nay,
though it be yet to come, perhaps many ages to come, yet it was intended
that in every age the people of God should encourage themselves, under
their troubles, with the belief and prospect of it. Enoch, the seventh
from Adam, prophesied of it, [Jde
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014). Does the mouth of the enemy
speak great things, [Dan 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008). Here are
far greater things which the mouth of the Lord has spoken. Many of the
New Testament predictions of the judgment to come have a plain allusion
to this vision, especially St John's vision of it, [Rev
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011), [Rev
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012). (1.) The Judge is the Ancient
of days himself, God the Father, the glory of whose presence is here
described. He is called the Ancient of days, because he is God from
everlasting to everlasting. Among men we reckon that with the ancient is
wisdom, and days shall speak; shall not all flesh then be silent before
him who is the Ancient of days? The glory of the Judge is here set forth
by his garment, which was white as snow, denoting his splendour and
purity in all the administrations of his justice; and the hair of his
head clean and white, as the pure wool, that, as the white and hoary
head, he may appear venerable. (2.) The throne is very formidable. It is
like the fiery flame, dreadful to the wicked that shall be summoned
before it. And the throne being movable upon wheels, or at least the
chariot in which he rode the circuit, the wheels thereof are as burning
fire, to devour the adversaries; for our God is a consuming fire, and
with him are everlasting burnings, [Isa
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#014). This is enlarged upon, [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010). As to all his faithful friends
there proceeds out of the throne of God and the Lamb a pure river of
water of life ([Rev 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001)), so to all
his implacable enemies there issues and comes forth from his throne a
fiery stream, a stream of brimstone ([Isa
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033)), a fire that shall devour
before him. He is a swift witness, and his word a word upon the wheels.
(3.) The attendants are numerous and very splendid. The Shechinah is
always attended with angels; it is so here ([Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)): Thousand thousands minister to
him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stand before him. It is his
glory that he has such attendants, but much more his glory that he
neither needs them nor can be benefited by them. See how numerous the
heavenly hosts are (there are thousands of angels), and how obsequious
they are - they stand before God, ready to go on his errands and to take
the first intimation of his will and pleasure. They will particularly be
employed as ministers of his justice in the last judgment day, when the
Son of man shall come, and all the holy angels with him. Enoch
prophesied that the Lord should come with his holy myriads. (4.) The
process is fair and unexceptionable: The judgment is set, publicly and
openly, that all may have recourse to it; and the books are opened. As
in courts of judgment among men the proceedings are in writing and upon
record, which is laid open when the cause comes to a hearing, the
examination of witnesses is produced, and affidavits are read, to clear
the matter of fact, and the statute and common-law books are consulted
to find out what is the law, so, in the judgment of the great day, the
equity of the sentence will be as incontestably evident as if there were
books opened to justify it.

II\. That the proud and cruel enemies of the church of God will
certainly be reckoned with and brought down in due time, [Dan
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#011), [Dan
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#012). This is here represented to us,
1. In the destroying of the fourth beast. God's quarrel with this beast
is because of the voice of the great words which the horn spoke, bidding
defiance to Heaven, and triumphing over all that is sacred; this
provokes God more than any thing, for the enemy to behave himself
proudly, [Deu 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#027). Therefore Pharaoh
must be humbled, because he has said, Who is the Lord? and has said, I
will pursue, I will overtake. Enoch foretold that therefore the Lord
would come to judge the world, that he might convince all that are
ungodly of their hard speeches, [Jde
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015). Note, Great words are but idle
words, for which men must give account in the great day. And see what
becomes of this beast that talks so big: He is slain, and his body
destroyed and given to the burning flame. The Syrian empire, after
Antiochus, was destroyed. He himself died of a miserable disease, his
family was rooted out, the kingdom wasted by the Parthians and
Armenians, and at length made a province of the Roman empire by Pompey.
And the Roman empire itself (if we take that for the fourth beast),
after it began to persecute Christianity, declined and wasted away, and
the body of it was destroyed. So shall all thy enemies perish, O Lord!
and be slain before thee. 2. In the diminishing and weakening of the
other three beasts ([Dan 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#012)): They
had their dominion taken away, and so were disabled from doing the
mischiefs they had done to the church and people of God; but a
prolonging in life was given them, for a time and a season, a set time,
the bounds of which they could not pass. The power of the foregoing
kingdoms was quite broken, but the people of them still remained in a
mean, weak, and low condition. We may allude to this in describing the
remainders of sin in the hearts of good people; they have corruptions in
them, the lives of which are prolonged, so that they are not perfectly
free from sin, but the dominion of them is taken away, so that sin does
not reign in their mortal bodies. And thus God deals with his church's
enemies; sometimes he breaks the teeth of them ([Psa
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007)), when he does not break the neck
of them, crushes the persecution, but reprieves the persecutors, that
they may have space to repent. And it is fit that God, in doing his own
work, should take his own time and way.

III\. That the kingdom of the Messiah shall be set up, and kept up, in
the world, in spite of all the opposition of the powers of darkness. Let
the heathen rage and fret as long as they please, God will set his King
upon his holy hill of Zion. Daniel sees this in vision, and comforts
himself and his friends with the prospect of it. This is the same with
Nebuchadnezzar's foresight of the stone cut out of the mountain without
hands, which broke in pieces the image; but in this vision there is much
more of pure gospel than in that. 1. The Messiah is here called the Son
of man - one like unto the Son of man; for he was made in the likeness
of sinful flesh, was found in fashion as a man. I saw one like unto the
Son of man, one exactly agreeing with the idea formed in the divine
counsels of him that in the fulness of time was to be the Mediator
between God and man. He is like unto the son of man, but is indeed the
Son of God. Our Savior seems plainly to refer to this vision when he
says ([Joh 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#027)) that the Father has
therefore given him authority to execute judgment because he is the Son
of man, and because he is the person whom Daniel saw in vision, to whom
a kingdom and dominion were to be given. 2. He is said to come with the
clouds of heaven. Some refer this to his incarnation; he descended in
the clouds of heaven, came into the world unseen, as the glory of the
Lord took possession of the temple in a cloud. The empires of the world
were beasts that rose out of the sea; but Christ's kingdom is from
above: he is the Lord from heaven. I think it is rather to be referred
to his ascension; when he returned to the Father the eye of his
disciples followed him, till a cloud received him out of their sight,
[Act 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009). He made that cloud his
chariot, wherein he rode triumphantly to the upper world. He comes
swiftly, irresistibly, and comes in state, for he comes with the clouds
of heaven. 3. He is here represented as having a mighty interest in
Heaven. When the cloud received him out of the sight of his disciples,
it is worth while to enquire (as the sons of the prophets concerning
Elijah in a like case) whither it carried him, where it lodged him; and
here we are told, abundantly to our satisfaction, that he came to the
Ancient of days; for he ascended to his Father and our Father, to his
God and our God ([Joh 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)); from him
he came forth, and to him he returns, to be glorified with him, and to
sit down at his right hand. It was with a great deal of pleasure that he
said, Now I go to him that sent me. But was he welcome? Yes, not doubt,
he was, for they brought him near before him; he was introduced into his
Father's presence, with the attendance and adorations of all the angels
of God, [Heb 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006). God caused him to
draw near and approach to him, as an advocate and undertaker for us
([Jer 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#021)), that we through him
might be made nigh. By this solemn near approach which he made to the
Ancient of days it appears that the Father accepted the sacrifice he
offered, and the satisfaction he made, and was entirely well pleased
with all he had done. He was brought near, as our high priest, who for
us enters within the veil, and as our forerunner, 4. He is here
represented as having a mighty influence upon this earth, [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014). When he went to be glorified
with his Father he had a power given him over all flesh, [Joh
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002), [Joh
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005). With the prospect of this Daniel
and his friends are here comforted, that not only the dominion of the
church's enemies shall be taken away ([Dan
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#012)), but the church's head and best
friend shall have the dominion given him; to him every knee shall bow
and every tongue confess. [Phi 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009),
[Phi 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010). To him are given glory and
a kingdom, and they are given by him who has an unquestionable right to
give them, which, some think with an eye to these words, our Savior
teaches us to acknowledge in the close of the Lord's prayer, For thine
is the kingdom, the power, and the glory. It is here foretold that the
kingdom of the exalted Redeemer shall be, (1.) A universal kingdom, the
only universal monarchy, whatever others have pretended to, or aimed at:
All people, nations, and languages, shall fear him, and be under his
jurisdiction, either as his willing subjects or as his conquered
captives, to be either ruled or overruled by him. One way or other, the
kingdoms of the world shall all become his kingdoms. (2.) An everlasting
kingdom. His dominion shall not pass away to any successor, much less to
any invader, and his kingdom is that which shall bot be destroyed. Even
the gates of hell, or the infernal powers and policies, shall not
prevail against it. The church shall continue militant to the end of
time, and triumphant to the endless ages of eternity.

[Daniel 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 7:15</span></span>

Here we have, I. The deep impressions which these visions made upon the
prophet. God in them put honour upon him, and gave him satisfaction, yet
not without a great allay of pain and perplexity ([Dan
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#015)): I Daniel was grieved in my
spirit, in the midst of my body. The word here used for the body
properly signifies a sheath or scabbard, for the body is no more to the
soul; that is the weapon; it is that which we are principally to take
care of. The visions of my head troubled me, and again ([Dan
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#028)), my cogitations much troubled
me. The manner in which these things were discovered to him quite
overwhelmed him, and put his thoughts so much to the stretch that his
spirits failed him, and the trance he was in tired him and made him
faint. The things themselves that were discovered amazed and astonished
him, and put him into a confusion, till by degrees he recollected and
conquered himself, and set the comforts of the vision over against the
terrors of it.

II\. His earnest desire to understand the meaning of them ([Dan
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#016)): I came near to one of those
that stood by, to one of the angels that appeared attending the Son of
man in his glory, and asked him the truth (the true intent and meaning)
of all this. Note, It is a very desirable thing to take the right and
full sense of what we see and hear from God; and those that would know
must ask by faithful and fervent prayer and by accomplishing a diligent
search.

III\. The key that was given him, to let him into the understanding of
this vision. The angel told him, and told him so plainly that he made
him know the interpretation of the thing, and so made him somewhat more
easy.

1\. The great beasts are great kings and their kingdoms, great monarchs
and their monarchies, which shall arise out of the earth, as those
beasts did out of the sea, [Dan 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#017).
They are but terraefilii - from beneath; they savour of the earth, and
their foundation is in the dust; they are of the earth earthy, and they
are written in the dust, and to the dust they shall return.

2\. Daniel pretty well understands the first three beasts, but
concerning the fourth he desires to be better informed, because it
differed so much from the rest, and was exceedingly dreadful, and not
only so, but very mischievous, or it devoured and broke in pieces, [Dan
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#019). Perhaps it was this that put
Daniel into such a fright, and this part of the visions of his head
troubled him more than any of the rest. But especially he desired to
know what the little horn was, that had eyes, and a mouth that spoke
very great things, and whose countenance was more fearless and
formidable than that of any of his fellows, [Dan
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020). And this he was most inquisitive
about because it was this horn that made war with the saints, and
prevailed against them, [Dan 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#021).
While no more is intimated than that the children of men make war with
one another, and prevail against one another, the prophet does not show
himself so much concerned (let the potsherds strive with the potsherds
of the earth, and be dashed in pieces one against another); but when
they make war with the saints, when the precious sons of Zion,
comparable to fine gold, are broken as earthen pitchers, it is time to
ask, "What is the meaning of this? Will the Lord cast off his people?
Will he suffer their enemies to trample upon them and triumph over them?
What is this same horn that shall prevail so far against the saints?" To
this his interpreter answers ([Dan
7:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023)) that this fourth beast is a
fourth kingdom, that shall devour the whole earth, or (as it may be
read) the whole land. That the ten horns are ten kings, and the little
horn is another king that shall subdue three kings, and shall be very
abusive to God and his people, shall act, (1.) Very impiously towards
God. He shall speak great words against the Most High, setting him, and
his authority and justice, at defiance. (2.) Very imperiously towards
the people of God. He shall wear out the saints of the Most High; he
will not cut them off at once, but wear them out by long oppressions and
a constant course of hardships put upon them, ruining their estates and
weakening their families. The design of Satan has been to wear out the
saints of the Most High, that they may be no more in remembrance; but
the attempt is vain, for while the world stands God will have a church
in it. He shall think to change times and laws, to abolish all the
ordinances and institutions of religion, and to bring every body to say
and do just as he would have them. He shall trample upon laws and
customs, human and divine. Diruit, aedificut, mutat quadrata rotundis -
He pulls down, he builds, he changes square into round, as if he meant
to alter even the ordinances of heaven themselves. And in these daring
attempts he shall for a time prosper and have success; they shall be
given into his hand until time, times, and half a time (that is, for
three years and a half), that famous prophetical measure of time which
we meet with in the Revelation, which is sometimes called forty-two
months, sometimes 1260 days, which come all to one. But at the end of
that time the judgment shall sit and take away his dominion (v. 26),
which he expounds (v. 11) of the beast being slain and his body
destroyed. And (as Mr. Mede reads v. 12) as to the rest of the beast,
the ten horns, especially the little ruffling horn (as he calls it),
they had their dominion taken away. Now the question is, Who is this
enemy, whose rise, reign, and ruin, are foretold? Interpreters are not
agreed. Some will have the fourth kingdom to be that of the Seleucidae,
and the little horn to be Antiochus, and show the accomplishment of all
this in the history of the Maccabees; so Junius, Piscator, Polanus,
Broughton, and many others: but others will have the fourth kingdom to
be that of the Romans, and the little horn to be Julius Caesar, and the
succeeding emperors (says Calvin), the antichrist, the papal kingdom
(says Mr. Joseph Mede), that wicked one, which, as this little horn, is
to be consumed by the brightness of Christ's second coming. The pope
assumes a power to change times and laws, potestas autokratorikē - an
absolute and despotic power, as he calls it. Others make the little horn
to be the Turkish empire; so Luther, Vatablus, and others. Now I cannot
prove either side to be wrong; and therefore, since prophecies sometimes
have many fulfillings, and we ought to give scripture its full latitude
(in this as in many other controversies), I am willing to allow that
they are both in the right, and that this prophecy has primary reference
to the Syrian empire, and was intended for the encouragement of the Jews
who suffered under Antiochus, that they might see even these melancholy
times foretold, but might foresee a glorious issue of them at last, and
the final overthrow of their proud oppressors; and, which is best of
all, might foresee, not long after, the setting up of the kingdom of the
Messiah in the world, with the hopes of which it was usual with the
former prophets to comfort the people of God in their distresses. But
yet it has a further reference, and foretels the like persecuting power
and rage in Rome heathen, and no less in Rome papal, against the
Christian religion, that was in Antiochus against the pious Jews and
their religion. And St. John, in his visions and prophecies, which point
primarily at Rome, has plain reference, in many particulars, to these
visions of Daniel.

3\. He has a joyful prospect given him of the prevalency of God's
kingdom among men, and its victory over all opposition at last. And it
is very observable that in the midst of the predictions of the force and
fury of the enemies this is brought in abruptly ([Dan
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#018) and again [Dan
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#022)), before it comes, in the course
of the vision, to be interpreted, [Dan
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#026), [Dan
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027). And this also refers, (1.) To
the prosperous days of the Jewish church, after it had weathered the
storm under Antiochus, and the power which the Maccabees obtained over
their enemies. (2.) To the setting up of the kingdom of the Messiah in
the world by the preaching of his gospel. For judgment Christ comes into
this world, to rule by his Spirit, and to make all his saints kings and
priests to their God. (3.) To the second coming of Jesus Christ, when
the saints shall judge the world, shall sit down with him on his throne
and triumph in the complete downfall of the devil's kingdom. Let us see
what is here foretold. \[1.\] The Ancient of days shall come, [Dan
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#022). God shall judge the world by his
Son, to whom he has committed all judgment, and, as an earnest of that,
he comes for the deliverance of his oppressed people, comes for the
setting up of his kingdom in the world. \[2.\] The judgment shall sit,
[Dan 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#026). God will make it appear
that he judges in the earth, and will, both in wisdom and in equity,
plead his people's righteous cause. At the great day he will judge the
world in righteousness by that man whom he has ordained. \[3.\] The
dominion of the enemy shall be taken away, [Dan
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#026). All Christ's enemies shall be
made his footstool, and shall be consumed and destroyed to the end:
these were the apostle uses concerning the man of sin, [Th2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008). He shall be consumed with the
spirit of Christ's mouth and destroyed with the brightness of his
coming. \[4.\] Judgment is given to the saints of the Most High. The
apostles are entrusted with the preaching of a gospel by which the world
shall be judged. All the saints by their faith and obedience condemn an
unbelieving disobedient world; in Christ their head they shall judge the
world, shall judge the twelve tribes of Israel, [Mat
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028). See what reason we have to
honour those that fear the Lord; how mean and despicable soever the
saints now appear in the eye of the world, and how much contempt soever
is poured upon them; they are the saints of the Most High; they are near
and dear to God, and he owns them for his, and judgment is given to
them. \[5.\] That which is most insisted upon is that the saints of the
Most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, [Dan
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#018). And again ([Dan
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#022)), The time came that the saints
possessed the kingdom. And again ([Dan
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027)), The kingdom and dominion, and
the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heavens, shall be given to
the people of the saints of the Most High. Far be it from us to infer
hence that dominion is founded on grace, or that this will warrant any,
under pretence of saintship, to usurp kingship. No; Christ's kingdom is
not of this world; but this intimates the spiritual dominion of the
saints over their own lusts and corruptions, their victories over Satan
and his temptations, and the triumphs of the martyrs over death and its
terrors. It likewise promises that the gospel kingdom shall be set up, a
kingdom of grace, the privileges and comforts of which now, under the
heavens, shall be the earnest and first-fruits of the kingdom of glory
in the heavens. When the empire became Christian, and princes used their
power for the defence and advancement of Christianity, then the saints
possessed the kingdom. The saints rule by the Spirit's ruling in them
(and this is the victory overcoming the world, even their faith) and by
making the kingdoms of this world to become Christ's kingdom. But the
full accomplishment of this will be in the everlasting happiness of the
saints, the kingdom that cannot be moved, which we, according to his
promise, look for (that is the greatness of the kingdom), the crown of
glory that fades not away - that is the everlasting kingdom. See what an
emphasis is laid upon this ([Dan
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#018)): The saints shall possess the
kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever; and the reason is because he
whose saints they are is the Most High and his kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom, [Dan 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027). He is so, and
therefore theirs shall be so. Because I live, you shall live also, [Joh
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#019). His kingdom is theirs; they
reckon themselves exalted in his exaltation, and desire no greater
honour and satisfaction to themselves than that all dominions should
serve and obey him, as they shall do, [Dan
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027). They shall either be brought
into subjection to his golden sceptre or brought to destruction by his
iron rod.

Daniel, in the close, when he ends that matter, tells us what
impressions this vision made upon him; it overwhelmed his spirits to
such a degree that his countenance was changed, and it made him look
pale; but he kept the matter in his heart. Note, The heart must be the
treasury and store-house of divine things; there we must hide God's
word, as the Virgin Mary kept the sayings of Christ, [Luk
2:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#051). Daniel kept the matter in his
heart, with a design, not to keep it from the church, but to keep it for
the church, that what he had received from the Lord he might fully and
faithfully deliver to the people. Note, It concerns God's prophets and
ministers to treasure up the things of God in their minds, and there to
digest them well. If we would have God's word ready in our mouths when
we have occasion for it, we must keep it in our hearts at all times.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 8](dan008)

</div>
