<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu012)  [Next](deu014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 13:0</span></span>

Moses is still upon that necessary subject concerning the peril of
idolatry. In the close of the foregoing chapter he had cautioned them
against the peril that might arise from their predecessors the
Canaanites. In this chapter he cautions them against the rise of
idolatry from among themselves; they must take heed lest any should draw
them to idolatry, 1. By the pretence of prophecy ([Deu
13:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001)). II. By the pretence of
friendship and relation ([Deu
13:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#006)). III. By the pretence of
numbers ([Deu 13:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#012)). But in all
these cases the temptation must be resolutely resisted and the tempters
punished and cut off.

[Deuteronomy 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 13:1</span></span>

Here is, I. A very strange supposition, [Deu
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001), [Deu
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#002). 1. It is strange that there
should arise any among themselves, especially any pretending to vision
and prophecy, who should instigate them to go and serve other gods. Was
it possible that any who had so much knowledge of the methods of divine
revelation as to be able to personate a prophet should yet have so
little knowledge of the divine nature and will as to go himself and
entice his neighbours after other gods? Could an Israelite ever be
guilty of such impiety? Could a man of sense ever be guilty of such
absurdity? We see it in our own day, and therefore may think it the less
strange; multitudes that profess both learning and religion yet exciting
both themselves and others, not only to worship God by images, but to
give divine honour to saints and angels, which is no better than going
after other gods to serve them; such is the power of strong delusions.
2. It is yet more strange that the sign or wonder given for the
confirmation of this false doctrine should come to pass. Can it be
thought that God himself should give any countenance to such a vile
proceeding? Did ever a false prophet work a true miracle? It is only
supposed here for two reasons: - (1.) To strengthen the caution here
given against hearkening to such a one. "Though it were possible that he
should work a true miracle, yet you must not believe him if he tell you
that you must serve other gods, for the divine law against that is
certainly perpetual and unalterable." The supposition is like that in
[Gal 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008), If we, or an angel from
heaven, preach any other gospel to you - which does not prove it
possible that an angel should preach another gospel, but strongly
expresses the certainty and perpetuity of that which we have received.
So here, (2.) It is to fortify them against the danger of impostures and
lying wonders ([Th2 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009)): "Suppose the
credentials he produces be so artfully counterfeited that you cannot
discern the cheat, nor disprove them, yet, if they are intended to draw
you to the service of other gods, that alone is sufficient to disprove
them; no evidence can be admitted against so clear a truth as that of
the unity of the Godhead, and so plain a law as that of worshipping the
one only living and true God." We cannot suppose that the God of truth
should set his seal of miracles to a lie, to so gross a lie as is
supposed in that temptation, Let us go after other gods. But if it be
asked, Why is this false prophet permitted to counterfeit this broad
seal? It is answered here ([Deu 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003)):
"The Lord you God proveth you. He suffers you to be set upon by such a
temptation to try your constancy, that both those that are perfect and
those that are false and corrupt may be made manifest. It is to prove
you; therefore see that you acquit yourselves well in the trial, and
stand your ground."

II\. Here is a very necessary charge given in this case,

1\. Not to yield to the temptation: "Thou shalt not hearken to the
worlds of that prophet, [Deu 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003). Not
only thou shalt not do the thing he tempts thee to, but thou shalt not
so much as patiently hear the temptation, but reject it with the utmost
disdain and detestation. Such a suggestion as this is not to be so much
as parleyed with, but the ear must be stopped against it. Get thee
behind me, Satan." Some temptations are so grossly vile that they will
not bear a debate, nor may we so much as give them the hearing. What
follows ([Deu 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#004)), You shall walk
after the Lord, may be looked upon, (1.) As prescribing a preservative
from the temptation: "Keep close to your duty, and you keep out of
harm's way. God never leaves us till we leave him." Or, (2.) As
furnishing us with an answer to the temptation; say, "It is written,
Thou shalt walk after the Lord, and cleave unto him; and therefore what
have I to do with idols?"

2\. Not to spare the tempter, [Deu
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#005). That prophet shall be put to
death, both to punish him for the attempt he has made (the seducer must
die, though none were seduced by him - a design upon the crown is
treason) and to prevent his doing further mischief. This is called
putting away the evil. There is no way of removing the guilt but by
removing the guilty; if such a criminal be not punished, those that
should punish him make themselves responsible. And thus the mischief
must be put away; the infection must be kept from spreading by cutting
off the gangrened limb, and putting away the mischief-makers. such
Dangerous diseases as these must be taken in time.

[Deuteronomy 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 13:6</span></span>

Further provision is made by this branch of the statute against
receiving the infection of idolatry from those that are near and dear to
us.

I. It is the policy of the tempter to send his solicitations by the hand
of those whom we love, whom we least suspect of any ill design upon us,
and whom we are desirous to please and apt to conform ourselves to. The
enticement here is supposed to come from a brother or child that are
near by nature, from a wife or friend that are near by choice, and are
to us as our own souls, [Deu 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#006).
Satan tempted Adam by Eve and Christ by Peter. We are therefore
concerned to stand upon our guard against a bad proposal when the person
that makes it can pretend to an interest in us, that we many never sin
against God in compliment to the best friend we have in the world. The
temptation is supposed to be private: he will entice thee secretly,
implying that idolatry is a work of darkness, which dreads the light and
covets to be concealed, and in which the sinner promises himself, and
the tempter promises him, secrecy and security. Concerning the false
gods proposed to be served, 1. The tempter suggests that the worshipping
of these gods was the common practice of the world; and, if they limited
their adorations to an invisible Deity, they were singular, and like
nobody, for these gods were the gods of the people round about them, and
indeed of all the nations of the earth, [Deu
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#007). This suggestion draws many away
from religion and godliness, that it is an unfashionable thing; and they
make their court to the world and the flesh because these are the gods
of the people that are round about them. 2. Moses suggests, in
opposition to this, that it had not been the practice of their
ancestors; they are gods which thou hast not known, thou nor thy
fathers. Those that are born of godly parents, and have been educated in
pious exercises, when they are enticed to a vain, loose, careless way of
living should remember that those are ways which they have not known,
they nor their fathers. And will they thus degenerate?

II\. It is our duty to prefer God and religion before the best friends
we have in the world. 1. We must not, in complaisance to our friends,
break God's law ([Deu 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#008)): "Thou
shalt not consent to him. nor go with him to his idolatrous worship, no,
not for company, or curiosity, or to gain a better interest in is
affections." It is a general rule, If sinners entice thee, consent thou
not, [Pro 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#010). 2. We must not, in
compassion to our friends, obstruct the course of God's justice. He that
attempts such a thing must not only be looked upon as an enemy, or
dangerous person, whom one should be afraid of, and swear the peace
against, but as a criminal or traitor, whom, in zeal for our sovereign
Lord, his crown and dignity, we are bound to inform against, and cannot
conceal without incurring the guilt of a great misprision ([Deu
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#009)): Thou shalt surely kill him. By
this law the persons enticed were bound to the seducer, and to give
evidence against him before the proper judges, that he might suffer the
penalty of the law, and that without delay, which the Jews say is here
intended in that phrase, as it is in the Hebrew, killing thou shalt kill
him. Neither the prosecution nor the execution must be deferred; and he
that was first in the former must be first in the latter, to show that
he stood to his testimony: "Thy hand shall be first upon him, to mark
him out as an anathema, and then the hands of all the people, to put him
away as an accursed thing." The death he must die was that which was
looked upon among the Jews as the severest of all deaths. He must be
stoned: and his accusation written is that he has sought to thrust thee
away, by a kind of violence, from the Lord they God, [Deu
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#010). Those are certainly our worst
enemies that would thrust us from God, our best friend; and whatever
draws us to sin, separates between us and God, is a design upon our
life, and to be resented accordingly, And, lastly, here is the good
effect of this necessary execution ([Deu
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#011)): All Israel shall hear and
fear. They ought to hear and fear; for the punishment of crimes
committed is designed in terrorem - to terrify, and so to prevent their
repetition. And it is to be hoped they will hear and fear, and by the
severity of the punishment, especially when it is at the prosecution of
a father, a brother, or a friend, will be made to conceive a horror of
the sin, as exceedingly sinful, and to be afraid of incurring the like
punishment themselves. Smite the scorner that sins presumptuously, and
the simple, that is in danger of sinning carelessly, will beware.

[Deuteronomy 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 13:12</span></span>

Here the case is put of a city revolting from its allegiance to the God
of Israel, and serving other gods.

I. The crime is supposed to be committed, 1. By one of the cities of
Israel, that lay within the jurisdiction of their courts. The church
then judged those only that were within, [Co1
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012), [Co1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#013). And, even when they were ordered
to preserve their religion in the first principles of it by fire and
sword to propagate it. Those that are born within the allegiance of a
prince, if they take up arms against him, are dealt with as traitors,
but foreign invaders are not so. The city that is here supposed to have
become idolatrous is one that formerly worshipped the true God, but had
now withdrawn to other gods, which intimates how great the crime is, and
how sore the punishment will be, of those that, after they have known
the way of righteousness, turn aside from it, [Pe2
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#021). 2. It is supposed to be
committed by the generality of the inhabitants of the city, for we may
conclude that, if a considerable number did retain their integrity,
those only that were guilty were to be destroyed, and the city was to be
spared for the sake of the righteous in it; for will not the Judge of
all the earth do right? No doubt he will. 3. They are supposed to be
drawn to idolatry by certain men, the children of Belial, men that would
endure no yoke (so it signifies), that neither fear God nor regard man,
but shake off all restraints of law and conscience, and are perfectly
lost to all manner of virtue; these are those that say, "Let us serve
other gods," that will not only allow, but will countenance and
encourage, our immoralities. Belial is put for the devil ([Co2
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015)), and the children of Belial are
his children. These withdraw the inhabitants of the city; for a little
of this old leaven, when it is entertained, soon leavens the whole lump.

II\. The cause is ordered to be tried with a great deal of care ([Deu
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#014)): Thou shalt enquire and make
search. They must not proceed upon common fame, or take the information
by hearsay, but must examine the proofs, and not give judgment against
them unless the evidence was clear and the charge fully made out. God
himself, before he destroyed Sodom, is said to have come down to see
whether its crimes were according to the clamour, [Gen
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021). In judicial processes it is
requisite that time, and care, and pains, be taken to find out the
truth, and that search be made without any passion, prejudice, or
partiality. The Jewish writers say that, though particular persons who
were idolaters might be judged by the inferior courts, the defection of
a city was to be tried by the great Sanhedrim; and, if it appeared that
they were thrust away to idolatry, two learned men were sent to them to
admonish and reclaim them. If they repented, all would be well; if not,
then all Israel must go up to war against them, to testify their
indignation against idolatry and to stop the spreading of the contagion.

III\. If the crime were proved, and the criminals were incorrigible, the
city was to be wholly destroyed. If there were a few righteous men in
it, no doubt they would remove themselves and their families out of such
a dangerous place, and then all the inhabitants, men, women, and
children, must be put to the sword ([Deu
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#015)), all the spoil of the city,
both shop-goods and the furniture of houses, must be brought into the
marketplace and burned, and the city itself must be laid in ashes and
never built again, [Deu 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#016). The
soldiers are forbidden, upon pain of death, to convert any of the
plunder to their own use, [Deu 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#017).
It was a devoted thing, and dangerous to meddle with, as we find in the
case of Achan. Now, 1. God enjoins this severity of show what a jealous
God he is in the matters of his worship, and how great a crime it is to
serve other gods. Let men know that God will not give his glory to
another, nor his praise to graven images. 2. He expects that
magistrates, having their honour and power from him, should be concerned
for his honour, and use their power for terror to evil doers, else they
bear the sword in vain. 3. The faithful worshippers of the true God must
take all occasions to show their just indignation against idolatry, much
more against atheism, infidelity, and irreligion. 4. It is here
intimated that the best expedient for the turning away of God's anger
from a land is to execute justice upon the wicked of the land ([Deu
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#017)), that the Lord may turn from
the fierceness of his anger, which was ready to break out against the
whole nation, for the wickedness of that one apostate city. It is
promised that, if they would thus root wickedness out of their land, God
would multiply them. They might think it impolitic, and against the
interest of their nation, to ruin a whole city for a crime relating
purely to religion, and that they should be more sparing of the blood of
Israelites: "Fear not the" (says Moses), "God will multiply you the
more; the body of your nation will lose nothing by the letting out of
this corrupt blood." Lastly, Though we do not find this law put in
execution in all the history of the Jewish church (Gibeah was destroyed,
not for idolatry, but immorality), yet for the neglect of the execution
of it upon the inferior cities that served idols God himself, by the
army of the Chaldeans, put it in execution upon Jerusalem, the head
city, which, for is apostasy from God, was utterly destroyed and laid
waste, and lay in ruins seventy years. Though idolaters may escape
punishment from men (nor is this law in the letter of it binding now,
under the gospel), yet the Lord our God will not suffer them to escape
his righteous judgements. The New Testament speaks of communion with
idolaters as a sin which, above any other, provokes the Lord to
jealousy, and dares him as if we were stronger than he, [Co1
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#021), [Co1
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#022).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 14](deu014)

</div>
