<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu002)  [Next](deu004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 3:0</span></span>

Moses, in this chapter, relates, I. The conquest of Og, king of Bashan,
and the seizing of his country ([Deu
3:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#001)). II. The distribution of these
new conquests to the two tribes and a half ([Deu
3:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012)). Under certain provisos and
limitations ([Deu 3:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#018)). III. The
encouragement given to Joshua to carry on the war which was so
gloriously begun ([Deu 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#021), [Deu
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#022)). IV. Moses's request to go over
into Canaan ([Deu 3:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#023)), with the
denial of that request, but the grant of an equivalent ([Deu
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#026), etc.).

[Deuteronomy 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 3:1</span></span>

We have here another brave country delivered into the hand of Israel,
that of Bashan; the conquest of Sihon is often mentioned together with
that of Og, to the praise of God, the rather because in these Israel's
triumphs began, [Psa 135:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#011); [Psa
136:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#019), [Psa
136:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#020). See,

I. How they got the mastery of Og, a very formidable prince, 1. Very
strong, for he was of the remnant of the giants ([Deu
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#011)); his personal strength was
extraordinary, a monument of which was preserved by the Ammonites in his
bedstead, which was shown as a rarity in their chief city. You might
guess at his weight by the materials of his bedstead; it was iron, as if
a bedstead of wood were too weak for him to trust to: and you might
guess at his stature by the dimensions of it; it was nine cubits long
and four cubits broad, which, supposing a cubit to be but half a yard
(and some learned men have made it appear to be somewhat more), was four
yards and a half long, and two yards broad; and if we allow his bedstead
to be two cubits longer than himself, and that is as much as we need
allow, he was three yards and a half high, double the stature of an
ordinary man, and every way proportionable, yet they smote him, [Deu
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#003). Note, when God pleads his
people's cause he can deal with giants as with grasshoppers. No man's
might can secure him against the Almighty. The army of Og was very
powerful, for he had the command of sixty fortified cities, besides the
unwalled towns, [Deu 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#005). Yet all this
was nothing before God's Israel, when they came with commission to
destroy him. 2. He was very bold and daring: He came out against Israel
to battle, [Deu 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#001). It was wonderful
that he did not take warning by the ruin of Sihon, and send to desire
conditions of peace; but he trusted to his own strength, and so was
hardened to his destruction. Note, Those that are not awakened by the
judgments of God upon others, but persist in their defiance of heaven,
are ripening apace for the like judgments upon themselves, [Jer
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#008). God bade Moses not fear him, [Deu
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#002). If Moses himself was so strong in
faith as not to need the caution, yet it is probable that the people
needed it, and for them these fresh assurances are designed; "I will
deliver him into thy hand; not only deliver thee out of his hand, that
he shall not be thy ruin, but deliver him into thy hand, that thou shalt
be his ruin, and make him pay dearly for his attempt." He adds, Thou
shalt do to him as thou didst to Sihon, intimating that they ought to be
encouraged by their former victory to trust in God for another victory,
for he is God, and changeth not.

II\. How they got possession of Bashan, a very desirable country. They
took all the cities ([Deu 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#004)), and
all the spoil of them, [Deu 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#007). They
made them all their own, [Deu 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#010). So
that now they had in their hands all that fruitful country which lay
east of Jordan, from the river Arnon unto Hermon, [Deu
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#008). Their conquering and possessing
these countries was intended, not only for the encouragement of Israel
in the wars of Canaan, but for the satisfaction of Moses before his
death. Since he must not live to see the completing of their victory and
settlement, God thus gives him a specimen of it. Thus the Spirit is
given to those that believe as the earnest of their inheritance, until
the redemption of the purchased possession.

[Deuteronomy 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 3:12</span></span>

Having shown how this country which they were now in was conquered, in
these verses he shows how it was settled upon the Reubenites, Gadites,
and half the tribe of Manasseh, which we had the story of before, Num.
32. Here is the rehearsal. 1. Moses specifies the particular parts of
the country that were allotted to each tribe, especially the
distribution of the lot to the half tribe of Manasseh, the subdividing
of which tribe is observable. Joseph was divided into Ephraim and
Manasseh; Manasseh was divided into one half on the one side Jordan and
the other half on the other side: that on the east side Jordan was again
divided into two great families, which had their several allotments:
Jair, [Deu 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014), Machir, [Deu
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#015). And perhaps Jacob's prediction
of the smallness of that tribe was now accomplished in these divisions
and subdivisions. Observe that Bashan is here called the land of the
giants, because it had been in their possession, but Og was the last of
them. These giants, it seems, had lost their country, and were rooted
out of it sooner than any of their neighbours; for those who, presuming
upon their strength and stature, had their hand against every man, had
every man's hand against them, and went down slain to the pit, though
they were the terror of the mighty in the land of the living. 2. He
repeats the condition of the grant which they had already agreed to,
[Deu 3:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#018). That they should send a
strong detachment over Jordan to lead the van in the conquest of Canaan,
who should not return to their families, at least not to settle (though
for a time they might retire thither into winter quarters, at the end of
a campaign), till they had seen their brethren in as full possession of
their respective allotments as they themselves were now in of theirs.
They must hereby be taught not to look at their own things only, but at
the things of others, [Phi 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#004). It ill
becomes an Israelite to be selfish, and to prefer any private interest
before the public welfare. When we are rest we should desire to see our
brethren at rest too, and should be ready to do what we can towards it;
for we are not born for ourselves, but are members one of another. A
good man cannot rejoice much in the comforts of his family unless withal
he sees peace upon Israel, [Psa 128:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#006).

[Deuteronomy 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 3:21</span></span>

Here is I. The encouragement which Moses gave to Joshua, who was to
succeed him in the government, [Deu
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#021), [Deu
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#022). He commanded him not to fear.
This those that are aged and experienced in the service of God should do
all they can to strengthen the hands of those that are young, and
setting out in religion. Two things he would have him consider for his
encouragement: - 1. What God has done. Joshua had seen what a total
defeat God had given by the forces of Israel to these two kings, and
thence he might easily infer, so shall the Lord do to all the rest of
the kingdoms upon which we are to make war. He must not only infer
thence that thus the Lord can do with them all, for his arm is not
shortened, but thus he will do, for his purpose is not changed; he that
has begun will finish; as for God, his work is perfect. Joshua had seen
it with his own eyes. And the more we have seen of the instances of
divine wisdom, power, and goodness, the more inexcusable we are if we
fear what flesh can do unto us. 2. What God had promised. The Lord your
God he shall fight for you; and that cause cannot but be victorious
which the Lord of hosts fights for. If God be for us, who can be against
us so as to prevail? We reproach our leader if we follow him trembling.

II\. The prayer which Moses made for himself, and the answer which God
gave to that prayer.

1\. His prayer was that, if it were God's will, he might go before
Israel over Jordan into Canaan. At that time, when he had been
encouraging Joshua to fight Israel's battles, taking it for granted that
he must be their leader, he was touched with an earnest desire to go
over himself, which expresses itself not in any passionate and impatient
complaints, or reflections upon the sentence he was under, but in humble
prayers to God for a gracious reversing of it. I besought the Lord.
Note, We should never allow any desires in our hearts which we cannot in
faith offer up to God by prayer; and what desires are innocent, let them
be presented to God. We have not because we ask not. Observe,

(1.) What he pleads here. Two things: - \[1.\] The great experience
which he had had of God's goodness to him in what he had done for
Israel: "Thou hast begun to show thy servant thy greatness. Lord,
perfect what thou hast begun. Thou hast given me to see thy glory in the
conquest of these two kings, and the sight has affected me with wonder
and thankfulness. O let me see more of the outgoings of my God, my King!
This great work, no doubt, will be carried on and completed; let me have
the satisfaction of seeing it." Note, the more we see of God's glory in
his works the more we shall desire to see. The works of the Lord are
great, and therefore are sought out more and more of all those that have
pleasure therein. \[2.\] The good impressions that had been made upon
his heart by what he had seen: For what God is there in heaven or earth
that can do according to thy works? The more we are affected with what
we have seen of God, of his wisdom, power, and goodness, the better we
are prepared for further discoveries. Those shall see the works of God
that admire him in them. Moses had thus expressed himself concerning God
and his works long before ([Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011)), and he still continues of the
same mind, that there are no works worthy to be compared with God's
works, [Psa 86:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#008).

(2.) What he begs: I pray thee let me go over, [Deu
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#025). God had said he should not go
over; yet he prays that he might, not knowing but that the threatening
was conditional, for it was not ratified with an oath, as that
concerning the people was, that they should not enter. Thus Hezekiah
prayed for his own life, and David for the life of his child, after both
had ben expressly threatened; and the former prevailed, though the
latter did not. Moses remembered the time when he had by prayer
prevailed with God to recede from the declarations which he had made of
his wrath against Israel, [Exo 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#014).
And why might he not hope in like manner to prevail for himself? Let me
go over and see the good land. Not, "Let me go over and be a prince and
a ruler there;" he seeks not his own honour, is content to resign the
government to Joshua; but, "Let me go to be a spectator of thy kindness
to Israel, to see what I believe concerning the goodness of the land of
promise." How pathetically does he speak of Canaan, that good land, that
goodly mountain! Note, Those may hope to obtain and enjoy God's favours
that know how to value them. What he means by that goodly mountain we
may learn from [Psa 78:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#054), where it is
said of God's Israel that he brought them to the border of his
sanctuary, even to this mountain which his right hand had purchased,
where it is plainly to be understood of the whole land of Canaan, yet
with an eye to the sanctuary, the glory of it.

2\. God's answer to this prayer had in it a mixture of mercy and
judgment, that he might sing unto God of both.

(1.) There was judgment in the denial of his request, and that in
something of anger too: The Lord was wroth with me for your sakes, [Deu
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#026). God not only sees sin in his
people, but is much displeased with it; and even those that are
delivered from the wrath to come may yet lie under the tokens of God's
wrath in this world, and may be denied some particular favour which
their hearts are much set upon. God is a gracious, tender, loving
Father; but he is angry with his children when they do amiss, and denies
them many a thing that they desire and are ready to cry for. But how was
he wroth with Moses for the sake of Israel? Either, \[1.\] For that sin
which they provoked him to; see [Psa
106:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#032), [Psa
106:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#033). Or, \[2.\] The removal of
Moses at that time, when he could so ill be spared, was a rebuke to all
Israel, and a punishment of their sin. Or, \[3.\] It was for their
sakes, that it might be a warning to them to take heed of offending God
by passionate and unbelieving speeches at any time, after the similitude
of his transgression; for, if this were done to such a green tree, what
should be done to the dry? He acknowledges that God would not hear him.
God had often heard him for Israel, yet he would not hear him for
himself. It was the prerogative of Christ, the great Intercessor, to be
heard always; yet of him his enemies said, He saved others, himself he
could not save, which the Jews would not have upbraided him with had
they considered that Moses, their great prophet, prevailed for others,
but for himself he could not prevail. Though Moses, being one of the
wrestling seed of Jacob, did not seek in vain, yet he had not the thing
itself which he sought for. God may accept our prayers, and yet not
grant us the very thing we pray for.

(2.) Here is mercy mixed with this wrath in several things: - \[1.\] God
quieted the spirit of Moses under the decree that had gone forth by that
word ([Deu 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#026)), Let it suffice thee.
With this word, no doubt, a divine power went to reconcile Moses to the
will of God, and to bring him to acquiesce in it. If God does not by his
providence give us what we desire, yet, if by his grace he makes us
content without it, it comes much to one. "Let it suffice thee to have
God for they father, and heaven for thy portion, though thou hast not
every thing thou wouldest have in this world. Be satisfied with this,
God is all-sufficient." \[2.\] He put an honour upon his prayer in
directing him not to insist upon this request: Speak no more to me of
this matter. It intimates that what God does not think fit to grant we
should not think fit to ask, and that God takes such a pleasure in the
prayer of the upright that it is no pleasure to him, no, not in any
particular instance, to give a denial to it. \[3.\] He promised him a
sight of Canaan from the top of Pisgah, [Deu
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#027). Though he should not have the
possession of it, he should have the prospect of it; not to tantalize
him, but such a sight of it as would yield him true satisfaction, and
would enable him to form a very clear and pleasing idea of that promised
land. Probably Moses had not only his sight preserved for other
purposes, but greatly enlarged for this purpose; for, if he had not had
such a sight of it as others could not have from the same place, it
would have been no particular favour to Moses, nor the matter of a
promise. Even great believers, in this present state, see heaven but at
a distance. \[4.\] He provided him a successor, one who should support
the honour of Moses and carry on and complete that glorious work which
the heart of Moses was so much upon, the bringing of Israel to Canaan,
and settling them there ([Deu 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#028)):
Charge Joshua and encourage him in this work. Those to whom God gives a
charge, he will be sure to give encouragement to. And it is a comfort to
the church's friends (when they are dying and going off) to see God's
work likely to be carried on by other hands, when they are silent in the
dust.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 4](deu004)

</div>
