<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu026)  [Next](deu028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 27:0</span></span>

Moses having very largely and fully set before the people their duty,
both to God and one another, in general and in particular instances, -
having shown them plainly what is good, and what the law requires of
them, - and having in the close of the foregoing chapter laid them under
the obligation both of the command and the covenant, he comes in this
chapter to prescribe outward means, I. For the helping of their
memories, that they might not forget the law as a strange thing. They
must write all the words of this law upon stones ([Deu
27:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001)). II. For the moving of their
affections, that they might not be indifferent to the law as a light
thing. Whey they came into Canaan, the blessings and curses which were
the sanctions of the law, were to be solemnly pronounced in the hearing
of all Israel, who were to say Amen to them (v. 11-26). And if such a
solemnity as this would not make a deep impression upon them, and affect
them with the great things of God's law, nothing would.

[Deuteronomy 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 27:1</span></span>

Here is, I. A general charge to the people to keep God's commandments;
for in vain did they know them, unless they would do them. This is
pressed upon them, 1. With all authority. Moses with the elders of
Israel, the rulers of each tribe ([Deu
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001)), and again, Moses and the
priests the Levites ([Deu 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#009)); so
that the charge is given by Moses who was king in Jeshurun, and by their
lords, both spiritual and temporal, in concurrence with him. Lest they
should think that it was Moses only, an old and dying man, that made
such ado about religion, or the priests and Levites only, whose trade it
was to attend religion and who had their maintenance out of it, the
elders of Israel, whom God had placed in honour and power over them, and
who were men of business in the world and likely to be so long so when
Moses was gone, they commanded their people to keep God's law. Moses,
having put some of his honour upon them, joins them in commission with
himself, in giving this charge, as Paul sometimes in his epistles joins
with himself Silvanus and Timotheus. Note, All that have any interest in
others, or power over them, should use it for the support and
furtherance of religion among them. Though the supreme power of a nation
provide ever so good laws for this purpose, if inferior magistrates in
their places, and ministers in theirs, and masters of families in
theirs, do not execute their offices, it will all be to little effect.
2. With all importunity. They press it upon them with the utmost
earnestness ([Deu 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#009), [Deu
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#010)): Take heed and hearken, O
Israel. It is a thing that requires and deserves the highest degree of
caution and attention. They tell them of their privilege and honour:
"This day thou hast become the people of the Lord thy God, the Lord
having avouched thee to be his own, and being now about to put thee in
possession of Canaan which he had long promised as thy God ([Gen
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007), [Gen
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008)), and which if he had failed to
do in due time, he would have been ashamed to be called thy God, [Heb
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#016). Now thou art more than ever his
people, therefore obey his voice." Privileges should be improved as
engagements to duty. Should not a people be ruled by their God?

II\. A particular direction to them with great solemnity to register the
words of this law, as soon as they came into Canaan. It was to be done
but once, and at their entrance into the land of promise, in token of
their taking possession of it under the several provisos and conditions
contained in this law. There was a solemn ratification of the covenant
between God and Israel at Mount Sinai, when an altar was erected, with
twelve pillars, and the book of the covenant was produced, [Exo
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#004). That which is here appointed is
a somewhat similar solemnity.

1\. They must set up a monument on which they must write the words of
this law. (1.) The monument itself was to be very mean, only rough
unhewn stone plastered over; not polished marble or alabaster, nor brass
tables, but common plaster upon stone, [Deu
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#002). The command is repeated ([Deu
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#004)), and orders are given that it be
written, not very finely, to be admired by the curious, but very
plainly, that he who runs may read it, [Hab
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002). The word of God needs not to be
set off by the art of man, nor embellished with the enticing words of
man's wisdom. But, (2.) The inscription was to be very great: All the
words of this law, [Deu 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#003), and
again, [Deu 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#008). Some understand it
only of the covenant between God and Israel, mentioned [Deu
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#017), [Deu
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#018). Let this help be set up for a
witness, like that memorial of the covenant between Laban and Jacob,
which was nothing but a heap of stones thrown hastily together, upon
which they did eat together in token of friendship ([Gen
31:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#046), [Gen
31:47](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#047)), and that stone which Joshua
set up, [Jos 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#026). Others think that
the curses of the covenant in this chapter were written upon this
monument, the rather because it was set up in Mount Ebal, [Deu
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#004). Others think that the whole book
of Deuteronomy was written upon this monument, or at least the statutes
and judgments from ch. 12 to the end of ch. 26. And it is not improbable
that the heap might be so large as, taking in all the sides of it, to
contain so copious an inscription, unless we will suppose (as some do)
that the ten commandments only were here written, as an authentic copy
of the close rolls which were laid up in the ark. They must write this
when they had gone into Canaan, and yet Moses says ([Deu
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#003)), "Write it that thou mayest go
in," that is, "that thou mayest go in with comfort, and assurance of
success and settlement, otherwise it were well for thee not to go in at
all. Write it as the conditions of thy entry, and own that thou comest
in upon these terms and no other: since Canaan is given by promise, it
must be held by obedience."

2\. They must also set up an altar. By the words of the law which were
written upon the plaster, God spoke to them; by the altar, and the
sacrifices offered upon it, they spoke to God; and thus was communion
kept up between them and God. The word and prayer must go together.
Though they might not, of their own heads, set up any altar besides that
at the tabernacle, yet, but the appointment of God, they might upon a
special occasion. Elijah built a temporary altar of twelve unhewn
stones, similar to this, when he brought Israel back to the covenant
which was now made, [Kg1 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#031), [Kg1
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#032). Now, (1.) This altar must be
made of such stones as they found ready upon the field, not newly cut
out of the rock, much less squared artificially: Thou shalt not lift up
any iron tool upon them, [Deu 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#005).
Christ, our altar, is a stone cut out of the mountain without hands
([Dan 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034), [Dan
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035)), and therefore refused by the
builders, as having no form or comeliness, but accepted of God the
Father, and made the head of the corner. (2.) Burnt-offerings and
peace-offerings must be offered upon this altar ([Deu
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#006), [Deu
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#007)), that by them they might give
glory to God and obtain favour. Where the law was written, an altar was
set up close by it, to signify that we could not look with any comfort
upon the law, being conscious to ourselves of the violation of it, if it
were not for the great sacrifice by which atonement is made for sin; and
the altar was set up on Mount Ebal, the mount on which those tribes
stood that said Amen to the curses, to intimate that through Christ we
are redeemed from the curse of the law. In the Old Testament the words
of the law are written, with the curse annexed, which would fill us with
horror and amazement if we had not in the New Testament (which is bound
up with it) an altar erected close by it, which gives us everlasting
consolation. (3.) They must eat there, and rejoice before the Lord their
God, [Deu 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#007). This signified, \[1.\]
The consent they gave to the covenant; for the parties to a covenant
ratified the covenant by feasting together. They were partakers of the
altar, which was God's table, as his servants and tenants, and such they
acknowledged themselves, and, being put in possession of this good land,
bound themselves to pay the rent and to do the services reserved by the
royal grant. \[2.\] The comfort they took in the covenant; they had
reason to rejoice in the law, when they had an altar, a remedial law, so
near it. It was a great favour to them, and a token for good, that God
gave them his statutes; and that they were owned as the people of God,
and the children of the promise, was what they had reason to rejoice in,
though, when this solemnity was to be performed, they were not put in
full possession of Canaan; but God has spoken in his holiness, and then
I will rejoice, Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine; all my own.

[Deuteronomy 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 27:11</span></span>

When the law was written, to be seen and read by all men, the sanctions
of it were to be published, which, to complete the solemnity of their
covenanting with God, they were deliberately to declare their
approbation of. This they were before directed to do ([Deu
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#029), [Deu
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#030)), and therefore the appointment
here begins somewhat abruptly, [Deu
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#012). There were, it seems, in
Canaan, that part of it which afterwards fell to the lot of Ephraim
(Joshua's tribe), two mountains that lay near together, with a valley
between, one called Gerizim and the other Ebal. On the sides of these
two mountains, which faced one another, all the tribes were to be drawn
up, six on one side and six on the other, so that in the valley, at the
foot of each mountain, they came pretty near together, so near as that
the priests standing betwixt them might be heard by those that were next
them on both sides; then when silence was proclaimed, and attention
commanded, one of the priests, or perhaps more at some distance from
each other, pronounced with a loud voice one of the curses here
following, and all the people that stood on the side and foot of Mount
Ebal (those that stood further off taking the signal from those that
stood nearer and within hearing) said Amen; then the contrary blessing
was pronounced, "Blessed is he that doth not so or so," and then those
that stood on the side, and at the foot, of Mount Gerizim, said Amen.
This could not but affect them very much with the blessings and curses,
the promises and threatenings, of the law, and not only acquaint all the
people with them, but teach them to apply them to themselves.

I. Something is to be observed, in general, concerning this solemnity,
which was to be done, but once and not repeated, but would be talked of
to posterity,. 1. God appointed which tribes should stand upon Mount
Gerizim and which on Mount Ebal ([Deu
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#012), [Deu
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#013)), to prevent the disputes that
might have arisen if they had been left to dispose of themselves. The
six tribes that were appointed for blessing were all the children of the
free women, for to such the promise belongs, [Gal
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#031). Levi is here put among the rest,
to teach ministers to apply to themselves the blessing and curse which
they preach to others, and by faith to set their own Amen to it. 2. Of
those tribes that were to say Amen to the blessings it is said, They
stood to bless the people, but of the other, They stood to curse, not
mentioning the people, as loth to suppose that any of this people whom
God had taken for his own should lay themselves under the curse. Or,
perhaps, the different mode of expression intimates that there was to be
but one blessing pronounced in general upon the people of Israel, as a
happy people, and that should ever be so, if they were obedient; and to
this blessing the tribes on Mount Gerizim were to say Amen - "Happy art
thou, O Israel, and mayest thou ever be so;" but then the curses come in
as exceptions from the general rule, and we know exceptio firmat regulam
- the exception confirms the rule. Israel is a blessed people, but, if
there be any particular persons even among them that do such and such
things as are mentioned, let them know that they have no part nor lot in
the matter, but are under a curse. This shows how ready God is to bestow
the blessing; if any fall under the curse, they may thank themselves,
they bring it upon their own heads. 3. The Levites or priests, such of
them as were appointed for that purpose, were to pronounce the curses as
well as the blessings. They were ordained to bless ([Deu
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008)), the priests did it daily, [Num
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#023). But they must separate between
the precious and the vile; they must not give that blessing
promiscuously, but must declare it to whom it did not belong, lest those
who had no right to it themselves should think to share in it by being
in the crowd. Note, Ministers must preach the terrors of the law as well
as the comforts of the gospel; must not only allure people to their duty
with the promises of a blessing, but awe them to it with the
threatenings of a curse. 4. The curses are here expressed, but not the
blessings; for as many as were under the law were under the curse, but
it was a honour reserved for Christ to bless us, and so to do that for
us which the law could not do, in that it was weak. In Christ's sermon
upon the mount, which was the true Mount Gerizim, we have blessings
only, [Mat 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003), etc. 5. To each of the
curses the people were to say Amen. It is easy to understand the meaning
of Amen to the blessings. The Jews have a saying to encourage people to
say Amen to the public prayers, Whosoever answereth Amen, after him that
blesseth, he is as he that blesseth. But how could they say Amen to the
curses? (1.) It was a profession of their faith in the truth of them,
that these and the like curses were not bug-bears to frighten children
and fools, but the real declarations of the wrath of God against the
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, not one iota of which shall fall
to the ground. (2.) It was an acknowledgment of the equity of these
curses; when they said Amen, they did in effect say, not only, It is
certain it shall be so, but, It is just it should be so. Those who do
such things deserve to fall and lie under the curse. (3.) It was such an
imprecation upon themselves as strongly obliged them to have nothing to
do with those evil practices upon which the curse is here entailed. "Let
God's wrath fall upon us if ever we do such things." We read of those
that entered into a curse (and with us that is the usual form of a
solemn oath) to walk in God's law [Neh
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#029). Nay, the Jews say (as the
learned bishop Patrick quotes them), "All the people, by saying this
Amen, became bound for one another, that they would observe God's laws,
by which every man was obliged, as far as he could, to prevent his
neighbour from breaking these laws, and to reprove those that had
offended, lest they should bear sin and the curse for them."

II\. Let us now observe what are the particular sins against which the
curses are here denounced.

1\. Sins against the second commandment. This flaming sword is set to
keep that commandment first, [Deu
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015). Those are here cursed, not only
that worship images, but that make them or keep them, if they be such
(or like such) as idolaters used in the service of their gods. Whether
it be a graven image or a molten image, it comes all to one, it is an
abomination to the Lord, even though it be not set up in public, but in
a secret place, - though it be not actually worshipped, nor is it said
to be designed for worship, but reserved there with respect and a
constant temptation. He that does this may perhaps escape punishment
from men, but he cannot escape the curse of God.

2\. Against the fifth commandment, [Deu
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#016). The contempt of parents is a
sin so heinous that it is put next to the contempt of God himself. If a
man abused his parents, either in word or deed, he fell under the
sentence of the magistrate, and must be put to death, [Exo
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#015), [Exo
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#017). But to set light by them in his
heart was a thing which the magistrate could not take cognizance of, and
therefore it is here laid under the curse of God, who knows the heart.
Those are cursed children that carry themselves scornfully and
insolently towards their parents.

3\. Against the eighth commandment. The curse of God is here fastened,
(1.) Upon an unjust neighbour that removes the land-marks, [Deu
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#017). See [Deu
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#014). Upon an unjust counsellor, who,
when his advice is asked, maliciously directs his friend to that which
he knows will be to his prejudice, which is making the blind to wander
out of the way, under pretence of directing him in the way, than which
nothing can be either more barbarous or more treacherous, [Deu
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#018). Those that seduce others from
the way of God's commandments, and entice them to sin, bring this curse
upon themselves, which our Saviour has explained, [Mat
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014), The blind lead the blind, and
both shall fall into the ditch. (3.) Upon an unjust judge, that
perverteth the judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and widow, whom he
should protect and vindicate, [Deu
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#019). These are supposed to be poor
and friendless (nothing to be got by doing them a kindness, nor any
thing lost by disobliging them), and therefore judges may be tempted to
side with their adversaries against right and equity; but cursed are
such judges.

4\. Against the seventh commandment. Incest is a cursed sin, with a
sister, a father's wife, or a mother-in-law, [Deu
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#020), [Deu
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#022), [Deu
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#023). These crimes not only exposed
men to the sword of the magistrate ([Lev
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#011)), but, which is more dreadful,
to the wrath of God; bestiality likewise, [Deu
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#021).

5\. Against the sixth commandment. Two of the worst kinds of murder are
here specified: - (1.) Murder unseen, when a man does not set upon his
neighbour as a fair adversary, giving him an opportunity to defend
himself, but smites him secretly ([Deu
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#024)), as by poison or otherwise,
when he sees not who hurts him. See [Psa
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#008), [Psa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#009). Though such secret murders may
go undiscovered and unpunished, yet the curse of God will follow them.
(2.) Murder under colour of law, which is the greatest affront to God,
for it makes an ordinance of his to patronise the worst of villains, and
the greatest wrong to our neighbour, for it ruins his honour as well as
his life: cursed therefore is he that will be hired, or bribed, to
accuse, or to convict, or to condemn, and so to slay, an innocent
person, [Deu 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#025). See [Psa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005).

6\. The solemnity concludes with a general curse upon him that
confirmeth not, or, as it might be read, that performeth not, all the
words of this law to do them, [Deu
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026). By our obedience to the law we
set our seal to it, and so confirm it, as by our disobedience we do what
lies in us to disannul it, [Psa
119:126](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#126). The apostle, following all
the ancient versions, reads it, Cursed is every one that continues not,
[Gal 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010). Lest those who were guilty
of other sins, not mentioned in this commination, should think
themselves safe from the curse, this last reaches all; not only those
who do the evil which the law forbids, but those also who omit the good
which the law requires: to this we must all say Amen, owning ourselves
under the curse, justly to have deserved it, and that we must certainly
have perished for ever under it, if Christ had not redeemed us from the
curse of the law, by being made a curse for us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 28](deu028)

</div>
