<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu010)  [Next](deu012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 11:0</span></span>

With this chapter Moses concludes his preface to the repetition of the
statutes and judgments which they must observe to do. He repeats the
general charge ([Deu 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#001)), and,
having in the close of the foregoing chapter begun to mention the great
things God had done among them, in this, I. He specifies several of the
great works God had done before their eyes ([Deu
11:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#002)). II. He sets before them, for
the future, life and death, the blessing and the curse, according as
they did, or did not, keep God's commandments, that they should
certainly prosper if they were obedient, should be blessed with plenty
of all good things ([Deu 11:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#008)), and
with victory over their enemies, and the enlargement of their coast
thereby ([Deu 11:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#022)). But their
disobedience would undoubtedly be their ruin ([Deu
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#016), [Deu
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#017)). III. He directs them what
means to use that they might keep in mind the law of God ([Deu
11:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#018)). And, IV. Concludes all with
solemnly charging them to choose which they would have, the blessing or
the curse ([Deu 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#026), etc.).

[Deuteronomy 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 11:1</span></span>

Because God has made thee as the stars of heaven for multitude (so the
preceding chapter concludes), therefore thou shalt love the Lord thy God
(so this begins). Those whom God has built up into families, whose
beginning was small, but whose latter end greatly increases, should use
that as an argument with themselves why they should serve God. Thou
shalt keep his charge, that is, the oracles of his word and ordinances
of his worship, with which they were entrusted and for which they were
accountable. It is a phrase often used concerning the office of the
priests and Levites, for all Israel was a kingdom of priests, a holy
nation. Observe the connection of these two: Thou shalt love the Lord
and keep his charge, since love will work in obedience, and that only is
acceptable obedience which flows from a principle of love. [Jo1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#003).

Mention is made of the great and terrible works of God which their eyes
had seen, [Deu 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#007). This part of his
discourse Moses addresses to the seniors among the people, the elders in
age; and probably the elders in office were so, and were now his
immediate auditors: there were some among them that could remember their
deliverance out of Egypt, all above fifty, and to them he speaks this,
not to the children, who knew it by hearsay only, [Deu
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#002). Note, God's mercies to us when
we were young we should remember and retain the impressions of when we
are old; what our eyes have seen, especially in our early days, has
affected us, and should be improved by us long after. They had seen what
terrible judgments God had executed upon the enemies of Israel's peace,
1. Upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians that enslaved them. What a fine
country was ruined and laid waste by one plague after another, to force
Israel's enlargement! [Deu 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#003). What
a fine army was entirely drowned in the Red Sea, to prevent Israel's
being re-enslaved! [Deu 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#004). Thus did
he give Egypt for their ransom, [Isa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003). Rather shall that famous kingdom
be destroyed than that Israel shall not be delivered. 2. Upon Dathan and
Abiram that embroiled them. Remember what he did in the wilderness ([Deu
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#005)), by how many necessary
chastisements (as they are called, [Deu
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#002)) they were kept from ruining
themselves, particularly when those daring Reubenites defied the
authority of Moses and headed a dangerous rebellion against God himself,
which threatened the ruin of a whole nation, and might have ended in
that if the divine power had not immediately crushed the rebellion by
burying the rebels alive, them and all that was in their possession,
[Deu 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#006). What was done against them,
though misinterpreted by the disaffected party ([Num
16:41](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#041)), was really done in mercy to
Israel. To be saved from the mischiefs of insurrections at home is as
great a kindness to a people, and therefore lays them under as strong
obligations, as protection from the invasion of enemies abroad.

[Deuteronomy 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 11:8</span></span>

Still Moses urges the same subject, as loth to conclude till he had
gained his point. "If thou wilt enter into life, if thou wilt enter into
Canaan, a type of that life, and find it a good land indeed to thee,
keep the commandments: Keep all the commandments which I command you
this day; love God, and serve him with all your heart."

I. Because this was the way to get and keep possession of the promised
land. 1. It was the way to get possession ([Deu
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#008)): That you may be strong for war,
and so go in and possess it. So little did they know either of hardship
or hazard in the wars of Canaan that he does not say they should go in
and fight for it; no, they had nothing in effect to do but go in and
possess it. He does not go about to teach them the art of war, how to
draw the bow, and use the sword, and keep ranks, that they might be
strong, and go in and possess the land; no, but let them keep God's
commandments, and their religion, while they are true to it, will be
their strength, and secure their success. (2.) It was the way to keep
possession ([Deu 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#009)): That you may
prolong your days in this land that your eye is upon. Sin tends to the
shortening of the days of particular persons and to the shortening of
the days of a people's prosperity; but obedience will be a lengthening
out of their tranquillity.

II\. Because the land of Canaan, into which they were going, had a more
sensible dependence upon the blessing of heaven than the land of Egypt
had, [Deu 11:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#010). Egypt was a
country fruitful enough, but it was all flat, and was watered, not as
other countries with rain (it is said of Egypt, [Zac
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#018), that it has no rain), but by
the overflowing of the river Nile at a certain season of the year, to
the improving of which there was necessary a great deal of the art and
labour of the husbandman, so that in Egypt a man must bestow as much
cost and pains upon a field as upon a garden of herbs. And this made
them the more apt to imagine that the power of their own hands got them
this wealth. But the land of Canaan was an uneven country, a land of
hills and valleys, which not only gave a more pleasing prospect to the
eye, but yielded a greater variety of soils for the several purposes of
the husbandman. It was a land that had no great rivers in it, except
Jordan, but drank water of the rain of heaven, and so, 1. Saved them a
great deal of labour. While the Egyptians were ditching and guttering in
the fields, up to the knees in mud, to bring water to their land, which
otherwise would soon become like the heath in the wilderness, the
Israelites could sit in their houses, warm and easy, and leave it to God
to water their land with the former and the latter rain, which is called
the river of God ([Psa 65:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009)), perhaps
in allusion to, and contempt of, the river of Egypt, which that nation
was so proud of. Note, The better God has provided, by our outward
condition, for our ease and convenience, the more we should abound in
his service: the less we have to do for our bodies the more we should do
for God and our souls. 2. So he directed them to look upwards to God,
who giveth us rain form heaven and fruitful seasons ([Act
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)), and promised to be himself as
the dew unto Israel, [Hos 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#005). Note,
(1.) Mercies bring with them the greatest comfort and sweetness when we
see them coming from heaven, the immediate gifts of divine Providence.
(2.) The closer dependence we have upon God the more cheerful we should
be in our obedience to him. See how Moses here magnifies the land of
Canaan above all other lands, that the eyes of God were always upon it,
that is, they should be so, to see that nothing was wanting, while they
kept close to God and duty; its fruitfulness should be not so much the
happy effect of its soil as the immediate fruit of the divine blessing;
this may be inferred from its present state, for it is said to be at
this day, now that God has departed from it, as barren a spot of ground
as perhaps any under heaven. Call it not Naomi: call it Marah.

III\. Because God would certainly bless them with an abundance of all
good things if they would love him and serve him ([Deu
11:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#013)): I will give you the rain of
your land in due season, so that they should neither want it when the
ground called for it nor have it in excess; but they should have the
former rain, which fell at seed-time, and the latter rain, which fell
before the harvest, [Amo 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#007). This
represented all the seasonable blessings which God would bestow upon
them, especially spiritual comforts, which should come as the latter and
former, rain, [Hos 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003). And the earth
thus watered produced, 1. Fruits for the service of man, corn and wine,
and oil, [Psa 104:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#013). 2. Grass for
the cattle, that they also might be serviceable to man, that he might
eat of them and be full, [Deu 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#015).
Godliness hath here the promise of the life that now is; but the favour
of God shall put gladness into the heart, more than the increase of
corn, and wine, and oil will.

IV\. Because their revolt from God to idols. would certainly be their
ruin: Take heed that your hearts be not deceived, [Deu
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#016), [Deu
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#017). All that forsake God to set
their affection upon, or pay their devotion to, any creature, will find
themselves wretchedly deceived to their own destruction; and this will
aggravate it that it was purely for want of taking heed. A little care
would have prevented their being imposed upon by the great deceiver. To
awaken them to take heed, Moses here tells them plainly that if they
should turn aside to other gods, 1. They would provoke the wrath of God
against them; and who knows the power of that anger? 2. Good things
would be turned away from them; the heaven would withhold its rain, and
then of course the earth would not yield its fruit. 3. Evil things would
come upon them; they would perish quickly form off this good land. And
the better the land was the more grievous it would be to perish from it.
The goodness of the land would not be their security, when the badness
of the inhabitants had made them ripe for ruin.

[Deuteronomy 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 11:18</span></span>

Here, I. Moses repeats the directions he had given for the guidance and
assistance of the people in their obedience, and for the keeping up of
religion among them ([Deu 11:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#018)),
which is much to the same purport with what we had before, [Deu
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#006), etc. Let us all be directed by
the three rules here given: - 1. Let our hearts be filled with the word
of God: Lay up these words in your heart and in your soul. The heart
must be the treasury or store-house in which the word of God must be
laid up, to be used upon all occasions. We cannot expect good practices
in the conversation, unless there be good thoughts, good affections, and
good principles, in the heart. 2. Let our eyes be fixed upon the word of
God. "Bind these words for a sign upon your hand, which is always in
view ([Isa 49:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#016)), and as frontlets
between your eyes, which you cannot avoid the sight of; let them be as
ready and familiar to you, and have your eye as constantly upon them, as
if they were written upon your door-posts, and could not be overlooked
either when you go out or when you come in." Thus we must lay God's
judgments before us, having a constant regard to them, as the guide of
our way, as the rule of our work, [Psa
119:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#030). 3. Let our tongues be employed
about the word of God. Let it be the subject of our familiar discourse,
wherever we are; especially with our children, who must be taught the
service of God, as the one thing needful, much more needful than either
the rules of decency or the calling they must live by in this world.
Great care and pains must be taken to acquaint children betimes, and to
affect them, with the word of God and the wondrous things of his law.
Nor will any thing contribute more to the prosperity and perpetuity of
religion in a nation than the good education of children: if the seed be
holy, it is the substance of a land.

II\. He repeats the assurances he had before given them, in God's name,
of prosperity and success if they were obedient. 1. They should have a
happy settlement, [Deu 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#021). Their
days should be multiplied; and, when they were fulfilled, the days of
their children likewise should be many, as the days of heaven, that is,
Canaan should be sure to them and their heirs for ever, as long as the
world stands, if they did not by their own sin throw themselves out of
it. 2. It should not be in the power of their enemies to give them any
disturbance, nor make them upon any account uneasy. "If you will keep
God's commandments, and be careful to do your duty ([Deu
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#022)), God will not only crown the
labours of the husbandman with plenty of the fruits of the earth, but he
will own and succeed the more glorious undertakings of the men of war.
Victory shall attend your arms; which way soever they turn, God will
drive out these nations, and put you in possession of their land," [Deu
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#023), [Deu
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#024). Their territories should be
enlarged to the utmost extent of the promise, [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018). And all their neighbours should
stand in awe of them, [Deu 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#025).
Nothing contributes more to the making of a nation considerable abroad,
valuable to its friends and formidable to its enemies, than religion
reigning in it; for who can be against those that have God for them? And
he is certainly for those that are sincerely for him, [Pro
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#034).

[Deuteronomy 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 11:26</span></span>

Here Moses concludes his general exhortations to obedience; and his
management is very affecting, and such as, one would think, should have
engaged them for ever to God, and should have left impressions upon them
never to be worn out.

I. He sums up all his arguments for obedience in two words, the blessing
and the curse ([Deu 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#026)), that is,
the rewards and the punishments, as they stand in the promises and the
threatenings, which are the great sanctions of the law, taking hold of
hope and fear, those two handles of the soul, by which it is caught,
held, and managed. These two, the blessing and the curse, he set before
them, that is, 1. He explained them, that they might know them; he
enumerated the particulars contained both in the blessing and in the
curse, that they might see the more fully how desirable the blessing
was, and how dreadful the curse. 2. He confirmed them, that they might
believe them, made it evident to them, by the proofs he produced of his
own commission, that the blessing was not a fool's paradise, nor the
curse a bugbear, but that both were real declarations of the purpose of
God concerning them. 3. He charged them to choose which of these they
would have, so fairly does he deal with them, and so far is he from
putting out the eyes of these men, as he was charged, [Num
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#014). They and we are plainly told on
what terms we stand with Almighty God. (1.) If we be obedient to his
laws, we may be sure of a blessing, [Deu
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#027). But, (2.) If we be disobedient,
we may be as sure of a curse, [Deu
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#028). Say you to the righteous (for
God has said it, and all the world cannot unsay it) that it shall be
well with them: but woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with them.

II\. He appoints a public and solemn proclamation to be made of the
blessing and curse which he had set before them, upon the two mountains
of Gerizim and Ebal, [Deu 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#029), [Deu
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#030). We have more particular
directions for this solemnity in [Deu
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#011), etc., and an account of the
performance of it, [Jos 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#033), etc. It
was to be done, and was done, immediately upon their coming into Canaan,
that when they first took possession of that land they might know upon
what terms they stood. The place where this was to be done is
particularly described by Moses, though he never saw it, which is one
circumstance among many that evidences his divine instructions. It is
said be near the plain, or oaks, or meadows, of Moreh, which was one of
the first places that Abraham came to in Canaan; so that in sending them
thither, to hear the blessing and the curse, God reminded them of the
promise he made to Abraham in that very place, [Gen
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006), [Gen
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007). The mention of this appointment
here serves, 1. For the encouragement of their faith in the promise of
God, that they should be masters of Canaan quickly. Do it (says Moses)
on the other side Jordan ([Deu 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#030)),
for you may be confident you shall pass over Jordan, [Deu
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#031). The institution of this service
to be done in Canaan was an assurance to them that they should be
brought into possession of it, and a token like that which God gave to
Moses ([Exo 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#012)): You shall serve God
upon this mountain. And, 2. It serves for an engagement upon them to be
obedient, that they might escape that curse, and obtain that blessing,
which, besides what they had already heard, they must shortly be
witnesses to the solemn publication of ([Deu
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#032)): "You shall observe to do the
statutes and judgements, that you may not in that solemnity be witnesses
against yourselves."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 12](deu012)

</div>
