<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu019)  [Next](deu021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 20:0</span></span>

This chapter settles the militia, and establishes the laws and
ordinances of war, I. Relating to the soldiers. 1. Those must be
encouraged that were drawn up to battle ([Deu
20:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001)). 2. Those must be dismissed
and sent back again whose private affairs called for their attendance at
home ([Deu 20:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#005)), or whose weakness
and timidity unfitted them for service in the field ([Deu
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#008), [Deu
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#009)). II. Relating to the enemies
they made war with. 1. The treaties they must make with the cities that
were far off ([Deu 20:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010)). 2. The
destruction they must make of the people into whose land they were going
([Deu 20:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#016)). 3. The care they must
take, in besieging cities, not to destroy the fruit-trees ([Deu
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#019), [Deu
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#020)).

[Deuteronomy 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 20:1</span></span>

Israel was at this time to be considered rather as a camp than as a
kingdom, entering upon an enemy's country, and not yet settled in a
country of their own; and, besides the war they were now entering upon
in order to their settlement, even after their settlement they could
neither protect nor enlarge their coast without hearing the alarms of
war. It was therefore needful that they should have directions given
them in their military affairs; and in these verses they are directed in
managing, marshalling, and drawing up their own forces. And it is
observable that the discipline of war here prescribed is so far from
having any thing in it harsh or severe, as is usual in martial law, that
the intent of the whole is, on the contrary, to encourage the soldiers,
and to make their service easy to them.

I. Those that were disposed to fight must be encouraged and animated
against their fears.

1\. Moses here gives a general encouragement, which the leaders and
commanders in the war must take to themselves: "Be not afraid of them,
[Deu 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001). Though the enemy have ever
so much the advantage by their numbers (being more than thou), and by
their cavalry (their armies being much made up of horses and chariots,
which thou art not allowed to multiply), yet decline not coming to a
battle with them, dread not the issue, nor doubt of success." Two things
they must encourage themselves with in their wars, provided they kept
close to their God and their religion, otherwise they forfeited these
encouragements: - (1.) The presence of God with them: "The Lord thy God
is with thee, and therefore thou art not in danger, nor needest thou be
afraid." See [Isa 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010). (2.) The
experience they and their fathers had had of God's power and goodness in
bringing them out of the land of Egypt, in defiance of Pharaoh and all
his hosts, which was not only in general a proof of the divine
omnipotence, but to them in particular a pledge of what God would do
further for them. He that saved them from those greater enemies would
not suffer them to be run down by those that were every way less
considerable, and thus to have all he had done for them undone again.

2\. This encouragement must be particularly addressed to the common
soldiers by a priest appointed, and, the Jews say, anointed, for that
purpose, whom they call the anointed of the war, a very proper title for
our anointed Redeemer, the captain of our salvation: This priest, in
God's name, was to animate the people; and who so fit to do that as he
whose office it was as priest to pray for them? For the best
encouragements arise from the precious promises made to the prayer of
faith. This priest must, (1.) Charge them not to be afraid ([Deu
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#003)), for nothing weakens the hands
so much as that which makes the heart tremble, [Deu
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#003). There is need of precept upon
precept to this purport, as there is here: Let not your hearts be tender
(so the word is), to receive all the impressions of fear, but let a
believing confidence in the power and promise of God harden them. Fear
not, and do not make haste (so the word is), for he that believeth doth
not make more haste than good speed. "Do not make haste either rashly to
anticipate your advantages or basely to fly off upon every
disadvantage." (2.) He must assure them of the presence of God with
them, to own and plead their righteous cause, and not only to save them
from their enemies, but to give them victory over them, [Deu
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#004). Note, Those have no reason to
fear that have God with them. The giving of this encouragement by a
priest, one of the Lord's ministers, intimates, \[1.\] That it is very
fit that armies should have chaplains, not only to pray for them, but to
preach to them, both to reprove that which would hinder their success
and to raise their hopes of it. \[2.\] That it is the work of Christ's
ministers to encourage his good soldiers in their spiritual conflict
with the world and the flesh, and to assure them of a conquest, yea,
more than a conquest, through Christ that loved us.

II\. Those that were indisposed to fight must be discharged, whether the
indisposition did arise,

1\. From the circumstances of a man's outward condition; as, (1.) If he
had lately built or purchased a new house, and had not taken possession
of it, had not dedicated it ([Deu
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#005)), that is, made a solemn festival
for the entertainment of his friends, that came to him to welcome him to
his house; let him go home and take the comfort of that which God had
blessed him with, till, by enjoying it for some time, he become less
fond of it, and consequently less disturbed in the war by the thoughts
of it, and more willing to lie and leave it. For this is the nature of
all our worldly enjoyments, that they please us best at first; after a
while we see the vanity of them. Some think that this dedication of
their houses was a religious act, and that they took possession of them
with prayers and praises, with a solemn devoting of themselves and all
their enjoyments to the service and honour of God. David penned the 30th
Psalm on such an occasion, as appears by the title. Note, He that has a
house of his own should dedicate it to God by setting up and keeping up
the fear and worship of God in it, that he may have a church in his
house; and nothing should be suffered to divert a man from this. Or,
(2.) If a man had been at a great expense to plant a vineyard, and
longed to eat of the fruit of it, which for the first three years he was
forbidden to do by the law ([Lev
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#023), etc.), let him go home, if he
has a mind, and gratify his own humour with the fruits of it, [Deu
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#006). See how indulgent God is to his
people in innocent things, and how far from being a hard Master. Since
we naturally covet to eat the labour of our hands, rather than an
Israelite should be crossed therein, his service in war shall be
dispensed with., Or, (3.) If a man had made up his mind to be married,
and the marriage were not solemnized, he was at liberty to return ([Deu
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#007)), as also to tarry at home for
one year after marriage ([Deu 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#005)),
for the terrors of war would be disagreeable to a man who had just
welcomed the soft scene of domestic attachment. And God would not be
served in his wars by pressed men, that were forced into the army
against their will, but they must all be perfectly volunteers. [Psa
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003), Thy people shall be willing. In
running the Christian race, and fighting the good fight of faith, we
must lay aside every weight, and all that which would clog and divert
our minds and make us unwilling. The Jewish writers agree that this
liberty to return was allowed only in those wars which they made
voluntarily (as bishop Patrick expresses it), not those which were made
by the divine command against Amalek and the Canaanites, in which every
man was bound to fight.

2\. If a man's indisposition to fight arose from the weakness and
timidity of his own spirit, he had leave to return from the war, [Deu
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#008). This proclamation Gideon made to
his army, and it detached above two-thirds of them, [Jdg
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#003). Some make the fearfulness and
faintheartedness here supposed to arise from the terrors of an evil
conscience, which would make a man afraid to look death and danger in
the face. It was then thought that men of loose and profligate lives
would not be good soldiers, but must needs be both cowards in an army
and curses to it, the shame and trouble of the camp; and therefore those
who were conscious to themselves of notorious guilt were shaken off. But
it seems rather to be meant of a natural fearfulness. It was partly in
kindness to them that they had their discharge (for, though shamed, they
were eased); but much more in kindness to the rest of the army, who were
hereby freed from the incumbrance of such as were useless and
unserviceable, while the danger of infection from their cowardice and
flight was prevented. This is the reason here given: Lest his brethren's
heart fail as well as his heart. Fear is catching, and in an army is of
most pernicious consequence. We must take heed that we fear not the fear
of those that are afraid, [Isa 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#012).

III\. It is here ordered that, when all the cowards were dismissed, then
captains should be nominated ([Deu
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#009)), for it was in a special manner
necessary that the leaders and commanders should be men of courage. That
reform therefore must be made when the army was first mustered and
marshalled. The soldiers of Christ have need of courage, that they may
quit themselves like men, and endure hardness like good soldiers,
especially the officers of his army.

[Deuteronomy 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 20:10</span></span>

They are here directed what method to take in dealing with the cities
(these only are mentioned, [Deu 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010),
but doubtless the armies in the field, and the nations they had occasion
to deal with, are likewise intended) upon which they made war. They must
not make a descent upon any of their neighbours till they had first
given them fair notice, by a public manifesto, or remonstrance, stating
the ground of their quarrel with them. In dealing with the worst of
enemies, the laws of justice and honour must be observed; and, as the
sword must never be taken in hand without cause, so not without cause
shown. War is an appeal, in which the merits of the cause must be set
forth.

I. Even to the proclamation of war must be subjoined a tender of peace,
if they would accept of it upon reasonable terms. That is (say the
Jewish writers), "upon condition that they renounce idolatry, worship
the God of Israel, as proselytes of the gate that were not circumcised,
pay to their new masters a yearly tribute, and submit to their
government:" on these terms the process of war should be stayed, and
their conquerors, upon this submission, were to be their protectors,
[Deu 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010), [Deu
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#011). Some think that even the seven
nations of Canaan were to have this offer of peace made to them; and the
offer was no jest or mockery, though it was of the Lord to harden their
hearts that they should not accept it, [Jos
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#020). Others think that they are
excluded ([Deu 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#016)) not only from
the benefit of that law ([Deu 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#013))
which confines military execution to the males only, but from the
benefit of this also, which allows not to make war till peace was
refused. And I see not how they could proclaim peace to those who by the
law were to be utterly rooted out, and to whom they were to show no
mercy, [Deu 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#002). But for any other
nation which they made war upon, for the enlarging of their coast, the
avenging of any wrong done, or the recovery of any right denied, they
must first proclaim peace to the. Let this show, 1. God's grace in
dealing with sinners: though he might most justly and easily destroy
them, yet, having no pleasure in their ruin, he proclaims peace, and
beseeches them to be reconciled; so that those who lie most obnoxious to
his justice, and ready to fall as sacrifices to it, if they make him an
answer of peace, and open to him, upon condition that they will be
tributaries and servants to him, shall not only be saved from ruin, but
incorporated with his Israel, as fellow-citizens with the saints. 2. Let
it show us our duty in dealing with our brethren: if any quarrel happen,
let us not only be ready to hearken to the proposals of peace, but
forward to make such proposals. We should never make use of the law till
we have first tried to accommodate matters in variance amicably, and
without expense and vexation. We must be for peace, whoever are for war.

II\. If the offers of peace were not accepted, then they must proceed to
push on the war. And let those to whom God offers peace know that if
they reject the offer, and take not the benefit of it within the time
limited, judgment will rejoice against mercy in the execution as much as
now mercy rejoices against judgment in the reprieve. In this case, 1.
There is a promise implied that they should be victorious. It is taken
for granted that the Lord their God would deliver it into their hands,
[Deu 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#013). Note, Those enterprises
which we undertake by a divine warrant, and prosecute by divine
direction, we may expect to succeed in. If we take God's method, we
shall have his blessing. 2. They are ordered, in honour to the public
justice, to put all the soldiers to the sword, for them I understand by
every male ([Deu 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#013)), all that bore
arms (as all then did that were able); but the spoil they are allowed to
take to themselves ([Deu 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#014)), in
which were reckoned the women and children. Note, A justifiable property
is acquired in that which is won in lawful war. God himself owns the
title: The Lord thy God gives it thee; and therefore he must be owned in
it, [Psa 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003).

III\. The nations of Canaan are excepted from the merciful provisions
made by this law. Remnants might be left of the cities that were very
far off ([Deu 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#015)), because by them
they were not in so much danger of being infected with idolatry, nor was
their country so directly and immediately intended in the promise; but
of the cities which were given to Israel for an inheritance no remnants
must be left of their inhabitants ([Deu
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#016)), for it put a slight upon the
promise to admit Canaanites to share with them in the peculiar land of
promise; and for another reason they must be utterly destroyed ([Deu
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#017)), because, since it could not be
expected that they should be cured of their idolatry, if they were left
with that plague-sore upon them they would be in danger of infecting
God's Israel, who were too apt to take the infection: They will teach
you to do after their abominations ([Deu
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#018)), to introduce their customs
into the worship of the God of Israel, and by degrees to forsake him and
to worship false gods; for those that dare violate the second
commandment will not long keep to the first. Strange worships open the
door to strange deities.

IV\. Care is here taken that in the besieging of cities there should not
be any destruction made of fruit-trees, [Deu
20:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#019). In those times, when
besiegers forced their way, not as now with bombs and cannon-ball, but
with battering rams, they had occasion for much timber in carrying on
their sieges: now because, in the heat of war, men are not apt to
consider, as they ought, the public good, it is expressly provided that
fruit-trees should not be used as timber-trees. That reason, for the
tree of the field is man's (the word life we supply), all the ancient
versions, the Septuagint, Targums, etc., read, For is the tree of the
field a man? Or the tree of the field is not a man, that it should come
against thee in the siege, or retire from thee into the bulwark. "Do not
brutishly vent thy rage against the trees that can do thee no harm." But
our translation seems most agreeable to the intent of the law, and it
teaches us, 1. That God is a better friend to man than man is to
himself; and God's law, which we are apt to complain of as a heavy yoke,
consults our interest and comfort, while our own appetites and passions,
of which we are so indulgent, are really enemies to our welfare. The
intent of many of the divine precepts is to restrain us from destroying
that which is our life and food. 2. That armies and their commanders are
not allowed to make what desolation they please in the countries that
are the seat of war. Military rage must always be checked and ruled with
reason. War, though carried on with ever so much caution, is destructive
enough, and should not be made more so than is absolutely necessary.
Generous spirits will show themselves tender, not only of men's lives,
but of their livelihoods; for, though the life is more than meat, yet it
will soon be nothing without meat. 3. The Jews understand this as a
prohibition of all wilful waste upon any account whatsoever. No
fruit-tree is to be destroyed unless it be barren, and cumber the
ground. "Nay," they maintain, "whoso wilfully breaks vessels, tears
clothes, stops wells, pulls down buildings, or destroys meat,
transgresses this law: Thou shalt not destroy." Christ took care that
the broken meat should be gathered up, that nothing might be lost. Every
creature of God is good, and, as nothing is to be refused, so nothing is
to be abused. We may live to want what we carelessly waste.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 21](deu021)

</div>
