<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu027)  [Next](deu029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 28:0</span></span>

This chapter is a very large exposition of two words in the foregoing
chapter, the blessing and the curse. Those were pronounced blessed in
general that were obedient, and those cursed that were disobedient; but,
because generals are not so affecting, Moses here descends to
particulars, and describes the blessing and the curse, not in their
fountains (these are out of sight, and therefore the most considerable,
yet least considered, the favour of God the spring of all the blessings,
and the wrath of God the spring of all the curses), but in their
streams, the sensible effects of the blessing and the curse, for they
are real things and have real effects. I. He describes the blessings
that should come upon them if they were obedient; personal, family, and
especially national, for in that capacity especially they are here
treated with ([Deu 28:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001)). II. He
more largely describes the curses which would come upon them if they
were disobedient; such as would be, I. Their extreme vexation (v.
15-44). 2. Their utter ruin and destruction at last (v. 45-68). This
chapter is much to the same purport with Lev. 26, setting before them
life and death, good and evil; and the promise, in the close of that
chapter, of their restoration, upon their repentance, is here likewise
more largely repeated, ch. 30. Thus, as they had precept upon precept in
the repetition of the law, so they had line upon line in the repetition
of the promises and threatenings. And these are both there and here
delivered, not only as sanctions of the law, what should be
conditionally, but as predictions of the event, what would be certainly,
that for a while the people of Israel would be happy in their obedience,
but that at length they would be undone by their disobedience; and
therefore it is said ([Deu 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001)) that
all those things would come upon them, both the blessing and the curse.

[Deuteronomy 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 28:1</span></span>

The blessings are here put before the curses, to intimate, 1. That God
is slow to anger, but swift to show mercy: he has said it, and sworn,
that he would much rather we would obey and live than sin and die. It is
his delight to bless. 2. That though both the promises and the
threatenings are designed to bring and hold us to our duty, yet it is
better that we be allured to that which is good by a filial hope of
God's favour than that we be frightened to it by a servile fear of his
wrath. That obedience pleases best which comes from a principle of
delight in God's goodness. Now,

I. We have here the conditions upon which the blessing is promised. 1.
It is upon condition that they diligently hearken to the voice of God
([Deu 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001), [Deu
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#002)), that they hear God speaking to
them by his word, and use their utmost endeavours to acquaint themselves
with his will, [Deu 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#013). 2. Upon
condition that they observe and do all his commandments (and in order to
obedience there is need of observation) and that theykeep the
commandments of God ([Deu 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#009)) and
walk in his ways. Not only do them for once, but keep them for ever; not
only set out in his ways, but walk in them to the end. 3. Upon condition
that they should not go aside either to the right hand or to the left,
either to superstition on the one hand, or profaneness on the other; and
particularly that they should not go after other gods ([Deu
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#014)), which was the sin that of all
others they were most prone to, and God would be most displeased with.
Let them take care to keep up religion, both the form and power of it,
in their families and nation, and God would not fail to bless them.

II\. The particulars of this blessing.

1\. It is promised that the providence of God should prosper them in all
their outward concerns. These blessings are said to overtake them, [Deu
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#002). Good people sometimes, under the
sense of their unworthiness, are ready to fly from the blessing and to
conclude that it belongs not to them,; but the blessing shall find them
out and follow them notwithstanding. Thus in the great day the blessing
will overtake the righteous that say, Lord, when saw we thee hungry and
fed thee? [Mat 25:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#037). Observe,

(1.) Several things are enumerated in which God by his providence would
bless them: - \[1.\] They should be safe and easy; a blessing should
rest upon their persons wherever they were, in the city, or in the
field, [Deu 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#003). Whether their
habitation was in town or country, whether they were husbandmen or
tradesmen, whether their business called them into the city or into the
field, they should be preserved from the dangers and have the comforts
of their condition. This blessing should attend them in their journeys,
going out and coming in, [Deu 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#006).
Their persons should be protected, and the affair they went about should
succeed well. Observe here, What a necessary and constant dependence we
have upon God both for the continuance and comfort of this life. We need
him at every turn, in all the various movements of life; we cannot be
safe if he withdraw his protection, nor easy if he suspend his favour;
but, if he bless us, go where we will it is well with us. \[2.\] Their
families should be built up in a numerous issue: blessed shall be the
fruit of thy body ([Deu 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#004)), and in
that the Lord shall make thee plenteous ([Deu
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#011)), in pursuance of the promise
made to Abraham, that his seed should be as the stars of heaven for
multitude, and that God would be a God to them, than which a greater
blessing, and more comprehensive, could not be entailed upon the fruit
of their body. See [Isa 61:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#009). \[3.\]
They should be rich, and have an abundance of all the good things of
this life, which are promised them, not merely that they might have the
pleasure of enjoying them, but (as bishop Patrick observes out of one of
the Jewish writers) that they might have wherewithal to honour God, and
might be helped and encouraged to serve him cheerfully and to proceed
and persevere in their obedience to him. A blessing is promised, First,
On all they had without doors, corn and cattle in the field ([Deu
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#004), [Deu
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#011)), their cows and sheep
particularly, which would be blessed for the owners' sakes, and made
blessings to them. In order to this, it is promised that God would give
them rain in due season, which is called his good treasure ([Deu
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#012)), because with this river of God
the earth is enriched, [Psa 65:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009). Our
constant supplies we must see coming from God's good treasure, and own
our obligations to him for them; if he withhold his rain, the fruits
both of the ground and of the cattle soon perish. Secondly, On all they
had within doors, the basket and the store ([Deu
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#005)), the store-houses or barns, [Deu
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#008). When it is brought home, God
will bless it, and not blow upon it as sometimes he does, [Hag
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006), [Hag
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#009). We depend upon God and his
blessing, not only for our yearly corn out of the field, but for our
daily bread out of our basket and store, and therefore are taught to
pray for it every day. \[4.\] They should have success in all their
employments, which would be a constant satisfaction to them: "The Lord
shall command the blessing (and it is he only that can command it) upon
thee, not only in all thou hast, but in all thou doest, all that thou
settest thy hand to," [Deu 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#008). This
intimated that even when they were rich they must not be idle, but must
find some good employment or other to set their hand to, and God would
own their industry, and bless the work of their hand ([Deu
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#012)); for that which makes rich, and
keeps so, is the blessing of the Lord upon the hand of the diligent,
[Pro 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#004), [Pro
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#022). \[5.\] They should have honour
among their neighbours ([Deu 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001)):
The Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations. He made them
so, by taking them into covenant with himself, [Deu
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#019). And he would make them more and
more so by their outward prosperity, if they would not by sin disparage
themselves. Two things should help to make them great among the nations:
- First, Their wealth ([Deu 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#012)):
"Thou shalt lend to many nations upon interest" (which they were allowed
to take form the neighbouring nations), "but thou shalt not have
occasion to borrow." This would give them great influence with all about
them; for the borrower is servant to the lender. It may be meant of
trade and commerce, that they should export abundantly more than they
should import, which would keep the balance on their side. Secondly,
Their power ([Deu 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#013)): "The Lord
shall make thee the head, to give law to all about thee, to exact
tribute, and to arbitrate all controversies." Every sheaf should bow to
theirs, which would make them so considerable that all the people of the
earth would be afraid of them ([Deu
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#010)), that is, would reverence their
true grandeur, and dread making them their enemies. The flourishing of
religion among them, and the blessing of God upon them, would make them
formidable to all their neighbours, terrible as an army with banners.
\[6.\] They should be victorious over their enemies, and prosper in all
their wars. If any were so daring as to rise up against them to oppress
them, or encroach upon them, it should be at their peril, they should
certainly fall before them, [Deu 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#007).
The forces of the enemy, though entirely drawn up to come against them
one way, should be entirely routed, and flee before them seven ways,
each making the best of his way.

(2.) From the whole we learn (though it were well if men would believe
it) that religion and piety are the best friends to outward prosperity.
Though temporal blessings do not take up so much room in the promises of
the New Testament as they do in those of the Old, yet it is enough that
our Lord Jesus has given us his word (and surely we may take his word)
that if we seek first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof,
all other things shall be added to us, as far as Infinite Wisdom sees
good; and who can desire them further? [Mat
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033).

2\. It is likewise promised that the grace of God should establish them
a holy people, [Deu 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#009). Having taken
them into covenant with himself, he would keep them in covenant; and,
provided they used the means of stedfastness, he would give them the
grace of steadfastness, that they should not depart from him. Note,
Those that are sincere in holiness God will establish in holiness; and
he is of power to do it, [Rom 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025).
He that is holy shall be holy still; and those whom God establishes in
holiness he thereby establishes a people to himself, for a long as we
keep close to God he will never forsake us. This establishment of their
religion would be the establishment of their reputation ([Deu
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#010)): All the people of the earth
shall see, and own, that thou art called by the name of the Lord, that
is, "that thou art a most excellent and glorious people, under the
particular care and countenance of the great God. They shall be made to
know that a people called by the name Jehovah are without doubt the
happiest people under the sun, even their enemies themselves being
judges." The favourites of Heaven are truly great, and, first or last,
it will be made to appear that they are so, if not in this world, yet at
that day when those who confess Christ now shall be confessed by him
before men and angels, as those whom he delights to honour.

[Deuteronomy 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 28:15</span></span>

Having viewed the bright side of the cloud, which is towards the
obedient, we have now presented to us the dark side, which is towards
the disobedient. If we do not keep God's commandments, we not only come
short of the blessing promised, but we lay ourselves under the curse,
which is as comprehensive of all misery as the blessing is of all
happiness. Observe,

I. The equity of this curse. It is not a curse causeless, nor for some
light cause; God seeks not occasion against us, nor is he apt to quarrel
with us. That which is here mentioned as bringing the curse is, 1.
Despising God, refusing to hearken to his voice ([Deu
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#015)), which bespeaks the highest
contempt imaginable, as if what he said were not worth the heeding, or
we were not under any obligation to him. 2. Disobeying him, not doing
his commandments, or not observing to do them. None fall under his curse
but those that rebel against his command. 3. Deserting him. "It is
because of the wickedness of thy doings, not only whereby thou hast
slighted me, but whereby thou hast forsaken me," [Deu
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#020). God never casts us off till we
first cast him off. It intimates that their idolatry, by which they
forsook the true God for false gods, would be their destroying sin more
than any other.

II\. The extent and efficacy of this curse.

1\. In general, it is declared, "All these curses shall come upon thee
from above, and shall overtake thee; though thou endeavour to escape
them, it is to no purpose to attempt it, they shall follow thee
whithersoever thou goest, and seize thee, overtake thee, and overcome
thee," [Deu 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#015). It is said of the
sinner, when God's wrath is in pursuit of him, that he would fain flee
out of his hand ([Job 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#022)), but he
cannot; if he flee from the iron weapon, yet the bow of steel shall
reach him and strike him through. There is no running from God but by
running to him, no fleeing from his justice but by fleeing to his mercy.
See [Psa 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#007), [Psa
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#008). (1.) Wherever the sinner goes,
the curse of God follows him; wherever he is, it rests upon him. He is
cursed in the city and in the field, [Deu
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#016). The strength of the city cannot
shelter him from it, the pleasant air of the country is no fence against
these pestilential steams. He is cursed ([Deu
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#019)) when he comes in, for the curse
is upon the house of the wicked ([Pro
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#033)), and he is cursed when he goes
out, for he cannot leave that curse behind him, nor get rid of it, which
has entered into his bowels like water and like oil into his bones.
(2.). Whatever he has is under a curse: Cursed is the ground for his
sake, and all that is on it, or comes out of it, and so he is cursed
from the ground, as Cain, [Gen 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#011).
The basket and store are cursed, [Deu
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#017), [Deu
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#018). All his enjoyments being
forfeited by him are in a manner forbidden to him, as cursed things,
which he has no title to. To those whose mind and conscience are defiled
every thing else is so, [Tit 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015).
They are all embittered to him; he cannot take any true comfort in them,
for the wrath of God mixes itself with them, and he is so far from
having any security of the continuance of them that, if his eyes be
open, he may see them all condemned and ready to be confiscated, and
with them all his joys and all his hopes gone for ever. (3.) Whatever he
does is under a curse too. It is a curse in all that he sets his hand to
([Deu 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#020)), a constant
disappointment, which those are subject to that set their hearts upon
the world, and expect their happiness in it, and which cannot but be a
constant vexation. This curse is just the reverse of the blessing in the
former part of the chapter. Thus whatever bliss there is in heaven there
is not only the want of it, but the contrary to it, in hell. [Isa
65:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#013), My servants shall eat, but you
shall be hungry.

2\. Many particular judgments are here enumerated, which would be the
fruits of the curse, and with which God would punish the people of the
Jews for their apostasy and disobedience. These judgments threatened are
of divers kinds, for God has many arrows in his quiver, four sore
judgments ([Eze 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021)), and many more.
They are represented as very terrible, and the descriptions of them are
exceedingly lively and affecting, that men, knowing these terrors of the
Lord, might, if possible, be persuaded. The threatenings of the same
judgment are several times repeated, that they might make the more deep
and lasting impressions, and to intimate that, if men persisted in their
disobedience, the judgment which they thought was over, and of which
they said, "Surely the bitterness of it is past," would return with
double force; for when God judges he will overcome. (1.) Bodily diseases
are here threatened, that they should be epidemical in their land. These
God sometimes makes use of for the chastisement and improvement of his
own people. Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick. But here they are
threatened to be brought upon his enemies as tokens of his wrath, and
designed for their ruin. So that according to the temper of our spirits,
under sickness, accordingly it is to us a blessing or a curse. But,
whatever sickness may be to particular persons, it is certain that
epidemical diseases raging among a people are national judgments, and
are so to be accounted. He here threatens, \[1.\] Painful diseases ([Deu
28:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#035)), a sore botch, beginning in the
legs and knees, but spreading, like Job's boils, from heat to foot.
\[2.\] Shameful diseases (v. 27), the botch of Egypt (such boils and
blains as the Egyptians had been plagued with, when God brought Israel
from among them), and the emerods and scab, vile diseases, the just
punishment of those who by sin had made themselves vile. \[3.\] Mortal
diseases, the pestilence (v. 21), the consumption (put for all chronical
diseases), and the fever (for all acute diseases), v. 22. See [Lev
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#016). And all incurable, [Deu
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027). (2.) Famine, and scarcity of
provisions; and this, \[1.\] For want of rain ([Deu
28:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#023), [Deu
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#024)): Thy heaven over thy head, that
part that is over thy land, shall be as dry as brass, while the heavens
over other countries shall distil their dews; and, when the heaven is as
brass, the earth of course will be as iron, so hard and unfruitful.
Instead of rain, the dust shall be blown out of the highways into the
field, and spoil the little that there is of the fruits of the earth.
\[2.\] By destroying insects. The locust should destroy the corn, so
that they should not have so much as their seed again, [Deu
28:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#038), [Deu
28:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#042). And the fruit of the vine,
which should make glad their hearts, should all be worm-eaten, [Deu
28:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#039). and the olive, some way or
other, should be made to cast its fruit, [Deu
28:40](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#040). The heathen use many
superstitious customs in honour of their idol-gods for preserving the
fruits of the earth; but Moses tells Israel that the only way they had
to preserve them was to keep God's commandments; for he is a God that
will not be sported with, like their idols, but will be served in spirit
and truth. This threatening we find fulfilled in Israel, [Kg1
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001); [Jer
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#001), etc.; [Joe
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004). (3.) That they should be smitten
before their enemies in war, who, it is likely, would be the more cruel
to them, when they had them at their mercy, for the severity they had
used against the nations of Canaan, which their neighbours in after-ages
would be apt to remember against them, [Deu
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#025). It would make their flight the
more shameful, and the more grievous, that they might have triumphed
over their enemies if they had but been faithful to their God. The
carcases of those that were slain in war, or died in captivity among
strangers, should be meat for the fowls ([Deu
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#026)); and an Israelite, having
forfeited the favour of his God, should have so little humanity shown
him as that no man should drive them away, so odious would God's curse
make him to all mankind. (4.) That they should be infatuated in all
their counsels, so as not to discern their own interest, nor bring any
thing to pass for the public good: The Lord shall smite thee with
madness and blindness, [Deu 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#028),
[Deu 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#029). Note, God's judgments can
reach the minds of men to fill them with darkness and horror, as well as
their bodies and estates; and those are the sorest of all judgments
which make men a terror to themselves, and their own destroyers. That
which they contrived to secure themselves by should still turn to their
prejudice. Thus we often find that the allies they confided in
distressed them and strengthened them not, [Ch2
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#020). Those that will not walk in
God's counsels are justly left to be ruined by their own; and those that
are wilfully blind to their duty deserve to be made blind to their
interest, and, seeing they loved darkness rather than light, let them
grope at noon-day as in the dark. (5.) That they should be plundered of
all their enjoyments, stripped of all by the proud and imperious
conqueror, such as Benhadad was to Ahab, [Kg1
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#005), [Kg1
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#006). Not only their houses and
vineyards should be taken from them, but their wives and children, [Deu
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#030), [Deu
28:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#032). Their dearest comforts, which
they took most pleasure in, and promised themselves most from, should be
the entertainment and triumph of their enemies. As they had dwelt in
houses which they built not, and eaten of vineyards which they planted
not ([Deu 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#010), [Deu
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#011)), so others should do by them.
Their oxen, asses, and sheep, like Job's, should be taken away before
their eyes, and they should not be able to recover them, v. 31. And all
the fruit of their land and labours should be devoured and eaten up by
the enemy; so that they and theirs would want necessaries, while their
enemies were revelling with that which they had laboured for. (6.) That
they should be carried captives into a far country; nay, into all the
kingdoms of the earth, v. 25. Their sons and daughters, whom they
promised themselves comfort in, should go into captivity (v. 41), and
they themselves at length, and their king in whom they promised
themselves safety and settlement, v. 36. This was fully accomplished
when the ten tribes first were carried captive into Assyria ([Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006)), and not long after the two
tribes into Babylon, and two of their kings, [Kg2
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014), [Kg2
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#015); [Kg2
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#007), [Kg2
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#021). That which is mentioned as an
aggravation of their captivity is that they should go into an unknown
country, the language and customs of which would be very uncouth, and
their treatment among them barbarous, and there they should serve other
gods, that is, be compelled to do so by their enemies, as they were in
Babylon, [Dan 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#006). Note, God often
makes men's sin their punishment, and chooses their delusions. You shall
serve other gods, that is, "You shall serve those that do serve them;" a
nation is often in scripture called by the name of its gods, as [Jer
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#007). They had made idolaters their
associates, and now god made idolaters their oppressors. (7.) That those
who remained should be insulted and tyrannized over by strangers, [Deu
28:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#043), [Deu
28:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#044). So the ten tribes were by the
colonies which the king of Assyria sent to take possession of their
land, [Kg2 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024). Or this may be meant
of the gradual encroachments which the strangers within their gates
should make upon them, so as insensibly to worm them out of their
estates. We read of the fulfilling of this, [Hos
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#009), Strangers have devoured his
strength. Foreigners ate the bread out of the mouths of trueborn
Israelites, by which they were justly chastised for introducing strange
gods. (8.) That their reputation among their neighbours should be quite
sunk, and those that had been a name, and a praise, should be an
astonishment, a proverb, and a by-word, [Deu
28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037). Some have observed the
fulfilling of this threatening in their present state; for, when we
would express the most perfidious and barbarous treatment, we say, None
but a Jew would have done so. Thus is sin a reproach to any people. (9.)
To complete their misery, it is threatened that they should be put quite
out of the possession of their minds by all these troubles ([Deu
28:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#034)): Thou shalt be mad for the
sight of thy eyes, that is, quite bereaved of all comfort and hope, and
abandoned to utter despair. Those that walk by sight, and not by faith,
are in danger of losing reason itself, when every thing about them looks
frightful; and their condition is woeful indeed that are mad for the
sight of their eyes.

[Deuteronomy 28:45](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">deu 28:45</span></span>

One would have thought that enough had been said to possess them with a
dread of that wrath of God which is revealed from heaven against the
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. But to show how deep the
treasures of that wrath are, and that still there is more and worse
behind, Moses, when one would have thought that he had concluded this
dismal subject, begins again, and adds to this roll of curses many
similar words: as Jeremiah did to his, [Jer
36:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#032). It should seem that in the
former part of this commination Moses foretells their captivity in
Babylon, and the calamities which introduced and attended that, by
which, even after their return, they were brought to that low and poor
condition which is described, [Deu
28:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#044). That their enemies should be
the head, and they the tail: but here, in this latter part, he foretels
their last destruction by the Romans and their dispersion thereupon. And
the present deplorable state of the Jewish nation, and of all that have
incorporated themselves with them, by embracing their religion, does so
fully and exactly answer to the prediction in these verses that it
serves for an incontestable proof of the truth of prophecy, and
consequently of the divine authority of the scripture. And, this last
destruction being here represented as more dreadful than the former, it
shows that their sin, in rejecting Christ and his gospel, was more
heinous and more provoking to God than idolatry itself, and left them
more under the power of Satan; for their captivity in Babylon cured them
effectually of their idolatry in seventy years' time; but under this
last destruction now for above 1600 years they continue incurably averse
to the Lord Jesus. Observe,

I. What is here said in general of the wrath of God, which should light
and lie upon them for their sins.

1\. That, if they would not be ruled by the commands of God, they should
certainly be ruined by his curse, v. 45, 46. Because thou didst not keep
his commandments (especially that of hearing and obeying the great
prophet), these curses shall come upon thee, as upon a people appointed
to destruction, the generation of God's wrath: and they shall be for a
sign and for a wonder. It is amazing to think that a people so long the
favourites of Heaven should be so perfectly abandoned and cast off, that
a people so closely incorporated should be so universally dispersed, and
yet that a people so scattered in all nations should preserve themselves
distinct and not mix with any, but like Cain be fugitives and vagabonds,
and yet marked to be known.

2\. That, if they would not serve God with cheerfulness, they should be
compelled to serve their enemies (v. 47, 48), that they might know the
difference ([Ch2 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#008)), which, some
think, is the meaning of [Eze 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#024),
[Eze 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025), Because they despised my
statutes, I gave them statutes that were not good. Observe here, (1.) It
is justly expected from those to whom God gives an abundance of the good
things of this life that they should serve him. What does he maintain us
for out that we may do his work, and be some way serviceable to his
honour? (2.) The more God gives us the more cheerfully we should serve
him; our abundance should be oil to the wheels of our obedience. God is
a Master that will be served with gladness, and delights to hear us sing
at our work. (3.) If, when we receive the gifts of God's bounty, we
either do not serve him at all or serve him with reluctance, it is a
righteous thing with him to make us know the hardships of want and
servitude. Those deserve to have cause given them to complain who
complain without a cause. Tristis es et felix - Happy, and yet not easy!
Blush at thy own folly and ingratitude.

3\. That, if they would not give glory to God by a reverential
obedience, he would get him honour upon them by wonderful plagues, [Deu
28:58](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#058), [Deu
28:59](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#059). Note, (1.) God justly expects
from us that we should fear his fearful name; and, which is strange,
that name which is here proposed as the object of our fear is, THE LORD
THY GOD, which is very fitly here put in our Bibles in capital letters;
for nothing can sound more truly august. As nothing is more comfortable,
so nothing more awful, than this, that he with whom we have to do is
Jehovah, a being infinitely perfect and blessed, and the author of all
being; and that he is our God, our rightful Lord and owner, from whom we
are to receive laws and to whom we are to give account: this is great,
and greatly to be feared. (2.) We may justly expect from God that, if we
do not fear his fearful name, we shall feel his fearful plagues; for one
way or other God will be feared. All God's plagues are dreadful, but
some are wonderful, carrying in them extraordinary signatures of divine
power and justice, so that a man, upon the first view of them, may say,
Verily, there is a God that judgeth in the earth.

II\. How the destruction threatened is described. Moses is here upon the
same melancholy subject that our Saviour is discoursing of to his
disciples in his farewell sermon (Mt. 24), namely, The destruction of
Jerusalem and the Jewish nation. Observe,

1\. Five things are here foretold as steps to their ruin: -

(1.) That they should be invaded by a foreign enemy ([Deu
28:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049), [Deu
28:50](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#050)): A nation from far, namely, the
Romans, as swift as the eagle hastening to the prey. Our Saviour makes
use of this similitude, in foretelling this destruction, that where the
carcase is there will the eagles be gathered together, [Mat
24:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#028). And bishop Patrick observes (to
make the accomplishment the more remarkable) that the ensign of the
Roman armies was an eagle. This nation is said to be of a fierce
countenance, an indication of a fierce nature, stern and severe, that
would not pity the weakness and infirmity either of little children or
of old people.

(2.) That the country should be laid waste, and all the fruits of it
eaten up by this army of foreigners, which is the natural consequence of
an invasion, especially when it is made, as that by the Romans was, for
the chastisement of rebels: He shall eat the fruits of thy cattle and
land ([Deu 28:51](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#051)), so that the
inhabitants should be starved, while the invaders were fed to the full.

(3.) That their cities should be besieged, and that such would be the
obstinacy of the besieged, and such the vigour of the besiegers, that
they would be reduced to the last extremity, and at length fall into the
hands of the enemy, [Deu 28:52](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#052). No
place, though ever so well fortified, no, not Jerusalem itself, though
it held out long, would escape. Two of the common consequences of a long
siege are here foretold: - \[1.\] A miserable famine, which would
prevail to such a degree that, for want of food, they should kill and
eat their own children, [Deu 28:53](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#053).
Men should do so, notwithstanding their hardiness, and ability to bear
hunger; and, though obliged by the law of nature to provide for their
own families, yet should refuse to give to the wife and children that
were starving any of the child that was barbarously butchered, [Deu
28:54](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#054), [Deu
28:55](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#055). Nay, women, ladies of quality,
notwithstanding their natural niceness about their food, and their
natural affection to their children, yet, for want of food, should so
far forget all humanity as to kill and eat them, [Deu
28:56](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#056), [Deu
28:57](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#057). Let us observe, by the way, how
hard this fate must needs be to the tender and delicate women, and learn
not to indulge ourselves in tenderness and delicacy, because we know not
what we may be reduced to before we die; the more nice we are, the
harder it will be to us to bear want, and the more danger we shall be in
or sacrificing reason, and religion, and natural affection itself, to
the clamours and cravings of an unmortified and ungoverned appetite.
This threatening was fulfilled in the letter of it, more than once, to
the perpetual reproach of the Jewish nation: never was the like done
either by Greek or barbarian, but in the siege of Samaria, a woman
boiled her own son, [Kg2 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#028), [Kg2
6:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#029). And it is spoken of as commonly
done among them in the siege of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, [Lam
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#010). And, in the last siege by the
Romans, Josephus tells us of a noble woman that killed and ate her own
child, through the extremity of the famine, and when she had eaten one
half secretly ([Deu 28:57](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#057)), that she
might have it to herself, the mob, smelling meat, got into the house, to
whom she showed the other half, which she had kept till another time,
inviting them to share with her. What is too barbarous for those to do
that are abandoned of God! \[2.\] Sickness is another common effect of a
strait and long siege, and that is here threatened: Sore sickness, and
of long continuance, [Deu 28:59](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#059). These
should attend the Jews wherever they went afterwards, the diseases of
Egypt, leprosies, botches, and foul ulcers, [Deu
28:60](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#060). Nay, as if the particular
miseries here threatened were not enough, he concludes with an et
cetera, [Deu 28:61](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#061). The Lord will
bring upon thee every sickness, and every plague, though it be not
written in the book of this law. Those that fall under the curse of God
will find that the one half was not told them of the weight and terror
of that curse.

(4.) That multitudes of them should perish, so that they should become
few in number, [Deu 28:62](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#062). It was a
nation that God had wonderfully increased, so that they were as the
stars of heaven for multitude; but, for their sin, they were diminished
and brought low, [Psa 107:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#038), [Psa
107:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#039). It is computed that in the
destruction of the Jewish nation by the Romans, as appears by the
account Josephus gives of it, above two millions fell by the sword at
several places, besides what perished by famine and pestilence; so that
the whole country was laid waste and turned into a wilderness. That is a
terrible word ([Deu 28:63](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#063)), As the
Lord rejoiced over you to do you good, so he will rejoice over you to
destroy you. Behold here the goodness and severity of God: mercy here
shines brightly in the pleasure God takes in doing good - he rejoices in
it; yet justice here appears no less illustrious in the pleasure he
takes in destroying the impenitent; not as it is the making of his
creatures miserable, but as it is the asserting of his own honour and
the securing of the ends of his government. See what a malignant
mischievous thing sin is, which (as I may say) makes it necessary for
the God of infinite goodness to rejoice in the destruction of his own
creatures, even those that had been favourites.

(5.) That the remnant should be scattered throughout the nations This
completes their woe: The Lord shall scatter thee among all people, [Deu
28:64](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#064). This is remarkably fulfilled in
their present dispersion, for there are Jews to be fond almost in all
countries that are possessed either by Christians or Mahometans, and in
such numbers that it has been said, If they could unite in one common
interest, they would be a very formidable body, and able to deal with
the most powerful states and princes; but they abide under the power of
this curse, and are so scattered that they are not able to incorporate.
It is here foretold that in this dispersion, \[1.\] They should have no
religion, or none to any purpose, should have no temple, nor altar, nor
priesthood, for they should serve other gods. Some think this has been
fulfilled in the force put upon the Jews in popish countries to worship
the images that are used in the Romish church, to their great vexation.
\[2.\] They should have no rest, no rest of body: The sole of thy foot
shall not have rest ([Deu 28:65](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#065)), but
be continually upon the remove, either in hope of gain or fear of
persecution; all wandering Jews: no rest of the mind (which is much
worse), but a trembling heart ([Deu
28:65](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#065)); no assurance of life ([Deu
28:66](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#066)); weary both of light and
darkness, which are, in their turns, both welcome to a quiet mind, but
to them both day and night would be a terror, [Deu
28:67](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#067). Such was once the condition of
Job ([Job 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#004)), but to them this
should be constant and perpetual; that blindness and darkness which the
apostle speaks of as having happened to Israel, and that guilt which
bowed down their back always ([Rom
11:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#008)), must needs occasion a
constant restlessness and amazement. Those are a torment to themselves,
and to all about them, that fear day and night and are always uneasy.
Let good people strive against it, and not give way to that fear which
has torment; and let wicked people not be secure in their wickedness,
for their hearts cannot endure, nor can their hands be strong, when the
terrors of God set themselves in array against them. Those that say in
the morning, O that it were evening, and in the evening, O that it were
morning, show, First, A constant fret and vexation, chiding the hours
for lingering and complaining of the length of every minute. Let time be
precious to us when we are in prosperity, and then it will not be so
tedious to us when we are in afflictions as otherwise it would.
Secondly, A constant fright and terror, afraid in the morning of the
arrow that flieth by day, and therefore wishing the day over; but what
will this do for them? When evening comes, the trembling heart is no
less apprehensive of the terror by night, Ps. 91. 5, 6. Happy they whose
minds, being stayed on God, are quiet from the fear of evil! Observe
here, The terror arises not only from the sight of the eyes, but from
the fear of the heart, not only from real dangers, but from imaginary
ones; the causes of fear, when they come to be enquired into, often
prove to be only the creatures of the fancy.

2\. In the close, God threatens to leave them as he found them, in a
house of bondage ([Deu 28:68](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#068)): The
Lord shall bring thee into Egypt again, that is into such a miserable
state as they were in when they were slaves to the Egyptians, and ruled
by them with rigour. God had brought them out of Egypt, and had said,
They shall see it no more again ([Deu
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016)); but now they should be reduced
to the same state of slavery that they had been in there. To be sold to
strangers would be bad enough, but much worse to be sold to their
enemies. Even slaves may be valued as such, but a Jew should have so ill
a name for all that is base that when he was exposed to sale no man
would buy him, which would make his master that had him to sell the more
severe with him. Thirty Jews (they say) have been sold for one small
piece of money, as they sold our Saviour for thirty pieces.

3\. Upon the whole matter, (1.) The accomplishment of these predictions
upon the Jewish nation shows that Moses spoke by the Spirit of God, who
certainly foresees the ruin of sinners, and gives them warning of it,
that they may prevent it by a true and timely repentance, or else be
left inexcusable. (2.) Let us all hence learn to stand in awe and not to
sin. I have heard of a wicked man, who, upon reading the threatenings of
this chapter, was so enraged that he tore the leaf out of the Bible, as
Jehoiakim cut Jeremiah's roll; but to what purpose is it to deface a
copy, while the original remains upon record in the divine counsels, by
which it is unalterably determined that the wages of sin is death,
whether men will hear or whether they will forbear?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 29](deu029)

</div>
