<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu024)  [Next](deu026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 25:0</span></span>

Here is, I. A law to moderate the scourging of malefactors ([Deu
25:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#001)). II. A law in favour of the ox
the treads out the corn ([Deu 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004)).
III. For the disgracing of him that refused to marry his brother's widow
([Deu 25:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005)). IV. For the punishment
of an immodest woman ([Deu 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#011), [Deu
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#012)). V. For just weights and
measures ([Deu 25:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#013)). VI. For the
destroying of Amalek ([Deu 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#017),
etc.).

[Deuteronomy 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 25:1</span></span>

Here is, I. A direction to the judges in scourging malefactors, [Deu
25:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#001). 1. It is here supposed that,
if a man be charged with a crime, the accuser and the accused (Actor and
Reus) should be brought face to face before the judges, that the
controversy may be determined. 2. If a man were accused of a crime, and
the proof fell short, so that the charge could not be made out against
him by the evidence, then he was to be acquitted: "Thou shalt justify
the righteous," that is, "him that appears to the court to be so." If
the accusation be proved, then the conviction of the accused is a
justification of the accuser, as righteous in the prosecution. 3. If the
accused were found guilty, judgment must be given against him: "Thou
shalt condemn the wicked;" for to justify the wicked is as much an
abomination to the Lord as it is to condemn the righteous, [Pro
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#015). 4. If the crime were not made
capital by the law, then the criminal must be beaten. A great many
precepts we have met with which have not any particular penalty annexed
to them, the violation of most of which, according to the constant
practice of the Jews, was punished by scourging, from which no person's
rank or quality did exempt him if he were a delinquent, but with this
proviso, that he should never be upbraided with it, nor should it be
looked upon as leaving any mark of infamy or disgrace upon him. The
directions here given for the scourging of criminals are, (1.) That it
be done solemnly; not tumultuously through the streets, but in open
court before the judge's face, and with so much deliberation as that the
stripes might be numbered. The Jews say that while execution was in
doing the chief justice of the court read with a loud voice [Deu
28:58](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#058), [Deu
28:59](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#059), and [Deu
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#009), and concluded with those words
([Psa 78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038)), But he, being full of
compassion, forgave their iniquity. Thus it was made a sort of religious
act, and so much the more likely to reform the offender himself and to
be a warning to others. (2.) That it be done in proportion to the crime,
according to his fault, that some crimes might appear, as they are, more
heinous than others, the criminal being beaten with many stripes, to
which perhaps there is an allusion, [Luk
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047), [Luk
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#048). (3.) That how great soever the
crime were the number of stripes should never exceed forty, [Deu
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#003). Forty save one was the common
usage, as appears, [Co2 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024). It
seems, they always gave Paul as many stripes as ever they gave to any
malefactor whatsoever. They abated one for fear of having miscounted
(though one of the judges was appointed to number the stripes), or
because they would never go to the utmost rigour, or because the
execution was usually done with a whip of three lashes, so that thirteen
stripes (each one being counted for three) made up thirty-nine, but one
more by that reckoning would have been forty-two. The reason given for
this is, lest thy brother should seem vile unto thee. He must still be
looked upon as a brother ([Th2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#015)),
and his reputation as such was preserved by this merciful limitation of
his punishment. It saves him from seeming vile to his brethren, when God
himself by his law takes this care of him. Men must not be treated as
dogs; nor must those seem vile in our sight to whom, for aught we know,
God may yet give grace to make them precious in his sight.

II\. A charge to husbandmen not to hinder their cattle from eating when
they were working, if meat were within their reach, [Deu
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004). This instance of the beast that
trod out the corn (to which there is an allusion in that of the prophet,
[Hos 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#011)) is put for all similar
instances. That which makes this law very remarkable above its fellows
(and which countenances the like application of other such laws) is that
it is twice quoted in the New Testament to show that it is the duty of
the people to give their ministers a comfortable maintenance, [Co1
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009), [Co1
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#010), and [Ti1
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017), [Ti1
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#018). It teaches us in the letter of
it to make much of the brute-creatures that serve us, and to allow them
not only the necessary supports for their life, but the advantages of
their labour; and thus we must learn not only to be just, but kind, to
all that are employed for our good, not only to maintain but to
encourage them, especially those that labour among us in the word and
doctrine, and so are employed for the good of our better part.

[Deuteronomy 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 25:5</span></span>

Here is, I. The law settled concerning the marrying of the brother's
widow. It appears from the story of Judah's family that this had been an
ancient usage ([Gen 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#008)), for the
keeping up of distinct families. The case put is a case that often
happens, of a man's dying without issue, it may be in the prime of his
time, soon after his marriage, and while his brethren were yet so young
as to be unmarried. Now in this case, 1. The widow was not to marry
again into any other family, unless all the relations of her husband did
refuse her, that the estate she was endowed with might not be alienated.
2. The husband's brother, or next of kin, must marry her, partly out of
respect to her, who, having forgotten her own people and her father's
house, should have all possible kindness shown her by the family into
which she was married; and partly out of respect to the deceased
husband, that though he was dead and gone he might not be forgotten, nor
lost out of the genealogies of his tribe; for the first-born child,
which the brother or next kinsman should have by the widow, should be
denominated from him that was dead, and entered in the genealogy as his
child, [Deu 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005), [Deu
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#006). Under that dispensation we have
reason to think men had not so clear and certain a prospect of living
themselves on the other side death as we have now, to whom life and
immortality are brought to light by the gospel; and therefore they could
not but be the more desirous to live in their posterity, which innocent
desire was in some measure gratified by this law, an expedient being
found out that, though a man had no child by his wife, yet his name
should not be put out of Israel, that is, out of the pedigree, or, which
is equivalent, remain there under the brand of childlessness. The
Sadducees put a case to our Saviour upon this law, with a design to
perplex the doctrine of the resurrection by it ([Mat
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#024), etc.), perhaps insinuating that
there was no need of maintaining the immortality of the soul and a
future state, since the law had so well provided for the perpetuating of
men's names and families in the world. But, 3. If the brother, or next
of kin, declined to do this good office to the memory of him that was
gone, what must be done in that case? Why, (1.) He shall not be
compelled to do it, [Deu 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#007). If he
like her not, he is at liberty to refuse her, which, some think, was not
permitted in this case before this law of Moses. Affection is all in all
to the comfort of the conjugal relation; this is a thing which cannot be
forced, and therefore the relation should not be forced without it. (2.)
Yet he shall be publicly disgraced for not doing it. The widow, as the
person most concerned for the name and honour of the deceased, was to
complain to the elders of his refusal; if he persist in it, she must
pluck off his shoe, and spit in his face, in open court (or, as the
Jewish doctors moderate it, spit before his face), thus to fasten a mark
of infamy upon him, which was to remain with his family after him, [Deu
25:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#008). Note, Those justly suffer in
their own reputation who do not do what they ought to preserve the name
and honour of others. He that would not build up his brother's house
deserved to have this blemish put upon his own, that it should be called
the house of him that had his shoe loosed, in token that he deserved to
go barefoot. In the case of Ruth we find this law executed ([Rut
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#007)), but because, upon the refusal of
the next kinsman, there was another ready to perform the duty of a
husband's brother, it was that other that plucked off the shoe, and not
the widow - Boaz, and not Ruth.

II\. A law for the punishing of an immodest woman, [Deu
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#011), [Deu
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#012). The woman that by the foregoing
law was to complain against her husband's brother for not marrying her,
and to spit in his face before the elders, needed a good measure of
assurance; but, lest the confidence which that law supported should grow
to an excess unbecoming the sex, here is a very severe but just law to
punish impudence and immodesty. 1. The instance of it is confessedly
scandalous to the highest degree. A woman could not do it unless she
were perfectly lost to all virtue and honour. 2. The occasion is such as
might in part excuse it; it was to help her husband out of the hands of
one that was too hard for him. Now if the doing of it in a passion, and
with such a good intention, was to be so severely punished, much more
when it was done wantonly and in lust. 3. The punishment was that her
hand should be cut off; and the magistrates must not pretend to be more
merciful than God: Thy eye shall not pity her. Perhaps our Saviour
alludes to this law when he commands us to cut off the right hand that
offends us, or is an occasion of sin to us. Better put the greatest
hardships that can be upon the body than ruin the soul for ever. Modesty
is the hedge of chastity, and therefore ought to be very carefully
preserved and kept up by both sexes.

[Deuteronomy 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 25:13</span></span>

Here is, I. A law against deceitful weights and measures: they must not
only not use them, but they must not have them, not have them in the
bag, not have them in the house ([Deu
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#013), [Deu
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#014)); for, if they had them, they
would be strongly tempted to use them. They must not have a great weight
and measure to buy by and a small one to sell by, for that was to cheat
both ways, when either was bad enough; as we read of those that made the
ephah small, in which they measured the corn they sold, and the shekel
great, by which they weighed the money they received for it, [Amo
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005). But thou shalt have a perfect and
just weight, v. 15. That which is the rule of justice must itself be
just; if that be otherwise, it is a constant cheat. This had been taken
care of before, [Lev 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#035), [Lev
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#036). This law is enforced with two
very good reasons: - 1. That justice and equity will bring down upon us
the blessing of God. The way to have our days lengthened, and to
prosper, is to be just and fair in all our dealings Honesty is the best
policy. 2. That fraud and injustice will expose us to the curse of God,
[Deu 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#016). Not only unrighteousness
itself, but all that do unrighteously, are an abomination to the Lord.
And miserable is that man who is abhorred by his Maker. How hateful,
particularly, all the arts of deceit are to God, Solomon several times
observes, [Pro 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#001); [Pro
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#010), [Pro
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#023); and the apostle tells us that
the Lord is the avenger of all such as overreach and defraud in any
matter, [Th1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#006).

II\. A law for the rooting out of Amalek. Here is a just weight and a
just measure, that, as Amalek had measured to Israel, so it should be
measure to Amalek again.

1\. The mischief Amalek did to Israel must be here remembered, [Deu
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#017), [Deu
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#018). When it was first done it was
ordered to be recorded ([Exo
17:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014)), and here the remembrance of
it is ordered to be preserved, not in personal revenge (for that
generation which suffered by the Amalekites was gone, so that those who
now lived, and their posterity, could not have any personal resentment
of the injury), but in a zeal for the glory of God (which was insulted
by the Amalekites), that throne of the Lord against which the hand of
Amalek was stretched out. The carriage of the Amalekites towards Israel
is here represented, (1.) As very base and disingenuous. They had no
occasion at all to quarrel with Israel, nor did they give them any
notice, by a manifesto or declaration of war; but took them at an
advantage, when they had just come out of the house of bondage, and, for
aught that appeared to them, were only going to sacrifice to God in the
wilderness. (2.) As very barbarous and cruel; for they smote those that
were more feeble, whom they should have succoured. The greatest cowards
are commonly the most cruel; while those that have the courage of a man
will have the compassion of a man. (3.) As very impious and profane:
they feared not God. If they had had any reverence for the majesty of
the God of Israel, which they saw a token of in the cloud, or any dread
of his wrath, which they lately heard of the power of over Pharaoh, they
durst not have made this assault upon Israel. Well, here was the ground
of the quarrel: and it shows how God takes what is done against his
people as done against himself, and that he will particularly reckon
with those that discourage and hinder young beginners in religion, that
(as Satan's agents) set upon the weak and feeble, either to divert them
or to disquiet them, and offend his little ones.

2\. This mischief must in due time be revenged, [Deu
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#019). When their wars were finished,
by which they were to settle their kingdom and enlarge their coast, then
they must make war upon Amalek ([Deu
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#019)), not merely to chase them, but
to consume them, to blot out the remembrance of Amalek. It was an
instance of God's patience that he deferred the vengeance so long, which
should have led the Amalekites to repentance; yet an instance of fearful
retribution that the posterity of Amalek, so long after, were destroyed
for the mischief done by their ancestors to the Israel of God, that all
the world might see, and say, that he who toucheth them toucheth the
apple of his eye. It was nearly 400 years after this that Saul was
ordered to put this sentence in execution (1 Sa. 15), and was rejected
of God because he did not do it effectually, but spared some of that
devoted nation, in contempt, not only of the particular orders he
received from Samuel, but of this general command here given by Moses,
which he could not be ignorant of. David afterwards made some
destruction of them; and the Simeonites, in Hezekiah's time, smote the
rest that remained ([Ch1 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#043)); for
when God judges he will overcome.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 26](deu026)

</div>
