<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc004)  [Next](ecc006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 5:0</span></span>

Solomon, in this chapter, discourses, I. Concerning the worship of God,
prescribing that as a remedy against all those vanities which he had
already observed to be in wisdom, learning, pleasure, honour, power, and
business. That we may not be deceived by those things, nor have our
spirits vexed with the disappointments we meet with in them, let us make
conscience of our duty to God and keep up our communion with him; but,
withal, he gives a necessary caution against the vanities which are to
often found in religious exercises, which deprive them of their
excellency and render them unable to help against other vanities. If our
religion be a vain religion, how great is that vanity! Let us therefore
take heed of vanity, 1. In hearing the word, and offering sacrifice
([Ecc 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001)). 2. In prayer ([Ecc
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#002), [Ecc
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#003)). 3. In making vows ([Ecc
5:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#004)). 4. In pretending to divine
dreams ([Ecc 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#007)). Now, (1.) For a
remedy against those vanities, he prescribes the fear of God ([Ecc
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#007)). (2.) To prevent the offence that
might arise from the present sufferings of good people, he directs us to
look up to God ([Ecc 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#008)). II.
Concerning the wealth of this world and the vanity and vexation that
attend it. The fruits of the earth indeed are necessary to the support
of life ([Ecc 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#009)), but as for silver,
and gold, and riches, 1. They are unsatisfying ([Ecc
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#010)). 2. They are unprofitable ([Ecc
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#011)). 3. They are disquieting ([Ecc
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#012)). 4. They often prove hurtful and
destroying ([Ecc 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#013)). 5. They are
perishing ([Ecc 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#014)). 6. They must be
left behind when we die ([Ecc 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#015),
[Ecc 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#016)). 7. If we have not a heart
to make use of them, they occasion a great deal of uneasiness ([Ecc
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#017)). And therefore he recommends to
us the comfortable use of that which God has given us, with an eye to
him that is the giver, as the best way both to answer the end of our
having it and to obviate the mischiefs that commonly attend great
estates ([Ecc 5:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#018)). So that if we
can but learn out of this chapter how to manage the business of
religion, and the business of this world (which two take up most of our
time), so that both may turn to a good account, and neither our sabbath
days nor our week-days may be lost, we shall have reason to say, We have
learned two good lessons.

[Ecclesiastes 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 5:1</span></span>

Solomon's design, in driving us off from the world, by showing us its
vanity, is to drive us to God and to our duty, that we may not walk in
the way of the world, but by religious rules, nor depend upon the wealth
of the world, but on religious advantages; and therefore,

I. He here sends us to the house of God, to the place of public worship,
to the temple, which he himself had built at a vast expense. When he
reflected with regret on all his other works ([Ecc
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#004)), he did not repent of that, but
reflected on it with pleasure, yet mentions it not, lest he should seem
to reflect on it with pride; but he here sends those to it that would
know more of the vanity of the world and would find that happiness which
is in vain sought for in the creature. David, when he was perplexed,
went into the sanctuary of God, [Psa
73:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017). Let our disappointments in the
creature turn our eyes to the Creator; let us have recourse to the word
of God's grace and consult that, to the throne of his grace and solicit
that. In the word and prayer there is a balm for every wound.

II\. He charges us to behave ourselves well there, that we may not miss
of our end in coming thither. Religious exercises are not vain things,
but, if we mismanage them, they become vain to us. And therefore,

1\. We must address ourselves to them with all possible seriousness and
care: "Keep thy foot, not keep it back from the house of God (as [Pro
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#017)), nor go slowly thither, as one
unwilling to draw nigh to God, but look well to thy goings, ponder the
path of thy feet, lest thou take a false step. Address thyself to the
worship of God with a solemn pause, and take time to compose thyself for
it, not going about it with precipitation, which is called hasting with
the feet, [Pro 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#002). Keep thy thoughts
from roving and wandering from the work; keep thy affections from
running out towards wrong objects, for in the business of God's house
there is work enough for the whole man, and all too little to be
employed." Some think it alludes to the charge given to Moses and Joshua
to put off their shoes ([Exo 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#005), [Jos
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#015),) in token of subjection and
reverence. Keep thy feet clean, [Exo
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#019).

2\. We must take heed that the sacrifice we bring be not the sacrifice
of fools (of wicked men), for they are fools and their sacrifice is an
abomination to the Lord, [Pro 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#008)),
that we bring not the torn, and the lame, and the sick for sacrifice,
for we are plainly told that it will not be accepted, and therefore it
is folly to bring it, - that we rest not in the sign and ceremony, and
the outside of the performance, without regarding the sense and meaning
of it, for that is the sacrifice of fools. Bodily exercise, if that be
all, is a jest; none but fools will think thus to please him who is a
Spirit and requires the heart, and they will see their folly when they
find what a great deal of pains they have taken to no purpose for want
of sincerity. They are fools, for they consider not that they do evil;
they think they are doing God and themselves good service when really
they are putting a great affront upon God and a great cheat upon their
own souls by their hypocritical devotions. Men may be doing evil even
when they profess to be doing good, and even when they do not know it,
when they do not consider it. They know not but to do evil, so some read
it. Wicked minds cannot choose but sin, even in the acts of devotion.
Or, They consider not that they do evil; they act at a venture, right or
wrong, pleasing to God or not, it is all one to them.

3\. That we may not bring the sacrifice of fools, we must come to God's
house with hearts disposed to know and do our duty. We must be ready to
hear, that is, (1.) We must diligently attend to the word of God read
and preached. "Be swift to hear the exposition which the priests give of
the sacrifices, declaring the intent and meaning of them, and do not
think it enough to gaze upon what they do, for it must be a reasonable
service, otherwise it is the sacrifice of fools." (2.) We must resolve
to comply with the will of God as it is made known to us. Hearing is
often put for obeying, and that is it that is better than sacrifice,
[Sa1 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022); [Isa
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015), [Isa
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016). We come in a right frame to holy
duties when we come with this upon our heart, Speak, Lord, for thy
servant hears. Let the word of the Lord come (said a good man), and if I
had 600 necks I would bow them all to the authority of it.

4\. We must be very cautious and considerate in all our approaches and
addresses to God ([Ecc 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#002)): Be not
rash with thy mouth, in making prayers, or protestations, or promises;
let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God. Note, (1.)
When we are in the house of God, in solemn assemblies for religious
worship, we are in a special manner before God and in his presence,
there where he has promised to meet his people, where his eye is upon us
and ours ought to be unto him. (2.) We have something to say, something
to utter before God, when we draw nigh to him in holy duties; he is one
with whom we have to do, with whom we have business of vast importance.
If we come without an errand, we shall go away without any advantage.
(3.) What we utter before God must come from the heart, and therefore we
must not be rash with our mouth, never let our tongue outrun our
thoughts in our devotions; the words of our mouth, must always be the
product of the meditation of our hearts. Thoughts are words to God, and
words are but wind if they be not copied from the thoughts. Lip-labour,
though ever so well laboured, if that be all, is but lost labour in
religion, [Mat 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#008), [Mat
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#009). (4.) It is not enough that what
we say comes from the heart, but it must come from a composed heart, and
not from a sudden heat or passion. As the mouth must not be rash, so the
heart must not be hasty; we must not only think, but think twice, before
we speak, when we are to speak either from God in preaching or to God in
prayer, and not utter any thing indecent and undigested, [Co1
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015).

5\. We must be sparing of our words in the presence of God, that is, we
must be reverent and deliberate, not talk to God as boldly and
carelessly as we do to one another, not speak what comes uppermost, not
repeat things over and over, as we do to one another, that what we say
may be understood and remembered and may make impression; no, when we
speak to God we must consider, (1.) That between him and us there is an
infinite distance: God is in heaven, where he reigns in glory over us
and all the children of men, where he is attended with an innumerable
company of holy angels and is far exalted above all our blessing and
praise. We are on earth, the footstool of his throne; we are mean and
vile, unlike God, and utterly unworthy to receive any favour from him or
to have any communion with him. Therefore we must be very grave, humble,
and serious, and be reverent in speaking to him, as we are when we speak
to a great man that is much our superior; and, in token of this, let our
words be few, that they may be well chosen, [Job
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#014). This does not condemn all long
prayers; were they not good, the Pharisees would not have used them for
a pretence; Christ prayed all night; and we are directed to continue in
prayer. But it condemns careless heartless praying, vain repetitions
([Mat 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#007)), repeating Pater-nosters by
tale. Let us speak to God, and of him, in his own words, words which the
scripture teaches; and let our words, words of our own invention, be
few, lest, not speaking by rule, we speak amiss. (2.) That the
multiplying of words in our devotions will make them the sacrifices of
fools, [Ecc 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#003). As confused dreams,
frightful and perplexed, and such as disturb the sleep, are an evidence
of a hurry of business which fills our head, so many words and hasty
ones, used in prayer, are an evidence of folly reigning in the heart,
ignorance of and unacquaintedness with both God and ourselves, low
thoughts of God, and careless thoughts of our own souls. Even in common
conversation a fool is known by the multitude of words; those that know
least talk most ([Ecc 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#011)),
particularly in devotion; there, no doubt, a prating fool shall fall
([Pro 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#008), [Pro
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#010)), shall fall short of
acceptance. Those are fools indeed who think they shall be heard, in
prayer, for their much speaking.

[Ecclesiastes 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 5:4</span></span>

Four things we are exhorted to in these verses: -

I. To be conscientious in paying our vows.

1\. A vow is a bond upon the soul ([Num
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#002)), by which we solemnly oblige
ourselves, not only, in general, to do that which we are already bound
to do, but, in some particular instances, to do that to do which we were
not under any antecedent obligation, whether it respects honouring God
or serving the interests of his kingdom among men. When, under the sense
of some affliction ([Psa 66:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#014)), or in
the pursuit of some mercy ([Sa1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#011)),
thou hast vowed such a vow as this unto God, know that thou hast opened
thy mouth unto the Lord and thou canst not go back; therefore, (1.) Pay
it; perform what thou hast promised; bring to God what thou hast
dedicated and devoted to him: Pay that which thou hast vowed; pay it in
full and keep not back any part of the price; pay it in kind, do not
alter it or change it, so the law was, [Lev
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#010). Have we vowed to give our own
selves unto the Lord? Let us then be as good as our word, act in his
service, to his glory, and not sacrilegiously alienate ourselves. (2.)
Defer not to pay it. If it be in the power of thy hands to pay it today,
leave it not till tomorrow; do not beg a day, nor put it off to a more
convenient season. By delay the sense of the obligation slackens and
cools, and is in danger of wearing off; we thereby discover a loathness
and backwardness to perform our vow; and qui non est hodie cras minus
aptus erit - he who is not inclined today will be averse tomorrow. The
longer it is put off the more difficult it will be to bring ourselves to
it; death may not only prevent the payment, but fetch thee to judgment,
under the guilt of a broken vow, [Psa
76:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011).

2\. Two reasons are here given why we should speedily and cheerfully pay
our vows: - (1.) Because otherwise we affront God; we play the fool with
him, as if we designed to put a trick upon him; and God has no pleasure
in fools. More is implied than is expressed; the meaning is, He greatly
abhors such fools and such foolish dealings. Has he need of fools? No;
Be not deceived, God is not mocked, but will surely and severely reckon
with those that thus play fast and loose with him. (2.) Because
otherwise we wrong ourselves, we lose the benefit of the making of the
vow, nay, we incur the penalty for the breach of it; so that it would
have been better a great deal not to have vowed, more safe and more to
our advantage, than to vow and not to pay. Not to have vowed would have
been but an omission, but to vow and not pay incurs the guilt of
treachery and perjury; it is lying to God, [Act
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#004).

II\. To be cautious in making our vows. This is necessary in order to
our being conscientious in performing them, [Ecc
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#006). 1. We must take heed that we
never vow anything that is sinful, or that may be an occasion of sin,
for such a vow is ill-made and must be broken. Suffer not thy mouth, by
such a vow, to cause thy flesh to sin, as Herod's rash promise caused
him to cut off the head of John the Baptist. 2. We must not vow that
which, through the frailty of the flesh, we have reason to fear we shall
not be able to perform, as those that vow a single life and yet know not
how to keep their vow. Hereby, (1.) They shame themselves; for they are
forced to say before the angel, It was an error, that either they did
not mean or did not consider what they said; and, take it which way you
will, it is bad enough. "When thou hast made a vow, do not seek to evade
it, nor find excuses to get clear of the obligation of it; say not
before the priest, who is called the angel or messenger of the Lord of
hosts, that, upon second thoughts, thou hast changed thy mind, and
desirest to be absolved from the obligation of thy vow; but stick to it,
and do not seek a hole to creep out at." Some by the angel understand
the guardian angel which they suppose to attend every man and to inspect
what he does. Others understand it of Christ, the Angel of the covenant,
who is present with his people in their assemblies, who searches the
heart, and cannot be imposed upon; provoke him not, for God's name is in
him, and he is represented as strict and jealous, [Exo
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020), [Exo
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#021). (2.) They expose themselves to
the wrath of God, for he is angry at the voice of those that thus lie
unto him with their mouth and flatter him with their tongue, and is
displeased at their dissimulation, and destroys the works of their
hands, that is, blasts their enterprises, and defeats those purposes
which, when they made these vows, they were seeking to God for the
success of. If we treacherously cancel the words of our mouths, and
revoke our vows, God will justly overthrow our projects, and walk
contrary, and at all adventures, with those that thus walk contrary, and
at all adventures with him. It is a snare to a man, after vows, to make
enquiry.

III\. To keep up the fear of God, [Ecc
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#007). Many, of old, pretended to know
the mind of God by dreams, and were so full of them that they almost
made God's people forget his name by their dreams ([Jer
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#025), [Jer
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#026)); and many now perplex
themselves with their frightful or odd dreams, or with other people's
dreams, as if they foreboded this or the other disaster. Those that heed
dreams shall have a multitude of them to fill their heads with; but in
them all there are divers vanities, as there are in many words, and the
more if we regard them. "They are but like the idle impertinent chat of
children and fools, and therefore never heed them; forget them; instead
of repeating them lay no stress upon them, draw no disquieting
conclusions from them, but fear thou God; have an eye to his sovereign
dominion, set him before thee, keep thyself in his love, and be afraid
of offending him, and then thou wilt not disturb thyself with foolish
dreams." The way not to be dismayed at the signs of heaven, nor afraid
of the idols of the heathen, is to fear God as King of nations, [Jer
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#002), [Jer
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#005), [Jer
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#007).

IV\. With that to keep down the fear of man, [Ecc
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#008). "Set God before thee, and then,
if thou seest the oppression of the poor, thou wilt not marvel at the
matter, nor find fault with divine Providence, nor think the worse of
the institution of magistracy, when thou seest the ends of it thus
perverted, nor of religion, when thou seest it will not secure men from
suffering wrong." Observe here, 1. A melancholy sight on earth, and such
as cannot but trouble every good man that has a sense of justice and a
concern for mankind, to see the oppression of the poor because they are
poor and cannot defend themselves, and the violent perverting of
judgment and justice in a province, oppression under colour of law and
backed with power. The kingdom in general may have a good government,
and yet it may so happen that a particular province may be committed to
a bad man, by whose mal-administration justice may be perverted; so hard
it is for the wisest of kings, in giving preferments, to be sure of
their men; they can but redress the grievance when it appears. 2. A
comfortable sight in heaven. When things look thus dismal we may satisfy
ourselves with this, (1.) That, though oppressors be high, God is above
them, and in that very thing wherein they deal proudly, [Exo
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#011). God is higher than the highest
of creatures, than the highest of princes, than the king that is higher
than Agag ([Num 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#007)), than the
highest angels, the thrones and dominions of the upper world. God is the
Most High over all the earth, and his glory is above the heavens; before
him princes are worms, the brightest but glow-worms. (2.) That, though
oppressors be secure, God has his eye upon them, takes notice of, and
will reckon for, all their violent perverting of judgment; he regards,
not only sees it but observes it, and keeps it on record, to be called
over again; his eyes are upon their ways. See [Job
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#023). (3.) That there is a world of
angels, for there are higher than they, who are employed by the divine
justice for protecting the injured and punishing the injurious.
Sennacherib valued himself highly upon his potent army, but one angel
proved too hard for him and all his forces. Some, by those that are
higher than they understand the great council of the nation, the
presidents to whom the princes of the provinces are accountable ([Dan
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#002)), the senate that receive
complaints against the proconsuls, the courts above to which appeals are
made from the inferior courts, which are necessary to the good
government of a kingdom. Let it be a check to oppressors that perhaps
their superiors on earth may call them to an account; however, God the
Supreme in heaven will.

[Ecclesiastes 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 5:9</span></span>

Solomon had shown the vanity of pleasure, gaiety, and fine works, of
honour, power, and royal dignity; and there is many a covetous worldling
that will agree with him, and speak as slightly as he does of these
things; but money, he thinks, is a substantial thing, and if he can but
have enough of that he is happy. This is the mistake which Solomon
attacks, and attempts to rectify, in these verses; he shows that there
is as much vanity in great riches, and the lust of the eye about them,
as there is in the lusts of the flesh and the pride of life, and a man
can make himself no more happy by hoarding an estate than by spending
it.

I. He grants that the products of the earth, for the support and comfort
of human life, are valuable things ([Ecc
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#009)): The profit of the earth is for
all. Man's body, being made of the earth, thence has its maintenance
([Job 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#005)); and that it has so, and
that a barren land is not made his dwelling (as he has deserved for
being rebellious, [Psa 68:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006)), is an
instance of God's great bounty to him. There is profit to be got out of
the earth, and it is for all; all need it; it is appointed for all;
there is enough for all. It is not only for all men, but for all the
inferior creatures; the same ground brings grass for the cattle that
brings herbs for the service of men. Israel had bread from heaven,
angels' food, but (which is a humbling consideration) the earth is our
storehouse and the beasts are fellow-commoners with us. The king himself
is served of the field, and would be ill served, would be quite starved,
without its products. This puts a great honour upon the husbandman's
calling, that it is the most necessary of all to the support of man's
life. The many have the benefit of it; the mighty cannot live without
it; it is for all; it is for the king himself. Those that have an
abundance of the fruits of the earth must remember they are for all, and
therefore must look upon themselves but as stewards of their abundance,
out of which they must give to those that need. Dainty meats and soft
clothing are only for some, but the fruit of the earth is for all. And
even those that suck the abundance of the seas ([Deu
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#019)) cannot be without the fruit of
the earth, while those that have a competency of the fruit of the earth
may despise the abundance of the seas.

II\. He maintains that the riches that are more than these, that are for
hoarding, not for use, are vain things, and will not make a man easy or
happy. That which our Saviour has said ([Luk
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#015)), that a man's life consists not
in the abundance of the things which he possesses, is what Solomon here
undertakes to prove by various arguments.

1\. The more men have the more they would have, [Ecc
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#010). A man may have but a little
silver and be satisfied with it, may know when he has enough and covet
no more. Godliness, with contentment, is great gain. I have enough, says
Jacob; I have all, and abound, says St. Paul: but, (1.) He that loves
silver, and sets his heart upon it, will never think he has enough, but
enlarges his desire as hell ([Hab
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#005)), lays house to house and field to
field ([Isa 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#008)), and, like the
daughters of the horse-leech, still cries, Give, give. Natural desires
are at rest when that which is desired is obtained, but corrupt desires
are insatiable. Nature is content with little, grace with less, but lust
with nothing. (2.) He that has silver in abundance, and has it
increasing ever so fast upon him, yet does not find that it yields any
solid satisfaction to his soul. There are bodily desires which silver
itself will not satisfy; if a man be hungry, ingots of silver will do no
more to satisfy his hunger than clods of clay. Much less will worldly
abundance satisfy spiritual desires; he that has ever so much silver
covets more, not only of that, but of something else, something of
another nature. Those that make themselves drudges to the world are
spending their labour for that which satisfies not ([Isa
55:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#002)), which fills the belly, but will
never fill the soul, [Eze 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#019).

2\. The more men have the more occasion they have for it, and the more
they have to do with it, so that it is as broad as it is long: When
goods increase, they are increased that eat them, [Ecc
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#011). The more meat the more mouths.
Does the estate thrive? And does not the family at the same time grow
more numerous and the children grow up to need more? The more men have
the better house they must keep, the more servants they must employ, the
more guests they must entertain, the more they must give to the poor,
and the more they will have hanging on them, for where the carcase is
the eagles will be. What we have more than food and raiment we have for
others; and then what good is there to the owners themselves, but the
pleasure of beholding it with their eyes? And a poor pleasure it is. An
empty speculation is all the difference between the owners and the
sharers; the owner sees that as his own which those about him enjoy as
much of the real benefit of as he; only he has the satisfaction of doing
good to others, which indeed is a satisfaction to one who believes what
Christ said, that it is more blessed to give than to receive; but to a
covetous man, who thinks all lost that goes beside himself, it is a
constant vexation to see others eat of his increase.

3\. The more men have the more care they have about it, which perplexes
them and disturbs their repose, [Ecc
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#012). Refreshing sleep is as much the
support and comfort of this life as food is. Now, (1.) Those commonly
sleep best that work hard and have but what they work for: The sleep of
the labouring man is sweet, not only because he has tired himself with
his labour, which makes his sleep the more welcome to him and makes him
sleep soundly, but because he has little to fill his head with care
about and so break his sleep. His sleep is sweet, though he eat but
little and have but little to eat, for his weariness rocks him asleep;
and, though he eat much, yet he can sleep well, for his labour gets him
a good digestion. The sleep of the diligent Christian, and his long
sleep, is sweet; for, having spent himself and his time in the service
of God, he can cheerfully return to God and repose in him as his rest.
(2.) Those that have every thing else often fail to secure a good
night's sleep. Either their eyes are held waking or their sleeps are
unquiet and do not refresh them; and it is their abundance that breaks
their sleep and disturbs it, both the abundance of their care (as the
rich man's who, when his ground brought forth plentifully, thought
within himself, What shall I do? [Luk
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#017)) and the abundance of what they
eat and drink which overcharges the heart, makes them sick, and so
hinders their repose. Ahasuerus, after a banquet of wine, could not
sleep; and perhaps consciousness of guilt, both in getting and using
what they have, breaks their sleep as much as any thing. But God gives
his beloved sleep.

4\. The more men have the more danger they are in both of doing mischief
and of having mischief done them ([Ecc
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#013)): There is an evil, a sore evil,
which Solomon himself had seen under the sun, in this lower world, this
theatre of sin and woe - riches left for the owners thereof (who have
been industrious to hoard them and keep them safely) to their hurt; they
would have been better without them. (1.) Their riches do them hurt,
make them proud, secure, and in love with the world, draw away their
hearts from God and duty, and make it very difficult for them to enter
into the kingdom of heaven, nay, help to shut them out of it. (2.) They
do hurt with their riches, which not only put them into a capacity of
gratifying their own lusts and living luxuriously, but give them an
opportunity of oppressing others and dealing hardly with them. (3.)
Often they sustain hurt by their riches. They would not be envied, would
not be robbed, if they were not rich. It is the fat beast that is led
first to the slaughter. A very rich man (as one observes) has sometimes
been excepted out of a general pardon, both as to life and estate,
merely on account of his vast and overgrown estate; so riches often take
away the life of the owners thereof, [Pro
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#019).

5\. The more men have the more they have to lose, and perhaps they may
lose it all, [Ecc 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#014). Those riches
that have been laid up with a great deal of pains, and kept with a great
deal of care, perish by evil travail, by the very pains and care which
they take to secure and increase them. Many a one has ruined his estate
by being over-solicitous to advance it and make it more, and has lost
all by catching at all. Riches are perishing things, and all our care
about them cannot make them otherwise; they make themselves wings and
fly away. He that thought he should have made his son a gentleman leaves
him a beggar; he begets a son, and brings him up in the prospect of an
estate, but, when he dies, leaves it under a charge of debt as much as
it is worth, so that there is nothing in his hand. This is a common
case; estates that made a great show do not prove what they seemed, but
cheat the heir.

6\. How much soever men have when they die, they must leave it all
behind them ([Ecc 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#015), [Ecc
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#016)): As he came forth of his
mother's womb naked, so shall he return; only as his friends, when he
came naked into the world, in pity to him, helped him with
swaddling-clothes, so, when he goes out, they help him with
grave-clothes, and that is all. See [Job
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021); [Psa
49:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#017). This is urged as a reason why
we should be content with such things as we have, [Ti1
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#007). In respect of the body we must go
as we came; the dust shall return to the earth as it was. But sad is our
case if the soul return as it came, for we were born in sin, and if we
die in sin, unsanctified, we had better never have been born; and that
seems to be the case of the worldling here spoken of, for he is said to
return in all points as he came, as sinful, as miserable, and much more
so. This is a sore evil; he thinks it so whose heart is glued to the
world, that he shall take nothing of his labour which he may carry away
in his hand; his riches will not go with him into another world nor
stand him in any stead there. If we labour in religion, the grace and
comfort we get by that labour we may carry away in our hearts, and shall
be the better for it to eternity; that is meat that endures. But if we
labour only for the world, to fill our hands with that, we cannot take
that away with us; we are born with our hands griping, but we die with
them extended, letting go what we held fast. So that, upon the whole
matter, he may well ask, What profit has he that has laboured for the
wind? Note, Those that labour for the world labour for the wind, for
that which has more sound than substance, which is uncertain, and always
shifting its point, unsatisfying, and often hurtful, which we cannot
hold fast, and which, if we take up with it as our portion, will no more
feed us than the wind, [Hos 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#001). Men
will see that they have laboured for the wind when at death they find
the profit of their labour is all gone, gone like the wind, they know
not whither.

7\. Those that have much, if they set their hearts upon it, have not
only uncomfortable deaths, but uncomfortable lives too, [Ecc
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#017). This covetous worldling, that is
so bent upon raising an estate, all his days eats in darkness and much
sorrow, and it is his sickness and wrath; he has not only no pleasure of
his estate, nor any enjoyment of it himself, for he eats the bread of
sorrow ([Psa 127:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002)), but a great deal
of vexation to see others eat of it. His necessary expenses make him
sick, make him fret, and he seems as if he were angry that himself and
those about him cannot live without meat. As we read the last clause, it
intimates how ill this covetous worldling can bear the common and
unavoidable calamities of human life. When he is in health he eats in
darkness, always dull with care and fear about what he has; but, if he
be sick, he has much sorrow and wrath with his sickness; he is vexed
that his sickness takes him off from his business and hinders him in his
pursuits of the world, vexed that all his wealth will not give him any
ease or relief, but especially terrified with the apprehensions of death
(which his diseases are the harbingers of), of leaving this world and
the things of it behind him, which he has set his affections upon, and
removing to a world he has made no preparation for. He has not any
sorrow after a godly sort, does not sorrow to repentance, but he has
sorrow and wrath, is angry at the providence of God, angry at his
sickness, angry at all about him, fretful and peevish, which doubles his
affliction, which a good man lessens and lightens by patience and joy in
his sickness.

[Ecclesiastes 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ecc 5:18</span></span>

Solomon, from the vanity of riches hoarded up, here infers that the best
course we can take is to use well what we have, to serve God with it, to
do good with it, and take the comfort of it to ourselves and our
families; this he had pressed before, [Ecc
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#024); [Ecc
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#022). Observe, 1. What it is that is
here recommended to us, not to indulge the appetites of the flesh, or to
take up with present pleasures or profits for our portion, but soberly
and moderately to make use of what Providence has allotted for our
comfortable passage through this world. We must not starve ourselves
through covetousness, because we cannot afford ourselves food
convenient, nor through eagerness in our worldly pursuits, nor through
excessive care and grief, but eat and drink what is fit for us to keep
our bodies in good plight for the serving of our souls in God's service.
We must not kill ourselves with labour, and then leave others to enjoy
the good of it, but take the comfort of that which our hands have
laboured for, and that not now and then, but all the days of our life
which God gives us. Life is God's gift, and he has appointed us the
number of the days of our life ([Job
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005)); let us therefore spend those
days in serving the Lord our God with joyfulness and gladness of heart.
We must not do the business of our calling as a drudgery, and make
ourselves slaves to it, but we must rejoice in our labour, not grasp at
more business than we can go through without perplexity and disquiet,
but take a pleasure in the calling wherein God has put us, and go on in
the business of it with cheerfulness. This it to rejoice in our labour,
whatever it is, as Zebulun in his going out and Issachar in his tents.
2. What is urged to recommend it to us. (1.) That it is good and comely
to do this. It is well, and it looks well. Those that cheerfully use
what God has given them thereby honour the giver, answer the intention
of the gift, act rationally and generously, do good in the world, and
make what they have turn to the best account, and this is both their
credit and their comfort; it is good and comely; there is duty and
decency in it. (2.) That it is all the good we can have out of the
things of this world: It is our portion, and in doing thus we take our
portion, and make the best of bad. This is our part of our worldly
possession. God must have his part, the poor theirs, and our families
theirs, but this is ours; it is all that falls to our lot out of them.
(3.) That a heart to do thus is such a gift of God's grace as crowns all
the gifts of his providence. If God has given a man riches and wealth,
he completes the favour, and makes that a blessing indeed, if withal he
gives him power to eat thereof, wisdom and grace to take the good of it
and to do good with it. If this is God's gift, we must covet it
earnestly as the best gift relating to our enjoyments in this world.
(4.) That this is the way to make our own lives easy and to relieve
ourselves against the many toils and troubles which our lives on earth
are incident to ([Ecc 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#020)): He shall
not much remember the days of his life, the days of his sorrow and sore
travail, his working days, his weeping days. He shall either forget them
or remember them as waters that pass away; he shall not much lay to
heart his crosses, nor long retain the bitter relish of them, because
God answers him in the joy of his heart, balances all the grievances of
his labour with the joy of it and recompenses him for it by giving him
to eat the labour of his hands. If he does not answer all his desires
and expectations, in the letter of them, yet he answers them with that
which is more than equivalent, in the joy of his heart. A cheerful
spirit is a great blessing; it makes the yoke of our employments easy
and the burden of our afflictions light.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 6](ecc006)

</div>
