<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc.md)  
  [Previous](pro031)  [Next](ecc001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001.md)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Book of Ecclesiastes

We are still among Solomon's happy men, his happy servants, that stood
continually before him to hear his wisdom; and they are the choicest of
all the dictates of his wisdom, such as were more immediately given by
divine inspiration, that are here transmitted to us, not to be heard, as
by them, but once, and then liable to be mistaken or forgotten, and by
repetition to lose their beauty, but to be read, reviewed, revolved, and
had in everlasting remembrance. The account we have of Solomon's
apostasy from God, in the latter end of his reign ([Kg1
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001).md), is the tragical part of his
story; we may suppose that he spoke his Proverbs in the prime of his
time, while he kept his integrity, but delivered his Ecclesiastes when
he had grown old (for of the burdens and decays of age he speaks
feelingly [Ecc 12:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#001).md), and was, by
the grace of God, recovered from his backslidings. There he dictated his
observations; here he wrote his own experiences; this is what days
speak, and wisdom which the multitude of years teaches. The title of the
book and the penman we shall meet with in the first verse, and therefore
shall here only observe,

I. That it is a sermon, a sermon in print; the text is ([Ecc
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#002).md), Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity; that is the doctrine too; it is proved at large by many
arguments and an induction of particulars, and divers objections are
answered, and in the close we have the use and application of all, by
way of exhortation, to remember our Creator, to fear him, and to keep
his commandments. There are indeed many things in this book which are
dark and hard to be understood, and some things which men of corrupt
minds wrest to their own destruction, for want of distinguishing between
Solomon's arguments and the objections of atheists and epicures; but
there is enough easy and plain to convince us (if we will admit the
conviction) of the vanity of the world, and its utter insufficiency to
make us happy, the vileness of sin, and its certain tendency to make us
miserable, and of the wisdom of being religious, and the solid comfort
and satisfaction that are to be had in doing our duty both to God and
man. This should be intended in every sermon, and that is a good sermon
by which these points are in any measure gained. II. That it is a
penitential sermon, as some of David's psalms are penitential psalms; it
is a recantation-sermon, in which the preacher sadly laments his own
folly and mistake, in promising himself satisfaction in the things of
this world, and even in the forbidden pleasures of sense, which now he
finds more bitter than death. His fall is a proof of the weakness of
man's nature: Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor say, "I
shall never be such a fool as to do so and so," when Solomon himself,
the wisest of men, played the fool so egregiously; nor let the rich man
glory in his riches, since Solomon's wealth was so great a snare to him,
and did him a great deal more hurt than Job's poverty did him. His
recovery is a proof of the power of God's grace, in bringing one back to
God that has gone so far from him; it is a proof too of the riches of
God's mercy in accepting him notwithstanding the many aggravations of
his sin, pursuant to the promise made to David, that if his children
should commit iniquity they should be corrected, but not abandoned and
disinherited, [Sa2 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014.md), [Sa2
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#015.md). Let him therefore that thinks he
stands take heed lest he fall; and let him that has fallen make haste to
get up again, and not despair either of assistance or acceptance
therein. III. That it is a practical profitable sermon. Solomon, being
brought to repentance, resolves, like his father, to teach transgressors
God's way ([Psa 51:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#013).md) and to give
warning to all to take heed of splitting upon those rocks which had been
fatal to him; and these were fruits meet for repentance. The fundamental
error of the children of men, and that which is at the bottom of all
their departures from God, is the same with that of our first parents,
hoping to be as gods by entertaining themselves with that which seems
good for food, pleasant to the eyes, and desirable to make one wise. Now
the scope of this book is to show that this is a great mistake, that our
happiness consists not in being as gods to ourselves, to have what we
will and do what we will, but in having him that made us to be a God to
us. The moral philosophers disputed much about man's felicity, or chief
good. Various opinions they had about it; but Solomon, in this book,
determines the question, and assures us that to fear God and to keep his
commandments is the whole of man. He tried what satisfaction might be
found in the wealth of the world and the pleasures of sense, and at last
pronounced all vanity and vexation; yet multitudes will not take his
word, but will make the same dangerous experiment, and it proves fatal
to them. He, 1. Shows the vanity of those things in which men commonly
look for happiness, as human learning and policy, sensual delight,
honour and power, riches and great possessions. And then, 2. He
prescribes remedies against the vexation of spirit that attends them.
Though we cannot cure them of their vanity, we may prevent the trouble
they give us, by sitting loose to them, enjoying them comfortable, but
laying our expectations low from them, and acquiescing in the will of
God concerning us in every event, especially by remembering God in the
days of our youth, and continuing in his fear and service all our days,
with an eye to the judgment to come.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 1](ecc001.md)

</div>
