<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc007)  [Next](ecc009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 8:0</span></span>

Solomon, in this chapter, comes to recommend wisdom to us as the most
powerful antidote against both the temptations and vexations that arise
from the vanity of the world. Here is, I. The benefit and praise of
wisdom ([Ecc 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#001)). II. Some particular
instances of wisdom prescribed to us. 1. We must keep in due subjection
to the government God has set over us ([Ecc
8:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#002)). 2. We must get ready for
sudden evils, and especially for sudden death ([Ecc
8:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#006)). 3. We must arm ourselves
against the temptation of an oppressive government and not think it
strange ([Ecc 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#009), [Ecc
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#010)). The impunity of oppressors
makes them more daring ([Ecc 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011)),
but in the issue it will be well with the righteous and ill with the
wicked ([Ecc 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#012), [Ecc
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#013)), and therefore the present
prosperity of the wicked and afflictions of the righteous ought not to
be a stumbling-block to us ([Ecc
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#014)). 4. We must cheerfully use the
gifts of God's providence ([Ecc 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#015)).
5. We must with an entire satisfaction acquiesce in the will of God,
and, not pretending to find the bottom, we must humbly and silently
adore the depth of his unsearchable counsels, being assured they are all
wise, just, and good ([Ecc 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#016), [Ecc
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#017)).

[Ecclesiastes 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 8:1</span></span>

Here is, I. An encomium of wisdom ([Ecc
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#001)), that is, of true piety, guided
in all its exercises by prudence and discretion. The wise man is the
good man, that knows God and glorifies him, knows himself and does well
for himself; his wisdom is a great happiness to him, for, 1. It advances
him above his neighbours, and makes him more excellent than they: Who is
as the wise man? Note, Heavenly wisdom will make a man an incomparable
man. No man without grace, though he be learned, or noble, or rich, is
to be compared with a man that has true grace and is therefore accepted
of God. 2. It makes him useful among his neighbours and very serviceable
to them: Who but the wise man knows the interpretation of a thing, that
is, understands the times and the events of them, and their critical
junctures, so as to direct what Israel ought to do, [Ch1
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#032). 3. It beautifies a man in the
eyes of his friends: It makes his face to shine, as Moses's did when he
came down from the mount; it puts honour upon a man and a lustre on his
whole conversation, makes him to be regarded and taken notice of, and
gains him respect (as [Job 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#007),
etc.); it makes him lovely and amiable, and the darling and blessing of
his country. The strength of his face, the sourness and severity of his
countenance (so some understand the last clause), shall be changed by it
into that which is sweet and obliging. Even those whose natural temper
is rough and morose by wisdom are strangely altered; they become mild
and gentle, and learn to look pleasant. 4. It emboldens a man against
his adversaries, their attempts and their scorn: The boldness of his
face shall be doubled by wisdom; it will add very much to his courage in
maintaining his integrity when he not only has an honest cause to plead,
but by his wisdom knows how to manage it and where to find the
interpretation of a thing. He shall not be ashamed, but shall speak with
his enemy in the gate.

II\. A particular instance of wisdom pressed upon us, and that is
subjection to authority, and a dutiful and peaceable perseverance in our
allegiance to the government which Providence has set over us. Observe,

1\. How the duty of subjects is here described. (1.) We must be
observant of the laws. In all those things wherein the civil power is to
interpose, whether legislative or judicial, we ought to submit to its
order and constitutions: I counsel thee; it may as well be supplied, I
charge thee, not only as a prince but as a preacher: he might do both;
"I recommend it to thee as a piece of wisdom; I say, whatever those say
that are given to change, keep the king's commandment; wherever the
sovereign power is lodged, be subject to it. Observe the mouth of a
king" (so the phrase is); "say as he says; do as he bids thee; let his
word be a law, or rather let the law be his word." Some understand the
following clause as a limitation of this obedience: "Keep the king's
commandment, yet so as to have a regard to the oath of God, that is, so
as to keep a good conscience and not to violate thy obligations to God,
which are prior and superior to thy obligations to the king. Render to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, but so as to reserve pure and
entire to God the things that are his." (2.) We must not be forward to
find fault with the public administration, or quarrel with every thing
that is not just according to our mind, nor quit our post of service
under the government, and throw it up, upon every discontent ([Ecc
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#003)): "Be not hasty to go out of his
sight, when he is displeased at thee ([Ecc
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#004)), or when thou art displeased at
him; fly not off in a passion, nor entertain such jealousies of him as
will tempt thee to renounce the court or forsake the kingdom." Solomon's
subjects, as soon as his head was laid low, went directly contrary to
this rule, when upon the rough answer which Rehoboam gave them, they
were hasty to go out of his sight, would not take time for second
thoughts nor admit proposals of accommodation, but cried, To your tents,
O Israel! "There may perhaps be a just cause to go out of his sight; but
be not hasty to do it; act with great deliberation." (3.) We must not
persist in a fault when it is shown us: "Stand not in an evil thing; in
any offence thou hast given to thy prince humble thyself, and do not
justify thyself, for that will make the offence much more offensive. In
any ill design thou hast, upon some discontent, conceived against thy
prince, do not proceed in it; but if thou hast done foolishly in lifting
up thyself, or hast thought evil, lay thy hand upon thy mouth," [Pro
30:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#032). Note, Though we may by surprise
be drawn into an evil thing, yet we must not stand in it, but recede
from it as soon as it appears to us to be evil. (4.) We must prudently
accommodate ourselves to our opportunities, both for our own relief, if
we think ourselves wronged, and for the redress of public grievances: A
wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment ([Ecc
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#005)); it is the wisdom of subjects, in
applying themselves to their princes, to enquire and consider both at
what season and in what manner they may do it best and most effectually,
to pacify his anger, obtain his favour, or obtain the revocation of any
grievous measure prescribed. Esther, in dealing with Ahasuerus, took a
deal of pains to discern both time and judgment, and she sped
accordingly. This may be taken as a general rule of wisdom, that every
thing should be well timed; and our enterprises are then likely to
succeed, when we embrace the exact opportunity for them.

2\. What arguments are here used to engage us to be subject to the
higher powers; they are much the same with those which St. Paul uses,
[Rom 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001), etc. (1.) We must needs be
subject, for conscience-sake, and that is the most powerful principle of
subjection. We must be subject because of the oath of God, the oath of
allegiance which we have taken to be faithful to the government, the
covenant between the king and the people, [Ch2
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#016). David made a covenant, or
contract, with the elders of Israel, though he was king by divine
designation, [Ch1 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#003). "Keep the
king's commandments, for he has sworn to rule thee in the fear of God,
and thou hast sworn, in that fear, to be faithful to him." It is called
the oath of God because he is a witness to it and will avenge the
violation of it. (2.) For wrath's sake, because of the sword which the
prince bears and the power he is entrusted with, which make him
formidable: He does whatsoever pleases him; he has a great authority and
a great ability to support that authority ([Ecc
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#004)): Where the word of a king is,
giving orders to seize a man, there is power; there are many that will
execute his orders, which makes the wrath of a king, or supreme
government, like the roaring of a lion and like messengers of death. Who
may say unto him, What doest thou? He that contradicts him does it at
his peril. Kings will not bear to have their orders disputed, but expect
they should be obeyed. In short, it is dangerous contending with
sovereignty, and what many have repented. A subject is an unequal match
for a prince. He may command me who has legions at command. (3.) For the
sake of our own comfort: Whoso keeps the commandment, and lives a quiet
and peaceable life, shall feel no evil thing, to which that of the
apostle answers ([Rom 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#003)), Wilt thou
then not be afraid of the power of the king? Do that which is good, as
becomes a dutiful and loyal subject, and thou shalt ordinarily have
praise of the same. He that does no ill shall feel no ill and needs fear
none.

[Ecclesiastes 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 8:6</span></span>

Solomon had said ([Ecc 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#005)) that a
wise man's heart discerns time and judgment, that is, a man's wisdom
will go a great way, by the blessing of God, in moral prognostications;
but here he shows that few have that wisdom, and that even the wisest
may yet be surprised by a calamity which they had not any foresight of,
and therefore it is our wisdom to expect and prepare for sudden changes.
Observe, 1. All the events concerning us, with the exact time of them,
are determined and appointed in the counsel and foreknowledge of God,
and all in wisdom: To every purpose there is a time prefixed, and it is
the best time, for it is time and judgment, time appointed both in
wisdom and righteousness; the appointment is not chargeable with folly
or iniquity. 2. We are very much in the dark concerning future events
and the time and season of them: Man knows not that which shall be
himself; and who can tell him when or how it shall be? [Ecc
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#007). It cannot either be foreseen by
him or foretold him; the stars cannot foretel a man what shall be, nor
any of the arts of divination. God has, in wisdom, concealed from us the
knowledge of future events, that we may be always ready for changes. 3.
It is our great unhappiness and misery that, because we cannot foresee
an evil, we know not how to avoid it, or guard against it, and, because
we are not aware of the proper successful season of actions, therefore
we lose our opportunities and miss our way: Because to every purpose
there is but one way, one method, one proper opportunity, therefore the
misery of man is great upon him; because it is so hard to hit that, and
it is a thousand to one but he misses it. Most of the miseries men
labour under would have been prevented if they could have been foreseen
and the happy time discovered to avoid them. Men are miserable because
they are not sufficiently sagacious and attentive. 4. Whatever other
evils may be avoided, we are all under a fatal necessity of dying, [Ecc
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#008). (1.) When the soul is required it
must be resigned, and it is to no purpose to dispute it, either by arms
or arguments, by ourselves, or by any friend: There is no man that has
power over his own spirit, to retain it, when it is summoned to return
to God who gave it. It cannot fly any where out of the jurisdiction of
death, nor find any place where its writs do not run. It cannot abscond
so as to escape death's eye, though it is hidden from the eyes of all
living. A man has no power to adjourn the day of his death, nor can he
by prayers or bribes obtain a reprieve; no bail will be taken, no
essoine \[excuse\], protection, or imparlance \[conference\], allowed.
We have not power over the spirit of a friend, to retain that; the
prince, with all his authority, cannot prolong the life of the most
valuable of his subjects, nor the physician with his medicines and
methods, nor the soldier with his force, not the orator with his
eloquence, nor the best saint with his intercessions. The stroke of
death can by no means be put by when our days are determined and the
hour appointed us has come. (2.) Death is an enemy that we must all
enter the lists with, sooner or later: There is no discharge in that
war, no dismission from it, either of the men of business or of the
faint-hearted, as there was among the Jews, [Deu
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#005), [Deu
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#008). While we live we are struggling
with death, and we shall never put off the harness till we put off the
body, never obtain a discharge till death has obtained the mastery; the
youngest is not released as a fresh-water soldier, nor the oldest as
miles emeritus - a soldier whose merits have entitled him to a
discharge. Death is a battle that must be fought, There is no sending to
that war (so some read it), no substituting another to muster for us, no
champion admitted to fight for us; we must ourselves engage, and are
concerned to provide accordingly, as for a battle. (3.) Men's
wickedness, by which they often evade or outface the justice of the
prince, cannot secure them from the arrest of death, nor can the most
obstinate sinner harden his heart against those terrors. Though he
strengthen himself ever so much in his wickedness ([Psa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007)), death will be too strong for
him. The most subtle wickedness cannot outwit death, nor the most
impudent wickedness outbrave death. Nay, the wickedness which men give
themselves to will be so far from delivering them from death that it
will deliver them up to death.

[Ecclesiastes 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 8:9</span></span>

Solomon, in the beginning of the chapter, had warned us against having
any thing to do with seditious subjects; here, in these verses, he
encourages us, in reference to the mischief of tyrannical and oppressive
rulers, such as he had complained of before, [Ecc
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016); [Ecc
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#001).

1\. He had observed many such rulers, [Ecc
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#009). In the serious views and reviews
he had taken of the children of men and their state he had observed that
many a time one man rules over another to his hurt; that is, (1.) To the
hurt of the ruled (many understand it so); whereas they ought to be
God's ministers unto their subjects for their good ([Rom
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)), to administer justice, and to
preserve the public peace and order, they use their power for their
hurt, to invade their property, encroach upon their liberty, and
patronise the acts of injustice. It is sad with a people when those that
should protect their religion and rights aim at the destruction of both.
(2.) To the hurt of the rulers (so we render it), to their own hurt, to
the feeling of their pride and covetousness, the gratifying of their
passion and revenge, and so to the filling up of the measure of their
sins and the hastening and aggravating of their ruin. Agens agendo
repatitur - What hurt men do to others will return, in the end, to their
own hurt.

2\. He had observed them to prosper and flourish in the abuse of their
power ([Ecc 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#010)): I saw those wicked
rulers come and go from the place of the holy, go in state to and return
in pomp from the place of judicature (which is called the place of the
Holy One because the judgment is the Lord's, [Deu
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#017), and he judges among the gods,
[Psa 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001), and is with them in the
judgment, [Ch2 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#006)), and they
continued all their days in office, were never reckoned with for their
mal-administration, but died in honour and were buried magnificently;
their commissions were durante vit - during life, and not quamdiu se
bene gesserint - during good behaviour. And they were forgotten in the
city where they had so done; their wicked practices were not remembered
against them to their reproach and infamy when they were gone. Or,
rather, it denotes the vanity of their dignity and power, for that is
his remark upon it in the close of the verse: This is also vanity. They
are proud of their wealth, and power, and honour, because they sit in
the place of the holy; but all this cannot secure, (1.) Their bodies
from being buried in the dust; I saw them laid in the grave; and their
pomp, though it attended them thither, could not descend after them,
[Psa 49:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#017). (2.) Nor their names from
being buried in oblivion; for they were forgotten, as if they had never
been.

3\. He had observed that their prosperity hardened them in their
wickedness, [Ecc 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011). It is true of
all sinners in general, and particularly of wicked rulers, that, because
sentence against their evil works is not executed speedily, they think
it will never be executed, and therefore they set the law at defiance
and their hearts are full in them to do evil; they venture to do so much
the more mischief, fetch a greater compass in their wicked designs, and
are secure and fearless in it, and commit iniquity with a high hand.
Observe, (1.) Sentence is passed against evil works and evil workers by
the righteous Judge of heaven and earth, even against the evil works of
princes and great men, as well as of inferior persons. (2.) The
execution of this sentence is often delayed a great while, and the
sinner goes on, not only unpunished, but prosperous and successful. (3.)
Impunity hardens sinners in impiety, and the patience of God is
shamefully abused by many who, instead of being led by it to repentance,
are confirmed by it in their impenitence. (4.) Sinners herein deceive
themselves, for, though the sentence be not executed speedily, it will
be executed the more severely at last. Vengeance comes slowly, but it
comes surely, and wrath is in the mean time treasured up against the day
of wrath.

4\. He foresaw such an end of all these things as would be sufficient to
keep us from quarrelling with the divine Providence upon account of
them. He supposes a wicked ruler to do an unjust thing a hundred times,
and that yet his punishment is deferred, and God's patience towards him
is prolonged, much beyond what was expected, and the days of his power
are lengthened out, so that he continues to oppress; yet he intimates
that we should not be discouraged. (1.) God's people are certainly a
happy people, though they be oppressed: "It shall be well with those
that fear God, I say with all those, and those only, who fear before
him." Note, \[1.\] It is the character of God's people that they fear
God, have an awe of him upon their hearts and make conscience of their
duty to him, and this because they see his eye always upon them and they
know it is their concern to approve themselves to him. When they lie at
the mercy of proud oppressors they fear God more then they fear them.
They do not quarrel with the providence of God, but submit to it. \[2.\]
It is the happiness of all that fear God, that in the worst of times it
shall be well with them; their happiness in God's favour cannot be
prejudiced, nor their communion with God interrupted, by their troubles;
they are in a good case, for they are kept in a good frame under their
troubles, and in the end they shall have a blessed deliverance from and
an abundant recompence for their troubles. And therefore "surely I know,
I know it by the promise of God, and the experience of all the saints,
that, however it goes with others, it shall go well with them." All is
well that ends well. (2.) Wicked people are certainly a miserable
people; though they prosper, and prevail, for a time, the curse is as
sure to them as the blessing is to the righteous: It shall not be well
with the wicked, as others think it is, who judge by outward appearance,
and as they themselves expect it will be; nay, woe to the wicked; it
shall be ill with them ([Isa 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010),
[Isa 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#011)); they shall be reckoned
with for all the ill they have done; nothing that befals them shall be
really well for them. Nihil potest ad malos pervenire quod prosit, imo
nihil quod non noceat - No event can occur to the wicked which will do
them good, rather no event which will not do them harm. Seneca. Note,
\[1.\] The wicked man's days are as a shadow, not only uncertain and
declining, as all men's days are, but altogether unprofitable. A good
man's days have some substance in them; he lives to a good purpose. A
wicked man's days are all as a shadow, empty and worthless. \[2.\] These
days shall not be prolonged to what he promised himself; he shall not
live out half his days, [Psa 55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023).
Though they may be prolonged ([Ecc
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#012)) beyond what others expected, yet
his day shall come to fall. He shall fall short of everlasting life, and
then his long life on earth will be worth little. \[3.\] God's great
quarrel with wicked people is for their not fearing before him; that is
at the bottom of their wickedness, and cuts them off from all happiness.

[Ecclesiastes 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ecc 8:14</span></span>

Wise and good men have, of old, been perplexed with this difficulty, how
the prosperity of the wicked and the troubles of the righteous can be
reconciled with the holiness and goodness of the God that governs the
world. Concerning this Solomon here gives us his advice.

I. He would not have us to be surprised at it, as though some strange
thing happened, for he himself saw it in his days, [Ecc
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#014). 1. He saw just men to whom it
happened according to the work of the wicked, who, notwithstanding their
righteousness, suffered very hard things, and continued long to do so,
as if they were to be punished for some great wickedness. 2. He saw
wicked men to whom it happened according to the work of the righteous,
who prospered as remarkably as if they had been rewarded for some good
deed, and that from themselves, from God, from men. We see the just
troubled and perplexed in their own minds, the wicked easy, fearless,
and secure, - the just crossed and afflicted by the divine Providence,
the wicked prosperous, successful, and smiled upon, - the just,
censured, reproached, and run down, by the higher powers, the wicked
applauded and preferred.

II\. He would have us to take occasion hence, not to charge God with
iniquity, but to charge the world with vanity. No fault is to be found
with God; but, as to the world, This is vanity upon the earth, and
again, This is also vanity, that is, it is a certain evidence that the
things of this world are not the best things nor were ever designed to
make a portion and happiness for us, for, if they had, God would not
have allotted so much of this world's wealth to his worst enemies and so
much of its troubles to his best friends; there must therefore be
another life after this the joys and griefs of which must be real and
substantial, and able to make men truly happy or truly miserable, for
this world does neither.

III\. He would have us not to fret and perplex ourselves about it, or
make ourselves uneasy, but cheerfully to enjoy what God has given us in
the world, to be content with it and make the best of it, though it be
much better with others, and such as we think very unworthy ([Ecc
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#015)): Then I commended joy, a holy
security and serenity of mind, arising from a confidence in God, and his
power, providence, and promise, because a man has no better thing under
the sun (though a good man has much better things above the sun) than to
eat and drink, that is, soberly and thankfully to make use of the things
of this life according as his rank is, and to be cheerful, whatever
happens, for that shall abide with him of his labour. That is all the
fruit he has for himself of the pains that he takes in the business of
the world; let him therefore take it, and much good may it do him; and
let him not deny himself that, out of a peevish discontent because the
world does not go as he would have it. That shall abide with him during
the days of his life which God gives him under the sun. Our present life
is a life under the sun, but we look for the life of the world to come,
which will commence and continue when the sun shall be turned into
darkness and shine no more. This present life must be reckoned by days;
this life is given us, and the days of it are allotted to us, by the
counsel of God, and therefore while it does last we must accommodate
ourselves to the will of God and study to answer the ends of life.

IV\. He would not have us undertake to give a reason for that which God
does, for his way is in the sea and his path in the great waters, past
finding out, and therefore we must be contentedly and piously ignorant
of the meaning of God's proceedings in the government of the world, [Ecc
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#016), [Ecc
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#017). Here he shows, 1. That both he
himself and many others had very closely studied the point, and searched
far into the reasons of the prosperity of the wicked and the afflictions
of the righteous. He, for his part, had applied his heart to know this
wisdom, and to see the business that is done, by the divine Providence,
upon the earth, to find out if there were any certain scheme, any
constant rule or method, by which the affairs of this lower world were
administered, any course of government as sure and steady as the course
of nature, so that by what is done now we might as certainly foretel
what will be done next as by the moon's changing now we can foretel when
it will be at the full; this he would fain have found out. Others had
likewise set themselves to make this enquiry with so close an
application that they could not find time for sleep, either day or
night, nor find in their hearts to sleep, so full of anxiety were they
about these things. Some think Solomon speaks of himself, that he was so
eager in prosecuting this great enquiry that he could not sleep for
thinking of it. 2. That it was all labour in vain, [Ecc
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#017). When we look upon all the works
of God and his providence, and compare one part with another, we cannot
find that there is any such certain method by which the work that is
done under the sun is directed; we cannot discover any key by which to
decipher the character, nor by consulting precedents can we know the
practice of this court, nor what the judgment will be. \[1.\] Though a
man be ever so industrious, thou he labour to seek it out. \[2.\] Though
he be ever so ingenious, though he be a wise man in other things, and
can fathom the counsels of kings themselves and trace them by their
footsteps. Nay, \[3.\] Though he be very confident of success, though he
think to know it, yet he shall not; he cannot find it out. God's ways
are above ours, nor is he tied to his own former ways, but his judgments
are a great deep.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 9](ecc009)

</div>
