<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ephesians Index](eph.md)  
  [Previous](eph000)  [Next](eph002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001.md)

In this chapter we have, I. The introduction to the whole epistle, which
is much the same as in others ([Eph
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001.md), [Eph
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#002).md). II. The apostle's thanksgivings
and praises to God for his inestimable blessings bestowed on the
believing Ephesians ([Eph 1:3-14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003).md).
III. His earnest prayers to God in their behalf ([Eph
1:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#015).md). This great apostle was wont
to abound in prayers and in thanksgivings to almighty God, which he
generally so disposes and orders that at the same time they carry with
them and convey the great and important doctrines of the Christian
religion, and the most weighty instructions to all those who seriously
peruse them.

[Ephesians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 1:1</span></span>

Here is, 1. The title St. Paul takes to himself, as belonging to him -
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, etc. He reckoned it a great honour to
be employed by Christ, as one of his messengers to the sons of men. The
apostles were prime officers in the Christian church, being
extraordinary ministers appointed for a time only. They were furnished
by their great Lord with extraordinary gifts and the immediate
assistance of the Spirit, that they might be fitted for publishing and
spreading the gospel and for governing the church in its infant state.
Such a one Paul was, and that not by the will of man conferring that
office upon him, nor by his own intrusion into it; but by the will of
God, very expressly and plainly intimated to him, he being immediately
called (as the other apostles were) by Christ himself to the work. Every
faithful minister of Christ (though his call and office are not of so
extraordinary a nature) may, with our apostle, reflect on it as an
honour and comfort to himself that he is what he is by the will of God.
2. The persons to whom this epistle is sent: To the saints who are at
Ephesus, that is, to the Christians who were members of the church at
Ephesus, the metropolis of Asia. He calls them saints, for such they
were in profession, such they were bound to be in truth and reality, and
many of them were such. All Christians must be saints; and, if they come
not under that character on earth, they will never be saints in glory.
He calls them the faithful in Christ Jesus, believers in him, and firm
and constant in their adherence to him and to his truths and ways. Those
are not saints who are not faithful, believing in Christ, firmly
adhering to him, and true to the profession they make of relation to
their Lord. Note, It is the honour not only of ministers, but of private
Christians too, to have obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful. - In
Christ Jesus, from whom they derive all their grace and spiritual
strength, and in whom their persons, and all that they perform, are made
accepted. 3. The apostolical benediction: Grace be to you, etc. This is
the token in every epistle; and it expresses the apostle's good-will to
his friends, and a real desire of their welfare. By grace we are to
understand the free and undeserved love and favour of God, and those
graces of the Spirit which proceed from it; by peace all other
blessings, spiritual and temporal, the fruits and product of the former.
No peace without grace. No peace, nor grace, but from God the Father,
and from the Lord Jesus Christ. These peculiar blessings proceed from
God, not as a Creator, but as a Father by special relation: and they
come from our Lord Jesus Christ, who, having purchased them for his
people, has a right to bestow them upon them. Indeed the saints, and the
faithful in Christ Jesus, had already received grace and peace; but the
increase of these is very desirable, and the best saints stand in need
of fresh supplies of the graces of the Spirit, and cannot but desire to
improve and grow: and therefore they should pray, each one for himself
and all for one another, that such blessings may still abound unto them.

After this short introduction he comes to the matter and body of the
epistle; and, though it may seem somewhat peculiar in a letter, yet the
Spirit of God saw fit that his discourse of divine things in this
chapter should be cast into prayers and praises, which, as they are
solemn addresses to God, so they convey weighty instructions to others.
Prayer may preach; and praise may do so too.

[Ephesians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eph 1:3</span></span>

He begins with thanksgivings and praise, and enlarges with a great deal
of fluency and copiousness of affection upon the exceedingly great and
precious benefits which we enjoy by Jesus Christ. For the great
privileges of our religion are very aptly recounted and enlarged upon in
our praises to God.

I. In general he blesses God for spiritual blessings, [Eph
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003.md), where he styles him the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; for, as Mediator, the Father was his
God; as God, and the second person in the blessed Trinity, God was his
Father. It bespeaks the mystical union between Christ and believers,
that the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is their God and
Father, and that in and through him. All blessings come from God as the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. No good can be expected from a
righteous and holy God to sinful creatures, but by his mediation. He
hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings. Note, Spiritual blessings
are the best blessings with which God blesses us, and for which we are
to bless him. He blesses us by bestowing such things upon us as make us
really blessed. We cannot thus bless God again; but must do it by
praising, and magnifying, and speaking well of him on that account.
Those whom God blesses with some he blesses with all spiritual
blessings; to whom he gives Christ, he freely gives all these things. It
is not so with temporal blessings; some are favoured with health, and
not with riches; some with riches, and not with health, etc. But, where
God blesses with spiritual blessings, he blesses with all. They are
spiritual blessings in heavenly places; that is, say some, in the
church, distinguished from the world, and called out of it. Or it may be
read, in heavenly things, such as come from heaven, and are designed to
prepare men for it, and to secure their reception into it. We should
hence learn to mind spiritual and heavenly things as the principal
things, spiritual and heavenly blessings as the best blessings, with
which we cannot be miserable and without which we cannot but be so. Set
not your affections on things on the earth, but on those things which
are above. These we are blessed with in Christ; for, as all our services
ascend to God through Christ, so all our blessings are conveyed to us in
the same way, he being the Mediator between God and us.

II\. The particular spiritual blessings with which we are blessed in
Christ, and for which we ought to bless God, are (many of them) here
enumerated and enlarged upon. 1. Election and predestination, which are
the secret springs whence the others flow, [Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004.md), [Eph
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005.md), [Eph
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#011.md). Election, or choice, respects
that lump or mass of mankind out of which some are chosen, from which
they are separated and distinguished. Predestination has respect to the
blessings they are designed for; particularly the adoption of children,
it being the purpose of God that in due time we should become his
adopted children, and so have a right to all the privileges and to the
inheritance of children. We have here the date of this act of love: it
was before the foundation of the world; not only before God's people had
a being, but before the world had a beginning; for they were chosen in
the counsel of God from all eternity. It magnifies these blessings to a
high degree that they are the products of eternal counsel. The alms
which you give to beggars at your doors proceed from a sudden resolve;
but the provision which a parent makes for his children is the result of
many thoughts, and is put into his last will and testament with a great
deal of solemnity. And, as this magnifies divine love, so it secures the
blessings to God's elect; for the purpose of God according to election
shall stand. He acts in pursuance of his eternal purpose in bestowing
spiritual blessings upon his people. He hath blessed us - according as
he hath chosen us in him, in Christ the great head of the election, who
is emphatically called God's elect, his chosen; and in the chosen
Redeemer an eye of favour was cast upon them. Observe here one great end
and design of this choice: chosen - that we should be holy; not because
he foresaw they would be holy, but because he determined to make them
so. All who are chosen to happiness as the end are chosen to holiness as
the means. Their sanctification, as well as their salvation, is the
result of the counsels of divine love. - And without blame before him -
that their holiness might not be merely external and in outward
appearance, so as to prevent blame from men, but internal and real, and
what God himself, who looketh at the heart, will account such, such
holiness as proceeds from love to God and to our fellow-creatures, this
charity being the principle of all true holiness. The original word
signifies such an innocence as no man can carp at; and therefore some
understand it of that perfect holiness which the saints shall attain in
the life to come, which will be eminently before God, they being in his
immediate presence for ever. Here is also the rule and the fontal cause
of God's election: it is according to the good pleasure of his will
([Eph 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005).md), not for the sake of any
thing in them foreseen, but because it was his sovereign will, and a
thing highly pleasing to him. It is according to the purpose, the fixed
and unalterable will, of him who worketh all things after the counsel of
his own will ([Eph 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#011).md), who
powerfully accomplishes whatever concerns his elect, as he has wisely
and freely fore-ordained and decreed, the last and great end and design
of all which is his own glory: To the praise of the glory of his grace
([Eph 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#006).md), that we should be to the
praise of his glory ([Eph 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#012).md), that
is, that we should live and behave ourselves in such a manner that his
rich grace might be magnified, and appear glorious, and worthy of the
highest praise. All is of God, and from him, and through him, and
therefore all must be to him, and centre in his praise. Note, The glory
of God is his own end, and it should be ours in all that we do. This
passage has been understood by some in a very different sense, and with
a special reference to the conversion of these Ephesians to
Christianity. Those who have a mind to see what is said to this purpose
may consult Mr. Locke, and other well-known writers, on the place. 2.
The next spiritual blessing the apostle takes notice of is acceptance
with God through Jesus Christ: Wherein, or by which grace, he hath made
us accepted in the beloved, [Eph 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#006.md).
Jesus Christ is the beloved of his Father ([Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017).md), as well as of angels and
saints. It is our great privilege to be accepted of God, which implies
his love to us and his taking us under his care and into his family. We
cannot be thus accepted of God, but in and through Jesus Christ. He
loves his people for the sake of the beloved. 3. Remission of sins, and
redemption through the blood of Jesus, [Eph
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007.md). No remission without redemption.
It was by reason of sin that we were captivated, and we cannot be
released from our captivity but by the remission of our sins. This
redemption we have in Christ, and this remission through his blood. The
guilt and the stain of sin could be no otherwise removed than by the
blood of Jesus. All our spiritual blessings flow down to us in that
stream. This great benefit, which comes freely to us, was dearly bought
and paid for by our blessed Lord; and yet it is according to the riches
of God's grace. Christ's satisfaction and God's rich grace are very
consistent in the great affair of man's redemption. God was satisfied by
Christ as our substitute and surety; but it was rich grace that would
accept of a surety, when he might have executed the severity of the law
upon the transgressor, and it was rich grace to provide such a surety as
his own Son, and freely to deliver him up, when nothing of that nature
could have entered into our thoughts, nor have been any otherwise found
out for us. In this instance he has not only manifested riches of grace,
but has abounded towards us in all wisdom and prudence ([Eph
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#008).md), wisdom in contriving the
dispensation, and prudence in executing the counsel of his will, as he
has done. How illustrious have the divine wisdom and prudence rendered
themselves, in so happily adjusting the matter between justice and mercy
in this grand affair, in securing the honour of God and his law, at the
same time that the recovery of sinners and their salvation are
ascertained and made sure! 4. Another privilege which the apostle here
blesses God for is divine revelation - that God hath made known to us
the mystery of his will ([Eph 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#009).md),
that is, so much of his good-will to men, which had been concealed for a
long time, and is still concealed from so great a part of the world:
this we owe to Christ, who, having lain in the bosom of the Father from
eternity, came to declare his will to the children of men. According to
his good pleasure, his secret counsels concerning man's redemption,
which he had purposed, or resolved upon, merely in and from himself, and
not for any thing in them. In this revelation, and in his making known
unto us the mystery of his will, the wisdom and the prudence of God do
abundantly shine forth. It is described ([Eph
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013).md) as the word of truth, and the
gospel of our salvation. Every word of it is true. It contains and
instructs us in the most weighty and important truths, and it is
confirmed and sealed by the very oath of God, whence we should learn to
betake ourselves to it in all our searches after divine truth. It is the
gospel of our salvation: it publishes the glad tidings of salvation, and
contains the offer of it: it points out the way that leads to it; and
the blessed Spirit renders the reading and the ministration of it
effectual to the salvation of souls. O, how ought we to prize this
glorious gospel and to bless God for it! This is the light shining in a
dark place, for which we have reason to be thankful, and to which we
should take heed. 5. Union in and with Christ is a great privilege, a
spiritual blessing, and the foundation of many others. He gathers
together in one all things in Christ, [Eph
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010.md). All the lines of divine
revelation meet in Christ; all religion centres in him. Jews and
Gentiles were united to each other by being both united to Christ.
Things in heaven and things on earth are gathered together in him; peace
made, correspondence settled, between heaven and earth, through him. The
innumerable company of angels become one with the church through Christ:
this God purposed in himself, and it was his design in that dispensation
which was to be accomplished by his sending Christ in the fulness of
time, at the exact time that God had prefixed and settled. 6. The
eternal inheritance is the great blessing with which we are blessed in
Christ: In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, [Eph
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#011.md). Heaven is the inheritance, the
happiness of which is a sufficient portion for a soul: it is conveyed in
the way of an inheritance, being the gift of a Father to his children.
If children, then heirs. All the blessings that we have in hand are but
small if compared with the inheritance. What is laid out upon an heir in
his minority is nothing to what is reserved for him when he comes to
age. Christians are said to have obtained this inheritance, as they have
a present right to it, and even actual possession of it, in Christ their
head and representative. 7. The seal and earnest of the Spirit are of
the number of these blessings. We are said to be sealed with that Holy
Spirit of promise, [Eph 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013.md). The
blessed Spirit is holy himself, and he makes us holy. He is called the
Spirit of promise, as he is the promised Spirit. By him believers are
sealed; that is, separated and set apart for God, and distinguished and
marked as belonging to him. The Spirit is the earnest of our
inheritance, [Eph 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014.md). The earnest is
part of payment, and it secures the full sum: so is the gift of the Holy
Ghost; all his influences and operations, both as a sanctifier and a
comforter, are heaven begun, glory in the seed and bud. The Spirit's
illumination is an earnest of everlasting light; sanctification is an
earnest of perfect holiness; and his comforts are earnests of
everlasting joys. He is said to be the earnest, until the redemption of
the purchased possession. It may be called here the possession, because
this earnest makes it as sure to the heirs as though they were already
possessed of it; and it is purchased for them by the blood of Christ.
The redemption of it is mentioned because it was mortgaged and forfeited
by sin; and Christ restores it to us, and so is said to redeem it, in
allusion to the law of redemption. Observe, from all this, what a
gracious promise that is which secures the gift of the Holy Ghost to
those who ask him.

The apostle mentions the great end and design of God in bestowing all
these spiritual privileges, that we should be to the praise of his glory
who first trusted in Christ - we to whom the gospel was first preached,
and who were first converted to the faith of Christ, and to the placing
of our hope and trust in him. Note, Seniority in grace is a preferment:
Who were in Christ before me, says the apostle ([Rom
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#007).md); those who have for a longer
time experienced the grace of Christ are under more special obligations
to glorify God. They should be strong in faith, and more eminently
glorify him; but this should be the common end of all. For this we were
made, and for this we were redeemed; this is the great design of our
Christianity, and of God in all that he has done for us: unto the praise
of his glory, [Eph 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014.md). He intends
that his grace and power and other perfection should by this means
become conspicuous and illustrious, and that the sons of men should
magnify him.

[Ephesians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eph 1:15</span></span>

We have come to the last part of this chapter, which consists of Paul's
earnest prayer to God in behalf of these Ephesians. We should pray for
the persons for whom we give thanks. Our apostle blesses God for what he
had done for them, and then he prays that he would do more for them. He
gives thanks for spiritual blessings, and prays for further supplies of
them; for God will for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do
it for them. He has laid up these spiritual blessings for us in the
hands of his Son, the Lord Jesus; but then he has appointed us to draw
them out, and fetch them in, by prayer. We have no part nor lot in the
matter, any further than we claim it by faith and prayer. One inducement
to pray for them was the good account he had of them, of their faith in
the Lord Jesus and love to all the saints, [Eph
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#015.md). Faith in Christ, and love to the
saints, will be attended with all other graces. Love to the saints, as
such, and because they are such, must include love to God. Those who
love saints, as such, love all saints, how weak in grace, how mean in
the world, how fretful and peevish soever, some of them may be. Another
inducement to pray for them was because they had received the earnest of
the inheritance: this we may observe from the words being connected with
the preceding ones by the particle wherefore. "Perhaps you will think
that, having received the earnest, it should follow, therefore you are
happy enough, and need take no further care: you need not pray for
yourselves, nor I for you." No, quite the contrary. Wherefore - I cease
not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers, [Eph
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#016.md). While he blesses God for giving
them the Spirit, he ceases not to pray that he would give unto them the
Spirit ([Eph 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#017).md), that he would give
greater measures of the Spirit. Observe, Even the best of Christians
need to be prayed for: and, while we hear well of our Christian friends,
we should think ourselves obliged to intercede with God for them, that
they may abound and increase yet more and more. Now what is it that Paul
prays for in behalf of the Ephesians? Not that they might be freed from
persecution; nor that they might possess the riches, honours, or
pleasures of the world; but the great thing he prays for is the
illumination of their understandings, and that their knowledge might
increase and abound: he means it of a practical and experimental
knowledge. The graces and comforts of the Spirit are communicated to the
soul by the enlightening of the understanding. In this way he gains and
keeps possession. Satan takes a contrary way: he gets possession by the
senses and passions, Christ by the understanding. Observe,

I. Whence this knowledge must come from the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, [Eph 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#017.md). The Lord is a God
of knowledge, and there is no sound saving knowledge but what comes from
him; and therefore to him we must look for it, who is the God of our
Lord Jesus Christ (see [Eph 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003).md) and
the Father of glory. It is a Hebraism. God is infinitely glorious in
himself all glory is due to him from his creatures, and he is the author
of all that glory with which his saints are or shall be invested. Now he
gives knowledge by giving the Spirit of knowledge; for the Spirit of God
is the teacher of the saints, the Spirit of wisdom and revelation. We
have the revelation of the Spirit in the word: but will that avail us,
if we have not the wisdom of the Spirit in the heart? If the same Spirit
who indited the sacred scriptures do not take the veil from off our
hearts, and enable us to understand and improve them, we shall be never
the better. - In the knowledge of him, or for the acknowledgment of him;
not only a speculative knowledge of Christ, and of what relates to him,
but an acknowledgment of Christ's authority by an obedient conformity to
him, which must be by the help of the Spirit of wisdom and revelation.
This knowledge is first in the understanding. He prays that the eyes of
their understanding may be enlightened, [Eph
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018.md). Observe, Those who have their
eyes opened, and have some understanding in the things of God, have need
to be more and more enlightened, and to have their knowledge more clear,
and distinct, and experimental. Christians should not think it enough to
have warm affections, but they should labour to have clear
understandings; they should be ambitious of being knowing Christians,
and judicious Christians.

II\. What it is that he more particularly desire they should grow in the
knowledge of. 1. The hope of his calling, [Eph
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018.md). Christianity is our calling. God
has called us to it, and on that account it is said to be his calling.
There is a hope in this calling; for those who deal with God deal upon
trust. And it is a desirable thing to know what this hope of our calling
is, to have such an acquaintance with the immense privileges of God's
people, and the expectations they have from God, and with respect to the
heavenly world, as to be quickened thereby to the utmost diligence and
patience in the Christian course. We ought to labour after, and pray
earnestly for, a clearer insight into, and a fuller acquaintance with,
the great objects of a Christian's hopes. 2. The riches of the glory of
his inheritance in the saints. Besides the heavenly inheritance prepared
for the saints, there is a present inheritance in the saints; for grace
is glory begun, and holiness is happiness in the bud. There is a glory
in this inheritance, riches of glory, rendering the Christian more
excellent and more truly honourable than all about him: and it is
desirable to know this experimentally, to be acquainted with the
principles, pleasures, and powers, of the spiritual and divine life. It
may be understood of the glorious inheritance in or among the saints in
heaven, where God does, as it were, lay forth all his riches, to make
them happy and glorious, and where all that the saints are in possession
of is transcendently glorious, as the knowledge that can be attained of
this upon earth is very desirable, and must be exceedingly entertaining
and delightful. Let us endeavour then, by reading, contemplation, and
prayer, to know as much of heaven as we can, that we may be desiring and
longing to be there. 3. The exceeding greatness of God's power towards
those who believe, [Eph 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#019.md). The
practical belief of the all-sufficiency of God, and of the omnipotence
of divine grace, is absolutely necessary to a close and steady walking
with him. It is a desirable thing to know experimentally the mighty
power of that grace beginning and carrying on the work of faith in our
souls. It is a difficult thing to bring a soul to believe in Christ, and
to venture its all upon his righteousness, and upon the hope of eternal
life. It is nothing less than an almighty power that will work this in
us. The apostle speaks here with a mighty fluency and copiousness of
expression, and yet, at the same time, as if he wanted words to express
the exceeding greatness of God's almighty power, that power which God
exerts towards his people, and by which he raised Christ from the dead,
[Eph 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020.md). That indeed was the great
proof of the truth of the gospel to the world: but the transcript of
that in ourselves (our sanctification, and rising from the death of sin,
in conformity to Christ's resurrection) is the great proof to us. Though
this cannot prove the truth of the gospel to another who knows nothing
of the matter (there the resurrection of Christ is the proof), yet to be
able to speak experimentally, as the Samaritans, "We have heard him
ourselves, we have felt a mighty change in our hearts," will make us
able to say, with the fullest satisfaction, Now we believe, and are
sure, that this is the Christ, the Son of God. Many understand the
apostle here as speaking of that exceeding greatness of power which God
will exert for raising the bodies of believers to eternal life, even the
same mighty power which he wrought in Christ when he raised him, etc.
And how desirable a thing must it be to become at length acquainted with
that power, by being raised out of the grave thereby unto eternal life!

Having said something of Christ and his resurrection, the apostle
digresses a little from the subject he is upon to make some further
honourable mention of the Lord Jesus and his exaltation. He sits at the
Father's right hand in the heavenly places, etc., [Eph
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020.md), [Eph
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021.md). Jesus Christ is advanced above
all, and he is set in authority over all, they being made subject to
him. All the glory of the upper world, and all the powers of both
worlds, are entirely devoted to him. The Father hath put all things
under his feet ([Eph 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022).md), according
to the promise, [Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001.md). All
creatures whatsoever are in subjection to him; they must either yield
him sincere obedience or fall under the weight of his sceptre, and
receive their doom from him. God GAVE him to be head over all things. It
was a gift to Christ, considered as a Mediator, to be advanced to such
dominion and headship, and to have such a mystical body prepared for
him: and it was a gift to the church, to be provided with a head endued
with so much power and authority. God gave him to be the head over all
things. He gave him all power both in heaven and in earth. The Father
loves the Son, and hath given ALL things into his hands. But that which
completes the comfort of this is that he is the head over all things to
the church; he is entrusted with all power, that is, that he may dispose
of all the affairs of the providential kingdom in subserviency to the
designs of his grace concerning his church. With this therefore we may
answer the messengers of the nations, that the Lord hath founded Zion.
The same power that supports the world support the church; and we are
sure he loves his church, for it is his body ([Eph
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023).md), his mystical body, and he will
care for it. It is the fulness of him that filleth all in all. Jesus
Christ filleth all in all; he supplies all defects in all his members,
filling them with his Spirit, and even with the fulness of God, [Eph
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#019.md). And yet the church is said to be
his fulness, because Christ as Mediator would not be complete if he had
not a church. How could he be a king if he had not a kingdom? This
therefore comes in to the honour of Christ, as Mediator, that the church
is his fulness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 2](eph002.md)

</div>
