<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ephesians Index](eph.md)  
  [Previous](eph005)  [Next](phi000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001.md)

[Ephesians](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eph 6:0</span></span>

In this chapter, I. The apostle proceeds in the exhortation to relative
duties which he began in the former, particularly he insists on the
duties of children and parents, and of servants and masters ([Eph
6:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001).md). II. He exhorts and directs
Christians how to behave themselves in the spiritual warfare with the
enemies of their souls; and to the exercise of several Christian graces,
which he proposes to them as so many pieces of spiritual armour, to
preserve and defend them in the conflict ([Eph
6:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010).md). III. We have here the
conclusion of the epistle, in which he takes his leave of them,
recommending himself to the prayers of the believing Ephesians, and
praying for them ([Eph 6:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#019).md).

[Ephesians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 6:1</span></span>

Here we have further directions concerning relative duties, in which the
apostle is very particular.

I. The duty of children to their parents. Come, you children, hearken to
me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. The great duty of children is
to obey their parents ([Eph 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001).md),
parents being the instruments of their being, God and nature having
given them an authority to command, in subserviency to God; and, if
children will be obedient to their pious parents, they will be in a fair
way to be pious as they are. That obedience which God demands from their
children, in their behalf, includes an inward reverence, as well as the
outward expressions and acts. Obey in the Lord. Some take this as a
limitation, and understand it thus: "as far as is consistent with your
duty to God." We must not disobey our heavenly Father in obedience to
earthly parents; for our obligation to God is prior and superior to all
others. I take it rather as a reason: "Children, obey your parents; for
the Lord has commanded it: obey them therefore for the Lord's sake, and
with an eye to him." Or it may be a particular specification of the
general duty: "Obey your parents, especially in those things which
relate to the Lord. Your parents teach you good manners, and therein you
must obey them. They teach you what is for your health, and in this you
must obey them: but the chief things in which you are to do it are the
things pertaining to the Lord." Religious parents charge their children
to keep the ways of the Lord, [Gen
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#019.md). They command them to be found
in the way of their duty towards God, and to take heed of those sins
most incident to their age; in these things especially they must see
that they be obedient. There is a general reason given: For this is
right, there is a natural equity in it, God has enjoined it, and it
highly becomes Christians. It is the order of nature that parents
command and children obey. Though this may seem a hard saying, yet it is
duty, and it must be done by such as would please God and approve
themselves to him. For the proof of this the apostle quotes the law of
the fifth commandment, which Christ was so far from designing to
abrogate and repeal that he came to confirm it, as appears by his
vindicating it, [Mat 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#004.md), etc. Honour
thy father and mother ([Eph 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#002).md),
which honour implies reverence, obedience, and relief and maintenance,
if these be needed. The apostle adds, which is the first commandment
with promise. Some little difficulty arises from this, which we should
not overlook, because some who plead for the lawfulness of images bring
this as a proof that we are not bound by the second commandment. But
there is no manner of force in the argument. The second commandment has
not a particular promise; but only a general declaration or assertion,
which relates to the whole law of God's keeping mercy for thousands. And
then by this is not meant the first commandment of the decalogue that
has a promise, for there is no other after it that has, and therefore it
would be improper to say it is the first; but the meaning may be this:
"This is a prime or chief commandment, and it has a promise; it is the
first commandment in the second table, and it has a promise." The
promise is, That it may be well with thee, etc., [Eph
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#003.md). Observe, Whereas the promise in
the commandment has reference to the land of Canaan, the apostle hereby
shows that this and other promises which we have in the Old Testament
relating to the land of Canaan are to be understood more generally. That
you may not think that the Jews only, to whom God gave the land of
Canaan, were bound by the fifth commandment, he here gives it a further
sense, That it may be well with thee, etc. Outward prosperity and long
life are blessings promised to those who keep this commandment. This is
the way to have it well with us, and obedient children are often
rewarded with outward prosperity. Not indeed that it is always so; there
are instances of such children who meet with much affliction in this
life: but ordinarily obedience is thus rewarded, and, where it is not,
it is made up with something better. Observe, 1. The gospel has its
temporal promises, as well as spiritual ones. 2. Although the authority
of God be sufficient to engage us in our duty, yet we are allowed to
have respect to the promised reward: and, 3. Though it contains some
temporal advantage, even this may be considered as a motive and
encouragement to our obedience.

II\. The duty of parents: And you fathers, [Eph
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#004.md). Or, you parents, 1. "Do not
provoke your children to wrath. Though God has given you power, you must
not abuse that power, remembering that your children are, in a
particular manner, pieces of yourselves, and therefore ought to be
governed with great tenderness and love. Be not impatient with them, use
no unreasonable severities and lay no rigid injunctions upon them. When
you caution them, when you counsel them, when you reprove them, do it in
such a manner as not to provoke them to wrath. In all such cases deal
prudently and wisely with them, endeavouring to convince their judgments
and to work upon their reason." 2. "Bring them up well, in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord, in the discipline of proper and of
compassionate correction, and in the knowledge of that duty which God
requires of them and by which they may become better acquainted with
him. Give them a good education." It is the great duty of parents to be
careful in the education of their children: "Not only bring them up, as
the brutes do, taking care to provide for them; but bring them up in
nurture and admonition, in such a manner as is suitable to their
reasonable natures. Nay, not only bring them up as men, in nurture and
admonition, but as Christians, in the admonition of the Lord. Let them
have a religious education. Instruct them to fear sinning; and inform
them of, and excite them to, the whole of their duty towards God."

III\. The duty of servants. This also is summed up in one word, which
is, obedience. He is largest on this article, as knowing there was the
greatest need of it. These servants were generally slaves. Civil
servitude is not inconsistent with Christian liberty. Those may be the
Lord's freemen who are slaves to men. "Your masters according to the
flesh ([Eph 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005).md), that is, who have
the command of your bodies, but not of your souls and consciences: God
alone has dominion over these." Now, with respect to servants, he
exhorts, 1. That they obey with fear and trembling. They are to
reverence those who are over them, fearing to displease them, and
trembling lest they should justly incur their anger and indignation. 2.
That they be sincere in their obedience: In singleness of heart; not
pretending obedience when they design disobedience, but serving them
with faithfulness. 3. They should have an eye to Jesus Christ in all the
service that they perform to their masters ([Eph
6:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005).md), doing service as to the Lord,
and not to men; that is, not to men only or principally. When servants,
in the discharge of the duty of their places, have an eye to Christ,
this puts an honour upon their obedience, and an acceptableness into it.
Service done to their earthly masters, with an eye to him, becomes
acceptable service to him also. To have an eye to Christ is to remember
that he sees them and is ever present with them, and that his authority
obliges them to a faithful and conscientious discharge of the duties of
their station. 4. They must not serve their masters with eye-service
([Eph 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#006).md) - that is, only when their
master's eye is upon them; but they must be as conscientious in the
discharge of their duty, when they are absent and out of the way,
because then their Master in heaven beholds them: and therefore they
must not act as men-pleasers - as though they had no regard to the
pleasing of God, and approving themselves to him, if they can impose
upon their masters. Observe, A steady regard to the Lord Jesus Christ
will make men faithful and sincere in every station of life. 5. What
they do they must do cheerfully: Doing the will of God from the heart,
serving their masters as God wills they should, not grudgingly, nor by
constraint, but from a principle of love to them and their concerns.
This is doing it with good-will ([Eph
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#007).md), which will make their service
easy to themselves, pleasing to their masters, and acceptable to the
Lord Christ. There should be good-will to their masters, good-will to
the families they are in; and especially a readiness to do their duty to
God. Observe, Service, performed with conscience, and from a regard to
God, though it be to unrighteous masters, will be accounted by Christ as
service done to himself. 6. Let faithful servants trust God for their
wages, while they do their duty in his fear: Knowing that whatsoever
good thing ([Eph 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#008).md), how poor and
mean soever it may be, considered in itself, - the same shall he receive
of the Lord, that is, by a metonymy, the reward of the same. Though his
master on earth should neglect or abuse him, instead of rewarding him,
he shall certainly be rewarded by the Lord Christ, whether he be bond or
free, whether he be a poor bond-servant or a freeman or master. Christ
regards not these differences of men at present; nor will he in the
great and final judgment. You think, "A prince, or a magistrate, or a
minister, that does his duty here, will be sure to receive his reward in
heaven: but what capacity am I, a poor servant, in, of recommending
myself to the favour of God." Why, God will as certainly reward thee for
the meanest drudgery that is done from a sense of duty and with an eye
to himself. And what can be said more proper either to engage or to
encourage servants to their duty?

IV\. The duty of masters: "And you masters, do the same things unto them
([Eph 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009).md); that is, act after the
same manner. Be just to them, as you expect they should be to you: show
the like good-will and concern for them, and be careful herein to
approve yourselves to God." Observe, Masters are under as strict
obligations to discharge their duty to their servants as servants are to
be obedient and dutiful to them. "Forbearing threatening; anientes -
moderating threatening, and remitting the evils with which you threaten
them. Remember that your servants are made of the same mould with
yourselves, and therefore be not tyrannical and imperious over them,
knowing that your Master also is in heaven:" some copies read, both your
and their Master. "You have a Master to obey who makes this your duty;
and you and they are but fellow-servants in respect of Christ. You will
be as punishable by him, for the neglect of your duty, or for acting
contrary to it, as any others of meaner condition in the world. You are
therefore to show favour to others, as ever you expect to find favour
with him; and you will never be a match for him, though you may be too
hard for your servants." Neither is there respect of persons with him; a
rich, a wealthy, and a dignified master, if he be unjust, imperious, and
abusive, is not a jot the nearer being accepted of God for his riches,
wealth, and honour. He will call masters and servants to an impartial
account for their conduct one to another, and will neither spare the
former because they are more advanced nor be severe towards the latter
because they are inferior and mean in the world. If both masters and
servants would consider their relation and obligation to God and the
account they must shortly give to him, they would be more careful of
their duty to each other. Thus the apostle concludes his exhortation to
relative duties.

[Ephesians 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eph 6:10</span></span>

Here is a general exhortation to constancy in our Christian course, and
to encourage in our Christian warfare. Is not our life a warfare? It is
so; for we struggle with the common calamities of human life. Is not our
religion much more a warfare? It is so; for we struggle with the
opposition of the powers of darkness, and with many enemies who would
keep us from God and heaven. We have enemies to fight against, a captain
to fight for, a banner to fight under, and certain rules of war by which
we are to govern ourselves. "Finally, my brethren ([Eph
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010).md), it yet remains that you apply
yourselves to your work and duty as Christian soldiers." Now it is
requisite that a soldier be both stout-hearted and well armed. If
Christians be soldiers of Jesus Christ,

I. They must see that they be stout-hearted. This is prescribed here: Be
strong in the Lord, etc. Those who have so many battles to fight, and
who, in their way to heaven, must dispute every pass, with dint of
sword, have need of a great deal of courage. Be strong therefore, strong
for service, strong for suffering, strong for fighting. Let a soldier be
ever so well armed without, if he have not within a good heart, his
armour will stand him in little stead. Note, spiritual strength and
courage are very necessary for our spiritual warfare. Be strong in the
Lord, either in his cause and for his sake or rather in his strength. We
have no sufficient strength of our own. Our natural courage is as
perfect cowardice, and our natural strength as perfect weakness; but all
our sufficiency is of God. In his strength we must go forth and go on.
By the actings of faith, we must fetch in grace and help from heaven to
enable us to do that which of ourselves we cannot do, in our Christian
work and warfare. We should stir up ourselves to resist temptations in a
reliance upon God's all-sufficiency and the omnipotence of his might.

II\. They must be well armed: "Put on the whole armour of God ([Eph
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011).md), make use of all the proper
defensitives and weapons for repelling the temptations and stratagems of
Satan - get and exercise all the Christian graces, the whole armour,
that no part be naked and exposed to the enemy." Observe, Those who
would approve themselves to have true grace must aim at all grace, the
whole armour. It is called the armour of God, because he both prepares
and bestows it. We have no armour of our own that will be armour of
proof in a trying time. Nothing will stand us in stead but the armour of
God. This armour is prepared for us, but we must put it on; that is, we
must pray for grace, we must use the grace given us, and draw it out
into act and exercise as there is occasion. The reason assigned why the
Christian should be completely armed is that he may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil - that he may be able to hold out, and to
overcome, notwithstanding all the devil's assaults, both of force and
fraud, all the deceits he puts upon us, all the snares he lays for us,
and all his machinations against us. This the apostle enlarges upon
here, and shows,

1\. What our danger is, and what need we have to put on this whole
armour, considering what sort of enemies we have to deal with - the
devil and all the powers of darkness: For we wrestle not against flesh
and blood, etc., [Eph 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012.md). The combat
for which we are to be prepared is not against ordinary human enemies,
not barely against men compounded of flesh and blood, nor against our
own corrupt natures singly considered, but against the several ranks of
devils, who have a government which they exercise in this world. (1.) We
have to do with a subtle enemy, an enemy who uses wiles and stratagems,
as [Eph 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011.md). He has a thousand ways
of beguiling unstable souls: hence he is called a serpent for subtlety,
an old serpent, experienced in the art and trade of tempting. (2.) He is
a powerful enemy: Principalities, and powers, and rulers. They are
numerous, they are vigorous; and rule in those heathen nations which are
yet in darkness. The dark parts of the world are the seat of Satan's
empire. Yea, they are usurping princes over all men who are yet in a
state of sin and ignorance. Satan's is a kingdom of darkness; whereas
Christ's is a kingdom of light. (3.) They are spiritual enemies:
Spiritual wickedness in high places, or wicked spirits, as some
translate it. The devil is a spirit, a wicked spirit; and our danger is
the greater from our enemies because they are unseen, and assault us ere
we are aware of them. The devils are wicked spirits, and they chiefly
annoy the saints with, and provoke them to, spiritual wickednesses,
pride, envy, malice, etc. These enemies are said to be in high places,
or in heavenly places, so the word is, taking heaven (as one says) for
the whole expansum, or spreading out of the air between the earth and
the stars, the air being the place from which the devils assault us. Or
the meaning may be, "We wrestle about heavenly places or heavenly
things;" so some of the ancients interpret it. Our enemies strive to
prevent our ascent to heaven, to deprive us of heavenly blessings and to
obstruct our communion with heaven. They assault us in the things that
belong to our souls, and labour to deface the heavenly image in our
hearts; and therefore we have need to be upon our guard against them. We
have need of faith in our Christian warfare, because we have spiritual
enemies to grapple with, as well as of faith in our Christian work,
because we have spiritual strength to fetch in. Thus you see your
danger.

2\. What our duty is: to take and put on the whole armour of God, and
then to stand our ground, and withstand our enemies.

(1.) We must withstand, [Eph 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013.md). We
must not yield to the devil's allurements and assaults, but oppose them.
Satan is said to stand up against us, [Ch1
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#001.md). If he stand up against us, we
must stand against him; set up, and keep up, an interest in opposition
to the devil. Satan is the wicked one, and his kingdom is the kingdom of
sin: to stand against Satan is to strive against sin. That you may be
able to withstand in the evil day, in the day of temptation, or of any
sore affliction.

(2.) We must stand our ground: And, having done all, to stand. We must
resolve, by God's grace, not to yield to Satan. Resist him, and he will
flee. If we distrust our cause, or our leader, or our armour, we give
him advantage. Our present business is to withstand the assaults of the
devil, and to stand it out; and then, having done all that is incumbent
on the good soldiers of Jesus Christ, our warfare will be accomplished,
and we shall be finally victorious.

(3.) We must stand armed; and this is here most enlarged upon. Here is a
Christian in complete armour: and the armour is divine: Armour of God,
armour of light, [Rom 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#012.md). Armour of
righteousness, [Co2 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#007.md). The apostle
specifies the particulars of this armour, both offensive and defensive.
The military girdle or belt, the breast-plate, the greaves (or soldier's
shoes), the shield, the helmet, and the sword. It is observable that,
among them all, there is none for the back; if we turn our back upon the
enemy, we lie exposed. \[1.\] Truth or sincerity is our girdle, [Eph
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014.md). It was prophesied of Christ
([Isa 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#005).md) that righteousness should
be the girdle of his loins and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.
That which Christ was girded with all Christians must be girded with.
God desires truth, that is, sincerity, in the inward parts. This is the
strength of our loins; and it girds on all other pieces of our armour,
and therefore is first mentioned. I know no religion without sincerity.
Some understand it of the doctrine of the truths of the gospel: they
should cleave to us as the girdle does to the loins, [Jer
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#011.md). This will restrain from
libertinism and licentiousness, as a girdle restrains and keeps in the
body. This is the Christian soldier's belt: ungirded with this, he is
unblessed. \[2.\] Righteousness must be our breast-plate. The
breast-plate secures the vitals, shelters the heart. The righteousness
of Christ imputed to us is our breast-plate against the arrows of divine
wrath. The righteousness of Christ implanted in us is our breast-plate
to fortify the heart against the attacks which Satan makes against us.
The apostle explains this in [Th1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#008.md),
Putting on the breast-plate of faith and love. Faith and love include
all Christian graces; for by faith we are united to Christ and by love
to our brethren. These will infer a diligent observance of our duty to
God, and a righteous deportment towards men, in all the offices of
justice, truth, and charity. \[3.\] Resolution must be as the greaves to
our legs: And their feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of
peace, [Eph 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#015.md). Shoes, or greaves of
brass, or the like, were formerly part of the military armour ([Sa1
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#006).md): the use of them was to defend
the feet against the gall-traps, and sharp sticks, which were wont to be
laid privily in the way, to obstruct the marching of the enemy, those
who fell upon them being unfit to march. The preparation of the gospel
of peace signifies a prepared and resolved frame of heart, to adhere to
the gospel and abide by it, which will enable us to walk with a steady
pace in the way of religion, notwithstanding the difficulties and
dangers that may be in it. It is styled the gospel of peace because it
brings all sorts of peace, peace with God, with ourselves, and with one
another. It may also be meant of that which prepares for the
entertainment of the gospel, namely, repentance. With this our feet must
be shod: for by living a life of repentance we are armed against
temptations to sin, and the designs of our great enemy. Dr. Whitby
thinks this may be the sense of the words: "That you may be ready for
the combat, be shod with the gospel of peace, endeavour after that
peaceable and quiet mind which the gospel calls for. Be not easily
provoked, nor prone to quarrel: but show all gentleness and all
long-suffering to all men, and this will certainly preserve you from
many great temptations and persecutions, as did those shoes of brass the
soldiers from those galltraps," etc. \[4.\] Faith must be our shield:
Above all, or chiefly, taking the shield of faith, [Eph
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016.md). This is more necessary than any
of them. Faith is all in all to us in an hour of temptation. The
breast-plate secures the vitals; but with the shield we turn every way.
This is the victory over the world, even our faith. We are to be fully
persuaded of the truth of all God's promises and threatenings, such a
faith being of great use against temptations. Consider faith as it is
the evidence of things not seen and the substance of things hoped for,
and it will appear to be of admirable use for this purpose. Faith, as
receiving Christ and the benefits of redemption, so deriving grace from
him, is like a shield, a sort of universal defence. Our enemy the devil
is here called the wicked one. He is wicked himself, and he endeavours
to make us wicked. His temptations are called darts, because of their
swift and undiscerned flight, and the deep wounds that they give to the
soul; fiery darts, by way of allusion to the poisonous darts which were
wont to inflame the parts which were wounded with them, and therefore
were so called, as the serpents with poisonous stings are called fiery
serpents. Violent temptations, by which the soul is set on fire of hell,
are the darts which Satan shoots at us. Faith is the shield with which
we must quench these fiery darts, wherein we should receive them, and so
render them ineffectual, that they may not hit us, or at least that they
may not hurt us. Observe, Faith, acted upon the word of God and applying
that, acted upon the grace of Christ and improving that, quenches the
darts of temptation. \[5.\] Salvation must be our helmet ([Eph
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017).md); that is, hope, which has
salvation for its object; so [Th1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#008.md).
The helmet secures the head. A good hope of salvation, well founded and
well built, will both purify the soul and keep it from being defiled by
Satan, and it will comfort the soul and keep it from being troubled and
tormented by Satan. He would tempt us to despair; but good hope keeps us
trusting in God, and rejoicing in him. \[6.\] The word of God is the
sword of the Spirit. The sword is a very necessary and useful part of a
soldier's furniture. The word of God is very necessary, and of great use
to the Christian, in order to his maintaining the spiritual warfare and
succeeding in it. It is called the sword of the Spirit, because it is of
the Spirit's inditing and he renders it efficacious and powerful, and
sharper than a two-edged sword. Like Goliath's sword, none like that;
with this we assault the assailants. Scripture-arguments are the most
powerful arguments to repel temptation with. Christ himself resisted
Satan's temptations with, It is written, [Mat
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004.md), [Mat
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#006.md), [Mat
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#007.md), [Mat
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010.md). This, being hid in the heart,
will preserve from sin ([Psa 119:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#011).md),
and will mortify and kill those lusts and corruptions that are latent
there. \[7.\] Prayer must buckle on all the other parts of our Christian
armour, [Eph 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#018.md). We must join prayer
with all these graces, for our defence against these spiritual enemies,
imploring help and assistance of God, as the case requires: and we must
pray always. Not as though we were to do nothing else but pray, for
there are other duties of religion and of our respective stations in the
world that are to be done in their place and season; but we should keep
up constant times of prayer, and be constant to them. We must pray upon
all occasions, and as often as our own and others' necessities call us
to it. We must always keep up a disposition to prayer, and should
intermix ejaculatory prayers with other duties, and with common
business. Though set and solemn prayer may sometimes be unseasonable (as
when other duties are to be done), yet pious ejaculations can never be
so. We must pray with all prayer and supplication, with all kinds of
prayer: public, private, and secret, social and solitary, solemn and
sudden; with all the parts of prayer: confession of sin, petition for
mercy, and thanksgivings for favours received. We must pray in the
Spirit; our spirits must be employed in the duty and we must do it by
the grace of God's good Spirit. We must watch thereunto, endeavouring to
keep our hearts in a praying frame, and taking all occasions, and
improving all opportunities, for the duty: we must watch to all the
motions of our own hearts towards the duty. When God says, Seek my face,
our hearts must comply, [Psa 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#008.md).
This we must do with all perseverance. We must abide by the duty of
prayer, whatever change there may be in our outward circumstances; and
we must continue in it as long as we live in the world. We must
persevere in a particular prayer; not cutting it short, when our hearts
are disposed to enlarge, and there is time for it, and our occasions
call for it. We must likewise persevere in particular requests,
notwithstanding some present discouragements and repulses. And we must
pray with supplication, not for ourselves only, but for all saints; for
we are members one of another. Observe, None are so much saints, and in
so good a condition in this world, but they need our prayers, and they
ought to have them. The apostle passes hence to the conclusion of the
epistle.

[Ephesians 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eph 6:19</span></span>

Here, I. He desires their prayers for him, [Eph
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#019.md). Having mentioned supplication
for all saints, he puts himself into the number. We must pray for all
saints, and particularly for God's faithful ministers. Brethren, pray
for us, that the word of the Lord may run and be glorified. Observe what
it is he would have them pray for in his behalf: "That utterance may be
given unto me; that I may be enlarged from my present restraints, and so
have liberty to propagate the faith of Christ; that I may have ability
to express myself in a suitable and becoming manner; and that I may open
my mouth boldly, that is, that I may deliver the whole counsel of God,
without any base fear, shame, or partiality." To make known the mystery
of the gospel; some understand it of that part of the gospel which
concerns the calling of the Gentiles, which had hitherto, as a mystery,
been concealed. But the whole gospel was a mystery, till made known by
divine revelation; and it is the work of Christ's ministers to publish
it. Observe, Paul had a great command of language; they called him
Mercury, because he was the chief speaker ([Act
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#012).md), and yet he would have his
friends ask of God the gift of utterance for him. He was a man of great
courage, and often signalized himself for it; yet he would have them
pray that God would give him boldness. He knew as well what to say as
any man; yet he desires them to pray for him, that he may speak as he
ought to speak. The argument with which he enforces his request is that
for the sake of the gospel he was an ambassador in bonds, [Eph
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#020.md). He was persecuted and imprisoned
for preaching the gospel; though, notwithstanding, he continued in the
embassy committed to him by Christ, and persisted in preaching it.
Observe, 1. It is no new thing for Christ's ministers to be in bonds. 2.
It is a hard thing for them to speak boldly when that is their case. 3.
The best and most eminent ministers have need of, and may receive
advantage by, the prayers of good Christians; and therefore should
earnestly desire them. Having thus desired their prayers,

II\. He recommends Tychicus unto them, [Eph
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#021.md), [Eph
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#022.md). He sent him with this epistle,
that he might acquaint them with what other churches were informed of,
namely, how he did, and what he did; how he was used by the Romans in
his bonds, and how he behaved himself in his present circumstances. It
is desirable to good ministers both that their Christian friends should
know their state and that they should be acquainted with the condition
of their friends; for by this means they may the better help each other
in their prayers. - And that he might comfort their hearts, by giving
such an account of his sufferings, of the cause of them, and of the
temper of his mind and his behaviour under them, as might prevent their
fainting at his tribulations and even minister matter of joy and
thanksgiving unto them. He tells them that Tychicus was a beloved
brother and faithful minister in the Lord. He was a sincere Christian,
and so a brother in Christ: he was a faithful minister in the work of
Christ, and he was very dear to Paul, which makes Paul's love to these
Christian Ephesians the more observable, in that he should now part with
so good and dear a friend for their sakes, when his company and
conversation must have been peculiarly delightful and serviceable to
himself. But the faithful servants of Jesus Christ are wont to prefer
the public good to their own private or personal interests.

III\. He concludes with his good wishes and prayers for them, and not
for them only, but for all the brethren, [Eph
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#023.md), [Eph
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#024.md). His usual benediction was, Grace
and peace; here it is, Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith. By
peace we are to understand all manner of peace - peace with God, peace
with conscience, peace among themselves: and all outward prosperity is
included in the word; as if he had said, "I wish the continuance and
increase of all happiness to you." And love with faith. This in part
explains what he means in the following verse by grace; not only grace
in the fountain, or the love and favour of God, but grace in the
streams, the grace of the Spirit flowing from that divine principle,
faith and love including all the rest. It is the continuance and
increase of these that he desires for them, in whom they were already
begun. It follows, from God the Father, etc. All Grace and blessings are
derived to the saints from God, through the merit and intercession of
Jesus Christ our Lord. The closing benediction is more extensive than
the former; for in this he prays for all true believers at Ephesus, and
every where else. It is the undoubted character of all the saints that
they love our Lord Jesus Christ. Our love to Christ is not acceptable,
unless it be in sincerity: indeed there is no such thing as love to
Christ, whatever men may pretend, where there is not sincerity. The
words may be read, Grace be with all those who love our Lord Jesus
Christ in incorruption, who continue constant in their love to him, so
as not to be corrupted out of it by any baits or seductions whatsoever,
and whose love to him is uncorrupted by any opposite lust, or the love
of any thing displeasing to him. Grace, that is, the favour of God, and
all good (spiritual and temporal), that is, the product of it, are and
shall be with all those who thus love our Lord Jesus Christ. And it is,
or ought to be, the desire and prayer of every lover of Christ that it
may be so with all his fellow-christians. Amen, so be it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Introduction](phi000.md)

</div>
