<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Esther Index](est.md)  
  [Previous](est005)  [Next](est007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001.md)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 6:0</span></span>

It is a very surprising scene that opens in this chapter. Haman, when he
hoped to be Mordecai's judge, was made his page, to his great confusion
and mortification; and thus way was made for the defeat of Haman's plot
and the deliverance of the Jews. I. The providence of God recommends
Mordecai in the night to the king's favour ([Est
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001).md). II. Haman, who came to incense
the king against him, is employed as an instrument of the king's favour
to him ([Est 6:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#004).md). III. From this
his friends read him his doom, which is executed in the next chapter
([Est 6:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#012).md). And now it appears
that Esther's intercession for her people was happily adjourned, "De die
in diem" - from day to day.

[Esther 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 6:1</span></span>

Now Satan put it into the heart of Haman to contrive Mordecai's death we
read in the foregoing chapter; how God put it into the heart of the king
to contrive Mordecai's honour we are here told. Now, if the king's word
will prevail above Haman's (for, though Haman be a great man, the king
in the throne must be above him), much more will the counsel of God
stand, whatever devices there are in men's hearts. It is to no purpose
therefore for Haman to oppose it, when both God and the king will have
Mordecai honoured, and in this juncture too, when his preferment, and
Haman's disappointment, would help to ripen the great affair of the
Jewish deliverance for the effort that Esther was to make towards it the
next day. Sometimes delay may prove to have been good conduct. Stay
awhile, and we may have done the sooner. Cunctando restituit rem - He
conquered by delay. Let us trace the steps which Providence took towards
the advancement of Mordecai.

I. On that night could not the king sleep. His sleep fled away (so the
word is); and perhaps, like a shadow, the more carefully he pursued it
the further it went from him. Sometimes we cannot sleep because we fain
would sleep. Even after a banquet of wine he could not sleep when
Providence had a design to serve in keeping him waking. We read of no
bodily indisposition he was under, that might break his sleep; but God,
whose gift sleep is, withheld it from him. Those that are ever so much
resolved to cast away care cannot always do it; they find it in their
pillows when they neither expect nor welcome it. He that commanded 127
provinces could not command one hour's sleep. Perhaps the charms of
Esther's conversation the day before gave occasion to his heart to
reproach him for neglecting her, and banishing her from his presence,
though she was the wife of his bosom, for above thirty days; and that
might keep him waking. An offended conscience can find a time to speak
when it will be heard.

II\. When he could not sleep he called to have the book of records, the
Journals of his reign, read to him, [Est
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001.md). Surely he did not design that
that should lull him asleep; it would rather fill his head with cares,
and drive away sleep. But God put it into his heart to call for it,
rather than for music or songs, which the Persian kings used to be
attended with ([Dan 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#018).md) and which
would have been more likely to compose him to rest. When men do that
which is unaccountable we know not what God intends by it. Perhaps he
would have this book of business read to him that he might improve time
and be forming some useful projects. Had it been king David's case, he
would have found some other entertainment for his thoughts; when he
could not sleep he would have remembered God and meditated upon him
([Psa 64:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#006).md), and, if he would have had
any book read to him, it would have been his Bible; for in that law did
he meditate day and night.

III\. The servant that read to him either lighted first on that article
which concerned Mordecai, or, reading long, came to it at length. Among
other things it was found written that Mordecai had discovered a plot
against the life of the king which prevented the execution of it, [Est
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#002.md). Mordecai was not in such favour
at court that the reader should designedly pitch upon that place; but
Providence directed him to it; nay, if we may believe the Jews'
tradition (as bishop Patrick relates it), opening the book at this place
he turned over the leaves, and would have read another part of the book,
but the leaves flew back again to the same place where he opened it; so
that he was forced to read that paragraph. How Mordecai's good service
was recorded we read [Est 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#023.md), and
here it is found upon record.

IV\. The king enquired what honour and dignity had been done to Mordecai
for this, suspecting that this good service had gone unrewarded, and,
like Pharaoh's butler, remembering it as his fault this day, [Gen
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#009.md). Note, The law of gratitude is a
law of nature. We ought particularly to be grateful to our inferiors,
and not to think all their services such debts to us but that they make
us indebted to them. Two rules of gratitude may be gathered from the
king's enquiry here: - 1. Better honour than nothing. If we cannot, or
need not, make recompence to those who have been kind to us, yet let us
do them honour by acknowledging their kindnesses and owning our
obligations to them. 2. Better late than never. If we have long
neglected to make grateful returns for good offices done us, let us at
length bethink ourselves of our debts.

V. The servants informed him that nothing had been done to Mordecai for
that eminent service; in the king's gate he sat before, and there he
still sat. Note, 1. It is common for great men to take little notice of
their inferiors. The king knew not whether Mordecai was preferred or no
till his servants informed him. High spirits take a pride in being
careless and unconcerned about those that are below them and ignorant of
their state. The great God takes cognizance of the meanest of his
servants, knows what dignity is done them and what disgrace. 2.
Humility, modesty, and self-denial, though in God's account of great
price, yet commonly hinder men's preferment in the world. Mordecai rises
no higher than the king's gate, while proud ambitious Haman gets the
king's ear and heart; but, though the aspiring rise fast, the humble
stand fast. Honour makes proud men giddy, but upholds the humble in
spirit, [Pro 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#023.md). 3. Honour and
dignity are rated high in the king's books. He does not ask, What reward
has been given Mordecai? what money? what estate? but only, What honour?
- a poor thing, and which, if he had not wherewith to support it, would
be but a burden. 4. The greatest merits and the best services are often
overlooked and go unrewarded among men. Little honour is done to those
who best deserve it, and fittest for it, and would do most good with it.
See [Ecc 9:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#014.md). The acquisition of
wealth and honour is usually a perfect lottery, in which those that
venture least commonly carry off the best prize. Nay, 5. Good services
are sometimes so far from being a man's preferment that they will not be
his protection. Mordecai is at this time, by the king's edict, doomed to
destruction, with all the Jews, though it is owned that he deserved
dignity. Those that faithfully serve God need not fear being thus ill
paid.

[Esther 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">est 6:4</span></span>

It is now morning, and people begin to stir.

I. Haman is so impatient to get Mordecai hanged that he comes early to
court, to be ready at the king's levee, before any other business is
brought before him, to get a warrant for his execution ([Est
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#004).md), which he makes sure that he
shall have at the first word. The king would gratify him in a greater
thing than that; and he could tell the king that he was so confident of
the justice of his request, and the king's favour to him in it, that he
had got the gallows ready: one word from the king would complete his
satisfaction.

II\. The king is so impatient to have Mordecai honoured that he sends to
know who is in the court that is fit to be employed in it. Word is
brought him that Haman is in the court, [Est
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#005.md). Let him come in, says the king,
the fittest man to be made use of both in directing and in dispensing
the king's favour; and the king knew nothing of any quarrel he had with
Mordecai. Haman is brought in immediately, proud of the honour done him
in being admitted into the king's bed-chamber, as it should seem, before
he was up; for let the king but give orders for the dignifying of
Mordecai, and he will be easy in his mind and try to sleep. Now Haman
thinks he has the fairest opportunity he can wish for to solicit against
Mordecai; but the king's heart is as full as his, and it is fit he
should speak first.

III\. The king asks Haman how he should express his favour to one whom
he had marked for a favourite: What shall be done to the man whom the
king delights to honour? [Est 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#006.md).
Note, It is a good property in kings, and other superiors, to delight in
bestowing rewards and not to delight in punishing. Parents and masters
should take a pleasure in commending and encouraging that which is good
in those under their charge.

IV\. Haman concludes that he himself is the favourite intended, and
therefore prescribes the highest expressions of honour that could, for
once, be bestowed upon a subject. His proud heart presently suggested,
"To whom will the king delight to do honour more than to myself? No one
deserves it so well as I," thinks Haman, "nor stands so fair for it."
See how men's pride deceives them. 1. Haman had a better opinion of his
merits than there was cause for: he thought none so worthy of honour as
himself. It is a foolish thing for us thus to think ourselves the only
deserving persons, or more deserving than any other. The deceitfulness
of our own hearts appears in nothing so much as in the good conceit we
have of ourselves and our own performances, against which we should
therefore constantly watch and pray. 2. He had a better opinion of his
interest than there was reason for. He thought the king loved and valued
no one but himself, but he was deceived. We should suspect that the
esteem which others profess for us is not so great as it seems to be or
as we are sometimes willing to believe it is, that we may not think too
well of ourselves nor place too much confidence in others. Now Haman
thinks he is carving out honour for himself, and therefore does it very
liberally, [Est 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#008.md), [Est
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#009.md). Nay, he does it presumptuously,
prescribing honours too great to be conferred upon any subject, that he
must be dressed in the royal robes, wear the royal crown, and ride on
the king's own horse; in short, he must appear in all the pomp and
grandeur of the king himself, only he must not carry the sceptre, the
emblem of power. He must be attended by one of the king's most noble
princes, who must be his lacquey, and all the people must be made to
take notice of him and do him reverence; for he must ride in state
through the streets, and it must be proclaimed before him, for his
honour, and the encouragement of all to seek the ruler's favour, Thus
shall it be done to the man whom the king delights to honour, which had
the same intention with that which was proclaimed before Joseph, Bow the
knee; for every good subject will honour those whom the king delights to
honour. And shall not every good Christian then honour those whom the
King of kings delights to honour and call the saints that are on the
earth the excellent ones?

V. The king confounds him with a positive order that he should
immediately go himself and put all this honour upon Mordecai the Jew,
[Est 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#010.md). If the king had but said,
as Haman expected, Thou art the man, what a fair opportunity would he
have had to do the errand he came on, and to desire that, to grace the
solemnity of his triumphs, Mordecai, his sworn enemy, might be hanged at
the same time! But how is he thunderstruck when the king bids him not to
order all this to be done, but to do it himself to Mordecai the Jew, the
very man he hated above all men and whose ruin he was now designing!
Now, it is to no purpose to think of moving any thing to the king
against Mordecai when he is the man whom the king delights to honour.
Solomon says, The heart of the king is unsearchable ([Pro
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#003).md), but it is not unchangeable.

VI\. Haman dares not dispute nor so much as seem to dislike the king's
order, but, with the greatest regret and reluctance imaginable, brings
it to Mordecai, who I suppose did no more cringe to Haman now than he
had done, valuing his counterfeit respect no more than he had valued his
concealed malice. The apparel is brought, Mordecai is dressed up, and
rides in state through the city, recognized as the king's favourite,
[Est 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#011.md). It is hard to say which of
the two put a greater force upon himself, proud Haman in putting this
honour upon Mordecai, or humble Mordecai in accepting it: the king would
have it so, and both must submit. Upon this account it was agreeable to
Mordecai as it was an indication of the king's favour, and gave hope
that Esther would prevail for the reversing of the edict against the
Jews.

[Esther 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">est 6:12</span></span>

We may here observe,

I. How little Mordecai was puffed up with his advancement. he came again
to the king's gate ([Est 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#012).md); he
returned to his place and the duty of it immediately, and minded his
business as closely as he had done before. Honour is well bestowed on
those that are not made proud and idle by it, and will not think
themselves above their business.

II\. How much Haman was cast down with his disappointment. he could not
bear it. To wait upon any man, especially Mordecai, and at this time,
when he hoped to have seen him hanged, was enough to break such a proud
heart as he had. He hasted to his house mourning, and having his head
covered, as one that looked upon himself as sunk and in a manner
condemned. What harm had it done him to stoop thus to Mordecai? Was he
ever the worse for it? Was it not what he himself proposed to be done by
one of the king's most noble princes? Why then should he grudge to do it
himself? But that will break a proud man's heart which would not break a
humble man's sleep.

III\. How his doom was, out of this event, read to him by his wife and
his friends: "If Mordecai be, as they say he is, of the seed of the
Jews, before whom thou hast begun to fall, though but in a point of
honour, never expect to prevail against him; for thou shalt surely fall
before him," [Est 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#013.md). Miserable
comforters were they all; they did not advise him to repent, and ask
Mordecai's pardon for his bad design against him, but foretold his
destiny as fatal and unavoidable. Two things they foresaw: - 1. That
Haman would be disappointed in his enterprise against the Jews: "Thou
shalt not prevail to root out that people. Heaven plainly fights against
thee." 2. That he himself would be destroyed: Thou shalt surely fall
before him. The contest between Michael and the dragon will not be a
drawn battle; no, Haman must fall before Mordecai. Two things they
grounded their prognostications upon: - (1.) This Mordecai was of the
seed of the Jews; feeble Jews their enemies sometimes called them, but
formidable Jews they sometimes found them. They are a holy seed, a
praying seed, in covenant with God, and a seed that the Lord hath all
along blessed, and therefore let not their enemies expect to triumph
over them. (2.) Haman had begun to fall, and therefore he was certainly
a gone man. It has been observed of great court-favourites that when
once they have been frowned upon they have fallen utterly, as fast as
they rose; it is true of the church's enemies that when God begins with
them he will make an end. As for God his work is perfect.

IV\. How seasonably he was now sent for to the banquet that Esther had
prepared, [Est 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#014.md). He thought it
seasonable, in hopes it would revive his drooping spirits and save his
sinking honour. But really it was seasonable because, his spirits being
broken by this sore disappointment, he might the more easily be run down
by Esther's complaint against him. The wisdom of God is seen in timing
the means of his church's deliverance so as to manifest his own glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 7](est007.md)

</div>
