<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est007)  [Next](est009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 8:0</span></span>

We left the plotter hanging, and are now to see what becomes of his
plot. I. His plot was to raise an estate for himself; and all his
estate, being confiscated for treason, is given to Esther and Mordecai
([Est 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001), [Est
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#002)). II. His plot was to ruin the
Jews; and as to that, 1. Esther earnestly intercedes for the reversing
of the edict against them ([Est
8:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#003)). 2. It is in effect done by
another edict, here published, empowering the Jews to stand up in their
own defence against their enemies ([Est
8:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#007)). III. This occasions great joy
to the Jews and all their friends ([Est
8:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#015)).

[Esther 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 8:1</span></span>

It was but lately that we had Esther and Mordecai in tears and in fears,
but fasting and praying; now let us see how to them there arose light in
darkness. Here is, 1. Esther enriched. Haman was hanged as a traitor,
therefore his estate was forfeited to the crown, and the king gave it
all to Esther, in recompence for the fright that wicked man had put her
into and the vexation he had created her, [Est
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001). His houses and lands, good sand
chattels, and all the money he had heaped up which he was prime-minister
of state (which, we may suppose, was no little), are given to Esther;
they are all her own, added to the allowance she already had. Thus is
the wealth of the sinner laid up for the just, and the innocent divides
the silver, [Pro 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#022); [Job
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#017), [Job
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#018). What Haman would have done
mischief with Esther will do good with; and estates are to be valued as
they are used. 2. Mordecai advanced. His pompous procession, this
morning, through the streets of the city, was but a sudden flash or
blaze of honour; but here we have the more durable and gainful
preferments to which he was raised, which yet the other happily made way
for. (1.) He is now owned as the queen's cousin, which till now, though
Esther had been four years queen, for aught that appears, the king did
not know. So humble, so modest, a man was Mordecai, and so far from
being ambitious of a place at court, that he concealed his relation to
the queen and her obligations to him as her guardian, and never made us
of her interest for any advantage of his own. Who but Mordecai could
have taken so little notice of so great an honour? But now he was
brought before the king, introduced, as we say, to kiss his hand; for
now, at length, Esther had told what he was to her, not only near a-kin
to her, but the best friend she had in the world, who took care of her
when she was an orphan, and one whom she still respected as a father.
Now the king finds himself, for his wife's sake, more obliged than he
thought he had been to delight in doing honour to Mordecai. How great
were the merits of that man to whom both king and queen did in effect
owe their lives! Being brought before the king, to him no doubt he
bowed, and did reverence, though he would not to Haman an Amalekite.
(2.) The king makes his lord privy-seal in the room of Haman. All the
trust he had reposed in Haman, and all the power he had given him, are
here transferred to Mordecai; for the ring which he had taken from Haman
he gave to Mordecai, and made this trusty humble man as much his
favourite, his confidant, and his agent, as ever that proud perfidious
wretch was; a happy change he made of his bosom-friends, and so, no
doubt, he and his people soon found it. (3.) The queen makes him here
steward, for the management of Haman's estate, and for getting and
keeping possession of it: She set Mordecai over the house of Haman. See
the vanity of laying up treasure upon earth; he that heapeth up riches
knoweth not who shall gather them ([Psa
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)), not only whether he shall be a
wise man or a fool ([Ecc 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#019)), but
whether he shall be a friend or an enemy. With what little pleasure,
nay, with what constant vexation, would Haman have looked upon his
estate if he could have foreseen that Mordecai, the man he hated above
all men in the world, should have rule over all that wherein he had
laboured, and thought that he showed himself wise! It is our interest,
therefore, to make sure those riches which will not be left behind, but
will go with us to another world.

[Esther 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 8:3</span></span>

Haman, the chief enemy of the Jews, was hanged, Mordecai and Esther,
their chief friends, were sufficiently protected; but many others there
were in the king's dominions that hated the Jews and desired their ruin,
and to their rage and malice all the rest of that people lay exposed;
for the edict against them was still in force, and, in pursuance of it,
their enemies would on the day appointed fall upon them, and they would
be deemed as rebels against the king and his government if they should
offer to resist and take up arms in their own defence. For the
preventing of this,

I. The queen here makes intercession with much affection and
importunity. She came, a second time, uncalled into the king's presence
([Est 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#003)), and was as before
encouraged to present her petition, by the king's holding out the golden
sceptre to her, [Est 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#004). Her petition
is that the king, having put away Haman, would put away the mischief of
Haman and his device against the Jews, that that might not take place
now that he was taken off. Many a man's mischief survives him, and the
wickedness he devised operates when he is gone. What men project and
write may, after their death, be either very profitable or very
pernicious. It was therefore requisite in this case that, for the
defeating of Haman's plot, they should apply to the king for a further
act of grace, that by another edict he would reverse the letters devised
by Haman, and which he wrote (she does not say which the king consented
to and confirmed with his own seal; she leaves it to his own conscience
to say that), by which he took an effectual course to destroy the Jews
in all the king's provinces, [Est 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#005).
If the king were indeed, as he seemed to be, troubled that such a decree
was made, he could not do less than revoke it; for what is repentance,
but undoing, to the utmost of our power, what we have done amiss? 1.
This petition Esther presents with much affection: She fell down at the
king's feet and besought him with tears ([Est
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#003)), every tear as precious as any of
the pearls with which she was adorned. It was time to be earnest when
the church of God lay at stake. Let none be so great as to be unwilling
to stoop, none so merry as to be unwilling to weep, when thereby they
may do any service to God's church and people. Esther, though safe
herself, fell down, and begged with tears for the deliverance of her
people. 2. She expresses it with great submission, and a profound
deference to the king and his wisdom and will ([Est
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#005)): If it please the king and if I
have found favour in his sightand again, "If the thing itself seem right
and reasonable before the king, and if I that ask it be pleasing in his
eyes, let the decree be reversed." Even when we have the utmost reason
and justice on our side, and have the clearest cause to plead, yet it
becomes us to speak to our superiors with humility and modesty, and all
possible expressions of respect, and not to talk like demandants when we
are supplicants. There is nothing lost be decency and good breeding. As
soft answers turn away wrath, so soft askings obtain favour. 3. She
enforces her petition with a pathetic plea: "For how can I endure to see
the evil that shall come upon my people? Little comfort can I have of my
own life if I cannot prevail for theirs: as good share in the evil
myself as see it come upon them; for how can I endure to see the
destruction of my kindred, that are dear to me?" Esther, a queen, owns
her poor kindred, and speaks of them with a very tender concern. Now it
was that she mingled her tears with her words, that she wept and made
supplication; we read of no tears when she begged for her own life, but,
now that she was sure of that, she wept for her people. Tears of pity
and tenderness are the most Christ-like. Those that are truly concerned
for the public would rather die in the last ditch than live to see the
desolations of the church of God and the ruin of their country. Tender
spirits cannot bear to think of the destruction of their people and
kindred, and therefore dare not omit any opportunity of giving them
relief.

II\. The king here takes a course for the preventing of the mischief
that Haman had designed. 1. The king knew, and informed the queen, that,
according to the constitution of the Persian government, the former
edict could not be revoked ([Est 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#008)):
What is written in the king's name, and sealed with the king's ring, may
not, under any pretence whatsoever, be reversed. This was a fundamental
article of their magna charta, that no law or decree, when once it had
passed the royal assent, could be repealed or recalled, no judgment
vacated, no attainder reversed, [Dan
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#015). This is so far from bespeaking
the wisdom and honour of the Medes and Persians that really it bespeaks
their pride and folly, and consequently their shame. It is ridiculous in
itself for any man, or company of men, to pretend to such an
infallibility of wisdom as to foresee all the consequences of what they
decree; and therefore it is unjust, and injurious to mankind, to claim
such a supremacy of power as to make their decrees irrevocable, whether
the consequences prove good or bad. This savours of that old presumption
which ruined us all: We will be as gods. Much more prudent is that
proviso of our constitution, that no law can, by any words or sanctions
whatsoever, be made unrepealable, any more than any estate unalienable.
Cujus est instruere, ejus est destruere - the right to enact implies the
right to repeal. It is God's prerogative not to repent, and to say what
can never be altered or unsaid. 2. Yet he found an expedient to undo the
devices of Haman, and defeat his design, by signing and publishing
another decree to authorize the Jews to stand upon their defence, vim vi
repellere, et invasorem occidere - to oppose force to force, and destroy
the assailant. This would be their effectual security. The king shows
them that he had done enough already to convince them that he had a
concern for the Jewish nation, for he had ordered his favourite to be
hanged because he laid his hand upon the Jews ([Est
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#007)), and he therefore would d the
utmost he could to protect them; and he leaves it as fully with Esther
and Mordecai to use his name and power for their deliverance as before
he had left it with Haman to use his name and power for their
destruction: "Write for the Jews as it liketh you ([Est
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#008)), saving only the honour of our
constitution. Let the mischief be put away as effectually as may be
without reversing the letters." The secretaries of state were ordered to
attend to draw up this edict on the twenty-third day of the third month
([Est 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#009)), about two months after the
promulgation of the former, but nine months before the time set for its
execution: it was to be drawn up and published in the respective
languages of all the provinces. Shall the subjects of an earthly prince
have his decrees in a language they understand? and shall God's oracles
and laws be locked up from his servants in an unknown tongue? It was to
be directed to the proper officers of every province, both to the
justices of peace and to the deputy-lieutenants. It was to be carefully
dispersed throughout all the king's dominions, and true copies sent by
expresses to all the provinces. The purport of this decree was to
commission the Jews, upon the day which was appointed for their
destruction, to draw together in a body for their own defence. And, (1.)
To stand for their life, that, whoever assaulted them, it might be at
their peril. (2.) They might not only act defensively, but might
destroy, and slay, and cause to perish, all the power of the people that
would assault them, men, women, and children ([Est
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#011)), and thus to avenge themselves
on their enemies ([Est 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#013)), and, if
they pleased, to enrich themselves by their enemies, for they were
empowered to take the spoil of them for a prey. Now, \[1.\] This showed
his kindness to the Jews, and sufficiently provided for their safety;
for he latter decree would be looked upon as a tacit revocation of the
former, though not in expression. But, \[2.\] It shows the absurdity of
that branch of their constitution that none of the king's edicts might
be repealed; for it laid the king here under a necessity of enacting a
civil war in his own dominions, between the Jews and their enemies, so
that both sides took up arms by his authority, and yet against his
authority. No better could come of men's pretending to be wise above
what is given them. Great expedition was used in dispersing this decree,
the king himself being in pain lest it should come too late and any
mischief should be done to the Jews by virtue of the former decree
before the notice of this arrived. It was therefore by the king's
commandment, as well as Mordecai's, that the messengers were hastened
and pressed on ([Est 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#014)), and had
swift beasts provided them, [Est 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#010).
It was not a time to trifle when so many lives were in danger.

[Esther 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">est 8:15</span></span>

It was but a few days ago that we had Mordecai in sackcloth and all the
Jews in sorrow; but here is a blessed change, Mordecai in purple and all
the Jews in joy. See [Psa 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005), [Psa
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011), [Psa
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#012). 1. Mordecai in purple, [Est
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#015). Having obtained an order for the
relief of all the Jews, he was easy, he parted with his mourning weeds,
and put on the royal apparel, which either belonged to his place or
which the king appointed him as a favourite. His robes were rich, blue
and white, of fine linen and purple; so was his coronet: it was of gold.
These are things not worth taking notice of, but as they were marks of
the king's favour, and that the fruit of God's favour to his church. It
is well with a land when the ensigns of dignity are made the ornaments
of serious piety. The city Shushan was sensible of its advantage in the
preferment of Mordecai, and therefore rejoiced and was glad, not only
pleased in general with the advancement of virtue, but promising itself,
in particular, better times, now that so good a man was entrusted with
power. Haman was hanged; and, when the wicked perish, there is shouting,
[Pro 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#010). Mordecai was preferred;
and, when the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice. 2. The
Jews in joy, [Est 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#016), [Est
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#017). The Jews, who awhile ago were
under a dark cloud, dejected and disgraced, now had light and gladness,
joy and honour, a feast and a good lay. If they had not been threatened
and in distress they would not have had occasion for this extraordinary
joy. Thus are God's people sometimes made to sow in tears that they may
reap in so much the more joy. The suddenness and strangeness of the turn
of affairs in their favour added much to their joy. They were like those
that dream; then was their mouth filled with laughter, [Psa
126:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001), [Psa
126:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#002). One good effect of this
deliverance was that many of the people of the land, that were
considerate, sober, and well inclined, became Jews, were proselyted to
the Jewish religion, renounced idolatry, and worshipped the true God
only. Haman thought to extirpate the Jews, but it proves, in the issue,
that their numbers are greatly increased and many added to the church.
Observe, When the Jews had joy and gladness then many of the people of
the land became Jews. The holy cheerfulness of those that profess
religion is a great ornament to their profession, and will invite and
encourage others to be religious. The reason here given why so many
became Jews at this time is because the fear of the Jews fell upon them.
When they observed how wonderfully divine Providence had owned them and
wrought for them in this critical juncture, (1.) They thought them
great, and considered those happy that were among them; and therefore
they came over to them, as was foretold, [Zac
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023). We will go with you, for we have
heard, we have seen, that God is with you, the shield of your help, and
the sword of your excellency, [Deu
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029). When the church prospers, and
is smiled upon, many will come into it that will be shy of it when it is
in trouble. (2.) They thought them formidable, and considered those
miserable that were against them. They plainly saw in Haman's fate that,
if any offered injury to the Jews, it was at their peril; and therefore,
for their own security, they joined themselves to them. It is folly to
think of contending with the God of Israel, and therefore it is wisdom
to think of submitting to him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 9](est009)

</div>
