<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est003)  [Next](est005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 4:0</span></span>

We left God's Isaac bound upon the altar and ready to be sacrificed, and
the enemies triumphing in the prospect of it; but things here begin to
work towards a deliverance, and they begin at the right end. I. The
Jews' friends lay to heart the danger and lament it ([Est
4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001)). II. Matters are concerted
between Mordecai and Esther for the preventing of it. 1. Esther enquires
into this case, and receives a particular account of it ([Est
4:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#005)). 2. Mordecai urges her to
intercede with the king for a revocation of the edict ([Est
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#008), [Est
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#009)). III. Esther objects the danger
of addressing the king uncalled ([Est
4:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#010)). IV. Mordecai presses her to
venture ([Est 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#013), [Est
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#014)). V. Esther, after a religious
fast of three days, promises to do so ([Est
4:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#015)), and we shall find that she
sped well.

[Esther 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 4:1</span></span>

Here we have an account of the general sorrow that there was among the
Jews upon the publishing of Haman's bloody edict against them. It was a
sad time with the church. 1. Mordecai cried bitterly, rent his clothes,
and put on sackcloth, [Est 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001), [Est
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#002). He not only thus vented his
grief, but proclaimed it, that all might take notice of it that he was
not ashamed to own himself a friend to the Jews, and a fellow-sufferer
with them, their brother and companion in tribulation, how despicable
and how odious soever they were now represented by Haman's faction. It
was nobly done thus publicly to espouse what he knew to be a righteous
cause, and the cause of God, even when it seemed a desperate and a
sinking cause. Mordecai laid the danger to heart more than any because
he knew that Haman's spite was against him primarily, and that it was
for his sake that the rest of the Jews were struck at; and therefore,
though he did not repent of what some would call his obstinacy, for he
persisted in it ([Est 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#009)), yet it
troubled him greatly that his people should suffer for his scruples,
which perhaps occasioned some of them to reflect upon him as too
precise. But, being able to appeal to God that what he did he did from a
principle of conscience, he could with comfort commit his own cause and
that of his people to him that judgeth righteously. God will keep those
that are exposed by the tenderness of their consciences. Notice is here
taken of a law that none might enter into the king's gate clothed with
sackcloth; though the arbitrary power of their kings often, as now, set
many a mourning, yet none must come near the king in a mourning dress,
because he was not willing to hear the complaints of such. Nothing but
what was gay and pleasant must appear at court, and every thing that was
melancholy must be banished thence; all in king's palaces wear soft
clothing ([Mat 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#008)), not sackcloth.
But thus to keep out the badges of sorrow, unless they could withal have
kept out the causes of sorrow - to forbid sackcloth to enter, unless
they could have forbidden sickness, and trouble, and death to enter -
was jest. However this obliged Mordecai to keep his distance, and only
to come before the gate, not to take his place in the gate. 2. All the
Jews in every province laid it much to heart, [Est
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#003). They denied themselves the
comfort of their tables (for they fasted and mingled tears with their
meat and drink), and the comfort of their beds at night, for they lay in
sackcloth and ashes. Those who for want of confidence in God, and
affection to their own land, has staid in the land of their captivity,
when Cyrus gave them liberty to be gone, now perhaps repented of their
folly, and wished, when it was too late, that they had complied with the
call of God. 3. Esther the queen, upon a general intimation of the
trouble Mordecai was in, was exceedingly grieved, v. 4. Mordecai's grief
was hers, such a respect did she still retain for him; and the Jews'
danger was her distress; for, though a queen, she forgot not her
relation to them. Let not the greatest think it below them to grieve for
the affliction of Joseph, though they themselves be anointed with the
chief ointments, [Amo 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006). Esther sent
change of raiment to Mordecai, the oil of joy for mourning and the
garments of praise for the spirit of heaviness; but because he would
make her sensible of the greatness of his grief, and consequently of the
cause of it, he received it not, but was as one that refused to be
comforted.

[Esther 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">est 4:5</span></span>

So strictly did the laws of Persia confine the wives, especially the
king's wives, that it was not possible for Mordecai to have a conference
with Esther about this important affair, but divers messages are here
carried between them by Hatach, whom the king had appointed to attend
her, and it seems he was one she could confide in.

I. She sent to Mordecai to know more particularly and fully what the
trouble was which he was now lamenting ([Est
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#005)) and why it was that he would not
put off his sackcloth. To enquire thus after news, that we may know the
better how to direct our griefs and joys, our prayers and praises, well
becomes all that love Sion. If we must weep with those that weep, we
must know why they weep.

II\. Mordecai sent her an authentic account of the whole matter, with a
charge to her to intercede with the king in this matter: Mordecai told
him all that had happened unto him ([Est
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#007)), what a pique Haman had against
him for now bowing to him, and by what arts he had procured this edict;
he sent her also a true copy of the edict, that she might see what
imminent danger she and her people were in, and charged her, if she had
any respect for him or any kindness for the Jewish nation, that she
should appear now on their behalf, rectify the misinformations with
which the king was imposed upon, and set the matter in a true light, not
doubting but that then he would vacate the decree.

III\. She sent her case to Mordecai, that she could not, without peril
of her life, address the king, and that therefore he put a great
hardship upon her in urging her to it. Gladly would she wait, gladly
would she stoop, to do the Jews a kindness; but, if she must run the
hazard of being put to death as a malefactor, she might well say, I pray
thee have me excused, and find out some other intercessor.

1\. The law was express, and all knew it, that whosoever came to the
king uncalled should be put to death, unless he was pleased to hold out
the golden sceptre to them, and it was extremely doubtful whether she
should find him in so good a humour, [Est
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#011). This law was made, not so much
in prudence, for the greater safety of the king's person, as in pride,
that being seldom seen, and not without great difficulty, he might be
adored as a little god. A foolish law it was; for, (1.) It made the
kings themselves unhappy, confining them to their retirements for fear
they should be seen. This made the royal palace little better than a
royal prison, and the kings themselves could not but become morose, and
perhaps melancholy, and so a terror to others and a burden to
themselves. Many have their lives made miserable by their own
haughtiness and ill nature. (2.) It was bad for the subjects; for what
good had they of a king that they might never have liberty to apply to
for the redress of grievances and appeal to from the inferior judges? It
is not thus in the court of the King of kings; to the footstool of his
throne of grace we may at any time come boldly, and may be sure of an
answer of peace to the prayer of faith. We are welcome, not only into
the inner court, but even into the holiest, through the blood of Jesus.
(3.) It was particularly very uncomfortable for their wives (for there
was not a proviso in the law to except them), who were bone of their
bone and flesh of their flesh. But perhaps it was wickedly intended as
much against them as any other, that the kings might the more freely
enjoy their concubines, and Esther knew it. Miserable was the kingdom
when the princes framed their laws to serve their lusts.

2\. Her case was at present very discouraging. Providence so ordered it
that, just at this juncture, she was under a cloud, and the king's
affections cooled towards her, for she had been kept from his presence
thirty days, that her faith and courage might be the more tried, and
that God's goodness in the favour she now found with the king
notwithstanding might shine the brighter. It is probable that Haman
endeavoured by women, as well as wine, to divert the king from thinking
of what he had done, and then Esther was neglected, from whom no doubt
he did what he could to alienate the king, knowing her to be averse to
him.

IV\. Mordecai still insisted upon it that, whatever hazard she might
run, she must apply to the king in this great affair, [Est
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#013), [Est
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#014). No excuse will serve, but she
must appear an advocate in this cause; he suggested to her, 1. That it
was her own cause, for that the decree to destroy all the Jews did not
except here: "Think not therefore that thou shalt escape in the king's
house, that the palace will be thy protection, and the crown save thy
head: no, thou art a Jewess, and, if the rest be cut off, thou wilt be
cut off too." It was certainly her wisdom rather to expose herself to a
conditional death from her husband than to a certain death from her
enemy. 2. That it was a cause which, one way or other, would certainly
be carried, and which therefore she might safely venture in. "If thou
shouldst decline the service, enlargement and deliverance will arise to
the Jews from another place." This was the language of a strong faith,
which staggered not at the promise when the danger was most threatening,
but against hope believed in hope. Instruments may fail, but God's
covenant will not. 3. That if she deserted her friends now, through
cowardice and unbelief, she would have reason to fear that some judgment
from heaven would be the ruin of her and her family: "Thou and thy
father's house shall be destroyed, when the rest of the families of the
Jews shall be preserved." He that by sinful shifts will save his life,
and cannot find in his heart to trust God with it in the way of duty,
shall lose it in the way of sin. 4. That divine Providence had an eye to
this in bringing her to be queen: "Who knows whether thou hast come to
the kingdom for such a time as this?" and therefore, (1.) "Thou art
bound in gratitude to do this service for God and his church, else thou
dost not answer the end of thy elevation." (2.) "Thou needest not fear
miscarrying in the enterprise; if God designed thee for it, he will bear
thee out and give thee success." Now, \[1.\] It appeared, by the event,
that she did come to the kingdom that she might be an instrument of the
Jews' deliverance, so that Mordecai was right in the conjecture. Because
the Lord loved his people, therefore he made Esther queen. There is a
wise counsel and design in all the providences of God, which is unknown
to us till it is accomplished, but it will prove, in the issue, that
they are all intended for, and centre in, the good of the church. \[2.\]
The probability of this was a good reason why she should now bestir
herself, and do her utmost for her people. We should every one of us
consider for what end God has put us in the place where we are, and
study to answer that end; and, when any particular opportunity of
serving God and our generation offers itself, we must take care that we
do not let it slip; for we were entrusted with it that we might improve
it. These things Mordecai urges to Esther; and some of the Jewish
writers, who are fruitful in invention, add another thing which had
happened to him (v. 7) which he desired she might be told, "that going
home, the night before, in great heaviness, upon the notice of Haman's
plot, he met three Jewish children coming from school, of whom he
enquired what they had learned that day; one of them told him his lesson
was, [Pro 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#025), [Pro
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#026), Be not afraid of sudden fear;
the second told him his was, [Isa
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#010), Take counsel together, and it
shall come to nought; the third told him his was [Isa
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#004), I have made, and I will bear,
even I will carry and will deliver you. 'O the goodness of God,' says
Mordecai, 'who out of the mouth of babes and sucklings ordains
strength!"'

V. Esther hereupon resolved, whatever it might cost her, to apply to the
king, but not till she and her friends had first applied to God. Let
them first by fasting and prayer obtain God's favour, and then she
should hope to find favour with the king, [Est
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#015), [Est
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#016). She speaks here,

1\. With the piety and devotion that became an Israelite. She had here
eye up unto God, in whose hands the hearts of kings are, and on whom she
depended to incline this king's heart towards her. She went in peril of
her life, but would think herself safe, and would be easy, when she had
committed the keeping of her soul to God and had put herself under his
protection. She believed that God's favour was to be obtained by prayer,
that his people are a praying people, and he a prayer-hearing God. She
knew it was the practice of good people, in extraordinary cases, to join
fasting with prayer, and many of them to join together in both. She
therefore, (1.) Desired that Mordecai would direct the Jews that were in
Shushan to sanctify a fast and call a solemn assembly, to meet in the
respective synagogues to which they belonged, and to pray for her, and
to keep a solemn fast, abstaining from all set meals and all pleasant
food for three days, and as much as possible from all food, in token of
their humiliation for sin and in a sense of their unworthiness of God's
mercy. Those know not how to value the divine favours who grudge thus
much labour and self-denial in the pursuit of it. (2.) She promised that
she and her family would sanctify this fast in her apartment of the
palace, for she might not come to their assemblies; her maids were
either Jewesses or so far proselytes that they joined with her in her
fasting and praying. Here is a good example of a mistress praying with
her maids, and it is worthy to be imitated. Observe also, Those who are
confined to privacy may join their prayers with those of the solemn
assemblies of God's people; those that are absent in body may be present
in spirit. Those who desire, and have, the prayers of others for them,
must not think that this will excuse them from praying for themselves.

2\. With the courage and resolution that became a queen. "When we have
sought God in this matter, I will go unto the king to intercede for my
people. I know it is not according to the king's law, but it is
according to God's law; and therefore, whatever comes of it, I will
venture, and not count my life dear to me, so that I may serve God and
his church, and, if I perish, I perish. I cannot lose my life in a
better cause. Better do my duty and die for my people than shrink from
my duty and die with them." She reasons as the lepers ([Kg2
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#004)): "If I sit still, I die; if I
venture, I may live, and be the life of my people: if the worst come to
the worst," as we say, "I shall but die." Nothing venture, nothing win.
She said not this in despair or passion, but in a holy resolution to do
her duty and trust God with the issue; welcome his holy will. In the
apocryphal part of this book (ch. 13 and 14) we have Mordecai's prayer
and Esther's upon this occasion, and both of them very particular and
pertinent. In the sequel of the story we shall find that God said not to
this seed of Jacob, Seek you me in vain.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 5](est005)

</div>
