<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo018)  [Next](exo020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 19:0</span></span>

This chapter introduces the solemnity of the giving of the law upon
mount Sinai, which was one of the most striking appearances of the
divine glory that ever was in this lower world. We have here, I. The
circumstances of time and place ([Exo
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001), [Exo
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#002)). II. The covenant between God
and Israel settled in general. The gracious proposal God made to them
([Exo 19:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#003)), and their consent to
the proposal ([Exo 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#007), [Exo
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#008)). III. Notice given three days
before of God's design to give the law out of a thick cloud ([Exo
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009)). Orders given to prepare the
people to receive the law ([Exo
19:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010)), and care taken to execute
those orders ([Exo 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#014), [Exo
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#015)). IV. A terrible appearance of
God's glory upon mount Sinai ([Exo
19:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016)). V. Silence proclaimed, and
strict charges given to the people to observe decorum while God spoke to
them ([Exo 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#021), etc.).

[Exodus 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 19:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The date of that great charter by which Israel was
incorporated. 1. The time when it bears date ([Exo
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)) - in the third month after they
came out of Egypt. It is computed that the law was given just fifty days
after their coming out of Egypt, in remembrance of which the feast of
Pentecost was observed the fiftieth day after the passover, and in
compliance with which the Spirit was poured out upon the apostles at the
feast of pentecost, fifty days after the death of Christ. In Egypt they
had spoken of a three days' journey into the wilderness to the place of
their sacrifice ([Exo 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#003)), but it
proved to be almost a two months' journey; so often are we out in the
calculation of times, and things prove longer in the doing than we
expected. 2. The place whence it bears date - from Mount Sinai, a place
which nature, not art, had made eminent and conspicuous, for it was the
highest in all that range of mountains. Thus God put contempt upon
cities, and palaces, and magnificent structures, setting up his pavilion
on the top of a high mountain, in a waste and barren desert, there to
carry on this treaty. It is called Sinai, from the multitude of thorny
bushes that overspread it.

II\. The charter itself. Moses was called up the mountain (on the top of
which God had pitched his tent, and at the foot of which Israel had
pitched theirs), and was employed as the mediator, or rather no more
than the messenger of the covenant: Thus shalt thou say to the house of
Jacob, and tell the children of Israel, [Exo
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#003). Here the learned bishop Patrick
observes that the people are called by the names both of Jacob and
Israel, to remind them that those who had lately been as low as Jacob
when he went to Padan-aram had now grown as great as God made him when
he came thence (justly enriched with the spoils of him that had
oppressed him) and was called Israel. Now observe, 1. That the maker,
and first mover, of the covenant, is God himself. Nothing was said nor
done by this stupid unthinking people themselves towards this
settlement; no motion made, no petition put up for God's favour, but
this blessed charter was granted ex mero motu - purely out of God's own
good-will. Note, In all our dealings with God, free grace anticipates us
with the blessings of goodness, and all our comfort is owing, not to our
knowing God, but rather to our being known of him, [Gal
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009). We love him, visit him, and
covenant with him, because he first loved us, visited us, and covenanted
with us. God is the Alpha, and therefore must be the Omega. 2. That the
matter of the covenant is not only just and unexceptionable, and such as
puts no hardship upon them, but kind and gracious, and such as gives
them the greatest privileges and advantages imaginable. (1.) He reminds
them of what he had done for them, [Exo
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#004). He had righted them, and avenged
them upon their persecutors and oppressors: "You have seen what I did
unto the Egyptians, how many lives were sacrificed to Israel's honour
and interests:" He had given them unparalleled instances of his favour
to them, and his care of them: I bore you on eagles' wings, a high
expression of the wonderful tenderness God had shown for them. It is
explained, [Deu 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011), [Deu
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#012). It denotes great speed. God not
only came upon the wing for their deliverance (when the set time was
come, he rode on a cherub, and did fly), but he hastened them out, as it
were, upon the wing. He did it also with great ease, with the strength
as well as with the swiftness of an eagle: those that faint not, nor are
weary, are said to mount up with wings as eagles, [Isa
40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031). Especially, it denotes God's
particular care of them and affection to them. Even Egypt, that iron
furnace, was the nest in which these young ones were hatched, where they
were first formed as the embryo of a nation; when, by the increase of
their numbers, they grew to some maturity, they were carried out of that
nest. Other birds carry their young in their talons, but the eagle (they
say) upon her wings, so that even those archers who shoot flying cannot
hurt the young ones, unless they first shoot through the old one. Thus,
in the Red Sea, the pillar of cloud and fire, the token of God's
presence, interposed itself between the Israelites and their pursuers
(lines of defence which could not be forced, a wall which could not be
penetrated): yet this was not all; their way so paved, so guarded, was
glorious, but their end much more so: I brought you unto myself. They
were brought not only into a state of liberty and honour, but into
covenant and communion with God. This, this was the glory of their
deliverance, as it is of ours by Christ, that he died, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God. This God aims at in all the
gracious methods of his providence and grace, to bring us back to
himself, from whom we have revolted, and to bring us home to himself, in
whom alone we can be happy. He appeals to themselves, and their own
observation and experience, for the truth of what is here insisted on:
You have seen what I did; so that they could not disbelieve God, unless
they would first disbelieve their own eyes. They saw how all that was
done was purely the Lord's doing. It was not they that reached towards
God, but it was he that brought them to himself. Some have well observed
that the Old Testament church is said to be borne upon eagles' wings,
denoting the power of that dispensation, which was carried on with a
high hand an out-stretched arm; but the New Testament church is said to
be gathered by the Lord Jesus, as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings ([Mat 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)), denoting the grace
and compassion of that dispensation, and the admirable condescension and
humiliation of the Redeemer. (2.) He tells them plainly what he expected
and required from them in one word, obedience ([Exo
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005)), that they should obey his voice
indeed and keep his covenant. Being thus saved by him, that which he
insisted upon was that they should be ruled by him. The reasonableness
of this demand is, long after, pleaded with them, that in the day he
brought them out of the land of Egypt this was the condition of the
covenant, Obey my voice ([Jer 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#023));
and this he is said to protest earnestly to them, [Jer
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#004), [Jer
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#007). Only obey indeed, not in
profession and promise only, not in pretence, but in sincerity. God had
shown them real favours, and therefore required real obedience. (3.) He
assures them of the honour he would put upon them, and the kindness he
would show them, in case they did thus keep his covenant ([Exo
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005), [Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)): Then you shall be a peculiar
treasure to me. He does not specify any one particular favour, as giving
them the land of Canaan, or the like, but expresses it in that which was
inclusive of all happiness, that he would be to them a God in covenant,
and they should be to him a people. \[1.\] God here asserts his
sovereignty over, and propriety in, the whole visible creation: All the
earth is mine. Therefore he needed them not; he that had so vast a
dominion was great enough, and happy enough, without concerning himself
for so small a demesne as Israel was. All nations on the earth being
his, he might choose which he pleased for his peculiar, and act in a way
of sovereignty. \[2.\] He appropriates Israel to himself, First, As a
people dear unto him. You shall be a peculiar treasure; not that God was
enriched by them, as a man is by his treasure, but he was pleased to
value and esteem them as a man does his treasure; they were precious in
his sight and honourable ([Isa 43:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#004));
he set his love upon them ([Deu 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#007)),
took them under his special care and protection, as a treasure that is
kept under lock and key. He looked upon the rest of the world but as
trash and lumber in comparison with them. By giving them divine
revelation, instituted ordinances, and promises inclusive of eternal
life, by sending his prophets among them, and pouring out his Spirit
upon them, he distinguished them from, and dignified them above, all
people. And this honour have all the saints; they are unto God a
peculiar people ([Tit 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014)), his when
he makes up his jewels. Secondly, As a people devoted to him, to his
honour and service ([Exo 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)), a
kingdom of priests, a holy nation. All the Israelites, if compared with
other people, were priests unto God, so near were they to him ([Psa
148:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#014)), so much employed in his
immediate service, and such intimate communion they had with him. When
they were first made a free people it was that they might sacrifice to
the Lord their God, as priests; they were under God's immediate
government, and the tendency of the laws given them was to distinguish
them from others, and engage them for God as a holy nation. Thus all
believers are, through Christ, made to our God kings and priests ([Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006)), a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, [Pe1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009).

III\. Israel's acceptance of this charter, and consent to the conditions
of it. 1. Moses faithfully delivered God's message to them ([Exo
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#007)): He laid before their faces all
those words; he not only explained to them what God had given him in
charge, but he put it to their choice whether they would accept these
promises upon these terms or no. His laying it to their faces denotes
his laying it to their consciences. 2. They readily agreed to the
covenant proposed. They would oblige themselves to obey the voice of
God, and take it as a great favour to be made a kingdom of priests to
him. They answered together as one man, nemine contradicente - without a
dissentient voice ([Exo 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#008)): All
that the Lord hath spoken we will do. Thus they strike the bargain,
accepting the Lord to be to them a God, and giving up themselves to be
to him a people. O that there had been such a heart in them! 3. Moses,
as a mediator, returned the words of the people to God, [Exo
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#008). Thus Christ, the Mediator
between us and God, as a prophet reveals God's will to us, his precepts
and promises, and then as a priest offers up to God our spiritual
sacrifices, not only of prayer and praise, but of devout affections and
pious resolutions, the work of his own Spirit in us. Thus he is that
blessed days-man who lays his hand upon us both.

[Exodus 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 19:9</span></span>

Here, I. God intimates to Moses his purpose of coming down upon mount
Sinai, in some visible appearance of his glory, in a thick cloud ([Exo
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009)); for he said that he would dwell
in the thick darkness ([Ch2 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#001)), and
make this his pavilion ([Psa 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011)),
holding back the face of his throne when he set it upon mount Sinai, and
spreading a cloud upon it, [Job 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#009).
This thick cloud was to prohibit curious enquiries into things secret,
and to command an awful adoration of that which was revealed. God would
come down in the sight of all the people ([Exo
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#011)); though they should see no
manner of similitude, yet they should see so much as would convince them
that God was among them of a truth. And so high was the top of mount
Sinai that it is supposed that not only the camp of Israel, but even the
countries about, might discern some extraordinary appearance of glory
upon it, which would strike a terror upon them. It seems also to have
been particularly intended to put an honour upon Moses: That they may
hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for ever, [Exo
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009). Thus the correspondence was to
be first settled by a sensible appearance of the divine glory, which was
afterwards to be carried on more silently by the ministry of Moses. In
like manner, the Holy Ghost descended visibly upon Christ at his
baptism, and all that were present heard God speak to him ([Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)), that afterwards, without the
repetition of such visible tokens, they might believe him. So likewise
the Spirit descended in cloven tongues upon the apostles ([Act
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003)), that they might be believed.
Observe, When the people had declared themselves willing to obey the
voice of God, then God promised they should hear his voice; for, if any
man be resolved to do his will, he shall know it, [Joh
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#017).

II\. He orders Moses to make preparation for this great solemnity,
giving him two days' time for it.

1\. He must sanctify the people ([Exo
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010)), as Job, before this, sent and
sanctified his sons, [Job 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005). He must
raise their expectation by giving them notice what God would do, and
assist their preparation by directing them what they must do. "Sanctify
them," that is, "Call them off from their worldly business, and call
them to religious exercises, meditation and prayer, that they may
receive the law from God's mouth with reverence and devotion. Let them
be ready," [Exo 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#011). Note, When we
are to attend upon God in solemn ordinances it concerns us to sanctify
ourselves, and to get ready beforehand. Wandering thoughts must be
gathered in, impure affections abandoned, disquieting passions
suppressed, nay, and all cares about secular business, for the present,
dismissed and laid by, that our hearts may be engaged to approach unto
God. Two things particularly prescribed as signs and instances of their
preparation: - (1.) In token of their cleansing themselves from all
sinful pollutions, that they might be holy to God, they must wash their
clothes ([Exo 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010)), and they did so
([Exo 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#014)); not that God regards our
clothes; but while they were washing their clothes he would have them
think of washing their souls by repentance from the sins they had
contracted in Egypt and since their deliverance. It becomes us to appear
in clean clothes when we wait upon great men; so clean hearts are
required in our attendance on the great God, who sees them as plainly as
men see our clothes. This is absolutely necessary to our acceptably
worshipping God. See [Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006); [Isa
1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016); [Heb
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022). (2.) In token of their devoting
themselves entirely to religious exercises, upon this occasion, they
must abstain even from lawful enjoyments during these three days, and
not come at their wives, [Exo 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#015).
See [Co1 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005).

2\. He must set bounds about the mountain, [Exo
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#012), [Exo
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#013). Probably he drew a line, or
ditch, round at the foot of the hill, which none were to pass upon pain
of death. This was to intimate, (1.) That humble awful reverence which
ought to possess the minds of all those that worship God. We are mean
creatures before a great Creator, vile sinners before a holy righteous
Judge; and therefore a godly fear and shame well become us, [Heb
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#028); [Psa
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011). (2.) The distance at which
worshippers were kept, under that dispensation, which we ought to take
notice of, that we may the more value our privilege under the gospel,
having boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, [Heb
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019).

3\. He must order the people to attend upon the summons that should be
given ([Exo 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#013)): "When the trumpet
soundeth long then let them take their places at the foot of the mount,
and so sit down at God's feet," as it is explained, [Deu
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#003). Never was so great a
congregation called together, and preached to, at once, as this was
here. No one man's voice could have reached so many, but the voice of
God did.

[Exodus 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 19:16</span></span>

Now, at length, comes that memorable day, that terrible day of the Lord,
that day of judgment, in which Israel heard the voice of the Lord God
speaking to them out of the midst of the fire, and lived, [Deu
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#033). Never was there such a sermon
preached, before nor since, as this which was here preached to the
church in the wilderness. For,

I. The preacher was God himself ([Exo
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018)): The Lord descended in fire,
and ([Exo 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#020)), The Lord came down
upon mount Sinai. The shechinah, or glory of the Lord, appeared in the
sight of all the people; he shone forth from mount Paran with ten
thousands of his saints ([Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002)),
that is, attended, as the divine Majesty always is, by a multitude of
the holy angels, who were both to grace the solemnity and to assist at
it. Hence the law is said to be given by the disposition of angels, [Act
7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053).

II\. The pulpit (or throne rather) was mount Sinai, hung with a thick
cloud ([Exo 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016)), covered with smoke
([Exo 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018)), and made to quake
greatly. Now it was that the earth trembled at the presence of the Lord,
and the mountains skipped like rams ([Psa
114:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#004), [Psa
114:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#007)), that Sinai itself, though
rough and rocky, melted from before the Lord God of Israel, [Jdg
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#005). Now it was that the mountains saw
him, and trembled ([Hab 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#010)), and
were witnesses against a hard-hearted unmoved people, whom nothing would
influence.

III\. The congregation was called together by the sound of a trumpet,
exceedingly loud ([Exo 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016)), and
waxing louder and louder, [Exo 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#019).
This was done by the ministry of the angels, and we read of trumpets
sounded by angels, [Rev 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#006). It was
the sound of the trumpet that made all the people tremble, as those who
knew their own guilt, and who had reason to expect that the sound of
this trumpet was to them the alarm of war.

IV\. Moses brought the hearers to the place of meeting, [Exo
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#017). He that had led them out of the
bondage of Egypt now led them to receive the law from God's mouth.
Public persons are indeed public blessings when they lay out themselves
in their places to promote the public worship of God. Moses, at the head
of an assembly worshipping God, was as truly great as Moses at the head
of an army in the field.

V. The introductions to the service were thunders and lightnings, [Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016). These were designed to strike
an awe upon the people, and to raise and engage their attention. Were
they asleep? The thunders would awaken them. Were they looking another
way? The lightnings would engage them to turn their faces towards him
that spoke to them. Thunder and lightning have natural causes, but the
scripture directs us in a particular manner to take notice of the power
of God, and his terror, in them. Thunder is the voice of God, and
lightning the fire of God, proper to engage the senses of sight and
hearing, those senses by which we receive so much of our information.

VI\. Moses is God's minister, who is spoken to, to command silence, and
keep the congregation in order: Moses spoke, [Exo
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#019). Some think it was now that he
said, I exceedingly fear and quake ([Heb
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#021)); but God stilled his fear by
his distinguishing favour to him, in calling him up to the top of the
mount ([Exo 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#020)), by which also he
tried his faith and courage. No sooner had Moses got up a little way
towards the top of the mount than he was sent down again to keep the
people from breaking through to gaze, [Exo
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#021). Even the priests or princes,
the heads of the houses of their fathers, who officiated for their
respective families, and therefore are said to come near to the Lord at
other times, must now keep their distance, and conduct themselves with a
great deal of caution. Moses pleads that they needed not to have any
further orders given them, effectual care being taken already to prevent
any intrusions, [Exo 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#023). But God,
who knew their wilfulness and presumption, and what was now in the
hearts of some of them, hastens him down with this in charge, that
neither the priests nor the people should offer to force the lines that
were set, to come up unto the Lord, but Moses and Aaron on, the men whom
God delighted to honour. Observe, 1. What it was that God forbade them -
breaking through to gaze; enough was provided to awaken their
consciences, but they were not allowed to gratify their vain curiosity.
They might see, but not gaze. Some of them, probably, were desirous to
see some similitude, that they might know how to make an image of God,
which he took care to prevent, for they saw no manner of similitude,
[Deu 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#005). Note, In divine things we
must not covet to know more than God would have us know; and he has
allowed us as much as is good for us. A desire of forbidden knowledge
was the ruin of our first parents. Those that would be wise above what
is written, and intrude into those things which they have not seen, need
this admonition, that they break not through to gaze. 2. Under what
penalty it was forbidden: Lest the Lord break forth upon them ([Exo
19:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#022)), and many of them perish.
Note, (1.) The restraints and warnings of the divine law are all
intended for our good, and to keep us out of that danger into which we
should otherwise, by our own folly, run ourselves. (2.) It is at our
peril if we break the bounds that God has set us, and intrude upon that
which he has not allowed us; the Bethshemites and Uzzah paid dearly for
their presumption. And, even when we are called to approach God, we must
remember that he is in heaven and we upon earth, and therefore it
behoves us to exercise reverence and godly fear.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 20](exo020)

</div>
