<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo037)  [Next](exo039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 38:0</span></span>

Here is an account, I. Of the making of the brazen altar ([Exo
38:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#001)), and the laver ([Exo
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#008)). II. The preparing of the
hangings for the enclosing of the court in which the tabernacle was to
stand ([Exo 38:9-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#009)). III. A summary
of the gold, silver, and brass, that was contributed to, and used in,
the preparing of the tabernacle ([Exo
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#021), etc.).

[Exodus 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 38:1</span></span>

Bezaleel having finished the gold-work, which, though the richest, yet
was ordered to lie most out of sight, in the tabernacle itself, here
goes on to prepare the court, which lay open to the view of all. Two
things the court was furnished with, and both made of brass: -

I. An altar of burnt-offering, [Exo
38:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#001). On this all their sacrifices
were offered, and it was this which, being sanctified itself for this
purpose by the divine appointment, sanctified the gift that was in faith
offered on it. Christ was himself the altar to his own sacrifice of
atonement, and so he is to all our sacrifices of acknowledgment. We must
have an eye to him in offering them, as God has in accepting them.

II\. A laver, to hold water for the priests to wash in when they went in
to minister, [Exo 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#008). This signified
the provision that is made in the gospel of Christ for the cleansing of
our souls from the moral pollution of sin by the merit and grace of
Christ, that we may be fit to serve the holy God in holy duties. This is
here said to be made of the looking-glasses (or mirrors) of the women
that assembled at the door of the tabernacle.

1\. It should seem these women were eminent and exemplary for devotion,
attending more frequently and seriously at the place of public worship
than others did; and notice is here taken of it to their honour. Anna
was such a one long afterwards, who departed not from the temple, but
served God with fastings and prayers night and day, [Luk
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#037). It seems in every age of the
church there have been some who have thus distinguished themselves by
their serious zealous piety, and they have thereby distinguished
themselves; for devout women are really honourable women ([Act
13:50](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050)), and not the less so for their
being called, by the scoffers of the latter days, silly women. Probably
these women were such as showed their zeal upon this occasion, by
assisting in the work that was now going on for the service of the
tabernacle. They assembled by troops, so the word is; a blessed sight,
to see so many, and those so zealous and so unanimous, in this good
work.

2\. These women parted with their mirrors (which were of the finest
brass, burnished for that purpose) for the use of the tabernacle. Those
women that admire their own beauty, are in love with their own shadow,
and make the putting on of apparel their chief adorning by which they
value and recommend themselves, can but ill spare their looking-glasses;
yet these women offered them to God, either, (1.) In token of their
repentance for the former abuse of them, to the support of their pride
and vanity; now that they were convinced of their folly, and had devoted
themselves to the service of God at the door of the tabernacle, they
thus threw away that which, though lawful and useful in itself, yet had
been an occasion of sin to them. Thus Mary Magdalene, who had been a
sinner, when she became a penitent wiped Christ's feet with her hair.
Or, (2.) In token of their great zeal for the work of the tabernacle;
rather than the workmen should want brass, or not have of the best, they
would part with their mirrors, though they could not do well without
them. God's service and glory must always be preferred by us before any
satisfactions or accommodations of our own. Let us never complain of the
want of that which we may honour God by parting with.

3\. These mirrors were used for the making of the laver. Either they
were artfully joined together, or else molten down and cast anew; but it
is probable that the laver was so brightly burnished that the sides of
it still served for mirrors, that the priests, when they came to wash,
might there see their faces, and so discover the spots, to wash them
clean. Note, In the washing of repentance, there is need of the
looking-glass of self-examination. The word of God is a glass, in which
we may see our own faces (see [Jam
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#023)); and with it we must compare our
own hearts and lives, that, finding out our blemishes, we may wash with
particular sorrow, and application of the blood of Christ to our souls.
Usually the more particular we are in the confession of sin the more
comfort we have in the sense of the pardon.

[Exodus 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 38:9</span></span>

The walls of the court, or church-yard, were like the rest curtains or
hangings, made according to the appointment, [Exo
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#009), etc. This represented the state
of the Old Testament church: it was a garden enclosed; the worshippers
were then confined to a little compass. But the enclosure being of
curtains only intimated that the confinement of the church in one
particular nation was not to be perpetual. The dispensation itself was a
tabernacle-dispensation, movable and mutable, and in due time to be
taken down and folded up, when the place of the tent should be enlarged
and its cords lengthened, to make room for the Gentile world, as is
foretold, [Isa 54:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#002), [Isa
54:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#003). The church here on earth is but
the court of God's house, and happy they that tread these courts and
flourish in them; but through these courts we are passing to the holy
place above. Blessed are those that dwell in that house of God: they
well be still praising him. The enclosing of a court before the
tabernacle teaches us a gradual approach to God. The priests that
ministered must pass through the holy court, before they entered the
holy house. Thus before solemn ordinances there ought to be the
separated and enclosed court of a solemn preparation, in which we must
wash our hands, and so draw near with a true heart.

[Exodus 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 38:21</span></span>

Here we have a breviat of the account which, by Moses's appointment, the
Levites took and kept of the gold, silver, and brass, that was brought
in for the tabernacle's use, and how it was employed. Ithamar the son of
Aaron was appointed to draw up this account, and was thus by less
services trained up and fitted for greater, [Exo
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#021). Bezaleel and Aholiab must bring
in the account ([Exo 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#022), [Exo
38:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#023)), and Ithamar must audit it, and
give it in to Moses. And it was thus: - 1. All the gold was a free-will
offering; every man brought as he could and would, and it amounted to
twenty-nine talents, and 730 shekels over, which some compute to be
about 150,000l. worth of gold, according to the present value of it. Of
this were made all the golden furniture and vessels. 2. The silver was
levied by way of tax; every man was assessed half a shekel, a kind of
poll-money, which amounted in the whole to 100 talents, and 1775 shekels
over, [Exo 38:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#025), [Exo
38:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#026). Of this they made the sockets
into which the boards of the tabernacle were let, and on which they
rested; so that they were as the foundation of the tabernacle, [Exo
38:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#027). The silver amounted to about
34,000l. of our money. The raising of the gold by voluntary
contribution, and of the silver by way of tribute, shows that either way
may be taken for the defraying of public expenses, provided that nothing
be done with partiality. 3. The brass, though less valuable, was of use
not only for the brazen altar, but for the sockets of the court, which
probably in other tents were of wood: but it is promised ([Isa
60:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#017)), For wood I will bring brass.
See how liberal the people were and how faithful the workmen were, in
both which respects their good example ought to be followed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 39](exo039)

</div>
