<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo025)  [Next](exo027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 26:0</span></span>

Moses here receives instructions, I. Concerning the inner curtains of
the tent or tabernacle, and the coupling of those curtains ([Exo
26:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#001)). II. Concerning the outer
curtains which were of goats' hair, to strengthen the former ([Exo
26:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#007)). III. Concerning the case or
cover which was to secure it from the weather ([Exo
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#014)). IV. Concerning the boards
which were to be reared up to support the curtains, with their bars and
sockets (v. 15-30). V. The partition between the holy place and the most
holy ([Exo 26:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#031)). VI. The veil for
the door ([Exo 26:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#036), [Exo
26:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#037)). These particulars, thus
largely recorded, seem of little use to us now; yet, having been of
great use to Moses and Israel, and God having thought fit to preserve
down to us the remembrance of them, we ought not to overlook them. Even
the antiquity renders this account venerable.

[Exodus 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 26:1</span></span>

I. The house must be a tabernacle or tent, such as soldiers now use in
the camp, which was both a mean dwelling and a movable one; and yet the
ark of God had not better, till Solomon built the temple 480 years after
this, [Kg1 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001). God manifested his
presence among them thus in a tabernacle, 1. In compliance with their
present condition in the wilderness, that they might have him with them
wherever they went. Note, God suits the tokens of his favour, and the
gifts of his grace, to his people's wants and necessities, according as
they are, accommodating his mercy to their state, prosperous or adverse,
settled or unsettled. When thou passest through the waters, I will be
with thee, [Isa 43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002). 2. That it might
represent the state of God's church in this world, it is a
tabernacle-state, [Psa 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001). We have
here no continuing city; being strangers in this world, and travellers
towards a better, we shall never be fixed till we come to heaven.
Church-privileges are movable goods, from one place to another; the
gospel is not tied to any place; the candlestick is in a tent, and may
easily be taken away, [Rev 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#005). If we
make much of the tabernacle, and improve the privilege of it, wherever
we go it will accompany us; but, if we neglect and disgrace it, wherever
we stay it will forsake us. What hath my beloved to do in my house? [Jer
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#015).

II\. The curtains of the tabernacle must correspond to a divine pattern.
1. They were to be very rich, the best of the kind, fine twined linen;
and colours very pleasing, blue, and purple, and scarlet. 2. They were
to be embroidered with cherubim ([Exo
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#001)), to intimate that the angels of
God pitch their tents round about the church, [Psa
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007). As there were cherubim over the
mercy-seat, so there were round the tabernacle; for we find the angels
compassing, not only the throne, but the elders; see [Rev
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#011). 3. There were to be two
hangings, five breadths in each, sewed together, and the two hangings
coupled together with golden clasps, or tacks, so that it might be all
one tabernacle, [Exo 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#006). Thus the
churches of Christ and the saints, though they are many, are yet one,
being fitly joined together in holy love, and by the unity of the
Spirit, so growing into one holy temple in the Lord, [Eph
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#021), [Eph
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#022); [Eph
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016). This tabernacle was very strait
and narrow; but, at the preaching of the gospel, the church is bidden to
enlarge the place of her tent, and to stretch forth her curtains, [Isa
54:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#002).

[Exodus 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 26:7</span></span>

Moses is here ordered to make a double covering for the tabernacle, that
it might not rain in, and that the beauty of those fine curtains might
not be damaged. 1. There was to be a covering of hair camlet curtains,
which were somewhat larger every way than the inner curtains, because
they were to enclose them, and probably were stretched out at some
little distance from them, [Exo 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#007),
etc. These were coupled together with brass clasps. The stuff being less
valuable, the tacks were so; but the brass tacks would answer the
intention as effectually as the golden ones. The bonds of unity may be
as strong between curtains of goats' hair as between those of purple and
scarlet. 2. Over this there was to be another covering, and that a
double one ([Exo 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#014)), one of rams'
skins dyed red, probably dressed with the wool on; another of badgers'
skins, so we translate it, but it should rather seem to have been some
strong sort of leather (but very fine), for we read of the best sort of
shoes being made of it, [Eze 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010).
Now observe here, (1.) That the outside of the tabernacle was coarse and
rough, the beauty of it was in the inner curtains. Those in whom God
dwells must labour to be better than they seem to be. Hypocrites put the
best side outwards, like whited sepulchres; but the king's daughter is
all glorious within ([Psa 45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013)); in
the eye of the world black as the tents of Kedar, but, in the eye of
God, comely as the curtains of Solomon, [Sol
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#005). Let our adorning be that of the
hidden man of the heart, which God values, [Pe1
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#004). (2.) That where God places his
glory he will create a defence upon it; even upon the habitations of the
righteous there shall be a covert, [Isa
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005), [Isa
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#006). The protection of Providence
shall always be upon the beauty of holiness. God's tent will be a
pavilion, [Psa 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005).

[Exodus 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 26:15</span></span>

Very particular directions are here given about the boards of the
tabernacle, which were to bear up the curtains, as the stakes of a tent
which had need to be strong, [Isa
54:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#002). These boards had tenons which
fell into the mortises that were made for them in silver bases. God took
care to have every thing strong, as well as fine, in his tabernacle.
Curtains without boards would have been shaken by every wind; but it is
a good thing to have the heart established with grace, which is as the
boards to support the curtains of profession, which otherwise will not
hold out long. The boards were coupled together with gold rings at top
and bottom ([Exo 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#024)), and kept firm
with bars that ran through golden staples in every board ([Exo
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#026)), and the boards and bars were
all richly gilded, [Exo 26:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#029). Thus
every thing in the tabernacle was very splendid, agreeable to that
infant state of the church, when such things were proper enough to
please children, to possess the minds of the worshippers with a
reverence of the divine glory, and to affect them with the greatness of
that prince who said, Here will I dwell; in allusion to this the new
Jerusalem is said to be of pure gold, [Rev
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018). But the builders of the gospel
church said, Silver and gold have we none; and yet the glory of their
building far exceeded that of the tabernacle, [Co2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#010), [Co2
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#011). How much better is wisdom than
gold! No orders are given here about the floor of the tabernacle;
probably that also was boarded; for we cannot think that within all
these fine curtains they trod upon the cold or wet ground; if it was so
left, it may remind us of [Exo 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024),
An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me.

[Exodus 26:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 26:31</span></span>

Two veils are here ordered to be made, 1. One for a partition between
the holy place and the most holy, which not only forbade any to enter,
but forbade them so much as to look into the holiest of all, [Exo
26:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#031), [Exo
26:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#033). Under that dispensation, divine
grace was veiled, but now we behold it with open face, [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018). The apostle tells us ([Heb
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#008), [Heb
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009)) what was the meaning of this
veil; it intimated that the ceremonial law could not make the comers
thereunto perfect, nor would the observance of it bring men to heaven;
the way into the holiest of all was not made manifest while the first
tabernacle was standing; life and immortality lay concealed till they
were brought to light by the gospel, which was therefore signified by
the rending of this veil at the death of Christ, [Mat
27:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051). We have not boldness to enter
into the holiest, in all acts of devotion, by the blood of Jesus, yet
such as obliges us to a holy reverence and a humble sense of our
distance. 2. Another veil was for the outer door of the tabernacle, [Exo
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#036), [Exo
26:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#037). Through this first veil the
priests went in every day to minister in the holy place, but not the
people, [Heb 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#006). This veil, which was
all the defence the tabernacle had against thieves and robbers, might
easily be broken through, for it could be neither locked nor barred, and
the abundance of wealth in the tabernacle, one would think, might be a
temptation; but by leaving it thus exposed, (1.) The priests and Levites
would be so much the more obliged to keep a strict watch upon it, and,
(2.) God would show his care of his church on earth, though it is weak
and defenceless, and continually exposed. A curtain shall be (if God
please to make it so) as strong a defence to his house as gates of brass
and bars of iron.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 27](exo027)

</div>
