<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo027)  [Next](exo029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 28:0</span></span>

Orders being given for the fitting up of the place of worship, in this
and the following chapter care is taken about the priests that were to
minister in this holy place, as the menial servants of the God of
Israel. He hired servants, as a token of his purpose to reside among
them. In this chapter, I. He pitches upon the persons who should be his
servants ([Exo 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001)). II. He appoints
their livery; their work was holy, and so must their garments be, and
unanswerable to the glory of the house which was now to be erected ([Exo
28:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#002)). 1. He appoints the garments
of his head-servant, the high priest, which were very rich. (1.) An
ephod and girdle, ([Exo 28:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#006)). (2.)
A breast-plate of judgment ([Exo
28:15-29](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#015)), in which must be put the
urim and thummim ([Exo 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#030)). (3.)
The robe of the ephod ([Exo 28:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#031)).
(4.) The mitre ([Exo 28:36-39](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036)). 2. The
garments of the inferior priests ([Exo
28:40-43](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#040)). And these also were shadows
of good things to come.

[Exodus 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 28:1</span></span>

We have here,

I. The priests nominated: Aaron and his sons, [Exo
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001). Hitherto every master of a
family was priest to his own family, and offered, as he saw cause, upon
altars of earth; but now that the families of Israel began to be
incorporated into a nation, and a tabernacle of the congregation was to
be erected, as a visible centre of their unity, it was requisite there
should be a public priesthood instituted. Moses, who had hitherto
officiated, and is therefore reckoned among the priests of the Lord
([Psa 99:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006)), had enough to do as their
prophet to consult the oracle for them, and as their prince to judge
among them; nor was he desirous to engross all the honours to himself,
or to entail that of the priesthood, which alone was hereditary, upon
his own family, but was very well pleased to see his brother Aaron
invested in this office, and his sons after him, while (how great soever
he was) his sons after him would be but common Levites. It is an
instance of the humility of that great man, and an evidence of his
sincere regard for the glory of God, that he had so little regard to the
preferment of his own family. Aaron, who had humbly served as a prophet
to his younger brother Moses, and did not decline the office ([Exo
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)), is now advanced to be a priest,
a high priest to God; for he will exalt those that abase themselves. Nor
could any man have taken this honour to himself, but he that was called
of God to it, [Heb 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004). God had said
of Israel in general that they should be to him a kingdom of priests,
[Exo 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006). But because it was
requisite that those who ministered at the altar should give themselves
wholly to the service, and because that which is every body's work will
soon come to be nobody's work, God here chose from among them one to be
a family of priests, the father and his four sons; and from Aaron's
loins descended all the priests of the Jewish church, of whom we read so
often, both in the Old Testament and in the New. A blessed thing it is
when real holiness goes, as the ceremonial holiness did, by succession
in a family.

II\. The priests' garments appointed, for glory and beauty, [Exo
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#002). Some of the richest materials
were to be provided ([Exo 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#005)), and
the best artists employed in the making of them, whose skill God, by a
special gift for this purpose, would improve to a very high degree, [Exo
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#003). Note, Eminence, even in common
arts, is a gift of God, it comes from him, and, as there is occasion, it
ought to be used for him. He that teaches the husbandman discretion
teaches the tradesman also; both therefore ought to honour God with
their gain. Human learning ought particularly to be consecrated to the
service of the priesthood, and employed for the adorning of those that
minister about holy things. The garments appointed were, 1. Four, which
both the high priest and the inferior priests wore, namely, the linen
breeches, the linen coat, the linen girdle which fastened it to them,
and the bonnet or turban; that which the high priest wore is called a
mitre. 2. Four more, which were peculiar to the high priest, namely, the
ephod, with the curious girdle of it, the breast-plate of judgment, the
long robe with the bells and pomegranates at the bottom of it, and the
golden plate on his forehead. These glorious garments were appointed,
(1.) That the priests themselves might be reminded of the dignity of
their office, and might behave themselves with due decorum. (2.) That
the people might thereby be possessed with a holy reverence of that God
whose ministers appeared in such grandeur. (3.) That the priests might
be types of Christ, who should offer himself without spot to God, and of
all Christians, who have the beauty of holiness put upon them, in which
they are consecrated to God. Our adorning, now under the gospel, both
that of ministers and Christians, is not to be of gold, and pearl, and
costly array, but the garments of salvation, and the robe of
righteousness, [Isa 61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010); [Psa
132:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#009), [Psa
132:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#016). As the filthy garments
wherewith Joshua the high priest was clothed signified the iniquity
which cleaved to his priesthood, from which care was taken that it
should be purged ([Zac 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#003), [Zac
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#004).), so those holy garments
signified the perfect purity that there is in the priesthood of Christ;
he is holy, harmless, and undefiled.

[Exodus 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 28:6</span></span>

Directions are here given concerning the ephod, which was the outmost
garment of the high priest. Linen ephods were worn by the inferior
priests, [Sa1 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#018). Samuel wore one
when he was a child ([Sa1 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#018)), and
David when he danced before the ark ([Sa2
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#014)); but this which the high priest
only wore was called a golden ephod, because there was a great deal of
gold woven into it. It was a short coat without sleeves, buttoned
closely to him, with a curious girdle of the same stuff ([Exo
28:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#006)); the shoulder-pieces were
buttoned together with two precious stones set in gold, one on each
shoulder, on which were engraven the names of the children of Israel,
[Exo 28:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#009). In allusion to this, 1.
Christ our high priest appeared to John girt about the breast with a
golden girdle, such as was the curious girdle of the ephod, [Rev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013). Righteousness is the girdle of
his loins ([Isa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006)), and should be
of ours, [Eph 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014). He is girt with
strength for the work of our salvation, and is ready for it. 2. The
government is said to be upon his shoulders ([Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)), as Aaron had the names of all
Israel upon his shoulders in precious stone. He presents to himself and
to his Father a glorious church, [Eph
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027). He has power to support them,
interest to recommend them, and it is in him that they are remembered
with honour and favour. He bears them before the Lord for a memorial
([Exo 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#012)), in token of his
appearing before God as the representative of all Israel and an advocate
for them.

[Exodus 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 28:15</span></span>

The most considerable of the ornaments of the high priest was this
breast-plate, a rich piece of cloth, curiously wrought with gold and
purple, etc., two spans long and a span broad, so that, being doubled,
it was a span square, [Exo 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#016). This
was fastened to the ephod with wreathen chains of gold ([Exo
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#013), [Exo
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#014), [Exo
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#022), etc.) both at top and bottom,
so that the breast-plate might not be loosed from the ephod, [Exo
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#028). The ephod was the garment of
service; the breast-plate of judgment was an emblem of honour: these two
must by no means be separated. If any man will minister unto the Lord,
and do his will, he shall know his doctrine. In this breast-plate,

I. The tribes of Israel were recommended to God's favour in twelve
precious stones, [Exo 28:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#017), [Exo
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#019). Some question whether Levi had
a precious stone with his name or no. If not, Ephraim and Manasseh were
reckoned distinct, as Jacob had said they should be, and the high priest
himself, being head of the tribe of Levi, sufficiently represented that
tribe. If there was a stone for Levi, as is intimated by this, that they
were engraven according to their birth ([Exo
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#010)), Ephraim and Manasseh were one
in Joseph. Aaron was to bear their names for a memorial before the Lord
continually, being ordained for men, to represent them in things
pertaining to God, herein typifying our great high priest, who always
appears in the presence of God for us. 1. Though the people were
forbidden to come near, and obliged to keep their distance, yet by the
high priest, who had their names on his breast-plate, they entered into
the holiest; so believers, even while they are here on this earth, not
only enter into the holiest, but by faith are made to sit with Christ in
heavenly places, [Eph 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006). 2. The name
of each tribe was engraven in a precious stone, to signify how precious,
in God's sight, believers are, and how honourable, [Isa
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#004). They shall be his in the day he
makes up his jewels, [Mal 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#017). How
small and poor soever the tribe was, it was a precious stone in the
breast-plate of the high priest; thus are all the saints dear to Christ,
and his delight is in them as the excellent ones of the earth, however
men may esteem them as earthen pitchers, [Lam
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#002). 3. The high priest had the names
of the tribes both on his shoulders and on his breast, intimating both
the power and the love with which our Lord Jesus intercedes for those
that are his. He not only bears them up upon his heart, as the
expression here is ([Exo 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#029)),
carries them in his bosom ([Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011)), with the most tender
affection. How near should Christ's name be to our hearts, since he is
pleased to lay our names so near his! and what a comfort it is to us, in
all our addresses to God, that the great high priest of our profession
has the names of all his Israel upon his breast before the Lord for a
memorial, presenting them to God as the people of his choice, who were
to be made accepted in the beloved! Let not any good Christians fear
that God has forgotten them, nor question his being mindful of them upon
all occasions, when they are not only engraven upon the palms of his
hands ([Isa 49:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#016)), but engraven upon
the heart of the great intercessor. See [Sol
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006).

II\. The urim and thummim, by which the will of God was made known in
doubtful cases, were put in this breast-plate, which is therefore called
the breast-plate of judgment, [Exo
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#030). Urim and thummim signify light
and integrity; many conjectures there are among the learned what they
were; we have no reason to think they were any thing that Moses was to
make more than what was before ordered, so that either God made them
himself, and gave them to Moses, for him to put into the breast-plate,
when other things were prepared ([Lev
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#008)), or no more is meant than a
declaration of the further use of what was already ordered to be made. I
think the words may be read thus, And thou shalt give, or add, or
deliver, to the breast-plate of judgment, the illuminations and
perfections, and they shall be upon the heart of Aaron; that is, "He
shall be endued with a power of knowing and making known the mind of God
in all difficult doubtful cases, relating either to the civil or
ecclesiastical state of the nation." Their government was a theocracy:
God was their King, the high priest was, under God, their ruler, the
urim and thummim were his cabinet-council; probably Moses wrote upon the
breast-plate, or wove into it, these words, Urim and Thummim, to signify
that the high priest, having on him this breast-plate, and asking
counsel of God in any emergency relating to the public, should be
directed to take those measures, and give that advice, which God would
own. If he was standing before the ark (but without the veil) probably
he received instructions from off the mercy-seat, as Moses did ([Exo
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022)); thus, it should seem, Phinehas
did, [Jdg 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#027), [Jdg
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#028). If he was at a distance from
the ark, as Abiathar was when he enquired of the Lord for David ([Sa1
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#006), etc.), then the answer was given
either by a voice from heaven or rather by an impulse upon the mind of
the high priest, which last is perhaps intimated in that expression, He
shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart. This
oracle was of great use to Israel; Joshua consulted it ([Num
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#021)), and, it is likely, the judges
after him. It was lost in the captivity, and never regained after,
though, it should seem, it was expected, [Ezr
2:63](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#063). But it was a shadow of good
things to come, and the substance is Christ. He is our oracle; by him
God in these last days makes known himself and his mind to us, [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002); [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018). Divine revelation centres in
him, and comes to us through him; he is the light, the true light, the
faithful witness, the truth itself, and from him we receive the Spirit
of truth, who leads into all truth. The joining of the breast-plate to
the ephod denotes that his prophetical office was founded in his
priesthood; and it was by the merit of his death that he purchased this
honour for himself and this favour for us. It was the Lamb that had been
slain that was worthy to take the book and to open the seals, [Rev
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009).

[Exodus 28:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 28:31</span></span>

Here is, 1. Direction given concerning the robe of the ephod, [Exo
28:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#031). This was next under the
ephod, and reached down to the knees, was without sleeves, and was put
on over their head, having holes on the sides to put the arms through,
or, as Maimonides describes it, was not sewed together on the sides at
all. The hole on the top, through which the head was put, was carefully
bound about, that it might not tear in the putting on. In religious
worship, care must be taken to prevent every thing that may distract the
minds of the worshippers, or render the service despicable. Round the
skirts of the robe were hung golden bells, and the representations of
pomegranates made of yarn of divers colours. The pomegranates added to
the beauty of the robe, and the sound of the bells gave notice to the
people in the outer court when he went into the holy place to burn
incense, that they might then apply themselves to their devotions at the
same time ([Luk 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#010)), in token of
their concurrence with him in his offering, and their hopes of the
ascent of their prayers to God in virtue of the incense he offered.
Aaron must come near to minister in the garments that were appointed
him, that he die not. It is at his peril if he attend otherwise than
according to the institution. This intimates that we must serve the Lord
with fear and holy trembling, as those that know we deserve to die, and
are in danger of making some fatal mistake. Some make the bells of the
holy robe to typify the sound of the gospel of Christ in the world,
giving notice of his entrance within the veil for us. Blessed are those
that hear this joyful sound, [Psa
89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015). The adding of the pomegranates,
which are a fragrant fruit, denotes the sweet savour of the gospel, as
well as the joyful sound of it, for it is a savour of life unto life.
The church is called an orchard of pomegranates. 2. Concerning the
golden plate fixed upon Aaron's forehead, on which must be engraven,
Holiness to the Lord ([Exo 28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036), [Exo
28:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#037)), or The holiness of Jehovah.
Aaron must hereby be reminded that God is holy, and that his priests
must be holy. Holiness becomes his house and household. The high priest
must be sequestered from all pollution, and consecrated to God and to
his service and honour, and so must all his ministrations be. All that
attend in God's house must have Holiness to the Lord engraven upon their
foreheads, that is, they must be holy, devoted to the Lord, and
designing his glory in all they do. This must appear in their forehead,
in an open profession of their relation to God, as those that are not
ashamed to own it, and in a conversation in the world answerable to it.
It must likewise be engraven like the engravings of a signet, so deep,
so durable, not painted to be washed off, but sincere and lasting; such
must our holiness to the Lord be. Aaron must have this upon his
forehead, that he may bear the iniquity of the holy things ([Exo
28:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#038)), and that they may be accepted
before the Lord. Herein he was a type of Christ, the great Mediator
between God and man, through whom it is that we have to do with God.
(1.) Through him what is amiss in our services is pardoned. The divine
law is strict; in many things we come short of our duty, so that we
cannot but be conscious to ourselves of much iniquity cleaving even to
our holy things; when we would do good evil is present; even this would
be our ruin if God should enter into judgment with us. But Christ, our
high priest, bears this iniquity, bears it for us so as to bear it from
us, and through him it is forgiven to us and not laid to our charge.
(2.) Through him what is good is accepted; our persons, our
performances, are pleasing to God upon the account of Christ's
intercession, and not otherwise, [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005). His being holiness to the Lord
recommends all those to the divine favour that are interested in his
righteousness, and clothed with his Spirit; and therefore he has said it
was for our sakes that he sanctified himself, [Joh
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019). Having such a high priest, we
come boldly to the throne of grace, [Heb
4:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014). 3. The rest of the garments
are but named ([Exo 28:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#039)), because
there was nothing extraordinary in them. The embroidered coat of fine
linen was the innermost of the priestly garments; it reached to the
feet, and the sleeves to the wrists, and was bound to the body with a
girdle or sash of needle-work. The mitre, or diadem, was of linen, such
as kings anciently wore in the east, typifying the kingly office of
Christ. He is a priest upon a throne ([Zac
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013)), a priest with a crown. These
two God has joined, and we must not think to separate them.

[Exodus 28:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">exo 28:40</span></span>

We have here, 1. Particular orders about the vestments of the inferior
priests. They were to have coats, and girdles, and bonnets, of the same
materials with those of the high priest; but there was a difference in
shape between their bonnets and his mitre. Theirs, as his, were to be
for glory and beauty ([Exo 28:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#040)),
that they might look great in their ministration: yet all this glory was
nothing compared with the glory of grace, this beauty nothing to the
beauty of holiness, of which these holy garments were typical. They are
particularly ordered, in their ministration, to wear linen breeches,
[Exo 28:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#042). This teaches us modesty
and decency of garb and gesture at all times, especially in public
worship, in which a veil is becoming, [Co1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005), [Co1
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#006), [Co1
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010). It also intimates what need our
souls have of a covering, when we come before God, that the shame of
their nakedness may not appear. 2. A general rule concerning the
garments both of the high priest and of the inferior priests, that they
were to be put upon them, at first, when they were consecrated, in token
of their being invested in the office ([Exo
28:41](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#041)), and then they were to wear
them in all their ministrations, but not at other times ([Exo
28:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#043)), and this at their peril, lest
they bear iniquity and die. Those who are guilty of omissions in duty,
as well as omissions of duty, shall bear their iniquity. If the priests
perform the instituted service, and do not do it in the appointed
garments, it is (say the Jewish doctors) as if a stranger did it, and
the stranger that comes nigh shall be put to death. Nor will God connive
at the presumptions and irreverences even of those whom he causes to
draw most near to him; if Aaron himself put a slight upon the divine
institution, he shall bear iniquity, and die. To us these garments
typify, (1.) The righteousness of Christ; if we appear not before God in
this, we shall bear iniquity and die. What have we to do at the
wedding-feast without a wedding-garment, or at God's altar without the
array of his priests? [Mat 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#012), [Mat
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013). (2.) The armour of God
prescribed [Eph 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013). If we venture
without that armour, our spiritual enemies will be the death of our
souls, and we shall bear the iniquity, our blood will be upon our own
heads. Blessed is he therefore that watcheth, and keepeth his garments,
[Rev 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#015). 3. This is said to be a
statute for ever, that is, it is to continue as long as the priesthood
continues. But it is to have its perpetuity in the substance of which
these things were the shadows.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 29](exo029)

</div>
