<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo020)  [Next](exo022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 21:0</span></span>

The laws recorded in this chapter relate to the fifth and sixth
commandments; and though they are not accommodated to our constitution,
especially in point of servitude, nor are the penalties annexed binding
on us, yet they are of great use for the explanation of the moral law,
and the rules of natural justice. Here are several enlargements, I. Upon
the fifth commandment, which concerns particular relations. 1. The duty
of masters towards their servants, their men-servants ([Exo
21:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#002)), and the maidservants ([Exo
21:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#007)). 2. The punishment of
disobedient children that strike their parents ([Exo
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#015)), or curse them ([Exo
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#017)). II. Upon the sixth
commandment, which forbids all violence offered to the person of a man.
Here is, 1. Concerning murder ([Exo
21:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#012)). 2. Man-stealing ([Exo
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#016)). 3. Assault and battery ([Exo
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#018), [Exo
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#019)). 4. Correcting a servant ([Exo
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#020), [Exo
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#021)). 5. Hurting a woman with child
([Exo 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#022), [Exo
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#023)). 6. The law of retaliation
([Exo 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#024), [Exo
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#025)). 7. Maiming a servant ([Exo
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#026), [Exo
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#027)). 8. An ox goring ([Exo
21:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#028)). 9. Damage by opening a pit
([Exo 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#033), [Exo
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#034)). 10. Cattle fighting ([Exo
21:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#035), [Exo
21:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#036)).

[Exodus 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 21:1</span></span>

The first verse is the general title of the laws contained in this and
the two following chapters, some of them relating to the religious
worship of God, but most of them relating to matters between man and
man. Their government being purely a Theocracy, that which in other
states is to be settled by human prudence was directed among them by a
divine appointment, so that the constitution of their government was
peculiarly adapted to make them happy. These laws are called judgments,
because they are framed in infinite wisdom and equity, and because their
magistrates were to give judgment according to the people. In the
doubtful cases that had hitherto occurred, Moses had particularly
enquired of God for them, as appeared, [Exo
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#015); but now God gave him statutes
in general by which to determine particular cases, which likewise he
must apply to other like cases that might happen, which, falling under
the same reason, fell under the same rule. He begins with the laws
concerning servants, commanding mercy and moderation towards them. The
Israelites had lately been servants themselves; and now that they had
become, not only their own masters, but masters of servants too, lest
they should abuse their servants, as they themselves had been abused and
ruled with rigour by the Egyptian task-masters, provision was made by
these laws for the mild and gentle usage of servants. Note, If those who
have had power over us have been injurious to us this will not in the
least excuse us if we be in like manner injurious to those who are under
our power, but will rather aggravate our crime, because, in that case,
we may the more easily put our souls into their soul's stead. Here is,

I. A law concerning men-servants, sold, either by themselves or their
parents, through poverty, or by the judges, for their crimes; even those
of the latter sort (if Hebrews) were to continue in slavery but seven
years at the most, in which time it was taken for granted that they
would sufficiently have smarted for their folly or offence. At the seven
years' end the servant should either go out free ([Exo
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#002), [Exo
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#003)), or his servitude should
thenceforward be his choice, [Exo
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#005), [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006). If he had a wife given him by
his master, and children, he might either leave them and go out free
himself, or, if he had such a kindness for them that he would rather
tarry with them in bondage than go out at liberty without them, he was
to have his ear bored through to the doorpost and serve till the death
of his master, or the year of jubilee.

1\. By this law God taught, (1.) The Hebrew servants generosity, and a
noble love of liberty, for they were the Lord's freemen; a mark of
disgrace must be put upon him who refused liberty when he might have it,
though he refused it upon considerations otherwise laudable enough. Thus
Christians, being bought with a price, and called unto liberty, must not
be the servants of men, nor of the lusts of men, [Co1
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#023). There is a free and princely
spirit that much helps to uphold a Christian, [Psa
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012). He likewise taught, (2.) The
Hebrew masters not to trample upon their poor servants, knowing, not
only that they had been by birth upon a level with them, but that, in a
few years, they would be so again. Thus Christian masters must look with
respect on believing servants, [Plm
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#016).

2\. This law will be further useful to us, (1.) To illustrate the right
God has to the children of believing parents, as such, and the place
they have in his church. They are by baptism enrolled among his
servants, because they are born in his house, for they are therefore
born unto him, [Eze 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020). David owns
himself God's servant, as he was the son of his handmaid ([Psa
116:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016)), and therefore entitled to
protection, [Psa 86:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#016). (2.) To
explain the obligation which the great Redeemer laid upon himself to
prosecute the work of our salvation, for he says ([Psa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006)), My ears hast thou opened, which
seems to allude to this law. He loved his Father, and his captive
spouse, and the children that were given him, and would not go out free
from his undertaking, but engaged to serve in it for ever, [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001), [Isa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004). Much more reason have we thus to
engage ourselves to serve God for ever; we have all the reason in the
world to love our Master and his work, and to have our ears bored to his
door-posts, as those who desire not to go out free from his service, but
to be found more and more free to it, and in it, [Psa
84:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#010).

Concerning maid-servants, whom their parents, through extreme poverty,
had sold, when they were very young, to such as they hoped would marry
them when they grew up; if they did not, yet they must not sell them to
strangers, but rather study how to make them amends for the
disappointment; if they did, they must maintain them handsomely, [Exo
21:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#007). Thus did God provide for the
comfort and reputation of the daughters of Israel, and has taught
husbands to give honour to their wives (be their extraction ever so
mean) as to the weaker vessels, [Pe1
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#007).

[Exodus 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 21:12</span></span>

Here is, I. A law concerning murder. He had lately said, Thou shalt not
kill; here he provides, 1. For the punishing of wilful murder ([Exo
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#012)): He that smiteth a man, whether
upon a sudden passion or in malice prepense, so that he die, the
government must take care that the murderer be put to death, according
to that ancient law ([Gen 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006)), Whoso
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. God, who by his
providence gives and maintains life, thus by his law protects it; so
that mercy shown to a wilful murderer is real cruelty to all mankind
besides: such a one, God here says, shall be taken even from his altar
([Exo 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#014)), to which he might flee
for protection; and, if God will not shelter him, let him flee to the
pit, and let no man stay him. 2. For the relief of such as killed by
accident, per infortunium - by misfortune, or chance-medley, as our law
expresses it, when a man, in doing a lawful act, without intent of hurt
to any, happens to kill another, or, as it is here described, God
delivers him into his hand; for nothing comes to pass by chance; what
seems to us purely casual is ordered by the divine Providence, for wise
and holy ends secret to us. In this case God provided cities of refuge
for the protection of those whose infelicity it was, but not their
fault, to occasion the death of another, [Exo
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#013). With us, who know no avengers
of blood but the magistrates, the law itself is a sufficient sanctuary
for those whose minds are innocent, though their hands are guilty, and
there needs no other.

II\. Concerning rebellious children. It is here made a capital crime, to
be punished with death, for children either, 1. To strike their parents
([Exo 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#015)) so as either to draw
blood or to make the place struck black and blue. Or, 2. To curse their
parents ([Exo 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#017)), if they profaned
any name of God in doing it, as the rabbies say. Note, The undutiful
behaviour of children towards their parents is a very great provocation
to God our common Father; and, if men do not punish it, he will. Those
are perfectly lost to all virtue, and abandoned to all wickedness, that
have broken through the bonds of filial reverence and duty to such a
degree as in word or action to abuse their own parents. What yoke will
those bear that have shaken off this? Let children take heed of
entertaining in their minds any such thought or passions towards their
parents as savour of undutifulness and contempt; for the righteous God
searches the heart.

III\. Here is a law against man-stealing ([Exo
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#016)): He that steals a man (that is,
a person, man, woman, or child), with design to sell him to the Gentiles
(for no Israelite would buy him), was adjudged to death by this statute,
which is ratified by the apostle ([Ti1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#010)), where men-stealers are reckoned
among those wicked ones against whom laws must be made by Christian
princes.

IV\. Care is here taken that satisfaction be made for hurt done to a
person, though death do not ensue, [Exo
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#018), [Exo
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#019). He that did the hurt must be
accountable for damages, and pay, not only for the cure, but for the
loss of time, to which the Jews add that he must likewise give some
recompence both for the pain and for the blemish, if there were any.

V. Direction is given what should be done if a servant died by his
master's correction. This servant must not be an Israelite, but a
Gentile slave, as the negroes to our planters; and it is supposed that
he smite him with a rod, and not with any thing that was likely to give
a mortal wound; yet, if he died under his hand, he should be punished
for his cruelty, at the discretion of the judges, upon consideration of
circumstances, [Exo 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#020). But, if he
continued a day or two after the correction given, the master was
supposed to suffer enough by losing his servant, [Exo
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#021). Our law makes the death of a
servant, by his master's reasonable beating of him, but chance-medley.
Yet let all masters take heed of tyrannizing over their servants; the
gospel teaches them even to forbear and moderate threatenings ([Eph
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009)), considering with holy Job, What
shall I do, when God riseth up? [Job
31:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#013).

[Exodus 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 21:22</span></span>

Observe here,

I. The particular care which the law took of women with child, that no
hurt should be done them which might occasion their mis-carrying. The
law of nature obliges us to be very tender in that case, lest the tree
and fruit be destroyed together, [Exo
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#022), [Exo
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#023). Women with child, who are thus
taken under the special protection of the law of God, if they live in
his fear, may still believe themselves under the special protection of
the providence of God, and hope that they shall be saved in
child-bearing. On this occasion comes in that general law of retaliation
which our Saviour refers to, [Mat
5:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038), An eye for an eye. Now, 1. The
execution of this law is not hereby put into the hands of private
persons, as if every man might avenge himself, which would introduce
universal confusion, and make men like the fishes of the sea. The
tradition of the elders seems to have put this corrupt gloss upon it, in
opposition to which our Saviour commands us to forgive injuries, and not
to meditate revenge, [Mat 5:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039). 2. God
often executes it in the course of his providence, making the
punishment, in many cases, to answer to the sin, as [Jdg
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#007); [Isa
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001); [Hab
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#013); [Mat
26:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#052). 3. Magistrates ought to have an
eye to this rule in punishing offenders, and doing right to those that
are injured. Consideration must be had of the nature, quality, and
degree of the wrong done, that reparation may be made to the party
injured, and others deterred from doing the like; either an eye shall go
for an eye, or the forfeited eye shall be redeemed by a sum of money.
Note, He that does wrong must expect one way or other to receive
according to the wrong he has done, [Col
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#025). God sometimes brings men's
violent dealings upon their own heads ([Psa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016)); and magistrates are in this the
ministers of the justice, that they are avengers ([Rom
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004)), and they shall not bear the
sword in vain.

II\. The care God took of servants. If their masters maimed them, though
it was only striking out a tooth, that should be their discharge, [Exo
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#026), [Exo
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#027). This was intended, 1. To
prevent their being abused; masters would be careful not to offer them
any violence, lest they should lose their service. 2. To comfort them if
they were abused; the loss of a limb should be the gaining of their
liberty, which would do something towards balancing both the pain and
disgrace they underwent. Nay,

III\. Does God take care for oxen? Yes, it appears by the following laws
in this chapter that he does, for our sakes, [Co1
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009), [Co1
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#010). The Israelites are here directed
what to do,

1\. In case of hurt done by oxen, or any other brute-creature; for the
law, doubtless, was designed to extend to all parallel cases. (1.) As an
instance of God's care of the life of man (though forfeited a thousand
times into the hands of divine justice), and in token of his detestation
of the sin of murder. If an ox killed any man, woman, or child, the ox
was to be stoned ([Exo 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#028)); and,
because the greatest honour of the inferior creatures is to be
serviceable to man, the criminal is denied that honour: his flesh shall
not be eaten. Thus God would keep up in the minds of his people a rooted
abhorrence of the sin of murder and every thing that was barbarous. (2.)
To make men careful that none of their cattle might do hurt, but that,
by all means possible, mischief might be prevented. If the owner of the
beast knew that he was mischievous, he must answer for the hurt done,
and, according as the circumstances of the case proved him to be more or
less accessory, he must either be put to death or ransom his life with a
sum of money, [Exo 21:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#029). Some of
our ancient books make this felony, by the common law of England, and
give this reason, "The owner, by suffering his beast to go at liberty
when he knew it to be mischievous, shows that he was very willing that
hurt should be done." Note, It is not enough for us not to do mischief
ourselves, but we must take care that no mischief be done by those whom
it is in our power to restrain, whether man or beast.

2\. In case of hurt done to oxen, or other cattle. (1.) If they fall
into a pit, and perish there, he that opened the pit must make good the
loss, [Exo 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#033), [Exo
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#034). Note, We must take heed not
only of doing that which will be hurtful, but of doing that which may be
so. It is not enough not to design and devise mischief, but we must
contrive to prevent mischief, else we become accessory to our
neighbours' damage. Mischief done in malice is the great transgression;
but mischief done through negligence, and for want of due care and
consideration, is not without fault, but ought to be reflected upon with
great regret, according as the degree of the mischief is: especially we
must be careful that we do nothing to make ourselves accessory to the
sins of others, by laying an occasion of offence in our brother's way,
[Rom 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#013). (2.) If cattle fight, and
one kill another, the owners shall equally share in the loss, [Exo
21:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#035). Only if the beast that had done
the harm was known to the owner to have been mischievous he shall answer
for the damage, because he ought either to have killed him or kept him
up, [Exo 21:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#036). The determinations of
these cases carry with them the evidence of their own equity, and give
such rules of justice as were then, and are still, in use, for the
decision of similar controversies that arise between man and man. But I
conjecture that these cases might be specified, rather than others
(though some of them seem minute), because they were then cases in fact
actually depending before Moses; for in the wilderness where they lay
closely encamped, and had their flocks and herds among them, such
mischiefs as these last mentioned were likely enough to occur. That
which we are taught by these laws is that we should be very careful to
do no wrong, either directly or indirectly; and that, if we have done
wrong, we must be very willing to make satisfaction, and desirous that
nobody may lose by us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 22](exo022)

</div>
