<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze010)  [Next](eze012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 11:0</span></span>

This chapter concludes the vision which Ezekiel saw, and this part of it
furnished him with two messages: - I. A message of wrath against those
who continued still at Jerusalem, and were there in the height of
presumption, thinking they should never fall ([Eze
11:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001)). II. A message of comfort to
those who were carried captives into Babylon and were there in the depth
of despondency, thinking they should never rise. And, as the former are
assured that God has judgments in store for them notwithstanding their
present security, so the later are assured that God has mercy in store
for them notwithstanding their present distress ([Eze
11:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#014)). And so the glory of God
removes further ([Eze 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#022), [Eze
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#023)). The vision disappears ([Eze
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#024)), and Ezekiel faithfully gives
his hearers an account of it ([Eze
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#025)).

[Ezekiel 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 11:1</span></span>

We have here,

I. The great security of the prince's of Jerusalem, notwithstanding the
judgements of God that were upon them, The prophet was brought, in
vision, to the gate of the temple where these princes sat in council
upon the present arduous affairs of the city: The Spirit lifted me up,
and brought me to the east gate of the Lord's house, and behold
twenty-five men were there. See how obsequious the prophet was to the
Spirit's orders and how observant of all the discoveries that were made
to him. It should seem, these twenty-five men were not the same with
those twenty-five whom we saw at the door of the temple, worshipping
towards the east ([Eze 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#016)); those
seen to have been priests or Levites, for they were between the porch
and the altar, but these were princes sitting in the gate of the Lord's
house, to try causes ([Jer 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#010)), and
they are here charged, not with corruptions in worship, but with
mal-administration in the government; two of them are named, because
they were the most active leading men, and perhaps because the prophet
knew them, though he had been some years absent - Pelatiah and
Jaazaniah, not that mentioned [Eze
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#011), for he was the son of Shaphan,
this is the son of Azur. Some tell us that Jerusalem was divided into
twenty-four wards, and that these were the governors or aldermen of
those wards, with their mayor or president. Now observe, 1. The general
character which God gives of these men to the prophet ([Eze
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#002)): "These are the men that devise
mischief; under pretence of concerting measures for the public safety
they harden people in their sins, and take off their fear of God's
judgements which they are threatened with by the prophets; they gave
wicked counsel in this city, counselling them to restrain and silence
the prophets, to rebel against the king of Babylon, and to resolve upon
holding the city out to the last extremity." Note, It is bad with a
people when the things that belong to their peace are hidden from the
eyes of those who are entrusted with their counsels. And, when mischief
is done, God knows at whose door to lay it, and, in the day of discovery
and recompence, will be sure to lay it at the right door, and will say,
These are the men that devised it, though they are great men, and pass
for wise men, and must not now be contradicted or controlled. 2. The
particular charge exhibited against them in proof of this character.
They are indicted for words spoken at their council-board, which he that
stands in the congregation of the mighty would take cognizance of ([Eze
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#003)); they said to this effect, "It
is not near; the destruction of our city, that has been so often
threatened by the prophets, is not near, not so near as they talk of."
They are conscious to themselves of such an enmity to reformation that
they cannot but conclude it will come at last; but they have such an
opinion of God's patience (though they have long abused it) that they
are willing to hope it will not come this great while. Note, Where Satan
cannot persuade men to look upon the judgement to come as a thing
doubtful and uncertain, yet he gains his point by persuading them to
look upon it as a thing at a distance, so that it loses its force: if it
be sure, yet it is not near; whereas, in truth, the Judge stands before
the door. Now, if the destruction is not near, they conclude, Let us
build houses; let us count upon a continuance, for this city is the
caldron and we are the flesh. This seems to be a proverbial expression,
signifying no more than this, "We are as safe in this city as flesh in a
boiling pot; the walls of the city shall be to us as walls of brass, and
shall receive no more damage from the besiegers about it than the
cauldron does from the fire under it. Those that think to force us out
of our city into captivity shall find it to be as much at their peril as
it would be to take the flesh out of a boiling pot with their hands."
This appears to be the meaning of it, by the answer God gives to it
([Eze 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#009)): "I will bring you out of
the midst of the city, where you think yourselves safe, and then it will
appear ([Eze 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#011)) that this is not
your caldron, neither are you the flesh." Perhaps it has a particular
reference to the flesh of the peace-offerings, which it was so great an
offence for the priests themselves to take out of the caldron while it
was in seething (as we find [Sa1 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#013),
[Sa1 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#014)), and then it intimates that
they were the more secure because Jerusalem was the holy city, and they
thought themselves a holy people in it, not to be meddled with. Some
think this was a banter upon Jeremiah, who in one of his first visions
saw Jerusalem represented by a seething pot, [Jer
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013). "Now," say they, in a way of
jest and ridicule, "if it be a seething pot, we are as the flesh in it,
and who dares meddle with us?" Thus they continued mocking the
messengers of the Lord, even while they suffered for so doing; but be
you not mockers, lest your bands be made strong. Those hearts are indeed
which are made more secure by those words of God which were designed for
warning to them.

II\. The method taken to awaken them out of their security. One would
think that the providences of God which related to them were enough to
startle them; but, to help them to understand and improve those, the
word of God is sent to them to give them warning ([Eze
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#004)): Therefore prophesy against
them, and try to undeceive them; prophesy, O son of man! upon these dead
and dry bones. Note, The greatest kindness ministers can do to secure
sinners is to preach against them, and to show them their misery and
danger, though they are ever so unwilling to see them. We then act most
for them when we appear most against them. But the prophet, being at a
loss what to say to men that were hardened in sin, and that bade
defiance to the judgments of God, the Spirit of the Lord fell upon him,
to make him full of power and courage, and said unto him, Speak. Note,
When sinners are flattering themselves into their own ruin it is time to
speak, and to tell them that they shall have no peace if they go on.
Ministers are sometimes so bashful and timorous, and so much at a loss,
that they must be put on to speak, and to speak boldly. But he that
commands the prophet to speak gives him instructions what to say; and he
must address himself to them as the house of Israel ([Eze
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#005)), for not the princes only, but
all the people, were concerned to know the truth of their cause, to know
the worst of it. They are the house of Israel, and therefore the God of
Israel is concerned, in kindness to them, to give them warning; and they
are concerned in duty to him to take the warning. And what is it that
the must say to them in God's name? 1. Let them know that the God of
heaven takes notice of the vain confidences with which they support
themselves ([Eze 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#005)): "I know the
things which come into your minds every one of them, what secret reasons
you have for these resolutions, and what you aim at in putting so good a
face upon a matter you know to be bad." Note, God perfectly knows not
only the things that come out of our mouths, but the things that come
into our minds, not only all we say, but all we think; even those
thoughts that are most suddenly darted into our minds, and that as
suddenly slip out of them again, so that we ourselves are scarcely aware
of them, yet God knows them. He knows us better than we know ourselves;
he understands our thoughts afar off. The consideration of this should
oblige us to keep our hearts with all diligence, that no vain thoughts
come into them or lodge within them. 2. Let them know that those who
advised the people to stand it out should be accounted before God the
murderers of all who had fallen, or should yet fall, in Jerusalem, by
the sword of the Chaldeans; and those slain were the only ones that
should remain in the city, as the flesh in the caldron. "You have
multiplied your slain in the city, not only those whom you have by the
sword of justice unjustly put to death under colour of law, but those
whom you have by your wilfulness and pride unwisely exposed to the sword
of war, though you were told by the prophets that you should certainly
go by the worst. Thus you, with your stubborn humour, have filled the
streets of Jerusalem with the slain," [Eze
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#006). Note, Those who are either
unrighteous or imprudent in beginning or carrying on a war bring upon
themselves a great deal of the guilt of blood; and those who are slain
in the battles or sieges which they, by such a reasonable peace as the
war aimed at, might have prevented, will be called their slain. Now
these slain are the only flesh that shall be left in this caldron, [Eze
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#007). There shall none remain to keep
possession of the city but those that are buried in it. There shall be
no inhabitants of Jerusalem but the inhabitants of the graves there, no
freemen of the city but the free among the dead. 3. Let them know that,
how impregnable soever they thought their city to be, they should be
forced out of it, either driven to flight or dragged into captivity: I
will bring you forth out of the midst of it, whether you will or no,
[Eze 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#007), [Eze
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#009). They had provoked God to forsake
the city, and thought they should do well enough by their own policy and
strength when he was gone; but God will make them know that there is no
peace to those that have left their God. If they have by their sins
driven God from his house, he will soon by his judgments drive them from
theirs; and it will be found that those are least safe that are most
secure: "This city shall not be your caldron, neither shall you be the
flesh; you shall not soak away in it as you promise yourselves, and die
in your nest; you think yourself safe in the midst thereof, but you
shall not be long there." 4. Let them know that when God has got them
out of the midst of Jerusalem he will pursue them with his judgments
wherever he finds them, the judgments which they thought to shelter
themselves from by keeping close in Jerusalem. They feared the sword if
they should go out to the Chaldeans, and therefore would abide in their
caldron, but, says God, I will bring a sword upon you ([Eze
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#008)) and you shall fall by the sword,
[Eze 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#010). Note, The fear of the
wicked shall come upon him. And there is no fence against the judgments
of God when they come with commission, no, not in walls of brass. They
were afraid of trusting to the mercy of strangers. "But," says God, "I
will deliver you into the hands of strangers, whose resentments you
shall feel, since you were not willing to lie at their mercy." See [Jer
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#017), [Jer
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#018). They thought to escape the
judgments of God, but God says that he will execute judgments upon them;
and whereas they resolved, if they must be judged, that it should be in
Jerusalem, God tells them ([Eze 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#010)
and again [Eze 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#011)) that he will
judge them in the borders of Israel, which was fulfilled when
Nebuchadnezzar slew all the nobles of Judah at Riblah in the land of
Hamath, on the utmost border of the land of Canaan. Note, Those who have
taken ever so deep root in the place where they live cannot be sure that
in that place they shall die. 5. Let them know that all this is the due
punishment of their sin, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of
God against them: You shall know that I am the Lord, [Eze
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#010) and again [Eze
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#012). Those shall be made to know by
the sword of the Lord who would not be taught by his word what a hatred
he has to sin, and what a fearful thing it is for impenitent sinners to
fall into his hands. I will execute judgments, and then you shall know
that I am the Lord, for the Lord is known by the judgments which he
executes upon those that have not walked in his statutes. Hereby it is
known that he made the law, because he punishes the breach of it. I will
execute judgments among you (says God) because you have not executed my
judgments, [Eze 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#012). Note, The
executing of the judgments of God's mouth by us, in a uniform steady
course of obedience to his law, is the only way to prevent the executing
of the judgments of his hand upon us in our ruin and confusion. One way
or other. God's judgments will be executed; the law will take place
either in its precept or in its penalty. If we do not give honour to God
by executing his judgments as he has commanded, he will get him honour
upon us by executing his judgments as he has threatened; and thus we
shall know that he is the Lord, the sovereign Lord of all, that will not
be mocked. And observe, When they cast off God's statutes, and walked
not in them, they did after the manners of the heathen that were round
about them, and introduced into their worship all their impure,
ridiculous, and barbarous usages. When men leave the settled rule of
divine institutions, they wander endlessly. Justly therefore was this
made the reason why they should keep God's ordinances, that they might
not commit the abominable customs of the heathen, [Lev
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#030).

III\. This awakening word is here immediately followed by an awakening
providence, [Eze 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#013). Here we may
observe, 1. With what power Ezekiel prophesied, or, rather, what a
divine power went along with it: It came to pass, when I prophesied,
that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died; he was mentioned ([Eze
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001)) as a principal man among the
twenty-five princes that made all the mischief in Jerusalem. It should
seem, this was done in vision now, as the slaying of the ancient men
([Eze 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#006)) upon occasion of which
Ezekiel prayed ([Eze 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#008)) as he did
here; but it was an assurance that when this prophecy should be
published it should be done in fact. The death of Pelatiah was an
earnest of the complete accomplishment of this prophecy. Note, God is
pleased often-times to single out some sinners, and to make them
monuments of his justice, for warning to others of what is coming; and
some that thought themselves very safe and snatched away suddenly, and
drop down dead in an instant, as Ananias and Sapphira at Peter's feet
when he prophesied. 2. With what pity Ezekiel prayed. Thought the sudden
death of Pelatiah was a confirmation of Ezekiel's prophecy, and really
an honour to him, yet he was in deep concern about it, and laid it to
heart as if he had been his relation or friend: He fell on his face and
cried with a loud voice, as one in earnest, "Ah! Lord God, wilt thou
make a full end of the remnant of Israel? Many are swept away by the
judgments we have been under; and shall the remnant which have escaped
the sword die thus by the immediate hand of heaven? Then thou wilt
indeed make a full end." Perhaps it was Ezekiel's infirmity to bewail
the death of this wicked prince thus, as it was Samuel's to mourn so
long for Saul; but thus he showed how far he was from desiring the
woeful day he foretold. David lamented the sickness of those that hated
and persecuted him. And we ought to be much affected with the sudden
death of others, yea, though they are wicked.

[Ezekiel 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 11:14</span></span>

Prophecy was designed to exalt every valley as well as to bring low
every mountain and hill ([Isa 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#004)),
and prophets were to speak not only conviction to the presumptuous and
secure, but comfort to the despised and desponding that trembled at
God's word. The prophet Ezekiel, having in the former part of this
chapter received instructions for the awakening of those that were at
ease in Zion, is in these verses furnished with comfortable words for
those that mourned in Babylon and by the rivers there sat weeping when
they remembered Zion. Observe,

I. How the pious captives were trampled upon and insulted over by those
who continued in Jerusalem, [Eze
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#015). God tells the prophet what the
inhabitants of Jerusalem said of him and the rest of them that were
already carried away to Babylon. God had owned them as good figs, and
declared it was for their good that he had sent them into Babylon; but
the inhabitants of Jerusalem abandoned them, supposing those that were
really the best saints to be the greatest sinners of all men that dwelt
in Jerusalem. Observe, 1. How they are described: They are thy brethren
(says God to the prophet), whom thou hast a concern and affection for;
they are the men of thy kindred (the men of thy redemption, so the word
is), thy next of kin, to whom the right of redeeming the alienated
possession belongs, but who are so far from being able to do it that
they have themselves gone into captivity. They are the whole house of
Israel; God so accounts of them because they only have retained their
integrity, and are bettered by their captivity. They were not only of
the same family and nation with Ezekiel, but of the same spirit; they
were his hearers, and he had communion with them in holy ordinances; and
perhaps upon that account they are called his brethren and the men of
his kindred. 2. How they were disowned by the inhabitants of Jerusalem;
they said of them, Get you far from the Lord. Those that were at ease
and proud themselves scorned their brethren that were humbled and under
humbling providences. (1.) They cut them off from being members of their
church. Because they had separated themselves from their rulers and in
compliance with the will of God had surrendered themselves to the king
of Babylon, they excommunicated them, and said, "Get you far from the
Lord; we will have nothing to do with you." Those that were
superstitious were very willing to shake off those that were
conscientious, and were severe in their censures of them and sentences
against them, as if they were forsaken and forgotten of the Lord and
were cut off from the communion of the faithful. (2.) They cut them off
from being members of the commonwealth too, as if they had no longer any
part or lot in the matter: "Unto us is this land given in possession,
and you have forfeited your estates by surrendering to the king of
Babylon, and we have thereby become entitled to them." God takes notice
of, and is much displeased with, the contempt which those that are in
prosperity put upon their brethren that are in affliction.

II\. The gracious promises which God made to them in consideration of
the insolent conduct of their brethren towards them. Those that hated
them and cast them out said, Let the Lord be glorified; but he shall
appear to their joy, [Isa 66:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005). God
owns that his hand had gone out against them, which had given occasion
to their brethren to triumph over them ([Eze
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#016)): "It is true I have cast them
far off among the heathen and scattered them among the countries; they
look as if they were an abandoned people, and so mingled with the
nations that they will be lost among them; but I have mercy in store for
them." Note, God takes occasion from the contempts which are put upon
his people to speak comfort to them, as David hoped God would reward him
good for Shimei's cursing. His time to support his people's hopes is
when their enemies are endeavouring to drive them to despair. Now God
promises,

1\. That he will make up to them the want of the temple and the
privileges of it ([Eze 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#016)): I will
be to them as a little sanctuary, in the countries where they shall
come. Those at Jerusalem have the temple, but without God; those in
Babylon have God, though without the temple. (1.) God will be a
sanctuary to them; that is, a place of refuge; to him they shall flee,
and in him they shall be safe, as he was that took hold on the horns of
the altar. Or, rather, they shall have such communion with God in the
land of their captivity as it was thought could be had nowhere but in
the temple. They shall there see God's power and his glory, as they used
to see them in the sanctuary; they shall have the tokens of God's
presence with them, and his grace in their hearts shall sanctify their
prayers and praises, as well as ever the altar sanctified the gift, so
that they shall please the Lord better than an ox or bullock. (2.) He
will be a little sanctuary, not seen or observed by their enemies, who
looked with an evil and an envious eye upon that house at Jerusalem
which was high and great, [Kg1 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#008).
They were but few and mean, and a little sanctuary was fittest for them.
God regards the low estate of his people, and suits his favours to their
circumstances. Observe the condescensions of divine grace. The great God
will be to his people a little sanctuary. Note, Those that are deprived
of the benefit of public ordinances, if it be not their own fault, may
have the want of them abundantly made up in the immediate communications
of divine grace and comforts.

2\. That God would in due time put an end to their afflictions, bring
them out of the land of their captivity, and settle them again, them or
their children, in their own land ([Eze
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#017)): "I will gather even you that
are thus dispersed, thus despised, and given over for lost by your own
countrymen; I will gather you from the people, distinguish you from
those with whom you are mingled, deliver you from those by whom you are
held captives, and assemble you in a body out of the countries where you
have been scattered; you shall not come back one by one, but all
together, which will make your return more honourable, safe, and
comfortable; and then I will give you the land of Israel, which now your
brethren look upon you as for ever shut out from." Note, It is well for
us that men's severe censures cannot cut us off from God's gracious
promises. There are many that will be found to have a place in the holy
land whom uncharitable men, by their monopolies of it to themselves, had
secluded from it. I will give you the land of Israel, give it to you
again by a new grant, and they shall come thither. If there be any thing
in the change of the person from you to them, it may signify the
posterity of those to whom the promise is made. "You shall have the
title as the patriarchs had, and those that come after shall have the
possession."

3\. That God by his grace would part between them and their sins, [Eze
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#018). Their captivity shall
effectually cure them of their idolatry: When they come thither to their
own land again they shall take away all the detestable things thereof.
Their idols, that had been their delectable things, should now be looked
upon with detestation, not only the idols of Babylon, where they were
captives, but the idols of Canaan, where they were natives; they should
not only not worship them as they had done, but they should not suffer
any monuments of them to remain: They shall take all the abominations
thereof thence. Note, Then it is in mercy that we return to a prosperous
estate, when we return not to the sins and follies of that state. What
have I to do any more with idols?

4\. That God would powerfully dispose them to their duty; they shall not
only cease to do evil, but they shall learn to do well, because there
shall be not only an end of their troubles, but a return to their peace.

(1.) God will plant good principles in them; he will make the tree good,
[Eze 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019). This is a gospel promise,
and is made good to all those whom God designs for the heavenly Canaan;
for God prepares all for heaven whom he has prepared heaven for. It is
promised, \[1.\] That God will give them one heart, a heart entire for
the true God and not divided as it had been among many gods, a heart
firmly fixed and resolved for God and not wavering, steady and uniform,
and not inconstant with itself. One heart is a sincere and upright
heart, its intentions of a piece with its professions. \[2.\] That he
will put a new spirit within them, a temper of mind agreeable to the new
circumstances into which God in his providence would bring them. All
that are sanctified have a new spirit, quite different from what it was;
they act from new principles, walk by new rules, and aim at new ends. A
new name, or a new face, will not serve without a new spirit. If any man
be in Christ, he is a new creature. \[3.\] That he will take away the
stony heart out of their flesh, out of their corrupt nature. Their
hearts shall no longer be, as they have been, dead and dry, and hard and
heavy, as a stone, no longer incapable of bearing good fruit, so that
the good seed is lost upon it, as it was on the stony ground. \[4.\]
That he will give them a heart of flesh, not dead or proud flesh, but
living flesh; he will make their hearts sensible of spiritual pains and
spiritual pleasures, will make them tender, and apt to receive
impressions. This is God's work, it is his gift, his gift by promise;
and a wonderful and happy change it is that is wrought by it, from death
to life. This is promised to those whom God would bring back to their
own land; for then such a change of the condition is for the better
indeed when it is accompanied with such a change of the heart; and such
a change must be wrought in all those that shall be brought to the
better country, that is, the heavenly.

(2.) Their practices shall be consonant to those principles: I will give
them a new spirit, not that they may be able to discourse well of
religion and to dispute for it, but that they may walk in my statues in
their whole conversation and keep my ordinances in all acts of religious
worship, [Eze 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#020). These two must go
together; and those to whom God has given a new heart and a new spirit
will make conscience of both; and then they shall be my people and I
will be their God. The ancient covenant, which seemed to be broken and
forgotten, shall be renewed. By their idolatry, it should seem, they had
cast God off; by their captivity, it should seem, God had cast them off.
But when they were cured of their idolatry, and delivered out of their
captivity, God and his Israel own one another again. God, by his good
work in them, will make them his people; and then, by the tokens of his
good-will towards them, he will show that he is their God.

III\. Here is a threatening of wrath against those who hated to be
reformed. As, when judgments are threatened, the righteous are
distinguished so as not to share in the evil of those judgments, so,
when favours are promised, the wicked are distinguished so as not to
share in the comfort of those favours; they have no part nor lot in the
matter, [Eze 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#021). But, as for those
that have no grace, what have they to do with peace? Observe, 1. Their
description. Their heart walks after the heart of their detestable
things; they have as great a minds to worship devils as devils have to
be worshipped. Or, in opposition to the new heart which God gives his
people, which is a heart after his own heart, they have a heart after
the heart of their idols; in their temper and practice they conformed to
the characters and accounts given them of their idols, and the ideas
they had of them, and of them they learned lewdness and cruelty. Here
lies the root of all their wickedness, the corruption of the heart; as
the root of their reformation is laid in the renovation of the heart.
The heart has its walks, and according as those are the man is. 2. Their
doom. It carries both justice and terror in it: I will recompense their
way upon their own heads; I will deal with them as they deserve. There
needs no more than this to speak God righteous, that he does but render
to men according to their deserts: and yet such are the deserts of sin
that there needs no more than this to speak the sinner miserable.

[Ezekiel 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 11:22</span></span>

Here is, 1. The departure of God's presence from the city and temple.
When the message was committed to the prophet, and he was fully apprized
of it, fully instructed how to separate between the precious and the
vile, then the cherubim lifted up their wings and the wheels beside them
([Eze 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#022)) as before, [Eze
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#019). Angels, when they have done
their errands in this lower world, are upon the wing to be gone, for
they lose no time. We left the glory of the Lord last at the east gate
of the temple ([Eze 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#019)), which is
here said to be in the midst of the city. Now here we are told that,
finding and wondering that there was none to intercede, none to uphold,
none to invite its return, it removed next to the mountain which is on
the east side of the city ([Eze
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#023)); that was the mount of Olives.
On this mountain they had set up their idols, to confront God in his
temple, when he dwelt there ([Kg1
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007)), and thence it was called the
mount of corruption ([Kg2 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013));
therefore there God does as it were set up his standard, his tribunal,
as it were to confront those who thought to keep possession of the
temple for themselves now that God had left it. From that mountain there
was a full prospect of the city; thither God removed, to make good what
he had said ([Deu 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020)), I will hide
my face from them, I will see what their end shall be. It was from this
mountain that Christ beheld the city and wept over it, in the foresight
of its last destruction by the Romans. The glory of the Lord removed
thither, to be as it were yet within call, and ready to return if now at
length, in this their day, they would have understood the things that
belonged to their peace. Loth to depart bids oft farewell. God, by going
away thus slowly, thus gradually, intimated that he left them with
reluctance, and would not have gone if they had not perfectly forced him
from them. He did now, in effect, say, How shall I give thee up,
Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? But, though he bear long, he
will not bear always, but will at length forsake those, and cast them
off for ever, who have forsaken him and cast him off. 2. The departure
of this vision from the prophet. At length it went up from him ([Eze
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#024)); he saw it mount upwards, till
it went out of sight, which would be a confirmation to his faith that it
was a heavenly vision, that it descended from above, for thitherward it
returned. Note, The visions which the saints have of the glory of God
will not be constant will they come to heaven. They have glimpses of
that glory, which they soon lose again, visions which go up from them,
tastes of divine pleasures, but not a continual feast. It was from the
mount of Olives that the vision went up, typifying the ascension of
Christ to heaven from that very mountain, when those that had seen him
manifested in the flesh saw him no more. It was foretold ([Zac
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004)) that his feet should stand upon
the mount of Olives, stand last there. 3. The prophet's return to those
of the captivity. The same spirit that had carried him in a trance or
ecstasy to Jerusalem brought him back to Chaldea; for there the bounds
of his habitation are at present appointed, and that is the place of his
service. The Spirit came to him, not to deliver him out of captivity,
but (which was equivalent) to support and comfort him in his captivity.
4. The account which he gave to his hearers of all he had seen and
heard, [Eze 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#025). He received that he
might give, and he was faithful to him that appointed him; he delivered
his message very honestly: he spoke all that, and that only, which God
had shown him. He told them of the great wickedness he had seen at
Jerusalem, and the ruin that was hastening towards that city, that they
might not repent of their surrendering themselves to the king of Babylon
as Jeremiah advised them, and blame themselves for it, nor envy those
that staid behind, and laughed at them for going when they did, nor wish
themselves there again, but be content in their captivity. Who would
covet to be in a city so full of sin and so near to ruin? It is better
to be in Babylon under the favour of God than in Jerusalem under his
wrath and curse. But, though this was delivered immediately to those of
the captivity, yet we may suppose that they sent the contents of it to
those at Jerusalem, with whom they kept up a correspondence; and well
would it have been for Jerusalem if she had taken the warning hereby
given.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 12](eze012)

</div>
