<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze043)  [Next](eze045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 44:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. The appropriating of the east gate of the
temple to the prince ([Eze 44:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#001)).
II. A reproof sent to the house of Israel for their former profanations
of God's sanctuary, with a charge to them to be more strict for the
future ([Eze 44:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#004)). III. The
degrading of those Levites that had formerly been guilty of idolatry and
the establishing of the priesthood in the family of Zadok, which had
kept their integrity ([Eze 44:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#010)).
IV. Divers laws and ordinances concerning the priests ([Eze
44:17-31](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#017)).

[Ezekiel 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 44:1</span></span>

The prophet is here brought to review what he had before once surveyed;
for, though we have often looked into the things of God, they will yet
bear to be looked over again, such a copiousness there is in them. The
lessons we have learned we should still repeat to ourselves. Every time
we review the sacred fabric of holy things, which we have in the
scriptures, we shall still find something new which we did not before
take notice of. The prophet is brought a third time to the east gate,
and finds it shut, which intimates that the rest of the gates were open
at all times to the worshippers. But such an account is given of this
gate's being shut as puts honour, 1. Upon the God of Israel. It is for
the honour of him that the gate of the inner court, at which his glory
entered when he took possession of the house, was ever after kept shut,
and no man was allowed to enter in by it, [Eze
44:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#002). The difference ever after made
between this and the other gates, that this was shut when the others
were open, was intended both to perpetuate the remembrance of the solemn
entrance of the glory of the Lord into the house (which it would remain
a traditional evidence of the truth of) and also to possess the minds of
people with a reverence for the Divine Majesty, and with very awful
thoughts of his transcendent glory, which was designed in God's charge
to Moses at the bush, Put off thy shoe from off thy foot. God will have
a way by himself. 2. Upon the prince of Israel, [Eze
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#003). It is an honour to him that
though he may not enter in by this gate, for no man may, yet, (1.) He
shall sit in this gate to eat his share of the peace-offerings, that
sacred food, before the Lord. (2.) He shall enter by the way of the
porch of that gate, by some little door or wicket, either in the gate or
adjoining to it, which is called the say of the porch. This as to
signify that God puts some of his glory upon magistrates, upon the
princes of his people, for he has said, You are gods. Some by the prince
here understand the high priests, or the sagan or second priest; and
that he only was allowed to enter by this gate, for he was God's
representative. Christ is the high priest of our profession, who entered
himself into the holy place, and opened the kingdom of heaven to all
believers.

[Ezekiel 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 44:4</span></span>

This is much to the same purport with what we had in the beginning of
ch. 43. As the prophet must look again upon what he had before seen, so
he must be told again what he had before heard. Here, as before, he sees
the house filled with the glory of the Lord, which strikes an awe upon
him, so that he falls prostrate at the sight, the humblest posture of
adoration and the expression of a holy awe: I fell upon my face, [Eze
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#004). Note, The more we see of the
glory of God the more low we shall lie in our own eyes. Now here,

I. God charges the prophet to take a very particular notice of all he
saw, and all that was said to him ([Eze
44:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#005)): "Behold with thy eyes what is
shown thee, particularly the entering in of the house and every going
forth of it, all the inlets and all the outlets of the sanctuary;" those
he must take special notice of. Note, In acquainting ourselves with
divine things we must not aim so much at an abstract speculation of the
things themselves as at finding the plain appointed way of converse and
communion with those things, that we may go in and out and find pasture.
2. Hear with thy ears all that I say unto thee about the laws and
ordinances of the house, which he was to instruct the people in. Note,
Those who are appointed to be teachers have need to be very diligent
careful learners, that they may neither forget any of the things they
are entrusted with nor mistake concerning them.

II\. He sends him upon an errand to the people, to the rebellious, even
to the house of Israel, [Eze 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#006). It
is sad to think that the house of Israel should deserve this character
from him who perfectly knew them, that a people in covenant with God
should be rebellious against him. Who are his subjects if the house of
Israel be rebels? But it is an instance of God's rich mercy that, though
they had been rebellious, yet, being the house of Israel, he does not
cast them off, but sends an ambassador to them, to invite and encourage
them to return to their allegiance, which he would not have done if he
had been pleased to kill them. The whole race of mankind has fallen
under the character here given of the house of Israel; but our Lord
Jesus, when he ascended on high, received gifts for men, yea, even for
the rebellious also, that, as here, the Lord God might dwell among them,
[Psa 68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018).

1\. He must tell them of their faults, must show them their rebellions,
must show the house of Jacob their sins. Note, Those that are sent to
comfort God's people must first convince them, and so prepare them for
comfort. Let it suffice you of all your abominations, [Eze
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#006). Note, It is time for those that
have continued long in sin to reckon it long enough, and too long, and
to begin to think of taking up in time, and leaving off their evil
courses. "Let the time past of your lives suffice, for by this time,
surely, you have surfeited upon your abominations and have become sick
of them," [Pe1 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#003). That which is here
charged upon them is, (1.) That they had admitted those to the
privileges of the sanctuary that were not entitled to them; whereas God
had said, The stranger that comes nigh shall be put to death, they had
not only connived at the intrusion of strangers into the sanctuary, but
had themselves introduced them ([Eze
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#007)): You brought in strangers
uncircumcised in flesh, and therefore under a legal incapacity to enter
into the sanctuary, which was a breaking of the covenant of
circumcision, throwing down the hedge of their peculiarity, and laying
themselves in common with the rest of the world. Yet if these strangers
had been devout and good, though they were not circumcised, the crime
would not have been so great; but they were uncircumcised in heart too,
unhumbled, unreformed, and strangers indeed to God and all goodness.
When they came to offer sacrifice they brought these with them to feast
with them upon the sacrifice, because they were fond of their company,
and this was one of their abominations, wherewith they polluted God's
sanctuary; it was giving that which was holy unto dogs, [Mat
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006). Note, The admission of those who
are openly wicked and profane to special ordinances is a polluting of
God's sanctuary and a great provocation to him. (2.) That they had
employed those in the service of the sanctuary who were not fit for it.
Though none but priests and Levites were to minister in the sanctuary,
yet we may suppose that all who were priests and Levites did not
immediately attend there, but chosen men of them, who were best
qualified, who were most wise, serious, and conscientious, and most
likely to keep the charge of the holy things carefully; but, in making
this choice, they had not regard to merit and qualification for the
work: "You have set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves,
such as you had some favour or affection for, such as you either had
got, or hoped to get, money by, or such as would comply with your
humours and would dispense with the laws of the sanctuary to please you;
thus you have not kept the charge of my holy things." Note, Those who
have the choice of the keepers of the holy things, if, to serve some
secular selfish purpose, they choose such as are unfit and unfaithful,
will justly have it laid at their door, that they have betrayed the holy
things by lodging them in bad hands.

2\. He must tell them their duty ([Eze
44:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#009)): "No stranger shall enter into
my sanctuary till he has first submitted to the laws of it." But, lest
any should think that this excluded the penitent believing Gentiles from
the church, the stranger here is described to be one that is
uncircumcised in heart, not in sincerity consenting to the covenant, nor
putting away the filth of the flesh; whereas the believing Gentiles were
circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, [Col
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011). This circumcision of the heart,
in the spirit, not in the letter, was what the unbelieving Jews were
strangers to and unconcerned about, while yet they were zealous to keep
out of the sanctuary uncircumcised Gentiles, witness their rage against
Paul when they did but suspect him to have brought Greeks into the
temple, [Act 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#028).

[Ezekiel 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 44:10</span></span>

The Master of the house, being about to set up house again, takes
account of his servants the priests, and sees who are fit to be turned
out of their places and who to be kept in, and takes a course with them
accordingly.

I. Those who have been treacherous are degraded and put lower those
Levites - or priests who were carried down the stream of the apostasy of
Israel formerly, who went astray from God after their idols ([Eze
44:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#010)), who had complied with the
idolatrous kings of Israel or Judah, who ministered to them before their
idols ([Eze 44:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#012)), bowed with them in
the house of Rimmon, or set up altars for them, as Urijah did for Ahaz,
and so caused the house of Israel to fall into iniquity, led them to sin
and hardened them in sin; for, if the priests go astray, many will
follow their pernicious ways. Perhaps in Babylon some of the Jewish
priests had complied with the idolaters of the place, to the great
scandal of their religion. Now these priests who had thus prevaricated
were justly put under the mark of God's displeasure; or, if they were
dead (as it is probable that they were, if the crime were committed
before the captivity), the iniquity was visited upon their children. Or
perhaps it was the whole family of Abiathar that had been guilty of this
trespass, which was now called to account for it. And, 1. They are
sentenced to be deprived, in part, of their office, and from the dignity
of priests are put down into the condition or ordinary Levites. God has
lifted up his hand against them, has said it, and sworn it, that they
shall bear their iniquity ([Eze
44:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#012)); assuredly they shall suffer
for it, shall suffer disgrace for it; they shall bear their shame ([Eze
44:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#013)), for though they have (we
charitably hope) repented of it, yet they shall not come near to do the
office of a priest, that is, those parts of the office that were
peculiar to them, they shall not come near to any of the holy things
within the sanctuary, [Eze 44:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#013).
Note, those who have robbed God of his honour will justly be deprived of
their honour. And it is really a great punishment to be forbidden to
come near to God; and justly might those who have once gone away from
him be rejected as unworthy ever to come near to him and put at an
everlasting distance. 2. Yet there is a mixture of mercy in this
sentence. God deals not in severity, as he might have done, with those
who had dealt treacherously with him, but mitigates the sentence, [Eze
44:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#011), [Eze
44:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#014). They are deprived but in part,
ab officio - of their office, and, it should seem, not at all beneficio
- of their emoluments. They shall help to slay the sacrifice, which the
Levites were permitted to do, and which in this temple was done, not at
the altar, but at the tables, [Eze
40:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#029). They shall be porters at the
gates of the house, and they shall be keepers of the charge of the
house, for all the service thereof. Note, Those who may not be fit to be
employed in one kind of service may yet be fit to be employed in
another; and even those who have offended may yet be made use of, and
not quite thrown aside, much less thrown away.

II\. Those who have been faithful are honoured and established, [Eze
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#015), [Eze
44:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#016). These are remarkably
distinguished from the other: "But the sons of Zadok, who kept their
integrity in a time of general apostasy, who went not astray when others
did, they shall come near to me, shall come near to my table." Note, God
will put marks of honour upon those who give proofs of their fidelity
and constancy to him in shaking trying times, and will employ those in
his service who have kept close to his service when others deserted it
and drew back. And it ought to be reckoned a true and great reward of
stability in duty to be established in it. If we keep close to God, God
will keep us close to him.

[Ezekiel 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 44:17</span></span>

God's priests must be regulars, not seculars; and therefore here are
rules laid down for them to govern themselves by and due encouragement
given them to live up to those rules. Directions are here given,

I. Concerning their clothes; they must wear linen garments when they
went in to minister or do any service in the inner court, or in the
sanctuary, and nothing that was woollen, because it would cause sweat,
[Eze 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#017), [Eze
44:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#018). They must dress themselves
cool, that they might go the more readily about their work; and they had
the more need to do so because they were to attend the altars, which had
constant fires upon them. And they must dress themselves clean and
sweet, and avoid every thing that was sweaty and filthy, to signify the
purity of mind with which the service of God is to be attended to. Sweat
came in with sin and was part of the curse. In the sweat of thy face
shalt thou eat bread. Clothes came in with sin, coats of skins did; and
therefore the priests must use as little and as light clothing as
possible, and not such as caused sweat. When they had finished their
service they must change their clothes again, and lay up their linen
garments in the chambers appointed for that purpose, [Eze
44:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#019), as before, [Eze
42:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#014). They must not go among the
people with their holy garments on, lest they should imagine themselves
sanctified by the touch of them; or, They shall sanctify the people,
that is (as it is explained, [Eze
42:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#014)), they shall approach to those
things which are for the people, in their ordinary garments.

II\. Concerning their hair; in that they must avoid extremes on both
hands ([Eze 44:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#020)): They must not
shave their heads, in imitation of the Gentile priests, and as the
priests of the Romish church do; nor, on the other hand, must they
suffer their locks to grow long, as the beaux, or that they might be
thought Nazarites, when really they were not; but they must be grave and
modest, must poll their heads and keep their hair short. If a man,
especially a minister, wear long hair, it is not becoming ([Co1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014)); it is effeminate.

III\. Concerning their diet; they must be sure to drink no wine when
they went in to minister, lest they should rink to excess, should drink
and forget the law, [Eze 44:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#021). It is
not for kings to drink wine, more than will do them good, much less for
priests. See [Lev 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009); [Pro
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#004), [Pro
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#005).

IV\. Concerning their marriages, [Eze
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#022). Here they must consult the
credit of their office, and not marry one that had been divorced, that
was at least under the suspicion of immodesty, nor a widow, unless she
were a priest's widow, that had been accustomed to the usages of the
priests' families. Others may do that which ministers may not do, but
must deny themselves in, in honour of their character. Their wives as
well as themselves must be of good report.

V. Concerning their preaching and church-government. 1. It was part of
their business to teach the people; and herein they must approve
themselves both skilful and faithful ([Eze
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#023)): They shall teach my people the
difference between the holy and the profane, between good and evil,
lawful and unlawful, that they may neither scruple what is lawful nor
venture upon what is unlawful, that they may not pollute what is holy
nor pollute themselves with what is profane. Ministers must take pains
to cause people to discern between the clean and the unclean, that they
may not confound the distinctions between right and wrong, nor mistake
concerning them, so as to put darkness for light and light for darkness,
but may have a good judgment of discretion concerning their own actions.
2. It was part of their business to judge upon appeals made to them
([Deu 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#008), [Deu
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#009)); and in controversy they shall
stand in judgment, [Eze 44:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#024). They
shall have the honesty to stand up for what is right, and, when they
have passed a right judgment, shall have the courage to stand to it and
stand by it. They must judge, not according to their own fancies, or
inclinations, or secular interests, but according to my judgments; that
must be their rule and standard. Note, Ministers must decide
controversies according to the word of God, to the law and to the
testimony. Sit liber judex - Let the judge be unbiased. Their business
is to keep courts in God's name, to preside in the congregations of his
people. And herein they must go to the statute-book: They shall keep my
statutes in all my assemblies. God calls the assemblies of his people
his assemblies, because they are held in his name, to his glory.
Ministers are the masters of those assemblies, are to preside in them,
and in all their acts must keep close to God's laws. Another part of
their work, as church governors, is to hallow God's sabbaths, to do the
public work of that day with a becoming care and reverence, as the work
of a holy day should be done, and to see that God's people also sanctify
that day and do nothing to pollute it.

VI\. Concerning their mourning for dead relations; the rule here agrees
with the law of Moses, [Lev 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001), [Lev
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#011). A priest shall not come near
any dead body (for they must be purified from dead works) except of his
next relations, [Eze 44:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#025). Decent
expressions of a pious sorrow for dear relations, when they are removed
by death, are not disagreeable to the character of a minister. Yet by
this approach to the dead body of a relation they contracted a
ceremonial pollution, from which they must be cleansed by a sin-offering
before they went in again to minister, [Eze
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#026), [Eze
44:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#027). Note, Though sorrow for the
dead is very allowable and commendable, yet there is danger of sinning
in it, either by excess or dissimulation; and those tears have too often
need to be wept over again.

VII\. Concerning their maintenance; they must live upon the altar at
which they served, and live comfortably ([Eze
44:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#028)): "You shall give them no
possession in Israel, no lands or tenements, lest they should be
entangled with the affairs of this life;" for God has said, I am their
inheritance, and they need no other in reserve; I am their possession,
and they need no other in hand. Some land was allowed them ([Eze
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#010)), but their principal
subsistence was by their office. What God appropriated to himself they
were the receivers of, for their own proper use and behoof; they lived
upon the holy things, and so God himself was the portion both of their
inheritance and of their cup. Note, Those who have God for their
inheritance and their possession may be content with a little, and ought
not to covet a great deal of the possessions and inheritances of this
earth. If we have God, we have all; and therefore may well reckon that
we have enough. Observe,

1\. What the priests were to have from the people, for their maintenance
and encouragement. (1.) They must have the flesh of many of the
offerings, the sin-offering and trespass-offering, which would supply
them and their families with flesh-meat, and the meat-offerings, which
would supply them with bread. What we offer to God will redound to our
own advantage. (2.) They must have every dedicated devoted thing in
Israel, which was in many cases to be turned into money and given to the
priest. This is explained, [Eze 44:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#020).
Every oblation or free-will offering (which in times of reformation and
devotion would be many and considerable) of all, of every sort of your
oblations, shall be the priest's. We have the law concerning them Lev.
27. (3.) They were to have the first of the dough when it was going to
the oven, as well as the first of their fruits when they were going to
the barn. God, who is the first, must have the first; and, if it belong
to him, his priests must have it. We may then comfortably enjoy what we
have, when a share of it has been first set apart for works of piety and
charity. To this the apostle's rule bears some analogy, to begin the
week with laying by for pious uses, [Co1
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002). The priests being so well
provided for, it would be inexcusable in them if they (contrary to the
law which every Israelite is bound by) should eat that which is torn or
which died of itself, [Eze 44:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#031).
Those that were in want of necessary food might perhaps expect to be
dispensed with in such a case. Poverty has its temptations, but the
priests were so well provided for that they could have no pretence for
it.

2\. What the people might expect from the priest for their recompence.
Those that are kind to a prophet, to a priest, shall have a prophet's, a
priest's reward: That he may cause the blessing to rest in thy house
([Eze 44:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#030)), that God may cause it by
commanding it, that the priest may cause it by praying for it; and it
was part of the priest's work to bless the people in the name of the
Lord, not only their congregations, but their families. Note, It is all
in all to the comfort of any house to have the blessing of God upon it
and to have the blessing to rest in it, to dwell where we dwell and to
attend the entail of it upon those that shall come after us. And the way
to have the blessing of God abide upon our estates is to honour God with
them, and to give him and his ministers, him and his poor, their share
out of them. God blesses, he surely blesses, the habitation of those who
are thus just, [Pro 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#033). And
ministers, by instructing and praying for the families that are kind to
them, should do their part towards causing the blessing to rest there.
Peace be to this house.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 45](eze045)

</div>
