<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze034)  [Next](eze036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 35:0</span></span>

It was promised, in the foregoing chapter, that when the time to favour
Zion, yea, the set time, should come, especially the time for sending
the Messiah and setting up his kingdom in the world, God would cause the
enemies of his church to cease and the blessings and comforts of the
church to abound. This chapter enlarges upon the former promise,
concerning the destruction of the enemies of the church; the next
chapter upon the latter promise, the replenishing of the church with
blessings. Mount Seir (that is, Edom) is the enemy prophesied against in
this chapter, but fitly put here, as in the prophecy of Obadiah, for all
the enemies of the church; for, as those all walked in the way of Cain
that hated Abel, so those all walked in the way of Esau who hated Jacob,
but over whom Jacob, by virtue of a particular blessing, was to have
dominion. Now here we have, I. The sin charged upon the Edomites, and
that was their spite and malice to Israel ([Eze
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#005), [Eze
35:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#010)). II. The ruin threatened,
that should come upon them for this sin. God will be against them ([Eze
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#003)) and then their country shall be
laid waste ([Eze 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#004)), depopulated,
and made quite desolate ([Eze 35:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#006)),
and left so when other nations that had been wasted should recover
themselves ([Eze 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#014), [Eze
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#015)).

[Ezekiel 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 35:1</span></span>

Mount Seir was mentioned as partner with Moab in one of the threatenings
we had before ([Eze 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#008)); but here it
is convicted and condemned by itself, and has woes of its own. The
prophet must boldly set his face against Edom, and prophesy particularly
against it; for the God of Israel has said, O Mount Seir! I am against
thee. Note, Those that have God against them have the word of God
against them, and the face of his ministers, nor dare they prophesy any
good to them, but evil. The prophet must tell the Edomites that God has
a controversy with them, and let them know,

I. What is the cause and ground of that controversy, [Eze
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#005). God espouses his people's cause,
and will plead it, takes what is done against them as done against
himself, and will reckon for it; and it is upon their account that God
now contends with the Edomites. 1. Because of the enmity they had
against the people of God, that was rooted in the heart. "Thou hast had
a perpetual hatred to them, to the very name of an Israelite." The
Edomites kept up an hereditary malice against Israel, the same that Esau
bore to Jacob, because he got the birth-right and the blessing. Esau had
been reconciled to Jacob, had embraced and kissed him (Gen. 33), and we
do not find that ever he quarrelled with him again. But the posterity of
Esau would never be reconciled to the seed of Jacob, but hated them with
a perpetual hatred. Note, Children will be more apt to imitate the vices
than the virtues of their parents, and to tread in the steps of their
sin than in the steps of their repentance. Parents should therefore be
careful not to set their children any bad example, for though, through
the grace of God, they may return, and prevent the mischief of what they
have done amiss to themselves, they may not be able to obviate the bad
influence of it upon their children. It is strange how deeply rooted
national antipathies sometimes are, and how long they last; but it is
not to be wondered at that profane Edomites hate pious Israelites, since
the old enmity that was put between the seed of the woman and the seed
of the serpent ([Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)) will
continue to the end. Marvel not if the world hate you. 2. Because of the
injuries they had done to the people of God. They shed their blood by
the force of the sword, in the time of their calamity; they did not
attack them as fair and open enemies, but laid wait for them, to cut off
those of them that had escaped ([Oba
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#014)), or they drove them back upon
the sword of the pursuers, by which they fell. It was cowardly, as well
as barbarous, to take advantage of their distress; and for neighbours,
with whom they had lived peaceably, to smite them secretly when
strangers openly invaded them. It was in the time that their iniquity
had an end, when the measure of it was full and destruction came. Note,
Even those that suffer justly, and for their sins, are yet to be pitied
and not trampled upon. If the father corrects one child, he expects the
rest should tremble at it, not triumph in it.

II\. What should be the effect and issue of that controversy. If God
stretch out his hand against the country of Edom, he will make it most
desolate, [Eze 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#003). Desolation and
desolation. 1. The inhabitants shall be slain with the sword ([Eze
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#006)): I will prepare thee unto blood.
Edom shall be gradually weakened, and so be the more easily conquered,
and the enemy shall gather strength the more effectually to subdue it.
Thus preparation is in the making a great while before for this
destruction. Thou hast not hated blood; it implies, "Thou hast delighted
in it and thirsted after it." Those that do not keep up a rooted hatred
of sin, when a temptation to it is very strong, will be in danger of
yielding to it. Some read it, "Unless thou hatest blood" (that is,
"unless thou dost repent, and put off this bloody disposition) blood
shall pursue thee." And then it is an intimation that the judgment may
yet be prevented by a thorough reformation. If he turn not, he will whet
his sword, [Psa 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#012). But, if he turn,
he will lay it by. Blood shall pursue thee, the guilt of the blood which
thou hast shed or the judgment of blood; thy blood-thirsty enemies shall
pursue thee, which way soever thou seekest to make thy escape. A great
and general slaughter shall be made of the Idumeans, such as had been
foretold ([Isa 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006)): The mountains
and hills, the valleys and rivers, shall be filled with the slain, [Eze
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#008). The pursuers shall overtake
those that flee and shall give no quarter, but put them all to the
sword. Note, When God comes to make inquisition for blood those that
have shed the blood of his Israel shall have blood given them to drink,
for they are worthy. Satia te sanguine quem sitisti - Glut thyself with
blood, after which thou hast thirsted. 2. The country shall be laid
waste. The cities shall be destroyed ([Eze
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#004)), the country made most desolate
([Eze 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#007)); for God will cut off from
both him that passes out and him that returns; and when the inhabitants
are cut off that should keep the cities in repair they will decay and go
into ruins, and when those are cut off that should till the land that
will soon be over-run with briers and thorns and become a wilderness.
Note, Those that help forward the desolations of Israel may expect to be
themselves made desolate. And that which completes the judgment is that
Edom shall be made perpetual desolations ([Eze
35:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#009)) and the cities shall never
return to their former state, nor the inhabitants of them come back from
their captivity and dispersion. Note, Those that have a perpetual enmity
to God and his people, as the carnal mind has, can expect no other than
to be made a perpetual desolation. Implacable malice will justly be
punished with irreparable ruin.

[Ezekiel 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 35:10</span></span>

Here is, I. A further account of the sin of the Edomites, and their bad
conduct towards the people of God. We find the church complaining of
them for setting on the Babylonians, and irritating them against
Jerusalem, saying, Rase it, rase it, down with it, down with it ([Psa
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007)), inflaming a rage that needed
no spur; here it is further charged upon them that they triumphed in
Jerusalem's ruin and in the desolations of the country. Many blasphemies
they spoke against the mountains of Israel, saying, with pride and
pleasure, They are laid desolate, [Eze
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#012). Note, The troubles of God's
church, as they give proofs of the constancy and fidelity of its
friends, so they discover and draw out the corruptions of its enemies,
in whom there then appears more brutish malice than one would have
thought of. Now their triumphing in Jerusalem's ruin is here said to
proceed, 1. From a sinful passion against the people of Israel; from
anger and envy, and hatred against them ([Eze
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#011)), that perpetual hatred spoken
of [Eze 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#005). Though they were not a
match for them, and therefore could not do them a mischief themselves,
yet they were glad when the Chaldeans did them a mischief. 2. From a
sinful appetite to the land of Israel. They pleased themselves with
hopes that when the people of Israel were destroyed they should be let
into the possession of their country, which they had so often grudged
and envied them. They thought they could make out something of a title
to it, ob defectum sanguinis - for want of other heirs. If Jacob's issue
fail, they think that they are next in the entail, and that the
remainder will be to his brother's issue: "These two nations of Judah
and Israel shall be mine. Now is the time for me to put in for them." At
least they hope to come in as first occupants, being near neighbours: We
will possess it when it is deserted. Ceditur occupanti - Let us get
possession and that will be title enough. Note, Those have the spirit of
Edomites who desire the death of others because they hope to get by it,
or are pleased with their failing because they expect to come into their
business. When we see the vanity of the world in the disappointments,
losses, and crosses, that others meet with in it, instead of showing
ourselves, upon such an occasion, greedy of it, we should rather be made
thereby to sit more loose to it, and both take our affections off it and
lower our expectations from it. But in this case of the Edomites'
coveting the land of Israel, and gaping for it, there was a particular
affront to God, when they said, "These lands are given us to devour, and
we shall have our bellies full of their riches." God says, You have
boasted against me and have multiplied your words against me; for they
expected possession upon a vacancy, because Israel was driven out,
whereas the Lord was still there, [Eze
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#010). His temple indeed was burnt,
and the other tokens of his presence were gone; but his promise to give
that land to the seed of Jacob for an inheritance was not made void, but
remained in full force and virtue; and by that promise he did in effect
still keep possession for Israel, till they should in due time be
restored to it. That was Immanuel's land ([Isa
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008)); in that land he was to be born,
and therefore that people shall continue in it of whom he is to be born,
till he has passed his time in it, and then let who will take it. The
Lord is there, the Lord Jesus is to be there; and therefore Israel's
discontinuance of possession is no defeasance of their right, but it
shall be kept for them, and they shall have, hold, and enjoy it by
virtue of the divine grant, till the promise of this Canaan shall by the
Messiah be changed into the promise of a far better. Note, It is a piece
of presumption highly offensive to God for Edomites to lay claim to
those privileges and comforts that are peculiar to God's chosen Israel
and are reserved for them. It is blasphemy against the mountains of
Israel, the holy mountains, to say, because they are for the present
made a prey of and trodden under foot of the Gentiles ([Rev
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002)), even the holy city itself, that
therefore the Lord has forsaken them, their God has forgotten them. The
apostle will by no means admit such a thought as this, that God hath
cast away his people, [Rom 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001). No;
though they are cast down for a time, they are not cast off for ever.
Those reproach the Lord who say they are.

II\. The notice God took of the barbarous insolence of the Edomites, and
the doom passed upon them for it: I have heard all thy blasphemies, [Eze
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#012). And again ([Eze
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#013)), You have multiplied your words
against me, and I have heard them, I have observed them, I have kept an
account of them. Note, In the multitude of words, not one escapes God's
cognizance; let men speak ever so much, ever so fast, though they
multiply words, which they themselves regard not, but forget
immediately, yet none of them are lost in the crowd, not the most idle
words; but God hears them, and will be able to charge the sinner with
them. All the haughty and hard speeches, particularly, which are spoken
against the Israel of God, the words which are magnified (as it is in
the margin, [Eze 35:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#013)) as well as the
words which are multiplied, God takes notice of. For, as the most
trifling words are not below his cognizance, so the most daring are not
above his rebuke. I have heard all thy blasphemies. This is a good
reason why we should bear reproach as if we heard it not, because God
will hear, [Psa 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#013), [Psa
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#015). God has heard the Edomites'
blasphemy; let them therefore hear their doom, [Eze
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#014), [Eze
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#015). It was a national sin (the
blasphemies charged upon them were the sense and language of all the
Edomites), and therefore shall be punished with a national desolation.
And, 1. It shall be a distinguishing punishment. As God has peculiar
favours for Israelites, so he has peculiar plagues for Edomites: so that
"When the whole earth rejoices I will make thee desolate; when other
nations have their desolations repaired, to their joy, thine shall be
perpetual," [Eze 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#009). 2. The
punishment shall answer to the sin: "As thou didst rejoice in the
desolation of the house of Israel, God will give thee enough of
desolation; since thou art so fond of it, thou shalt be desolate; I will
make thee so." Note, Those who, instead of weeping with the mourners,
make a jest of their grievances, may justly be made to weep like the
mourners, and themselves to feel the weight, to feel the smart, of those
grievances which they set so light by. Some read [Eze
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#014) so as to complete the
resemblance between the sin and the punishment: The whole earth shall
rejoice when I make thee desolate, as thou didst rejoice when Israel was
made desolate. Those that are glad at the death and fall of others may
expect that others will be glad of their death, of their fall. 3. In the
destruction of the enemies of the church God designs his own glory, and
we may be sure that he will not come short of his design. (1.) That
which he intends is to manifest himself, as a just and jealous God, firm
to his covenant and faithful to his people and their injured cause ([Eze
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#011)): I will make myself known among
them when I have judged thee. The Lord is and will be known by the
judgments which he executes. (2.) His intention shall be fully answered;
not only his own people shall be made to know it to their comfort, but
even the Edomites themselves, and all the other enemies of his name and
people, shall know that he is the Lord, [Eze
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#004), [Eze
35:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#009), [Eze
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#015). As the works of creation and
common providence demonstrate that there is a God, so the care taken of
Israel shows that Jehovah, the God of Israel, is that God alone, the
true and living God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 36](eze036)

</div>
