<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze026)  [Next](eze028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 27:0</span></span>

Still we are attending the funeral of Tyre and the lamentations made for
the fall of that renowned city. In this chapter we have, I. A large
account of the dignity, wealth, and splendour of Tyre, while it was in
its strength, the vast trade it drove, and the interest it had among the
nations (v. 1-25), which is designed to make its ruin the more
lamentable. II. A prediction of its fall and ruin, and the confusion and
consternation which all its neighbours shall thereby be put into ([Eze
27:26-36](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#026)). And this is intended to
stain the pride of all worldly glory, and, by setting the one
over-against the other, to let us see the vanity and uncertainty of the
riches, honours, and pleasures of the world, and what little reason we
have to place our happiness in them or to be confident of the
continuance of them; so that all this is written for our learning.

[Ezekiel 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 27:1</span></span>

Here, I. The prophet is ordered to take up a lamentation for Tyrus, [Eze
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#002). It was yet in the height of its
prosperity, and there appeared not the least symptom of its decay; yet
the prophet must lament it, because its prosperity is its snare, is the
cause of its pride and security, which will make its fall the more
grievous. Even those that live at ease are to be lamented if they be not
preparing for trouble. He must lament it because its ruin is hastening
on apace; it is sure, it is near; and though the prophet foretel it, and
justify God in it, yet he must lament it. Note, We ought to mourn for
the miseries of other nations, as well as for our own, out of an
affection for mankind in general; it is a part of the honour we owe to
all men to bewail their calamities, even those which they have brought
upon themselves by their own folly.

II\. He is directed what to say, and to say it in the name of the Lord
Jehovah, a name not unknown in Tyre, and which shall be better known,
[Eze 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#006).

1\. He must upbraid Tyre with her pride: O Tyrus! thou hast said, I am
of perfect beauty ([Eze 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#003)), of
universal beauty (so the word is), every way accomplished, and therefore
every where admired. Zion, that had the beauty of holiness, is called
indeed the perfection of beauty ([Psa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#002)); that is the beauty of the Lord.
But Tyre, because well-built and well-filled with money and trade, will
set up for a perfect beauty. Note, It is the folly of the children of
this world to value themselves on the pomp and pleasure they live in, to
call themselves beauties for the sake of them, and, if in these they
excel others, to think themselves perfect. But God takes notice of the
vain conceits men have of themselves in their prosperity when the mind
is lifted up with the condition, and often, for the humbling of the
spirit, finds a way to bring down the estate. Let none reckon themselves
beautified any further than they are sanctified, nor say that they are
of perfect beauty till they come to heaven.

2\. He must upbraid Tyre with her prosperity, which was the matter of
her pride. In elegies it is usual to insert encomiums of those whose
fall we lament; the prophet, accordingly, praises Tyre for all that she
had that was praiseworthy. He has nothing to say of her religion, her
piety, her charity, her being a refuge to the distressed or using her
interest to do good offices among her neighbours; but she lived great,
and had a great trade, and all the trading part of mankind made court to
her. The prophet must describe her height and magnificence, that God may
be the more glorified in her fall, as the God who looks upon every one
that is proud and abases him, hides the proud in the dust together, and
binds their faces in secret, [Job
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#012).

(1.) The city of Tyre was advantageously situated, at the entry of the
sea ([Eze 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#003)), having many
commodious harbours each way, not as cities seated on rivers, which the
shipping can come but one way to. It stood at the east end of the
Mediterranean, very convenient for trade by land into all the Levant
parts; so that she became a merchant of the people for many isles. Lying
between Greece and Asia, it became the great emporium, or mart-town, the
rendezvous of merchants from all parts: They borders are in the heart of
the seas, [Eze 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#004). It was surrounded
with water, which was a great advantage to its trade; it was the darling
of the sea, laid in its bosom, in its heart. Note, It is a great
convenience, upon many accounts, to live in an island: seas are the most
ancient land-mark, not which our fathers have set, but the God of our
fathers, and which cannot be removed as other land-marks may, nor so
easily got over. The people so situated may the more easily dwell alone,
if they please, as not reckoned among the nations, and yet, if they
please, may the more easily traffic abroad and keep a correspondence
with the nations. We therefore of this island must own that he who
determines the bounds of men's habitations has determined well for us.

(2.) It was curiously built, according as the fashion then was; and,
being a city on a hill, it made a glorious show and tempted the ships
that sailed by into her ports ([Eze
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#004)): They builders have perfected
thy beauty; they have so improved in architecture that nothing appears
in the buildings of Tyre that can be found fault with; and yet it wants
that perfection of beauty into which the Lord does and will build up his
Jerusalem.

(3.) It had its haven replenished with abundance of gallant ships, [Isa
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#021). The ship-carpenters did their
part, as well as the house-carpenters theirs. The Tyrians are thought to
be the first that invented the art of navigation; at least they improved
it, and brought it to as great a perfection perhaps as it could be
without the loadstone. \[1.\] They made the boards, or planks, for the
hulk of the ship, of fir-trees fetched from Senir, a mount in the land
of Israel, joined with Hermon, [Sol
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008). Planks of fir were smooth and
light, but not so lasting as our English oak. \[2.\] They had cedars
from Lebanon, another mountain of Israel, for their masts, [Eze
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#005). \[3.\] They had oaks from Bashan
([Isa 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013)), to make oars of; for it
is probable that their ships were mostly galleys, that go with oars. The
people of Israel built few ships for themselves, but they furnished the
Tyrians with timber for shipping. Thus one country uses what another
produced, and so they are serviceable one to another, and cannot say to
each other, I have no need of thee. \[4.\] Such magnificence did they
affect in building their ships that they made the very benches of ivory,
which they fetched from the isles of Chittim, from Italy or Greece, and
had workmen from the Ashurites or Assyrians to make them, so rich would
they have their state-rooms in their ships to be. \[5.\] So very
prodigal were they that they made their sails of fine linen fetched from
Egypt, and that embroidered too, [Eze
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#007). Or it may be meant of their
flags (which they hoisted to notify what city they belonged to), which
were very costly. The word signifies a banner as well as a sail. \[6.\]
They hung those rooms on ship-board with blue and purple, the richest
cloths and richest colours they could get from the isles they traded
with. For though Tyre was itself famous for purple, which is therefore
called the Tyrian dye, yet they must have that which was far-fetched.

(4.) These gallant ships were well-manned, by men of great ingenuity and
industry. The pilots and masters of the ships, that had command in their
fleets, were of their own city, such as they could put a confidence in
([Eze 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#008)): Thy wise men, O Tyrus!
that were in thee, were thy pilots. But, for common sailors, they had
men from other countries; The inhabitants of Arvad and Zidon were thy
mariners. These came from cities hear them; Zidon was sister to Tyre,
not two leagues off, to the northward; there they bred able seamen,
which it is the interest of the maritime powers to support and give all
the countenance they can to. They sent to Gebal in Syria for calkers, or
strengtheners of the clefts or chinks, to stop them when the ships come
home, after long voyages, to be repaired. To do this they had the
ancients and wise men ([Eze 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#009)); for
there is more need of wisdom and prudence to repair what has gone to
decay than to build anew. In public matters there is occasion for the
ancients and wise men to be the repairers of the breaches and the
restorers of paths to dwell in. Nay, all the countries they traded with
were at their service, and were willing to send men into their pay, to
put their youths apprentice in Tyre, or to put them on board their
fleets; so that all the ships in the sea with their mariners were ready
to occupy thy merchandise. Those that give good wages shall have hands
at command.

(5.) Their city was guarded by a military force that was very
considerable, [Eze 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#010), [Eze
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#011). The Tyrians were themselves
wholly given to trade; but it was necessary that they should have a good
army on foot, and therefore they took those of other states into their
pay, such as were fittest for service, though they had them from afar
(which perhaps was their policy), from Persia, Lud, and Phut. These bore
their arms when there was occasion, and in time of peace hung up the
shield and buckler in the armoury, as it were to proclaim peace, and let
the world know that they had at present no need of them, but they were
ready to be taken down whenever there was occasion for them. Their walls
were guarded by the man of Arvad; their towers were garrisoned by the
Gammadim, robust men, that had a great deal of strength in their arms;
yet the vulgar Latin renders it pygmies, men no longer than one's arm.
They hung their shields upon the walls in their magazines or places of
arms; or hung them out upon the walls of the city, that none might dare
to approach them, seeing how well provided they were with all things
necessary for their own defence. "Thus they set forth thy comeliness
([Eze 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#010)), and made they beauty
perfect," [Eze 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#011). It contributed
as much as any thing to the glory of Tyre that it had those of all the
surrounding nations in its service, except the land of Israel (though it
lay next them), which furnished them with timber, but we do not find
that it furnished them with men; that would have trenched upon the
liberty and dignity of the Jewish nation, [Ch2
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#017), [Ch2
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#018). It was also the glory of Tyre
that it had such a militia, so fit for service, and in constant pay, and
such an armoury, like that in the tower of David, where hung the shields
of mighty men, [Sol 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004). It is
observable that there and here the armouries are said to be furnished
with shields and helmets, defensive arms, not with swords and spears,
offensive, though it is probable that there were such, to intimate that
the military force of a people must be intended only for their own
protection and not to invade and annoy their neighbours, to secure their
own right, not to encroach upon the rights of others.

(6.) They had a vast trade and a correspondence with all parts of the
known world. Some nations they dealt with in one commodity and some in
another, according as either its products or its manufactures were, and
the fruits of nature or art were, with which it was blessed. This is
very much enlarged upon here, as that which was the principal glory of
Tyre, and which supported all the rest. We do not find any where in
scripture so many nations named together as are here; so that this
chapter, some think, gives much light to the first account we have of
the settlement of the nations after the flood, Gen. 10. The critics have
abundance of work here to find out the several places and nations spoken
of. Concerning many of them their conjectures are different and they
leave us in the dark and at much uncertainty; it is well that it is not
material. Modern surveys come short of explaining the ancient geography.
And therefore we will not amuse ourselves here with a particular enquiry
either concerning the traders or the goods they traded in. We leave it
to the critical expositors, and observe that only which is improvable.
\[1.\] We have reason to think that Ezekiel knew little, of his own
knowledge, concerning the trade of Tyre. He was a priest, carried away
captive far enough from the neighbourhood of Tyre, we may suppose when
he was young, and there he had been eleven years. And yet he speaks of
the particular merchandises of Tyre as nicely as if he had been
comptroller of the custom-house there, by which it appears that he was
divinely inspired in what he spoke and wrote. It is God that saith this,
[Eze 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#003). \[2.\] This account of the
trade of Tyre intimates to us that God's eye is upon men, and that he
takes cognizance of what they do when they are employed in their worldly
business, not only when they are at church, praying and hearing, but
when they are in their markets and fairs, and upon the exchange, buying
and selling, which is a good reason why we should in all our dealings
keep a conscience void of offence, and have our eye always upon him
whose eye is always upon us. \[3.\] We may here observe the wisdom of
God, and his goodness, as the common Father of mankind, in making one
country to abound in one commodity and another in another, and all more
or less serviceable either to the necessity or to the comfort or
ornament of human life. Non omis fert omnia tellus - One land does not
supply all the varieties of produce. Providence dispenses its gifts
variously, some to each, and all to none, that there may be a mutual
commerce among those whom God has made of one blood, though they are
made to dwell on all the face of the earth, [Act
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026). Let every nations therefore
thank God for the productions of its country; though they be not so rich
as those of others, yet there is use for them in the public service of
the world. \[4.\] See what a blessing trade and merchandise are to
mankind, especially when followed in the fear of God, and with a regard
not only to private advantage, but to a common benefit. The earth is
full of God's riches, [Psa 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024).
There is a multitude of all kinds of riches in it (as it is here, [Eze
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#012)), gathered off its surface and
dug out of its bowels. The earth is also full of the fruits of men's
ingenuity and industry, according as their genius leads them. Now by
exchange and barter these are made more extensively useful; thus what
can be spared is helped off, and what is wanted is fetched in, in lieu
of it, from the most distant countries. Those that are not tradesmen
themselves have reason to thank God for tradesmen and merchants, by whom
the productions of other countries are brought to our hands, as those of
our own are by our husbandmen. \[5.\] Besides the necessaries that are
here traded in, see what abundance of things are here mentioned that
only serve to please fancy, and are made valuable only by men's humour
and custom; and yet God allows us to use them, and trade in them, and
part with those things for them which we can spare that are of an
intrinsic worth much beyond them. Here are horns of ivory and ebony
([Eze 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#015)), that are brought for a
present, exposed to sale, and offered in exchange, or (as some think)
presented to the city, or the great men of it, to obtain their favour.
Here are emeralds, coral, and agate ([Eze
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#016)), all precious stones, and gold
([Eze 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#022)), which the world could
better be without than iron and common stones. Here are, to please the
taste and smell, the chief of all spices ([Eze
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#022)), cassia and calamus ([Eze
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#019)), and, for ornament, purple,
broidered work, and fine linen ([Eze
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#016)), precious clothes for chariots
([Eze 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#020)), blue clothes (which Tyre
was famous for), broidered work, and chests of rich apparel, bound with
rich cords, and made of cedar, a sweet wood to perfume the garments kept
in them, [Eze 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#024). Upon the review
of this invoice, or bill of parcels, we may justly say, What a great
many things are here that we have no need of, and can live very
comfortably without! \[6.\] It is observable that Judah and the land of
Israel were merchants in Tyre too; in a way of trade they were allowed
to converse with the heathen. But they traded mostly in wheat, a
substantial commodity, and necessary, wheat of Minnith and Pannag, two
countries in Canaan famous for the best wheat, as some think. The whole
land indeed was a land of wheat ([Deu
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008)); it had the fat of kidneys of
wheat, [Deu 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014). Tyre was maintained
by corn fetched from the land of Israel. They traded likewise in honey,
and oil, and balm, or rosin; all useful things, and not serving to pride
or luxury. And the land which these were the staple commodities of was
that which was the glory of all lands, which God reserved for his
peculiar people, not those that traded in spices and precious stones;
and the Israel of God must reckon themselves well provided for if they
have food convenient; for those that are acquainted with the delights of
the children of God will not set their hearts on the delights of the
sons and daughters of men, or the treasures of kings and provinces. We
find indeed that the New Testament Babylon trades in such things as Tyre
traded in, [Rev 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012), [Rev
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013). For, notwithstanding its
pretensions to sanctity, it is a mere worldly interest. \[7.\] Though
Tyre was a city of great merchandise, and they got abundance by buying
and selling, importing commodities from one place and exporting them to
another, yet manufacture-trades were not neglected. The wares of their
own making, and a multitude of such wares, are here spoken of, [Eze
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#016), [Eze
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#018). It is the wisdom of a nation to
encourage art and industry, and not to bear hard upon the
handicraft-tradesmen; for it contributes much to the wealth and honour
of a nation to send abroad wares of their own making, which may bring
them in the multitude of all riches. \[8.\] All this made Tyrus very
great and very proud: The ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in they
market ([Eze 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#025)); thou wast admired
and cried up by all the nations that had dealings with thee; for thou
wast replenished in wealth and number of people, wast beautified, and
made very glorious, in the midst of the seas. Those that grow very rich
are cried up as very glorious; for riches are glorious things in the
eyes of carnal people, [Gen 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#001).

[Ezekiel 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 27:26</span></span>

We have seen Tyre flourishing; here we have Tyre falling, and great is
the fall of it, so much the greater for its having made such a figure in
the world. Note, The most mighty and magnificent kingdoms and states,
sooner or later, have their day to come down. They have their period;
and, when they are in their zenith, they will begin to decline. But the
destruction of Tyre was sudden. Her sun went down at noon. And all her
wealth and grandeur, pomp and power, did but aggravate her ruin, and
make it the more grievous to herself and astonishing to all about her.
Now observe here, 1. How the ruin of Tyrus will be brought about, [Eze
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#026). She is as a great ship richly
laden, that is split or sunk by the indiscretion of her steersmen: Thy
rowers have themselves brought thee into great and dangerous waters; the
governors of the city, and those that had the management of their public
affairs, by some mismanagement or other involved them in that war with
the Chaldeans which was the ruin of their state. By their insolence, by
some affront given to the Chaldeans or some attempt made upon them, in
confidence of their own ability to contend with them, they provoked
Nebuchadnezzar to make a descent upon them, and, by their obstinacy in
standing it out to the last, enraged him to such a degree that he
determined on the ruin of their state, and, like an east wind, broke
them in the midst of the seas. Note, It is ill with a people when those
that sit at the stern, instead of putting them into the harbour, run
them aground. 2. How great and general the ruin will be. All her wealth
shall be buried with her, her riches, her fairs, and her merchandise
([Eze 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#027)); all that had any
dependence upon her, and dealings with her, in trade, in war, in
conversation, shall ball with her into the midst of the seas, in the day
of her ruin. Note, Those who make creatures their confidence, place
their happiness in their interest in them and rest their hopes upon
them, will of course fall with them; happy therefore are those that have
the God of Jacob for their help, and whose hope is in the Lord their
God, who lives for ever. 3. What sad lamentation would be made for the
destruction of Tyre. The pilots, her princes and governors, when they
see how wretchedly they have mismanaged and how much they have
contributed to their own ruin, shall cry out so loud as to make even the
suburbs shake ([Eze 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#028)), such a
vexation shall it be to them to reflect upon their own bad conduct. The
inferior officers, that were as the mariners of the state, shall be
forced to come down from their respective posts ([Eze
27:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#029)), and they shall cry out against
thee, as having deceived them, in not proving so well able to hold out
as they thought thou hadst been; they shall cry bitterly for the common
ruin, and their own share in it. They shall use all the most solemn
expressions of grief; they shall cast dust on their heads, in
indignation against themselves, shall wallow themselves in ashes, as
having bid a final farewell to all ease and pleasure; they shall make
themselves bald ([Eze 27:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#031)), with
tearing their hair; and, according to the custom of great mourners,
those shall gird themselves with sackcloth who used to wear find linen,
and, instead of merry songs, they shall weep with bitterness of heart.
Note, Losses and crosses are very grievous, and hard to be borne, to
those that have long been wallowing in pleasure and sleeping in carnal
security. 4. How Tyre should be upbraided with her former honour and
prosperity ([Eze 27:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#032), [Eze
27:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#033)); she that was Tyrus the
renowned shall now be called Tyrus the destroyed in the midst of the
sea. "What city is like Tyre? Did ever any city come down from such a
height of prosperity to such a depth of adversity? Time was when thy
wares, those of thy own making and those that passed through thy hands,
went forth out of the seas, and were exported to all parts of the world;
then thou filledst many people, and didst enrich the kings of the earth
and their kingdoms." The Tyrians, though they bore such a sway in trade,
were yet, it seems, fair merchants, and let their neighbours not only
live, but thrive by them. All that dealt with them were gainers; they
did not cheat or oppress the people, but did enrich them with the
multitude of their merchandise. "But now those that used to be enriched
by thee shall be ruined with thee" (as is usual in trade); "when thou
shalt be broken, and all thou hast is seized on, all thy company shall
fall too," [Eze 27:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#034). There is an end
of Tyre, that made such a noise and bustle in the world. This great
blaze goes out in a snuff. 5. How the fall of Tyre should be matter of
terror to some and laughter to others, according as they were
differently interested and affected. Some shall be sorely afraid, and
shall be troubled ([Eze 27:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#035)),
concluding it will be their own turn to fall next. Others shall hiss at
her ([Eze 27:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#036)), shall ridicule her
pride, and vanity, and bad management, and think her ruin just. She
triumphed in Jerusalem's fall, and there are those that will triumph in
hers. When God casts his judgments on the sinner men also shall clap
their hands at him and shall hiss him out of his place, [Job
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#022), [Job
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#023). Is this the city which men
called the perfection of beauty?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 28](eze028)

</div>
