<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](lam005)  [Next](eze001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Book of the Prophet
Ezekiel

When we entered upon the writings of the prophets, which speak of the
things that should be hereafter, we seemed to have the same call that
St. John had ([Rev 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001).md), Come up
hither; but, when we enter upon the prophecy of this book, it is as if
the voice said, Come up higher; as we go forward in time (for Ezekiel
prophesied in the captivity, as Jeremiah prophesied just before it), so
we soar upward in discoveries yet more sublime of the divine glory.
These waters of the sanctuary still grow deeper; so far are they from
being fordable that in some places they are scarcely fathomable; yet,
deep as they are, out of them flow streams which make glad the city of
our God, the holy place of the tabernacles of the Most High. As to this
prophecy now before us, we may enquire, I. Concerning the penman of it -
it was Ezekiel; his name signifies, The strength of God, or one girt or
strengthened of God. He girded up the loins of his mind to the service,
and God put strength into him. Whom God calls to any service he will
himself enable for it; if he give commission, he will give power to
execute it. Ezekiel's name was answered when God said (and no doubt did
as he said), I have made thy face strong against their faces. The
learned Selden, in his book De Diis Syris, says that it was the opinion
of some of the ancients that the prophet Ezekiel was the same with that
Nazaratus Assyrius whom Pythagoras (as himself relates) had for his
tutor for some time, and whose lectures he attended. It is agreed that
they lived much about the same time; and we have reason to think that
many of the Greek philosophers were acquainted with the sacred writings
and borrowed some of the best of their notions from them. If we may give
credit to the tradition of the Jews, he was put to death by the captives
in Babylon, for his faithfulness and boldness in reproving them; it is
stated that they dragged him upon the stones till his brains were dashed
out. An Arabic historian says that he was put to death and was buried in
the sepulchre of Shem the son of Noah. So Hottinger relates, Thesaur.
Philol. lib. 2 cap. 1. II. Concerning the date of it - the place whence
it is dated and the time when. The scene is laid in Babylon, when it was
a house of bondage to the Israel of God; there the prophecies of this
book were preached, there they were written, when the prophet himself,
and the people to whom he prophesied, were captives there. Ezekiel and
Daniel are the only writing prophets of the Old Testament who lived and
prophesied any where but in the land of Israel, except we add Jonah, who
was sent to Nineveh to prophesy. Ezekiel prophesied in the beginning of
the captivity, Daniel in the latter end of it. It was an indication of
God's good-will to them, and his gracious designs concerning them in
their affliction, that he raised up prophets among them, both to
convince them when, in the beginning of their troubles, they were secure
and unhumbled, which was Ezekiel's business, and to comfort them when,
in the latter end of their troubles, they were dejected and discouraged.
If the Lord had been pleased to kill them, he would not have used such
apt and proper means to cure them. III. Concerning the matter and scope
of it. 1. There is much in it that is very mysterious, dark, and hard to
be understood, especially in the beginning and the latter end of it,
which therefore the Jewish rabbin forbade the reading of to their young
men, till they came to be thirty years of age, lest by the difficulties
they met with there they should be prejudiced against the scriptures;
but if we read these difficult parts of scripture with humility and
reverence, and search them diligently, though we may not be able to
untie all the knots we meet with, any more than we can solve all the
phenomena in the book of nature, yet we may from them, as from the book
of nature, gather a great deal for the confirming of our faith and the
encouraging of our hope in the God we worship. 2. Though the visions
here be intricate, such as an elephant may swim in, yet the sermons are
mostly plain, such as a lamb may wade in; and the chief design of them
is to show God's people their transgressions, that in their captivity
they might be repenting and not repining. It should seem the prophet was
constantly attended (for we read of their sitting before him as God's
people sat to hear his words, [Eze
33:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#031).md), and that he was occasionally
consulted, for we read of the elders of Israel who came to enquire of
the Lord by him, [Eze 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#001.md), [Eze
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#003.md). And as it was of great use to
the oppressed captives themselves to have a prophet with them, so it was
a testimony to their holy religion against their oppressors who
ridiculed it and them. 3. Though the reproofs and the threatenings here
are very sharp and bold, yet towards the close of the book very
comfortable assurances are given of great mercy God had in store for
them; and there, at length, we shall meet with something that has
reference to gospel times, and which was to have its accomplishment in
the kingdom of the Messiah, of whom indeed this prophet speaks less than
almost any of the prophets. But by opening the terrors of the Lord he
prepares Christ's way. By the law is the knowledge of sin, and so it
becomes our school-master to bring us to Christ. The visions which were
the prophet's credentials we have ch. 1-3, the reproofs and threatenings
ch. 4-24 betwixt which and the comforts which we have in the latter part
of the book we have messages sent to the nations that bordered upon the
land of Israel, whose destruction is foretold (ch. 25-35), to make way
for the restoration of God's Israel and the re-establishment of their
city and temple, which are foretold ch. 36 to the end. Those who would
apply the comforts to themselves must apply the convictions to
themselves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 1](eze001.md)

</div>
