<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze002)  [Next](eze004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 3:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have the further preparation of the prophet for the
work to which God called him. I. His eating the roll that was presented
to him in the close of the foregoing chapter ([Eze
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#001)). II. Further instructions and
encouragements given him to the same purport with those in the foregoing
chapter ([Eze 3:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#004)). III. The mighty
impulse he was under, with which he was carried to those that were to be
his hearers ([Eze 3:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#012)). IV. A
further explication of his office and business as a prophet, under the
similitude of a watchman ([Eze
3:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#016)). V. The restraining and
restoring of the prophet's liberty of speech, as God pleased ([Eze
3:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#022)).

[Ezekiel 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 3:1</span></span>

These verses are fitly joined by some translators to the foregoing
chapter, as being of a piece with it and a continuation of the same
vision. The prophets received the word from God that they might deliver
it to the people of God, furnished themselves that they might furnish
them with the knowledge of the mind and will of God. Now here the
prophet is taught,

I. How he must receive divine revelation himself, [Eze
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#001). Christ (whom he saw upon the
throne, [Eze 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026)) said to him, "Son
of man, eat this roll, admit this revelation into thy understanding,
take it, take the meaning of it, understand it aright, admit it into thy
heart, apply it, and be affected with it; imprint it in thy mind,
ruminate and chew the cud upon it; take it as it is entire, and make no
difficulty of it, nay, take a pleasure in it as thou dost in thy meat,
and let thy soul be nourished and strengthened by it; let it be meat and
drink to thee, and as thy necessary food; be full of it, as thou art of
the meat thou hast eaten." Thus ministers should in their studies and
meditations take in that word of God which they are to preach to others.
Thy words were found, and I did eat them, [Jer
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#016). They must be both well
acquainted and much affected with the things of God, that they may speak
of them both clearly and warmly, with a great deal of divine light and
heat. Now observe, 1. How this command is inculcated upon the prophet.
In the foregoing chapter, Eat what I give thee; and here ([Eze
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#001)), "Eat that thou findest, that
which is presented to thee by the hand of Christ." Note, Whatever we
find to be the word of God, whatever is brought to us by him who is the
Word of God, we must receive it without disputing. What we find set
before us in the scripture, that we must eat. And again ([Eze
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#003)), "Cause thy belly to eat, and
fill thy bowels with this roll; do not eat it and bring it up again, as
that which is nauseous, but eat it and retain it, as that which is
nourishing and grateful to the stomach. Feast upon this vision till thou
be full of matter, as Elihu was, [Job
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#018). Let the word have a place in
thee, the innermost place." We must take pains with our own hearts, that
we may cause them duly to receive and entertain the word of God, that
every faculty may do its office, in order to the due digesting of the
word of God, that it may be turned in succum et sanguinem - into blood
and spirits. We must empty ourselves of worldly things, that we may fill
our bowels with this roll. 2. How this command is explained ([Eze
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#010)): "All my words that I shall
speak unto thee, to be spoken unto the people, thou must receive in thy
heart, as well as hear with thy ears, receive them in the love of them."
Let these sayings sink down into your ears, [Luk
9:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#044). Christ demands the prophet's
attention not only to what he now says, but to all that he shall at any
time hereafter speak: Receive it all in thy heart; meditate on these
things and give thyself wholly to them, [Ti1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#015). 3. How this command was obeyed
in vision. He opened his mouth and Christ caused him to eat the roll,
[Eze 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#002). If we be truly willing to
receive the word into our hearts, Christ will by his Spirit bring it
into them and cause it to dwell in us richly. If he that opens the roll,
and by his Spirit, as a Spirit of revelation, spreads it before us, did
not also open our understanding, and by his Spirit, as a Spirit of
wisdom, give us the knowledge of it and cause us to eat it, we should be
for ever strangers to it. The prophet had reason to fear that the roll
would be an unpleasant morsel and a sorry dish to make a meal of, but it
proved to be in his mouth as honey for sweetness. Note, if we readily
obey even the most difficult commands, we shall find that comfort in the
reflection which will make us abundant amends for all the hardships we
meet with in the way of our duty. Though the roll was filled with
lamentations, and mourning, and woe, yet it was to the prophet as honey
for sweetness. Note, Gracious souls can receive those truths of God with
great delight which speak most terror to wicked people. We find St. John
let into some part of the revelation by such a sign as this, [Rev
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#009), [Rev
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#010). He took the book out of the
angel's hand, and ate it up, and it was, as this, in his mouth sweet as
honey; but it was bitter in the belly; and we shall find that this was
so too, for ([Eze 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#014)) the prophet
went in bitterness.

II\. How he must deliver that divine revelation to others which he
himself had received ([Eze 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#001)): Eat
this roll, and then go, speak to the house of Israel. He must not
undertake to preach the things of God to others till he did himself
fully understand them; let him not go without his errand, nor take it by
the halves. But when he does himself fully understand them he must be
both busy and bold to preach them for the good of others. We must not
conceal the words of the Holy One ([Job
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#010)), for that is burying a talent
which was given us to trade with. He must go and speak to the house of
Israel; for it is their privilege to have God's statutes and judgments
made known to them; as the giving of the law (the lively oracles), so
prophecy (the living oracles) pertains to them. He is not sent to the
Chaldeans to reprove them for their sins, but to the house of Israel to
reprove them for theirs; for the father corrects his own child if he do
amiss, not the child of a stranger.

1\. The instructions given him in speaking to them are much the same
with those in the foregoing chapter.

(1.) He must speak to them all that, and that only, which God spoke to
him. he had said before ([Eze 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#007)):
Thou shalt speak my words to them; here he says ([Eze
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#004)), Thou shalt speak with my words
unto them, or in my words. He must not only say that which for substance
is the same that God had said to him, but as near as may be in the same
language and expressions. Blessed Paul, though a man of a very happy
invention, yet speaks of the things of God in the words which the Holy
Ghost teaches, [Co1 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#013). Scripture
truths look best in scripture language, their native dress; and how can
we better speak God's mind than with his words?

(2.) He must remember that they are the house of Israel whom he is sent
to speak to, God's house and his own; and therefore such as he ought to
have a particular concern for and to deal faithfully and tenderly with.
They were such as he had an intimate acquaintance with, being not only
their countryman, but their companion in tribulation; they and he were
fellow-sufferers, and had lately been fellow-travellers, in very
melancholy circumstances, from Judea to Babylon, and had often mingled
their tears, which could not but knit their affections to each other. It
was well for the people that they had a prophet who knew experimentally
how to sympathize with them, and could not but be touched with the
feeling of their infirmities. It was well for the prophet that he had to
do with those of his own nation, not with a people of strange speech and
a hard language, deep of lip, so that thou canst not fathom their
meaning, and heavy of tongue, whom it is intolerable and impossible to
converse with. Every strange language seems to us to be deep and heavy.
"Thou art not sent to many such people, whom thou couldst neither speak
to nor hear from, neither understand nor be understood among but by an
interpreter." The apostles indeed were sent to many people of a strange
speech, but they could not have done any good among them if they had not
had the gift of tongues; but Ezekiel was sent only to one people, those
but a few, and his own, whom having acquaintance with he might hope to
find acceptance with.

(3.) He must remember what God had already told him of the bad character
of those to whom he was sent, that, if he met with discouragement and
disappointment in them, he might not be offended. They are impudent and
hard-hearted ([Eze 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#007)), no
convictions of sin would make them blush, no denunciations of wrath
would make them tremble. Two things aggravated their obstinacy: - \[1.\]
That they were more obstinate than their neighbours would have been if
the prophet had been sent to them. had God sent him to any other people,
though of a strange speech, surely they would have hearkened to him;
they would at least have given him a patient hearing and shown him that
respect which he could not obtain of his own countrymen. The Ninevites
were wrought upon by Jonah's preaching when the house of Israel, that
was compassed about with so great a cloud of prophets, was unhumbled and
unreformed. But what shall we say to these things? The means of grace
are given to those that will not improve them and withheld from those
that would have improved them. We must resolve this into the divine
sovereignty, and say, Lord, thy judgments are a great deep. \[2.\] That
they were obstinate against God himself: "They will not hearken unto
thee, and no marvel, for they will not hearken unto me;" they will not
regard the word of the prophet, for they will not regard the rod of God,
by which the Lord's voice cries in the city. If they believe not God
speaking to them by a minister, neither would they believe though he
should speak to them by a voice from heaven; nay, therefore they reject
what the prophet says, because it comes from God, whom the carnal mind
is enmity to. They are prejudiced against the law of God, and for that
reason turn a deaf ear to his prophets, whose business it is to enforce
his law.

(4.) He must resolve to put on courage, and Christ promises to steel him
with it, [Eze 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#008), [Eze
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009). He is sent to such as are
impudent and hard-hearted, who will receive no impressions nor be
wrought upon either by fair means or foul, who will take a pride in
affronting God's messenger and confronting the message. It will be a
hard task to know how to deal with them; but, \[1.\] God will enable him
to put a good face on it: "I have made thy face strong against their
faces, endued thee with all the firmness and boldness that the case
calls for." Perhaps Ezekiel was naturally bashful and timorous, but, if
God did not find him fit, yet by his grace he made him fit, to encounter
the greatest difficulties. Note, The more impudent wicked people are in
their opposition to religion the more openly and resolutely should God's
people appear in the practice and defence of it. let the innocent stir
up himself against the hypocrite, [Job
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#008). When vice is daring let not
virtue be sneaking. And, when God has work to do, he will animate men
for it and give them strength according to the day. If there be
occasion, God can and will by his grace make the foreheads of faithful
ministers as an adamant, so that the most threatening powers shall not
dash them out of countenance. The Lord God will help men, therefore have
I set my face like a flint, [Isa 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007).
\[2.\] He is therefore commanded to have a good heart on it, and to go
on in his work with a holy security, not valuing either the censures or
the threats of his enemies: "Fear not, neither be dismayed at their
looks; let not the menaces of their impotent malice cast either a damp
upon thee or a stumbling-block before thee." Bold sinners must have bold
reprovers; evil beasts must be rebuked cuttingly ([Tit
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012), [Tit
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#013)), must be saved with fear, [Jde
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#023). Those that keep closely to the
service of God may be sure of the favour of God, and then they need not
be dismayed at the proud looks of men. Let not the angry countenance
that drives away a back-biting tongue give any check to a reproving
tongue.

(5.) He must continue instant with them in his preaching, whatever the
success was, [Eze 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#011). he must go to
those of the captivity, who, being in affliction, it was to be hoped
would receive instruction; he must look upon them as the children of his
people, to whom he was nearly allied, and for whom he therefore ought to
have a very tender concern, as Paul for his kinsmen, [Rom
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003). And he must tell them not only
what the Lord said, but that the Lord said it; let him speak in God's
name, and back what he said with his authority: Thus saith the Lord God;
tell them so, whether they will hear or whether they will forbear. Not
that it may be indifferent to us what success our ministry has, but,
whatever it be, we must go on with our work and leave the issue to God.
We must not say "Here are some so good that we do not need to speak to
them," or, "Here are others so bad that it is to no purpose to speak to
them;" but, however it be, deliver thy message faithfully, tell them,
The Lord God saith so and so, let them reject it at their peril.

2\. Full instructions being thus given to the prophet, pursuant to his
commission, we are here told,

(1.) With what satisfaction this mission of his was applauded by the
holy angels, who were very well pleased to see one of a nature inferior
to their own thus honourable employed and entrusted. He heard a voice of
a great rushing ([Eze 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#012)), as if the
angels thronged and crowded to see the inauguration of a prophet; for to
them is known by the church (that is, by reflection from the church) the
manifold wisdom of God, [Eph 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010).
They seemed to strive who should get nearest to this great sight. he
heard the noise of their wings that touched, or (as the word is) kissed
one another, denoting the mutual affections and assistances of the
angels. He heard also the noise of the wheels of Providence moving
over-against the angels and in concert with them. All this was to engage
his attention and to convince him that the God who sent him, having such
a glorious train of attendants, no doubt had power sufficient to bear
him out in his work. But all this noise ended in the voice of praise. He
heard them saying, Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.
\[1.\] From heaven, his place above, whence his glory was now in vision
descending, or whither perhaps it was now returning. Let the innumerable
company of angels above join with those employed in this vision in
saying, Blessed be the glory of the Lord. Praise you the Lord from the
heavens. Praise him, all his angels, [Psa
148:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001), [Psa
148:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#002). \[2.\] From the temple, his
place on earth, whence his glory was now departing. They lament the
departure of the glory, but adore the righteousness of God in it:
however it be, yet God is blessed and glorious, and ever will be so. The
prophet Isaiah heard God thus praised when he received his commission
([Isa 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003)); and a comfort it is to all
the faithful servants of God, when they see how much God is dishonoured
in this lower world, to think how much he is admired and glorified in
the upper world. The glory of the Lord has many slights from our place,
but many praises from his place.

(2.) With what reluctance of his own spirit, and yet with what a mighty
efficacy of the Spirit of God, the prophet was himself brought to the
execution of his office. The grace given to him was not in vain; for,
\[1.\] The Spirit led him with a strong hand. God bade him go, but he
stirred not till the Spirit took him up. The Spirit of the living
creatures that was in the wheels now was in the prophet too, and took
him up, first to hear more distinctly the acclamations of the angels
([Eze 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#012)), but afterwards ([Eze
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#014)) lifted him up, and took him away
to his work, which he was backward to, being very loth either to bring
trouble upon himself or foretel it to his people. he would gladly have
been excused, but must own, as another prophet does ([Jer
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#007)), Thou was stronger than I, and
hast prevailed. Ezekiel would willingly have kept all he heard and saw
to himself, that it might go no further, but the hand of the Lord was
strong upon him and overpowered him; he was carried on contrary to his
own inclinations by the prophetical impulse, so that he could not but
speak the things which he had heard and seen, as the apostles, [Act
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#020). Note, Those whom God calls to
the ministry, as he furnishes their heads for it, so he bows their
hearts to it. \[2.\] He followed with a sad heart: The Spirit took me
away, says he, and then I went, but it was in bitterness, in the heat of
my spirit. He had perhaps seen what a hard task Jeremiah had at
Jerusalem when he appeared as a prophet, what pains he took, what
opposition he met with, how he was abused by hand and tongue, and what
ill treatment he met with, and all to no purpose. "And" (thinks Ezekiel)
"must I be set up for a mark like him?" The life of a captive was bad
enough; but what would the life of a prophet in captivity be? Therefore
he went in this fret and under this discomposure. Note, There may in
some cases be a great reluctance of corruption even where there is a
manifest predominance of grace. "I went, not disobedient to the heavenly
vision, or shrinking from the work, as Jonah, but I went in bitterness,
not at all pleased with it." When he received the divine revelation
himself, it was to him sweet as honey ([Eze
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#003)); he could with abundance of
pleasure have spent all his days in meditating upon it; but when he is
to preach it to others, who, he foresees, will be hardened and
exasperated by it, and have their condemnation aggravated, then he goes
in bitterness. Note, It is a great grief to faithful ministers, and
makes them go on in their work with a heavy heart, when they find people
untractable and hating to be reformed. he went in the heat of his
spirit, because of the discouragements he foresaw he should meet with;
but the hand of the Lord was strong upon him, not only to compel him to
his work, but to fit him for it, to carry him through it, and animate
him against the difficulties he would meet with (so we may understand
it); and, when he found it so, he was better reconciled to his business
and applied himself to it: Then he came to those of the captivity ([Eze
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#015)), to some place where there were
many of them together, and sat where they sat, working, or reading, or
talking, and continued among them seven days to hear what they said and
observe what they did; and all that time he was waiting for the word of
the Lord to come to him. Note, Those that would speak suitably and
profitably to people about their souls must acquaint themselves with
them and with their case, must do as Ezekiel did here, must sit where
they sit, and speak familiarly to them of the things of God, and put
themselves into their condition, yea, though they sit by the rivers of
Babylon. But observe, He was there astonished, overwhelmed with grief
for the sins and miseries of his people and overpowered by the pomp of
the vision he had seen. he was there desolate (so some read it); God
showed him no visions, men made him no visit. Thus was he left to digest
his grief, and come to a better temper, before the word of the Lord
should come to him. Note, Those whom god designs to exalt and enlarge he
first humbles and straitens for a time.

[Ezekiel 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 3:16</span></span>

These further instructions God gave to the prophet at the end of seven
days, that is, on the seventh day after the vision he had; and it is
very probably that both that and this were on the sabbath day, which the
house of Israel, even in their captivity, observed as well as they could
in those circumstances. We do not find that their conquerors and
oppressors tied them to any constant service, as their Egyptian
task-masters had formerly done, but that they might observe the
sabbath-rest for a sign to distinguish between them and their
neighbours; but for the sabbath-work they had not the convenience of
temple or synagogue, only it should seem they had a place by the river
side where prayer was wont to be made (as [Act
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#013)); there they met on the sabbath
day; there their enemies upbraided them with the songs of Zion ([Psa
137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001), [Psa
137:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#003)); there Ezekiel met them, and
the word of the Lord then and there came to him. He that had been musing
and meditating on the things of God all the week was fit to speak to the
people in God's name on the sabbath day, and disposed to hear God speak
to him. This sabbath day Ezekiel was not so honoured with visions of the
glory of God as he had been the sabbath before; but he is plainly, and
by a very common similitude, told his duty, which he is to communicate
to the people. Note, Raptures and transports of joy are not the daily
bread of God's children, however they may upon special occasions be
feasted with them. We must not deny but that we have truly communion
with God ([Jo1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003)) though we have it
not always so sensibly as at some times. And, though the mysteries of
the kingdom of heaven may sometimes be looked into, yet ordinarily it is
plain preaching that is most for edification. God here tells the prophet
what his office was, and what the duty of that office; and this (we may
suppose) he was to tell the people, that they might attend to what he
said and improve it accordingly. Note, It is good for people to know and
consider what a charge their ministers have of them and what an account
they must shortly give of that charge. Observe,

I. What the office is to which the prophet is called: Son of man, I have
made thee a watchman to the house of Israel, [Eze
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017). The vision he saw astonished
him: he knew not what to make of that, and therefore God used this plain
comparison, which served better to lead him to the understanding of his
work and so to reconcile him to it. he sat among the captives, and said
little, but God comes to him, and tells him that will not do; he is a
watchman, and has something to say to them; he is appointed to be as a
watchman in the city, to guard against fire, robbers, and disturbers of
the peace, as a watchman over the flock, to guard against thieves and
beasts of prey, but especially as a watchman in the camp, in an invaded
country or a besieged town, that is to watch the motions of the enemy,
and to sound an alarm upon the approach, nay, upon the first appearance,
of danger. This supposes the house of Israel to be in a military state,
and exposed to enemies, who are subtle and restless in their attempts
upon it; yea, and each of the particular members of that house to be in
danger and concerned to stand upon their guard. Note, Ministers are
watchmen on the church's walls ([Isa
62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006)), watchmen that go about the
city, [Sol 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#003). It is a toilsome
office. Watchmen must keep awake, be they ever so sleepy, and keep
abroad, be it ever so cold; they must stand all weathers upon the
watch-tower, [Isa 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#008); [Gen
31:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#040). It is a dangerous office.
Sometimes they cannot keep their post, but are in peril of death from
the enemy, who gain their point if they kill the sentinel; and yet they
dare not quit their post upon pain of death from their general. Such a
dilemma are the church's watchmen in; men will curse them if they be
faithful, and God will curse them if they be false. But it is a needful
office; the house of Israel cannot be safe without watchmen, and yet,
except the Lord keep it, the watchman waketh but in vain, [Psa
127:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001), [Psa
127:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002).

II\. What is the duty of this office. The work of a watchman is to take
notice and to give notice.

1\. The prophet, as a watchman, must take notice of what God said
concerning this people, not only concerning the body of the people, to
which the prophecies of Jeremiah and other prophets had most commonly
reference, but concerning particular persons, according as their
character was. He must not, as other watchmen, look round to spy danger
and gain intelligence, but he must look up to God, and further he need
not look: Hear the word at my mouth, [Eze
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017). Note, Those that are to preach
must first hear; for how can those teach others who have not first
learned themselves?

2\. He must give notice of what he heard. As a watchman must have eyes
in his head, so he must have a tongue in his head; if he be dumb, it is
as bad as if he were blind, [Isa
56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010). Thou shalt give them warning
from me, sound an alarm in the holy mountain; not in his own name, or as
from himself, but in God's name, and from him. Ministers are God's mouth
to the children of men. The scriptures are written for our admonition.
By them is thy servant warned, [Psa
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#011). But, because that which is
delivered viv voce - by the living voice, commonly makes the deepest
impression, God is pleased, by men like ourselves, who are equally
concerned, to enforce upon us the warnings of the written word. Now the
prophet, in his preaching, must distinguish between the wicked and the
righteous, the precious and the vile, and in his applications must suit
his alarms to each, giving every one his portion; and, if he did this,
he should have the comfort of it, whatever the success was, but, if not,
he was accountable.

(1.) Some of those he had to do with were wicked, and he must warn them
not to go on in their wickedness, but to turn from it, [Eze
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#018), [Eze
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#019). We may observe here, \[1.\] That
the God of heaven has said, and does say, to every wicked man, that if
he go on still in his trespasses he shall surely die. His iniquity shall
undoubtedly be his ruin; it tends to ruin and will end in ruin. Dying
thou shalt die, thou shalt die so great a death, shalt die eternally, be
ever dying, but never dead. The wicked man shall die in his iniquity,
shall fie under the guilt of it, die under the dominion of it. \[2.\]
That if a wicked man turn from his wickedness, and from his wicked way,
he shall live, and the ruin he is threatened with shall be prevented;
and, that he may do so, he is warned of the danger he is in. The wicked
man shall die if he go on, but shall live if he repent. Observe, he is
to turn from his wickedness and from his wicked way. It is not enough
for a man to turn from his wicked way by an outward reformation, which
may be the effect of his sins leaving him rather than of his leaving his
sins, but he must turn from his wickedness, from the love of it and the
inclination to it, by an inward regeneration; if he do not so much as
turn from his wicked way, there is little hope that he will turn from
his wickedness. \[3.\] That it is the duty of ministers both to warn
sinners of the danger of sin and to assure them of the benefit of
repentance, to set before them how miserable they are if they go on in
sin, and how happy they may be if they will but repent and reform. Note,
The ministry of the word is concerning matters of life and death, for
those are the things it sets before us, the blessing and the curse, that
we may escape the curse and inherit the blessing. \[4.\] That, though
ministers do not warn wicked people as they ought of their misery and
danger, yet that shall not be admitted as an excuse for those that go on
still in their trespasses; for, though the watchman did not give them
warning, yet they shall die in their iniquity, for they had sufficient
warning given them by the providence of God and their own consciences;
and, if they would have taken it, they might have saved their lives.
\[5.\] That if ministers be not faithful to their trust, if they do not
warn sinners of the fatal consequences of sin, but suffer them to go on
unreproved, the blood of those that perish through their carelessness
will be required at their hand. It shall be charged upon them in the day
of account that it was owing to their unfaithfulness that such and such
precious souls perished in sin; for who knows but if they had had fair
warning given them they might have fled in time from the wrath to come?
And, if it contract so heinous a guilt as it does to be accessory to the
murder of a dying body, what is it to be accessory to the ruin of an
immortal soul? \[6.\] That if ministers do their duty in giving warning
to sinners, though the warning be not taken, yet they may have this
satisfaction, that they are clear from their blood, and have delivered
their own souls, though they cannot prevail to deliver theirs. Those
that are faithful shall have their reward, though they be not
successful.

(2.) Some of those he had to deal with were righteous, at least he had
reason to think, in a judgment of charity, that they were so; and he
must warn them not to apostatize and turn away from their righteousness,
[Eze 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#020), [Eze
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#021). We may observe here, \[1.\] That
the best men in the world have need to be warned against apostasy, and
to be told of the danger they are in of it and the danger they are in by
it. God's servants must be warned ([Psa
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#011)) that they do not neglect his
work and quit his service. One good means to keep us from falling is to
keep up a holy fear of falling, [Heb
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001). Let us therefore fear; and ([Rom
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020)) even those that stand by faith
must not be high-minded, but fear, and must therefore be warned. \[2.\]
There is a righteousness which a man may turn from, a seeming
righteousness, and, if men turn from this, it thereby appears that it
was never sincere, how passable, nay, how plausible soever it was; for,
if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, [Jo1
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019). There are many that begin in the
spirit, but end in the flesh, that set their faces heavenward, but look
back; that had a first love, but have lost it, and turned from the holy
commandment. \[3.\] When men turn from their righteousness they soon
learn to commit iniquity. When they grow careless and remiss in the
duties of God's worship, neglect them, or a re negligent in them, they
become an easy prey to the tempter. Omissions make way for commissions.
\[4.\] When men turn from their righteousness, and commit iniquity, it
is just with God to lay stumbling-blocks before them, that they may grow
worse and worse, till they are ripened for destruction. When Pharaoh
hardened his heart God hardened it. When sinners turn their back upon
God, desert his service, and so cast a reproach upon it, he does, in a
way of righteous judgment, not only withdraw his restraining grace and
give them up to their own hearts' lusts, but order them by his
providence into such circumstances as occasion their sin and hasten
their ruin. There are those to whom Christ himself is a stone of
stumbling and a rock of offence, [Pe1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008). \[5.\] The righteousness which
men relinquish shall never be remembered to their honour or comfort; it
will stand them in no stead in this world or the other. Apostates lose
all that they have wrought; their services and sufferings are all in
vain, and shall never be brought to an account, because not continued
in. It is a rule in the law, Factum non dicitur, quod non perseverat -
We are said to do only that which we do perseveringly, [Gal
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#003), [Gal
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#004). \[6.\] If ministers do no give
fair warning, as they ought, of the weakness of the best, their aptness
to stumble and fall, the particular temptations they are in and the
fatal consequences of apostasy, the ruin of those that do apostatize
will be laid at their door, and they shall answer for it. Not but that
there are those who are warned against it, and yet turn from their
righteousness; but that case is not put here, as was concerning the
wicked man, but, on the contrary, that a righteous man, being warned,
takes the warning and does not sin ([Eze
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#021)); for, if you give instruction to
a wise man, he will be yet wiser. We must not only not flatter the
wicked, but not flatter even the righteous as if they were perfectly
safe any where on this side heaven. \[7.\] If ministers give warning,
and people take it, it is well for both. Nothing is more beautiful than
a wise reprover upon an obedient ear; the one shall live because he is
warned and the other has delivered his soul. What can a good minister
desire more than to save himself and those that hear him? [Ti1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#016).

[Ezekiel 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 3:22</span></span>

After all this large and magnificent discovery which God had made of
himself to the prophet, and the full instructions he had given him how
to deal with those to whom he sent him with an ample commission, we
should have expected presently to see him preaching the word of God to a
great congregation of Israel; but here we find it quite otherwise. his
work here, at first, seems not at all proportionable to the pomp of his
call.

I. We have him here retired for further learning. By his unwillingness
to go it should seem as if he were not so thoroughly convinced as he
might have been of the ability of him that sent him to bear him out; and
therefore, to encourage him against the difficulties he foresaw, God
will favour him with another vision of his glory, which (if any thing)
would put life into him and animate him for his work. In order for this,
God calls him out to the plain ([Eze
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#022)) and there he will have some talk
with him. See and admire the condescension of God in conversing thus
familiarly with a man, a son of man, a poor captive, nay, with a sinful
man, who, when God sent him went in bitterness of spirit, and was at
this time out of humour with his work. And let us own ourselves for ever
indebted to the mediation of Christ for this blessed intercourse and
communion between God and man, between heaven and earth. See here the
benefit of solitude, and how much it befriends contemplation. It is very
comfortable to be alone with God, withdrawn from the word for converse
with him, to hear from him, to speak to him; and a good man will say
that he is never less along than when thus alone. Ezekiel went forth
into the plain more willingly than he went among those of the captivity
([Eze 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#015)); for those that know what
it is to have communion with God cannot but prefer that before any
converse with this world, especially such as is commonly met with. He
went out into the plain, and there he saw the same vision that he had
seen by the river of Chebar; for God is not tied to places. Note, Those
who follow God shall meet with his consolations, wherever they go. God
called him out to talk with him, but did more than that: he showed him
his glory, [Eze 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#023). We are not now
to expect such visions, but we must own that we have a favour done us no
way inferior if we so by faith behold the glory of the Lord as to be
changed into the same image, by the Spirit of the Lord; and this honour
have all his saints. Praise you the Lord, [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018).

II\. We have him here restrained from further teaching for the present.
When he saw he fell on his face, being struck with an awe of God's
majesty and a dread of his displeasure; but the Spirit entered into him
to raise him up, and then he recovered himself and got upon his feet and
heard what the Spirit whispered to him, which is very surprising. One
would have expected now that God would send him directly to the chief
place of concourse, would give him favour in the eyes of his brethren,
and make him and his message acceptable to them, that he would have a
wider door of opportunity opened to him and that God would give him a
door of utterance to open his mouth boldly; but what is here said to him
is the reverse of all this.

1\. Instead of sending him to a public assembly, he orders him to
confine himself to his own lodgings: Go, shut thyself within thy house,
[Eze 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#024). He was not willing to
appear in public, and, when he did, the people did not regard him, nor
show him the respect he deserved, and as a just rebuke both to him and
them, to him for his shyness of them and to them for their coldness
towards him, God forbids him to appear in public. Note, Our choice is
often made our punishment; and it is a righteous thing with God to
remove teachers into corners when they, or their people, or both, grow
indifferent to solemn assemblies. Ezekiel must shut up himself, some
think, to give a sign of the besieging of Jerusalem, in which the people
should be closely shut up as he was in his house, and which he speaks of
in the next chapter. He must shut himself within his house, that he
might receive further discoveries of the mind of God and might
abundantly furnish himself with something to say to the people when he
went abroad. We find that the elders of Judah visited him and sat before
him sometimes in his house ([Eze 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#001)),
to be witnesses of his ecstasies; but it was not till [Eze
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#025) that he spoke to those of the
captivity all the things that the Lord had shown him. Note, Those that
are called to preach must find time to study, and a great deal of time
too, must often shut themselves up in their houses, that they may give
attendance to reading and meditation, and so their profiting may appear
to all.

2\. Instead of securing him an interest in the esteem and affections of
those to whom he sent him he tells him that they shall put bands upon
him and bind him ([Eze 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#025)), either
(1.) As a criminal. They shall bind him in order to the further
punishing of him as a disturber of the peace; though they were
themselves sent into bondage in Babylon for persecuting the prophets,
yet there they continue to persecute them. Or, rather, (2.) As a
distracted man. They would go about to bind him as one beside himself;
for to that they imputed his violent motions in his raptures. The
captains asked Jehu, Wherefore came this mad fellow unto thee? Festus
said to Paul, Thou art beside thyself; and so the Jews said of our Lord
Jesus, [Mar 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#021). Perhaps this was the
reason why he must keep within doors, because otherwise they would bind
him, under pretence of his being mad, and therefore he must not go out
among them. Justly are prophets forbidden to go to those that will abuse
them.

3\. Instead of opening his lips that his mouth might show forth God's
praise, God silence him, made his tongue cleave to the roof of his
mouth, so that he was dumb for a considerable time, [Eze
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#026). The pious captives in Babylon
used this imprecation upon themselves, that, if they should forget
Jerusalem, there tongue might cleave to the roof of their mouth, [Psa
137:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#006). Ezekiel remembers Jerusalem
more than any of them, and yet his tongue cleaves to the roof of his
mouth, and he that can speak best is forbidden to speak at all; and the
reason given is because they are a rebellious house to whom he is sent,
and they are not worthy to have him for a reprover. He shall not give
them instructions and admonitions, for they are lost and thrown away
upon them. he is before commanded to speak boldly to them because they
are most rebellious ([Eze 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#007)); but,
since that proves to no purpose, he is now for that reason enjoined
silence and shall not speak at all to them. Note, Those whose hearts are
hardened against conviction are justly deprived of the mans of
conviction. Why should not the reprovers be dumb, if, after long trials,
it be found that the reproved resolve to be deaf? If Ephraim be joined
to idols, let him alone. Thou shalt be dumb, and not be a reprover,
implying that unless he were dumb he would be reproving; if he could
speak at all, he would witness against the wickedness of the wicked. But
when God speaks with him, and designs to speak by him, he will open his
mouth, [Eze 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#027). Note, Though God's
prophets may be silenced awhile, there will come a time when God will
give them the opening of the mouth again. And, when God speaks to his
ministers, he not only opens their ears to hear what he says, but opens
their mouth to return an answer. Moses, who had a veil on his face when
he went down to the people, took it off when he went up again to God,
[Exo 34:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#034).

4\. Instead of giving him assurance of success when he should at any
time speak to the people, he here leaves the matter very doubtful, and
Ezekiel must not perplex and disquiet himself about it, but let it be as
it will. He that hears, let him hear, and he is welcome to the comfort
of it; let him hear, and his soul shall live; but he that forbears, let
him forbear at his peril, and take what comes. If thou scornest, thou
alone shalt bear it; neither God nor his prophet shall be any losers by
it; but the prophet shall be rewarded for his faithfulness in reproving
the sinner, and God will have the glory of his justice in condemning him
for not taking the reproof.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 4](eze004)

</div>
