<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze014)  [Next](eze016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 15:0</span></span>

Ezekiel has again and again, in God's name, foretold the utter ruin of
Jerusalem; but, it should seem, he finds it hard to reconcile himself to
it, and to acquiesce in the will of God in this severe dispensation; and
therefore God takes various methods to satisfy him not only that it
shall be so, but that there is no remedy: it must be so; it is fit that
it should be so. Here, in this short chapter, he shows him (probably
with design that he should tell the people) that it was as requisite
Jerusalem should be destroyed as that the dead and withered branches of
a vine should be cut off and thrown into the fire. I. The similitude is
very elegant ([Eze 15:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#001)), but, II.
The explanation of the similitude is very dreadful ([Eze
15:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#006)).

[Ezekiel 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 15:1</span></span>

The prophet, we may suppose, was thinking what a glorious city Jerusalem
was, above any city in the world; it was the crown and joy of the whole
earth; and therefore what a pity it was that it should be destroyed; it
was a noble structure, the city of God, and the city of Israel's
solemnities. But, if these were the thoughts of his heart, God here
returns an answer to them by comparing Jerusalem to a vine. 1. It is
true, if a vine be fruitful, it is a most valuable tree, none more so;
it was one of those that were courted to have dominion over the trees,
and the fruit of it is such as cheers God and man ([Jdg
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#012), [Jdg
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#013)); it makes glad the heart, [Psa
104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015). So Jerusalem was planted a
choice and noble vine, wholly a right seed ([Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)); and, if it had brought forth
fruit suitable to its character as a holy city, it would have been the
glory both of God and Israel. It was a vine which God's right hand had
planted, a branch out of a dry ground, which, though its original was
mean and despicable, God had made strong for himself ([Psa
80:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#015)), to be to him for a name and
for a praise. 2. But, if it be not fruitful, it is good for nothing, it
is as worthless and useless a production of the earth as even thorns and
briers are: What is the vine-tree, if you take the tree by itself,
without consideration of the fruit? What is it more than any tree, that
it should have so much care taken of it and so much cost laid out upon
it? What is a branch of the vine, though it spread more than a branch
which is among the trees of the forest, where it grows neglected and
exposed? Or, as some read it, What is the vine more than any tree if the
branch of it be as the trees of the forest; that is, if it bear no
fruit, as forest-trees seldom do, being designed for timber-trees, not
fruit-trees? Now there are some fruit-trees which, if they do not bear,
are nevertheless of good use, as the wood of them may be made to turn to
a good account; but the vine is not of this sort: if that do not answer
its end as a fruit-tree, it is worth nothing as a timber-tree. Observe,

I. How this similitude is expressed here. The wild vine, that is among
the trees of the forest, or the empty vine (which Israel is compared to,
[Hos 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#001)), that bears no more fruit
than a forest-tree, is good for nothing; it is as useless as a brier,
and more so, for that will add some sharpness to the thorny hedge, which
the vine-branch will not do. He shows, 1. That it is fit for no use. The
wood of it is not taken to do any work; one cannot so much as make a pin
of it to hand a vessel upon, [Eze
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#003). See how variously the gifts of
nature are dispensed for the service of man. Among the plants, the roots
of some, the seeds or fruits of others, the leaves of others, and of
some the stalks, are most serviceable to us; so, among trees, some are
strong and not fruitful, as the oaks and cedars; others are weak but
very fruitful, as the vine, which is unsightly, low, and depending, yet
of great use. Rachel is comely but barren, Leah homely but fruitful. 2.
That therefore it is made use of for fuel; it will serve to heat the
oven with. Because it is not meet for any work, it is cast into the
fire, [Eze 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#004). When it is good for
nothing else it is useful this way, and answers a very needful
intention, for fuel is a thing we must have, and to burn any thing for
fuel which is good for other work is bad husbandry. To what purpose is
this waste? The unfruitful vine is disposed of in the same way with the
briers and thorns, which are rejected, and whose end is to be burnt,
[Heb 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#008). And what care is taken of it
then? If a piece of solid timber be kindled, somebody perhaps may snatch
it as a brand out of the burning, and say, "It is a pity to burn it, for
it may be put to some better use;" but if the branch of a vine be on
fire, and, as usual, both the ends of it and the middle be kindled
together, nobody goes about to save it. When it was whole it was meet
for no work, much less when the fire has devoured it ([Eze
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#005)); even the ashes of it are not
worth saving.

II\. How this similitude is applied to Jerusalem. 1. That holy city had
become unprofitable and good for nothing. It had been as the vine-tree
among the trees of the vineyard, abounding in the fruits of
righteousness to the glory of God. When religion flourished there, and
the pure worship of God was kept up, many a joyful vintage was then
gathered in from it; and, while it continued so, God made a hedge about
it; it was his pleasant plant ([Isa
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#007)); he watered it every moment and
kept it night and day ([Isa 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#003)); but
it had now become the degenerate plant of a strange vine, of a wild vine
(such as we read of [Kg2 4:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#039)), a
vine-tree among the trees of the wild grapes ([Isa
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004)), which are not only of no use,
but are nauseous and noxious ([Deu
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#032)), their grapes are grapes of
gall, and their clusters are bitter. It is explained ([Eze
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#008)): "They have trespassed a
trespass, that is, they have treacherously prevaricated with God and
perfidiously apostatized from him;" for so the word signifies. Note,
Professors of religion, if they do not live up to their profession, but
contradict it, if they degenerate and depart from it, are the most
unprofitable creatures in the world, like the salt that has lost its
savour and is thenceforth good for nothing, [Mar
9:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#050). Other nations were famed for
valour or politics, some for war, others for trade, and retained their
credit; but the Jewish nation, being famous as a holy people, when they
lost their holiness, and became wicked, were thenceforth good for
nothing; with that they lost all their credit and usefulness, and became
the most base and despicable people under the sun, trodden under foot of
the Gentiles. Daniel, and other pious Jews, were of great use in their
generation; but the idolatrous Jews then, and the unbelieving Jews now
since the preaching of the gospel, have been, and are, of no common
service, not fit for any work. 2. Being so, it is given to the fire for
fuel, [Eze 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#006). Note, Those who are
not fruitful to the glory of God's grace will be fuel to the fire of his
wrath; and thus, if they give not honour to him, he will get himself
honour upon them, honour that will shine brightly in that flaming fire
by which impenitent sinners will be for ever consumed. He will not be a
loser at last by any of his creatures. The Lord has made all things for
himself, yea, even the wicked, that would not otherwise be for him, for
the day of evil ([Pro 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#004)); and in
those who would not glorify him as the God to whom duty belongs he will
be glorified as the God to whom vengeance belongs. The fire of God's
wrath had before devoured both the ends of the Jewish nation ([Eze
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#004)), Samaria and the cities of
Judah; and now Jerusalem, that was the midst of it, was thrown into the
fire, to be burnt too, for it is meet for no work; it will not be
wrought upon, by any of the methods God has taken, to be serviceable to
him. The inhabitants of Jerusalem were like a vine-branch, rotten and
awkward; and therefore ([Eze 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#007)), "I
will set my face against them, to thwart all their counsels," as they
set their faces against God, to contradict his word and defeat all his
designs. It is decreed; the consumption is determined: I will make the
land quite desolate, and therefore, when they go out from one fire,
another fire shall devour them ([Eze
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#007)); the end of one judgment shall
be the beginning of another, and their escape from one only a reprieve
till another comes; they shall go from misery in their own country to
misery in Babylon. Those who kept out of the way of the sword perished
by famine or pestilence. When one descent of the Chaldean forces upon
them was over, and they thought, Surely the bitterness of death is past,
yet soon after they returned again with double violence, till they had
made a full end. Thus they shall know that I am the Lord, a God of
almighty power, when I set my face against them. Note, God shows himself
to be the Lord, by perfecting the destruction of his implacable enemies
as well as the deliverances of his obedient people. Those whom God sets
his face, though they may come out of one trouble little hurt, will fall
into another; though they come out of the pit, they will be taken in the
snare ([Isa 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#018)); though they escape
the sword of Hazael, they will fall by that of Jehu ([Kg1
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#017)); for evil pursues sinners. Nay,
though they go out from the fire of temporal judgments, and seem to die
in peace, yet there is an everlasting fire that will devour them; for,
when God judges, first or last he will overcome, and he will be known by
the judgments which he executes. See [Mat
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010); [Joh
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#006).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 16](eze016)

</div>
