<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze016)  [Next](eze018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 17:0</span></span>

God was, in the foregoing chapter, reckoning with the people of Judah,
and bringing ruin upon them for their treachery in breaking covenant
with him; in this chapter he is reckoning with the king of Judah for his
treachery in breaking covenant with the king of Babylon; for when God
came to contend with them he found many grounds of his controversy. The
thing was now in doing: Zedekiah was practising with the king of Egypt
underhand for assistance in a treacherous project he had formed to shake
off the yoke of the king of Babylon, and violate the homage and fealty
he had sworn to him. For this God by the prophet here, I. Threatens the
ruin of him and his kingdom, by a parable of two eagles and a vine ([Eze
17:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#001)), and the explanation of that
parable ([Eze 17:11-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#011)). But, in the
close, II. He promises hereafter to raise the royal family of Judah
again, the house of David, in the Messiah and his kingdom ([Eze
17:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#022)).

[Ezekiel 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 17:1</span></span>

We must take all these verses together, that we may have the parable and
the explanation of it at one view before us, because they will
illustrate one another. 1. The prophet is appointed to put forth a
riddle to the house of Israel ([Eze
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#002)), not to puzzle them, as Samson's
riddle was put forth to the Philistines, not to hide the mind of God
from them in obscurity, or to leave them in uncertainty about it, one
advancing one conjecture and another another, as is usual in expounding
riddles; no, he is immediately to tell them the meaning of it. Let him
that speaks in an unknown tongue pray that he may interpret, [Co1
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#013). But he must deliver this
message in a riddle or parable that they might take the more notice of
it, might be the more affected with it themselves, and might the better
remember it and tell it to others. For these reasons God often used
similitudes by his servants the prophets, and Christ himself opened his
mouth in parables. Riddles and parables are used for an amusement to
ourselves and an entertainment to our friends. The prophet must make use
of these to see if in this dress the things of God might find
acceptance, and insinuate themselves into the minds of a careless
people. Note, Ministers should study to find out acceptable words, and
try various methods to do good; and, as far as they have reason to think
will be for edification, should both bring that which is familiar into
their preaching and their preaching too into their familiar discourse,
that there may not be so vast a dissimilitude as with some there is
between what they say in the pulpit and what they say out. 2. He is
appointed to expound this riddle to the rebellious house, [Eze
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#012). Though being rebellious they
might justly have been left in ignorance, to see and hear and not
perceive, yet the thing shall be explained to them: Know you not what
these things mean? Those that knew the story, and what was now in
agitation, might make a shrewd guess at the meaning of this riddle, but,
that they might be left without excuse, he is to give it to them in
plain terms, stripped of the metaphor. But the enigma was first
propounded for them to study on awhile, and to send to their friends at
Jerusalem, that they might enquire after and expect the solution of it
some time after.

Let us now see what the matter of this message is.

I. Nebuchadnezzar had some time ago carried off Jehoiachin, the same
that was called Jeconiah, when he was but eighteen years of age and had
reigned in Jerusalem but three months, him and his princes and great
men, and had brought them captives to Babylon, [Kg2
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012). This in the parable is
represented by an eagle's cropping the top and tender branch of a cedar,
and carrying it into a land of traffic, a city of merchants ([Eze
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003), [Eze
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#004)), which is explained [Eze
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#012). The king of Babylon took the
king of Jerusalem, who was no more able to resist him than a young twig
of a tree is to contend with the strongest bird of prey, that easily
crops it off, perhaps towards the making of her nest. Nebuchadnezzar, in
Daniel's vision, is a lion, the king of beasts ([Dan
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004)); there he has eagle's wings, so
swift were his motions, so speedy were his conquests. Here, in this
parable, he is an eagle, the king of birds, a great eagle, that lives
upon spoil and rapine, whose young ones suck up blood, [Job
39:30](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#030). His dominion extends itself far
and wide, like the great and long wings of an eagle; the people are
numerous, for it is full of feathers; the court is splendid, for it has
divers colours, which look like embroidering, as the word is. Jerusalem
is Lebanon, a forest of houses, and very pleasant. The royal family is
the cedar; Jehoiachin is the top branch, the top of the young twigs,
which he crops off. Babylon is the land of traffic and city of merchants
where it is set. And the king of Judah, being of the house of David,
will think himself much degraded and disgraced to be lodged among
tradesmen; but he must make the best of it.

II\. When he carried him to Babylon he made his uncle Zedekiah king in
his room, [Eze 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#005), [Eze
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#006). His name was Mattaniah - the
gift of the Lord, which Nebuchadnezzar changed into Zedekiah - the
justice of the Lord, to remind him to be just like the God he called
his, for fear of his justice. This was one of the seed of the land, a
native, not a foreigner, not one of his Babylonian princes; he was
planted in a fruitful field, for so Jerusalem as yet was; he placed it
by great waters, where it would be likely to grow, like a willow-tree,
which grows quickly, and grows best in moist ground, but is never
designed nor expected to be a stately tree. He set it with care and
circumspection (so some read it); he wisely provided that it might grow,
but that it might not grow too big. He took of the king's seed (so it is
explained, [Eze 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#013)) and made a
covenant with him that he should have the kingdom, and enjoy the regal
power and dignity, provided he held it as his vassal, dependent on him
and accountable to him. He took an oath of him, made him swear
allegiance to him, swear by his own God, the God of Israel, that he
would be a faithful tributary to him, [Ch2
36:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#013). He also took away the mighty of
the land, the chief of the men of war, partly as hostages for the
performance of the covenant, and partly that, the land being thereby
weakened, the king might be the less able, and therefore the less in
temptation, to break his league. What he designed we are told ([Eze
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#014)): That the kingdom might be
base, in respect both of honour and strength, might neither be a rival
with its powerful neighbours, nor a terror to its feeble ones, as it had
been, that it might not left up itself to vie with the kingdom of
Babylon, or to bear down any of the petty states that were in subjection
to it. But yet he designed that by the keeping of this covenant it might
stand, and continue a kingdom. Hereby the pride and ambition of that
haughty potentate would be gratified, who aimed to be like the Most High
([Isa 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014)), to have all about him
subject to him. Now see here, 1. How sad a change sin made with the
royal family of Judah. Time was when all the nations about were
tributaries to that; now that has not only lost its dominion over other
nations, but has itself become a tributary. How has the gold become dim!
Nations by sin sell their liberty, and princes their dignity, and
profane their crowns by casting them to the ground. 2. How wisely
Zedekiah did for himself in accepting these terms, though they were
dishonourable, when necessity brought him to it. A man may live very
comfortably and contentedly, though he cannot bear a part, and make a
figure, as formerly. A kingdom may stand firmly and safely, though it do
not stand so high as it has sometimes done; and so may a family.

III\. Zedekiah, while he continued faithful to the king of Babylon, did
very well, and, if he would but have reformed his kingdom, and returned
to God and his duty, he would have done better, and by that means might
soon have recovered his former dignity, [Eze
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#006). This plant grew, and though it
was set as a willow-tree, and little account was made of it, yet it
became a spreading vine of low stature, a great blessing to his own
country, and his fruits made glad their hearts; and it is better to be a
spreading vine of low stature than a lofty cedar of no use.
Nebuchadnezzar was pleased, for the branches turned towards him, and
rested on him as the vine on the wall, and he had his share of the
fruits of this vine; the roots thereof too were under him, and at his
disposal. The Jews had reason to be pleased, for they sat under their
own vine, which brought forth branches, and shot forth sprigs, and
looked pleasant and promising. See how gradually the judgments of God
came upon this provoking people, how God gave them respite and so gave
them space to repent. He made their kingdom base, to try if that would
humble them, before he made it no kingdom; yet left it easy for them, to
try if that would win upon them to return to him, that the troubles
threatened might be prevented.

IV\. Zedekiah knew not when he was well off, but grew impatient of the
disgrace of being a tributary to the king of Babylon, and, to get clear
of it, entered into a private league with the king of Egypt. He had no
reason to complain that the king of Babylon put any new hardships upon
him or improved his advantages against him, that he oppressed or
impoverished his country, for, as the prophet had said before ([Eze
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#006)) to aggravate his treachery, he
shows again ([Eze 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#008)) what a fair
way he was in to be considerable: He was planted in a good soil by great
waters; his family was likely enough to be built up, and his exchequer
to be filled, in a little time, so that, if he had dealt faithfully, he
might have been a goodly vine. But there was another great eagle that he
had an affection for, and put a confidence in, and that was the king of
Egypt, [Eze 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#007). Those two great
potentates, the kings of Babylon and Egypt, were but two great eagles,
birds of prey. This great eagle of Egypt is said to have great wings,
but not to be long-winged as the king of Babylon, because, though the
kingdom of Egypt was strong, yet it was not of such a vast extent as
that of Babylon was. The great eagle is said to have many feathers, much
wealth and many soldiers, which he depended upon as a substantial
defence, but which really were no more than so may feathers. Zedekiah,
promising himself liberty, made himself a vassal to the king of Egypt,
foolishly expecting ease by changing his master. Now this vine did
secretly and under-hand bend her roots towards the king of Egypt, that
great eagle, and after awhile did openly shoot forth her branches
towards him, give him an intimation how much she coveted an alliance
with him, that he might water it by the furrows of her plantation,
whereas it was planted by great waters, and did not need any assistance
from him. This is expounded, [Eze
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#015). Zedekiah rebelled against the
king of Babylon in sending his ambassadors into Egypt, that they might
give him horses and much people, to enable him to contend with the king
of Babylon. See what a change sin had made with the people of God! God
promised that they should be a numerous people, as the sand of the sea;
yet now, if their king had occasion for much people, he must send to
Egypt for them, they being for sin diminished and brought low, [Psa
107:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#039). See also the folly of fretful
discontented spirits, that ruin themselves by striving to better
themselves, whereas they might be easy and happy enough if they would
but make the best of that which is.

V. God here threatens Zedekiah with the utter destruction of him and his
kingdom, and, in displeasure against him, passes that doom upon him for
his treacherous revolt from the king of Babylon. This is represented in
the parable ([Eze 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#009), [Eze
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#019)) by the plucking up of this vine
by the roots, the cutting off of the fruit, and the withering of the
leaves, the leaves of her spring, when they are in their greenness ([Job
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#012)), before they begin in autumn to
wither of themselves. The project shall be blasted; it shall utterly
wither. The affairs of this perfidious prince shall be ruined past
retrieve; as a vine when the east wind blasts it, so that it shall be
fit for nothing but the fire (as we had it in that parable, [Eze
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#004)), it shall wither even in the
furrows where it grew, though they were ever so well watered. It shall
be destroyed without great power or many people to pluck it up; for what
need is there of raising the militia to pluck up a vine? Note, God can
bring great things to pass without much ado. He needs not great power
and many people to effect his purposes; a handful will serve if he
pleases. He can without any difficulty ruin a sinful king and kingdom,
and make no more of it than we do of rooting up a tree that cumbers the
ground. In the explanation of the parable the sentence is very largely
recorded: Shall be prosper? [Eze
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#015). Can he expect to do ill and
fare well? Nay, shall he that does such wicked things escape? Shall he
break the covenant, and be delivered from that vengeance which is the
just punishment of his treachery? No; can he expect to do ill and not
suffer ill? Let him hear his doom.

1\. It is ratified by the oath of God ([Eze
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#016)): As I live, saith the Lord God,
he shall die for it. This intimates how highly God resented the crime,
and how sure and severe the punishment of it would be. God swears in his
wrath, as he did [Psa 95:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011). Note, As
God's promises are confirmed with an oath, for comfort to the saints, so
are his threatenings, for terror to the wicked. As sure as God lives and
is happy (I may add, and as long), so sure, so long, shall impenitent
sinners die and be miserable.

2\. It is justified by the heinousness of the crime he had been guilty
of. (1.) He had been very ungrateful to his benefactor, who had made him
king, and undertook to protect him, had made him a prince when he might
as easily have made him a prisoner. Note, It is a sin against God to be
unkind to our friends and to lift up the heel against those that have
helped to raise us. (2.) He had been very false to him whom he had
covenanted with. This is mostly insisted on: He despised the oath. When
his conscience or friends reminded him of it he made a jest of it, put
on a daring resolution, and broke it, [Eze
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#015), [Eze
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#016), [Eze
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#018), [Eze
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#019). He broke through it, and took a
pride in making nothing of it, as a great tyrant in our own day, whose
maxim (they say) it is, That princes ought not to be slaves to their
word any further than it is for their interest. That which aggravated
Zedekiah's perfidiousness was that the oath by which he had bound
himself to the king of Babylon was, \[1.\] A solemn oath. An emphasis is
laid upon this ([Eze 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#018)): When, lo,
he had given his hand, as a confederate with the king of Babylon, not
only as his subject, but as his friend, the joining of hands being a
token of the joining of hearts. \[2.\] As sacred oath. God says ([Eze
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#019)): It is my oath that he has
despised and my covenant that he has broken. In every solemn oath God is
appealed to as a witness of the sincerity of him that swears, and
invocated as a judge and revenger of his treachery if he now swear
falsely or at any time hereafter break his oath. But the oath of
allegiance to a prince is particularly called the oath of God ([Ecc
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#002)), as if that had something in it
more sacred than another oath; for princes are ministers of God to us
for good, [Rom 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004). Now Zedekiah's
breaking this oath and covenant is the sin which God will recompense
upon his own head ([Eze 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#019)), the
trespass which he has trespassed against God, for which God will plead
with him, [Eze 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#020). Note, Perjury is
a heinous sin and highly provoking to the God of heaven. It would not
serve for an excuse, First, That he who took this oath was a king, a
king of the house of David, whose liberty and dignity might surely set
him above the obligation of oaths. No; though kings are gods to us, they
are men to God, and not exempt from his law and judgment. The prince is
doubtless as firmly bound before God to the people by his
coronation-oath as the people are to the princes by the oath of
allegiance. Secondly, Nor that this oath was sworn to the king of
Babylon, a heathen prince, worse than a heretic, with whom the church of
Rome says, No faith is to be kept. No; though Nebuchadnezzar was a
worshipper of false gods, yet the true God will avenge this quarrel when
one of his worshippers breaks his league with him; for truth is a debt
due to all men; and, if the professors of the true religion deal
perfidiously with those of a false religion, their profession will be so
far from excusing, much less justifying them, that it aggravates their
sin, and God will the more surely and severely punish it, because by it
they give occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme; as that
Mahometan prince, who, when the Christians broke their league with him,
cried out, O Jesus! are these thy Christians? Thirdly, Nor would it
justify him that the oath was extorted from him by a conqueror, for the
covenant was made upon a valuable consideration. He held his life and
crown upon this condition, that he should be faithful and bear true
allegiance to the king of Babylon; and, if he enjoy the benefit of his
bargain, it is very unjust if he do not observe the terms. Let him know
then that, having despised the oath, and broken the covenant, he shall
not escape. And if the contempt and violation of such an oath, such a
covenant as this, would be so punished, of how much sorer punishment
shall those be thought worthy who break covenant with God (when, lo,
they had given their hand upon it that they would be faithful), who
tread under foot the blood of that covenant as an unholy thing? Between
the covenants there is no comparison.

3\. It is particularized in divers instances, wherein the punishment is
made to answer the sin. (1.) He had rebelled against the king of
Babylon, and the king of Babylon should be his effectual conqueror. In
the place where that king dwells whose covenant he broke, even with him
in the midst of Babylon he shall die, [Eze
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#016). He thinks to get out of his
hands, but he shall fall, more than before, into his hands. God himself
will now take part with the king of Babylon against him: I will spread
my net upon him, [Eze 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#020). God has a
net for those who deal perfidiously and think to escape his righteous
judgments, in which those shall be taken and held who would not be held
by the bond of an oath and covenant. Zedekiah dreaded Babylon: "Thither
I will bring him," says God, "and plead with him there." Men will justly
be forced upon that calamity which they endeavour by sin to flee from.
(2.) He had relied upon the king of Egypt, and the king of Egypt should
be his ineffectual helper: Pharaoh with his mighty army shall not make
for him in the war ([Eze 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#017)), shall
to him no service, nor give any check to the progress of the Chaldean
forces; he shall not assist him in the siege by casting up mounts and
building forts, nor in battle by cutting off many person. Note, Every
creature is that to us which God makes it to be; and he commonly weakens
and withers that arm of flesh which we trust in and stay ourselves upon.
Now was again fulfilled what was spoken on a former similar occasion
([Isa 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#007)), The Egyptians shall help
in vain. They did so; for though, upon the approach of the Egyptian
army, the Chaldeans withdrew from the siege of Jerusalem, upon their
retreat they returned to it again and took it. It should seem, the
Egyptians were not hearty, had strength enough, but no good-will, to
help Zedekiah. Note, Those who deal treacherously with those who put a
confidence in them will justly be dealt treacherously with by those they
put a confidence in. Yet the Egyptians were not the only states Zedekiah
stayed himself upon; he had bands of his own to stand by him, but those
bands, though we may suppose they were veteran troops and the best
soldiers his kingdom afforded, shall become fugitives, shall quit their
posts, and make the best of their way, and shall fall by the sword of
the enemy, and the remains of them shall be scattered, [Eze
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#021). This was fulfilled when the
city was broken up and all the men of war fled, [Jer
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#007). This you shall now that I the
Lord have spoken it. Note, Sooner or later God's word will prove itself;
and those who will not believe shall find by experience the reality and
weight of it.

[Ezekiel 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 17:22</span></span>

When the royal family of Judah was brought to desolation by the
captivity of Jehoiachin and Zedekiah it might be asked, "What has now
become of the covenant of royalty made with David, that his children
should sit upon his throne for evermore? Do the sure mercies of David
prove thus unsure?" To this it is sufficient for the silencing of the
objectors to answer that the promise was conditional. If they will keep
my covenant, then they shall continue, [Psa
132:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#012). But David's posterity broke
the condition, and so forfeited the promise. But the unbelief of man
shall not invalidate the promise of God. He will find out another seed
of David in which it shall be accomplished; and that is promised in
these verses.

I. The house of David shall again be magnified, and out of its ashes
another phoenix shall arise. The metaphor of a tree, which was made us
of in the threatening, is here presented in the promise, [Eze
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#022), [Eze
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#023). This promise had its
accomplishment in part when Zerubbabel, a branch of the house of David,
was raised up to head the Jews in their return out of captivity, and to
rebuild the city and temple and re-establish their church and state; but
it was to have its full accomplishment in the kingdom of the Messiah,
who was a root out of a dry ground, and to whom God, according to
promise, gave the throne of his father David, [Luk
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032). 1. God himself undertakes the
reviving and restoring of the house of David. Nebuchadnezzar was the
great eagle that had attempted the re-establishing of the house of David
in a dependence upon him, [Eze 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#005).
But the attempt miscarried; his plantation withered and was plucked up.
"Well," says God, "the next shall be of my planting: I will also take of
the highest branch of the high cedar and I will set it." Note, As men
have their designs, God also has his designs; but his will prosper when
theirs are blasted. Nebuchadnezzar prided himself in setting up kingdoms
at his pleasure, [Dan 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#019). But those
kingdoms soon had an end, whereas the God of heaven sets up a kingdom
that shall never be destroyed, [Dan
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044). 2. The house of David is revived
in a tender one cropped from the top of his young twigs. Zerubbabel was
so; that which was hopeful in him was but the day of small things ([Zac
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#010)), yet before him great mountains
were made plain. Our Lord Jesus was the highest branch of the high
cedar, the furthest of all from the root (for soon after he appeared the
house of David was all cut off and extinguished), but the nearest of all
to heaven, for his kingdom was not of this world. He was taken from the
top of the young twigs, for he is the man, the branch, a tender plant,
and a root out of a dry ground ([Isa
53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002)), but a branch of righteousness,
the planting of the Lord, that he may be glorified. 3. This branch is
planted in a high mountain ([Eze
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#022)), in the mountain of the height
of Israel, [Eze 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#023). Thither he
brought Zerubbabel in triumph; there he raised up his son Jesus, sent
him to gather the lost sheep of the house of Israel that were scattered
upon the mountains, set him his king upon his holy hill of Zion, sent
forth the gospel from Mount Zion, the word of the Lord from Jerusalem;
there, in the height of Israel, a nation which all its neighbours had an
eye upon as conspicuous and illustrious, was the Christian church first
planted. The churches of Judea were the most primitive churches. The
unbelieving Jews did what they could to prevent its being planted there;
but who can pluck up what God will plant? 4. Thence it spreads far and
wide. The Jewish state, though it began very low in Zerubbabel's time,
was set as a tender branch, which might easily be plucked up, yet took
root, spread strangely, and after some time became very considerable;
those of other nations, fowl of every wing, put themselves under the
protection of it. The Christian church was at first like a grain of
mustard-seed, but became, like this tender branch, a great tree, its
beginning small, but its latter end increasing to admiration. When the
Gentiles flocked into the church then did the fowl of every wing (even
the birds of prey, which those preyed upon, as the wolf and the lamb
feeding together, [Isa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006)) come and
dwell under the shadow of this goodly cedar. See [Dan
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#021).

II\. God himself will herein be glorified, [Eze
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#024). The setting up of the Messiah's
kingdom in the world shall discover more clearly than ever to the
children of men that God is the King of all the earth, [Psa
47:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#007). Never was there a more full
conviction given of this truth, that all things are governed by an
infinitely wise and mighty Providence, than that which was given by the
exaltation of Christ and the establishment of his kingdom among men; for
by that it appeared that God has all hearts in his hand, and the
sovereign disposal of all affairs. All the trees of the field shall
know, 1. That the tree which God will have to be brought down, and dried
up, shall be so, though it be ever so high and stately, ever so green
and flourishing. Neither honour nor wealth, neither external
advancements nor internal endowments, will secure men from humbling
withering providence. 2. That the tree which God will have to be
exalted, and to flourish, shall so be, shall so do, though ever so low,
and ever so dry. The house of Nebuchadnezzar, that now makes so great a
figure, shall be extirpated, and the house of David, that now makes so
mean a figure, shall become famous again; and the Jewish nation, that is
now despicable, shall be considerable. The kingdom of Satan, that has
borne so long, so large, a sway, shall be broken, and the kingdom of
Christ, that was looked upon with contempt. shall be established. The
Jews, who, in respect of church-privileges, had been high and green,
shall be thrown out, and the Gentiles, who had been low and dry trees,
shall be taken in their room, [Isa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001). All the enemies of Christ shall
be abased and made his footstool, and his interests shall be confirmed
and advanced: I the Lord have spoken (it is the decree, the declared
decree, that Christ must be exalted, must be the headstone of the
corner), and I have done it, that is, I will do it in due time, but it
is as sure to be done as if it were done already. With men saying and
doing are two things, but they are not so with God. What he has spoken
we may be sure that he will do, nor shall one iota or tittle of his word
fall to the ground, for he is not a man, that he should lie, or the son
of man, that he should repent either of his threatenings or of his
promises.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 18](eze018)

</div>
