<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze011)  [Next](eze013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 12:0</span></span>

Though the vision of God's glory had gone up from the prophet, yet his
word comes to him still, and is by him sent to the people, and to the
same purport with that which was discovered to him in the vision,
namely, to set forth the terrible judgments that were coming upon
Jerusalem, by which the city and temple should be entirely laid waste.
In this chapter, I. The prophet, by removing his stuff, and quitting his
lodgings, must be a sign to set forth Zedekiah's flight out of Jerusalem
in the utmost confusion when the Chaldeans took the city (v. 1-16). II.
The prophet, by eating his meat with trembling, must be a sign to set
forth the famine in the city during the siege, and the consternation
that the inhabitants should be in ([Eze
12:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#017)). III. A message is sent from
God to the people, to assure them that all these predictions should have
their accomplishment very shortly, and not be deferred, as they
flattered themselves they would be ([Eze
12:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#021)).

[Ezekiel 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 12:1</span></span>

Perhaps Ezekiel reflected with so much pleasure upon the vision he had
had of the glory of God that often, since it went up from him, he was
wishing it might come down to him again, and, having seen it once and a
second time, he was willing to hope he might be a third time so
favoured; but we do not find that he ever saw it any more, and yet the
word of the Lord comes to him; for God did in divers manners speak to
the fathers ([Heb 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)) and they often
heard the words of God when they did not see the visions of the
Almighty. Faith comes by hearing that word of prophecy which is more
sure than vision. We may keep up our communion with God without raptures
and ecstasies. In these verses the prophet is directed,

I. By what signs and actions to express the approaching captivity of
Zedekiah king of Judah; that was the thing to be foretold, and it is
foretold to those that are already in captivity, because as long as
Zedekiah was upon the throne they flattered themselves with hopes that
he would make his part good with the king of Babylon, whose yoke he was
now projecting to shake off, from which, it is probable, these poor
captives promised themselves great things; and it may be, when he was
forming that design, he privately sent encouragement to them to hope
that he would rescue them shortly, or procure their liberty by exchange
of prisoners. While they were fed with these vain hopes they could not
set themselves either to submit to their affliction or to get good by
their affliction. It was therefore necessary, but very difficult, to
convince them that Zedekiah, instead of being their deliverer, should
very shortly be their fellow-suffered. Now, one would think it might
have been sufficient if the prophet had only told them this in God's
name, as he does afterwards ([Eze
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#010)); but, to prepare them for the
prophecy of it, he must first give them a sign of it, must speak it to
their eyes first and then to their ears: and here we have, 1. The reason
why he must take this method ([Eze
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#002)): It is because they are a
stupid, dull, unthinking people, that will not heed or will soon forget
what they only hear of, or at least will not be at all affected with it;
it will make no impression at all upon them: Thou dwellest in the midst
of a rebellious house, whom it is next to impossible to work any good
upon. They have eyes and ears, they have intellectual powers and
faculties, but they see not, they hear not. They were idolaters, whose
character it was that they were like the idols they worshipped, which
have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, [Psa
115:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#005), [Psa
115:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#006), [Psa
115:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#008). Note, Those are to be reckoned
rebellious that shut their eyes against the divine light and stop their
ears to the divine law. The ignorance of those that are wilfully
ignorant, that have faculties and means and will not use them, is so far
from being their excuse that it adds rebellion to their sin. None so
blind, so deaf, as those that will not see, that will not hear. They see
not, they hear not; for they are a rebellious house. The cause is all
from themselves: the darkness of the understanding is owing to the
stubbornness of the will. Now this is the reason why he must speak to
them by signs, as deaf people are taught, that they might be either
instructed or ashamed. Note, Ministers must accommodate themselves not
only to the weakness, but to the wilfulness of those they deal with, and
deal with them accordingly: if they dwell among those that are
rebellious they must speak to them the more plainly and pressingly, and
take that course that is most likely to work upon them, that they may be
left inexcusable. 2. The method he just take to awaken and affect them;
he must furnish himself with all necessaries for removing ([Eze
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#003)), provide for a journey clothes
and money; he must remove from one place to another, as one unsettled
and forced to shift; this he must do by day, in the sight of the people;
he must bring out all his household goods, to be packed up and sent away
([Eze 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#004)); and, because all the
doors and gates were either locked up that they could not pass through
them or so guarded by the enemy that they durst not, he must therefore
dig through the wall, and convey his goods away clandestinely through
that breach in the wall, [Eze 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#005). He
must carry his goods away himself upon his own shoulders, for want of a
servant to attend him; he must do this in the twilight, that he might
not be discovered; and, when he has made what shift he can to secure
some of the best of his effects, he must himself steal away at evening
in their sight, with fear and trembling, and must go as those that go
forth into captivity ([Eze 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#004)); that
is, he must cover his face ([Eze 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#006))
as being ashamed to be seen and afraid to be known, or in token of very
great sorrow and concern; he must go away as a poor broken tradesman,
who, when he is forced to shut up shop, hides his head, or quits his
country. Thus Ezekiel must be himself a sign to them; and when perhaps
he seemed somewhat backward to put himself to all this trouble, and to
expose himself to be bantered and ridiculed for it, to reconcile him to
it God says ([Eze 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#003)) "It may be
they will consider, and will by it be taken off from their vain
confidence, though they be a rebellious house." Note, We must not
despair even of the worst, but that yet they may be brought to bethink
themselves and repent; and therefore we must continue the use of proper
means for their conviction and conversion, because, while there is life,
there is hope. And ministers must be willing to go through the most
difficult and inconvenient offices (for such was this of Ezekiel's
removing), though there be but the it may be of success. If but one soul
be awakened to consider, our care and pains will be well bestowed. 3.
Ezekiel's ready and punctual obedience to the orders God gave him ([Eze
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#007)): I did so as I was commanded.
Hereby he teaches us all, and ministers especially, (1.) To obey with
cheerfulness every command of God, even the most difficult. Christ
himself learned obedience, and so we must all. (2.) To do all we can for
the good of the souls of others, to put ourselves to any trouble or
pains for the conviction of those that are unconvinced. We do all things
(that is, we are willing to do any thing), dearly beloved, for your
edifying. (3.) To be ourselves affected with those things wherewith we
desire to affect others. When Ezekiel would give his hearers a
melancholy prospect he does himself put on a melancholy aspect. (4.) To
sit loose to this world, and prepare to leave it, to carry out our stuff
for removing, because we have here no continuing city. Arise, depart,
this it not your rest, for it is polluted. Thou dwellest in a rebellious
house, therefore prepare for removing; for who would not be willing to
leave such a house, such a wicked world as this is?

II\. He is directed by what words to explain those signs and actions, as
Agabus, when he bound his own hands and feet, told whose binding was
thereby signified. But observe, It was not till morning that God gave
him an exposition of the sign, till the next morning, to keep up in him
a continual dependence upon God for instruction. As what God does, so
what he directs us to do, perhaps we know not now, but shall know
hereafter.

1\. It was supposed that the people would ask the meaning of this sing,
or at least they should ([Eze 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#009)):
"Hath not the house of Israel said unto thee, What doest thou? Yes, I
know they have. Though they are a rebellious house, yet they are
inquisitive concerning the mind of God," as those ([Isa
58:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#002)) who sought God daily. Therefore
the prophet must do such a strange uncouth thing, that they might
enquire what it meant; and then, it may be hoped, people will take
notice of what is told them, and profit by it, when it comes to them in
answer to their enquiries. But some understand it as an intimation that
they had not made any such enquiries: "Hath not this rebellious house so
much as asked thee, What doest thou? No; they take no notice of it; but
tell them the meaning of it, though they do not ask." Note, When God
sends to us by his ministers he observes what entertainment we give to
the messages he sends us; he hearkens and hears what we say to them, and
what enquiries we make upon them, and is much displeased if we pass them
by without taking any notice of them. When we have heard the word we
should apply to our ministers for further instruction; and then we shall
know if we thus follow on to know.

2\. The prophet is to tell them the meaning of it. In general ([Eze
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#010)), This burden concerns the
prince in Jerusalem; they knew who that was, and gloried in it now that
they were in captivity that they had a prince of their own in Jerusalem,
and that the house of Israel was yet entire there, and therefore doubted
not but in time to do well enough. "But tell them," says God, "that in
what thou hast done they may read the doom of their friends at
Jerusalem. Say, I am your sign," [Eze
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#011). As the conversation of
ministers should teach the people what they should do, so the
providences of God concerning them are sometimes intended to tell them
what they must expect. The unsettled state and removals of ministers
give warning to people what they must expect in this world, no
continuance, but constant changes. When times of trouble are coming on
Christ tells his disciples, They shall first lay their hands on you,
[Luk 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#012). (1.) The people shall be
led away into captivity ([Eze 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#011)):
As I have done, so shall it be done unto them; they shall be forced away
from their own houses, no more to return to them, neither shall their
place know them any more. We cannot say concerning our dwelling-place
that it is our resting-place; for how far we may be tossed from it
before we die we cannot foresee. (2.) The prince shall in vain attempt
to make his escape; for he also shall go into captivity. Jeremiah had
told Zedekiah the same to his face ([Jer
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#003)): Thou shalt not escape, but
shalt surely be taken. Ezekiel here foretels it to those who made him
their confidence and promised themselves relief from him. \[1.\] That he
shall himself carry away his own goods: He shall bear upon his shoulder
some of his most valuable effects. Note, The judgments of God can turn a
prince into a porter. He that was wont to have the regalia carried
before him, and to march through the city at noon-day, shall now himself
carry his goods on his back and steal away out of the city in the
twilight. See what a change sin makes with men! All the avenues to the
palace being carefully watched by the enemy, they shall dig through the
wall to carry out thereby. Men shall be their own house-breakers, and
steal away their own goods; so it is when the sword of war has cancelled
all right and property. \[2.\] That he shall attempt to escape in a
disguise, with a mask or a visor on, which shall cover his face, so that
he shall be able only to look before him, and shall not see the ground
with his eyes. He who, when he was in pomp, affected to be seen, now
that he is in his flight is afraid to be seen; let none therefore either
be proud of being looked at or over-much pleased with looking about
them, when they see a king with his face covered, that he cannot see the
ground. \[3.\] That he shall be made a prisoner and carried captive into
Babylon ([Eze 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#013)): My net will I
spread upon him and he shall be taken in my snare. It seemed to be the
Chaldeans' net and their snare, but God owns them for his. Those that
think to escape the sword of the Lord will find themselves taken in his
net. Jeremiah had said that king Zedekiah should see the king of Babylon
and that he should go to Babylon; Ezekiel says, He shall be brought to
Babylon, yet he shall not see it, though he shall die there. Those that
were disposed to cavil would perhaps object that these two prophets
contradicted one another; for one said, He shall see the king of
Babylon, the other said, He shall not see Babylon; and yet both proved
true: he did see the king of Babylon at Riblah, where he passed sentence
upon him for his rebellion, but there he had his eyes put out, so that
he did not see Babylon when he was brought thither. These captives
expected to see their prince come to Babylon as a conqueror, to bring
them out of their trouble; but he shall come thither a prisoner, and his
disgrace will be a great addition to their troubles. Little joy could
they have in seeing him when he could not see them. \[4.\] That all his
guards should be dispersed and utterly disabled for doing him any
service ([Eze 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#014)): I will scatter
all that are about him to help him, so that he shall be left helpless; I
will scatter them among the nations and disperse them in the countries
([Eze 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#015)), to be monuments of
divine justice wherever they go. But are there not hopes that they may
rally again? (he that flies one time may fight another time); no: I will
draw out the sword after them, which shall cut them off wherever if
finds them; for the sword that God draws out will be sure to do the
execution designed. Yet of Zedekiah's scattered troops some shall escape
([Eze 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#016)): I will leave a few men
of them. Though they shall all be scattered, yet they shall not all be
cut off; some shall have their lives given them for a prey. And the end
for which they are thus remarkably spared is very observable: That they
may declare all their abominations among the heathen whither they come;
the troubles they are brought into will bring them to themselves and to
their right mind, and then they will acknowledge the justice of God in
all that is brought upon them and will make an ingenuous confession of
their sins, which provoked God thus to contend with them; and, as by
this it shall appear that they were spared in mercy, so hereby they will
make a suitable grateful return to God for his favours to them in
sparing them. Note, When God has remarkably delivered us from the deaths
wherewith we were surrounded we must look upon it that for this end,
among others, we were spared, that we might glorify God and edify others
by making a penitent acknowledgment of our sins. Those that by their
afflictions are brought to this are then made to know that God is the
Lord and may help to bring others to the knowledge of him. See how God
brings good out of evil. The dispersion of sinners, who had done God
much dishonour and disservice in their own country, proves the
dispersion of penitents, who shall do him much honour and service in
others countries. The Levites are by a curse divided in Jacob and
scattered in Israel, yet it is turned into a blessing, for thereby they
have the fairest opportunity to teach Jacob God's laws.

[Ezekiel 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 12:17</span></span>

Here again the prophet is made a sign to them of the desolations that
were coming on Judah and Jerusalem. 1. He must himself eat and drink in
care and fear, especially when he was in company, [Eze
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#017), [Eze
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#018). Though he was under no
apprehension of danger to himself, but lived in safety and plenty, yet
he must eat his bread with quaking (the bread of sorrows, [Psa
127:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002)) and drink his water with
trembling and with carefulness, that he might express the calamitous
condition of those that should be in Jerusalem during the siege; not
that he must dissemble and pretend to be in fear and care when really he
was not; but having to foretel this judgment, to show that he firmly
believed it himself, and yet was far from desiring it, in the prospect
of it he was himself affected with grief and fear. Note, When ministers
speak of the ruin coming upon impenitent sinners they must endeavour to
speak feelingly, as those that know the terrors of the Lord; and they
must be content to endure hardness, so that they may but do good. 2. He
must tell them that the inhabitants of Jerusalem should in like manner
eat and drink with care and fear, [Eze
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#019), [Eze
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#020). Both those that have their home
in Jerusalem and those of the land of Israel that come to shelter
themselves there, shall eat their bread with carefulness and drink their
water with astonishment, either because they are afraid it will not hold
out, but they shall want shortly, or because they are continually
expecting the alarms of the enemy, their life hanging in doubt before
them ([Deu 28:66](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#066)), so that what they
have they shall have no enjoyment of nor will it do them any good. Note,
Care and fear, if they prevail, are enough to embitter all our comforts
and are themselves very sore judgments. They shall be reduced to these
straits that thus by degrees, and by the hand of those that thus
straiten them, both city and country may be laid in ruins; for it is no
less than an utter destruction of both that is aimed at in these
judgments - that her land may be desolate from all the fulness thereof,
may be stripped of all its ornaments and robbed of all its fruits, and
then of course the cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste, for
they are served by the field. This universal desolation was coming upon
them, and then no wonder that they eat their bread with care and fear.
Now we are here told, (1.) How bad the cause of this judgment was; it is
because of the violence of all those that dwell therein, their injustice
and oppression, and the mischief they did one another, for which God
would reckon with them, as well as for the affronts put upon him in his
worship. Note, The decay of virtue in a nation brings on a decay of
every thing else; and when neighbours devour one another it is just with
God to bring enemies upon them to devour them all. (2.) How good the
effect of this judgment should be: You shall know that I am the Lord;
and if, by these judgments, they learn to know him aright, that will
make up the loss of all they are deprived of by these desolations. Those
are happy afflictions, how grievous soever to flesh and blood, that help
to introduce us into and improve us in an acquaintance with God.

[Ezekiel 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 12:21</span></span>

Various methods had been used to awaken this secure and careless people
to an expectation of the judgments coming, that they might be stirred
up, by repentance and reformation, to prevent them. The prophecies of
their ruin were confirmed by visions, and illustrated by signs, and all
with such evidence and power that one would think they must needs be
wrought upon; but here we are told how they evaded the conviction, and
guarded against it, namely, by telling themselves, and one another, that
though these judgments threatened should come at last yet they would not
come of a long time. This suggestion, with which they bolstered
themselves up in their security, is here answered, and shown to be vain
and groundless, in two separate messages which God sent to them by the
prophet at different times, both to the same purport; such care, such
pains, must the prophet take to undeceive them, [Eze
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#021), [Eze
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#026). Observe,

I. How they flattered themselves with hopes that the judgments should be
delayed. One saying they had, which had become proverbial in the land of
Israel, [Eze 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#022). They said, "The
days are prolonged; the judgments have not come when they were expected
to come, but seem to be still put off de die in diem - from day to day,
and therefore we may conclude that every vision fails, because it should
seem that some do, that because the destruction has not come yet it will
never come; we will never trust a prophet again, for we have been more
frightened than hurt." And another saying they had which, if it would
not conquer their convictions, yet would cool their affections and abate
their concern, and that was, "The vision is for a great while to come;
it refers to events at a vast distance, and he prophesies of things
which, though they may be true, are yet very far off, so that we need
not trouble our heads about them ([Eze
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#027)); we may die in honour and peace
before these troubles come." And, if indeed the troubles had been thus
adjourned, they might have made themselves easy, as Hezekiah did. Is it
not well if peace and truth shall be in my days? But it was a great
mistake, and they did but deceive themselves into their own ruin; and
God is here much displeased at it; for, 1. It was a wretched abuse of
the patience of God, who, because for a time he kept silence, was
thought to be altogether such a one as themselves, [Psa
50:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#021). That forbearance of God which
should have led them to repentance hardened them in sin. They were
willing to think their works were not evil because sentence against them
was not executed speedily; and therefore concluded the vision itself
failed, because the days were prolonged. 2. It received countenance form
the false prophets that were among them, as should seem from the notice
God takes ([Eze 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#024)) of the vain
visions, and flattering divinations, even within the house of Israel, to
whom were committed the oracles of God. No marvel if those that deceived
themselves by worshipping pretended deities deceived themselves also by
crediting pretended prophecies, to which strong delusions God justly
gave them up for their idolatries. 3. These sayings had become
proverbial; they were industriously spread among the people, so that
they had got into very one's mouth, and not only so, but were generally
assented to, as proverbs usually are, not only the proverbs of the
ancients, but those of the moderns too. Note, It is a token of universal
degeneracy in a nation when corrupt and wicked sayings have grown
proverbial; and it is an artifice of Satan by them to confirm men in
their prejudices against the word and ways of God, and a great offence
to the God of heaven. It will not serve for an excuse, in saying ill, to
plead that it is a common saying.

II\. How they are assured that they do but deceive themselves, for the
judgments shall be hastened, these profane proverbs shall be confronted:
Tell them, therefore, The days are at hand ([Eze
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#023)), and again, There shall none of
my words be prolonged any more, [Eze
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#028). Their putting the evil day far
from them does but provoke God to bring it the sooner upon them; and it
will be so much the sorer, so much the heavier, so much the more a
surprise and terror to them when it does come. He must tell them,

1\. That God will certainly silence the lying proverbs, and the lying
prophecies, with which they buoyed up their vain hopes, and will make
them ashamed of both: (1.) I will make this proverb to cease; for when
they find the days of vengeance have come, and not one iota or tittle of
the prediction falls to the ground, they will be ashamed to use it as a
proverb in Israel, The days are prolonged, and the vision fails. Note,
Those that will not have their eyes opened and their mistakes rectified,
by the word of God, shall be undeceived by his judgments: for every
mouth that speaks perverse things shall be stopped. (2.) There shall be
no more any vain vision, [Eze 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#024).
The false prophets, who told the people they should have peace and
should soon see an end of their troubles, shall be disproved by the
event, and then shall be ashamed of their pretensions, and shall hide
their heads and impose silence upon themselves. Note, As truth was older
than error, so it will survive it; it got the start, and it will get the
race. The true prophets' visions and predictions stand, and are in full
force, power, and virtue; they give law, and receive credit, when the
vain visions, and the flattering divinations, are lost and forgotten,
and shall be no more in the house of Israel; for great is the truth, and
will prevail.

2\. That God will certainly, and very shortly, accomplish every word
that he has spoken. With what majesty does he say it ([Eze
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#025)): I am the Lord! I am Jehovah!
That glorious name of his speaks him a God giving being to his word by
the performance of it, and therefore to the patriarchs, who lived by
faith in a promise not yet performed, he was not known by his name
Jehovah, [Exo 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003). But, as he is
Jehovah in making good his promise, so he is in making good his
threatenings. Let them know then that God, with whom they have to do, is
the great Jehovah, and therefore, (1.) He will speak, whether they will
hear or whether they will forbear: I am the Lord, I will speak. God will
have his saying, whoever gainsays it. God's oracles are called lively
ones, for they still speak when the pagan oracles are long ago struck
dumb. There has been, and shall be, a succession of God's ministers to
the end of the world, by whom he will speak; and, though contempt may be
put upon them, that shall not put a period to their ministration: In
your days, O rebellious house! will I say the word. Even in the worst
ages of the church God left not himself without witness, but raised up
men that spoke for him, that spoke from him. I will say the word, the
word that shall stand. (2.) The word that he speaks shall come to pass;
it shall infallibly be accomplished according to the true intent and
meaning of it, and according to the full extent and compass of it: I
will say the word and will perform it ([Eze
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#025)), for his mind is never changed,
nor his arm shortened, nor is Infinite Wisdom ever nonplussed. With men
saying and doing are two things, but they are not so with God; with him
it is dictum, factum - said, and done. In the works of providence, as in
those of creation, he speaks and it is done; for he said, Let there be
light, and there was light - Let there be a firmament, and there was a
firmament, [Num 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019); [Sa1
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#029). Whereas they had said, Every
vision fails ([Eze 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#022)), God says,
"No, there shall be the effect of every vision ([Eze
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#023)); it shall not return void, but
every sign shall be answered by the thing signified." Those that see the
visions of the Almighty do not see vain visions; God confirms the word
of his servants by performing it. (3.) It shall be accomplished very
shortly: "The days are at hand when you shall see the effect of every
vision, [Eze 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#023). It is said, it is
sworn, that delay shall be no longer ([Rev
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#006)); the year of God's patience has
now just expired, and he will no longer defer the execution of the
sentence. It shall be no more prolonged ([Eze
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#025)); he has borne with you a great
while, but he will not bear always. In your days, O rebellious house!
shall the word that is said be performed, and you shall see the
threatened judgments and share in them. Behold, the Judge stands at the
door. The righteous are taken away from the evil to come, but this
rebellious house shall not be so quietly taken away; no, they shall live
to be hurried away, to be chased out of the world." This is repeated
([Eze 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#028)): "There shall none of my
words be prolonged any more, but judgment shall now hasten on apace; and
the longer the bow has been in the drawing the deeper shall the arrow
pierce." When we tell sinners of death and judgment, heaven and hell,
and think by them to persuade them to a holy life, though we do not find
them downright infidels (they will own that they do believe there is a
state of rewards and punishments in the other world), yet they put by
the force of those great truths, and void the impressions of them, by
looking upon the things of the other world as very remote; they tell us,
"The vision you see is for many days to come, and you prophesy of the
times that are very far off; it will be time enough to think of them
when they come nearer," whereas really there is but a step between us
and death, between us and an awful eternity; yet a little while and the
vision shall speak and not lie, and therefore it concerns us to redeem
time, and get ready with all speed for a future state; for, though it is
future, it is very near, and while impenitent sinners slumber their
damnation slumbers not.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 13](eze013)

</div>
