<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr004)  [Next](ezr006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 5:0</span></span>

We left the temple-work at a full stop; but, being God's work, it shall
be revived, and here we have an account of the reviving of it. It was
hindered by might and power, but it was set a-going again "by the Spirit
of the Lord of hosts." Now here we are told how that blessed Spirit, I.
Warmed its cool-hearted friends and excited them to built ([Ezr
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001), [Ezr
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#002)). II. Cooled its hot-headed
enemies, and brought them to better tempers; for, though they secretly
disliked the work as much as those in the foregoing chapter, yet, 1.
They were more mild towards the builders ([Ezr
5:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#003)). 2. They were more fair in
their representation of the matter to the king, of which we have here an
account ([Ezr 5:6-17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#006)).

[Ezra 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 5:1</span></span>

Some reckon that the building of the temple was suspended for only nine
years; I am willing to believe that fifteen years were the utmost.
During this time they had an altar and a tabernacle, which no doubt they
made use of. When we cannot do what we would we must do what we can in
the service of God, and be sorry we can do no better. But the
counsellors that were hired to hinder the work ([Ezr
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#005)) told them, and perhaps with a
pretence to inspiration, that the time had not come for the building of
the temple ([Hag 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#002)), urging that it
was long ere the time came for the building of Solomon's temple; and
thus the people were made easy in their own ceiled houses, while God's
house lay waste. Now here we are told how life was put into that good
cause which seemed to lie dead.

I. They had two good ministers, who, in God's name, earnestly persuaded
them to put the wheel of business in motion again. Observe,

1\. Who these ministers were, namely, the prophets Haggai and Zechariah,
who both began to prophesy in the second year of Darius, as appears,
[Hag 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001); [Zac
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001). Note, (1.) The temple of God
among men is to be built by prophecy, not by secular force (that often
hinders it, but seldom furthers it), but by the word of God. As the
weapons of our warfare, so the instruments of our building, are not
carnal, but spiritual, and they are the ministers of the gospel that are
the master-builders. (2.) It is the business of God's prophets to stir
up God's people to that which is good, and to help them in it, to
strengthen their hands, and, by suitable considerations fetched from the
word of God, to quicken them to their duty and encourage them in it.
(3.) It is a sign that God has mercy in store for a people when he
raises up prophets among them to be their helpers in the way and work of
God, their guides, overseers, and rulers.

2\. To whom they were sent. They prophesied unto the Jews (for, as to
them pertained the giving of the law, so also the gift of prophecy, and
therefore they are called the children of the prophets, [Act
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#025), because they were educated under
their tuition and instruction), even unto them, upon them, even upon
them (so it is in the original), as Ezekiel prophesied upon the dry
bones, that they might live, [Eze
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#004). They prophesied against them (so
bishop Patrick), for they reproved them because they did not build the
temple. The word of God, if it be not received now as a testimony to us,
will be received now as a testimony to us, will be received another day
as a testimony against us, and will judge us.

3\. Who sent them. They prophesied in the name, or (as some read it) in
the cause, or for the sake, of the God of Israel; they spoke by
commission from him, and argued from his authority over them, his
interest in them, and the concern of his glory among them.

II\. They had two good magistrates, who were forward and active in this
work. Zerubbabel their chief prince, and Jeshua their chief priest, [Ezr
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#002). Those that are in places of
dignity and power ought with their dignity to put honour upon and with
their power to put life into every good work: thus it becomes those that
preceded, and those that preside, with an exemplary care and zeal to
fulfil all righteousness and to go before in a good work. These great
men thought it no disparagement to them, but a happiness, to be taught
and prescribed to by the prophets of the Lord, and were glad of their
help in reviving this good work. Read the first chapter of the prophecy
of Haggai here (for that is the best comment on these two verses) and
see what great things God does by his word, which he magnifies above all
his name, and by his Spirit working with it.

[Ezra 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 5:3</span></span>

We have here, I. The cognizance which their neighbours soon took of the
reviving of this good work. A jealous eye, it seems, they had upon them,
and no sooner did the Spirit of God stir up the friends of the temple to
appear for it than the evil spirit stirred up its enemies to appear
against it. While the people built and ceiled their own houses their
enemies gave them no molestation ([Hag
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#004)), though the king's order was to
put a stop to the building of the city ([Ezr
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#021)); but when they fell to work
again at the temple then the alarm was taken, and all heads were at work
to hinder them, [Ezr 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#003), [Ezr
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#004). The adversaries are here named:
Tatnai and Shethar-boznai. The governors we read of (ch. 4) were, it is
probable, displaced at the beginning of this reign, as is usual. It is
the policy of princes often to change their deputies, proconsuls, and
rulers of provinces. These, though real enemies to the building of the
temple, were men of better temper than the other, and made some
conscience of telling truth. If all men have not faith ([Th2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#002)), it is well some have, and a
sense of honour. The church's enemies are not all equally wicked and
unreasonable. The historian begins to relate what passed between the
builders and those inquisitors ([Ezr
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#003), [Ezr
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#004)), but breaks off his account, and
refers to the ensuing copy of the letter they sent to the king, where
the same appears more fully and at large, which he began to abridge
([Ezr 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#004)), or make an extract out of,
though, upon second thoughts, he inserted the whole.

II\. The care which the divine Providence took of this good work ([Ezr
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#005)): The eye of their God was upon
the elders of the Jews, who were active in the work, so that their
enemies could not cause them to cease, as they would have done, till the
matter came to Darius. They desired they would only cease till they had
instructions from the king about it. But they would not so much as yield
them that, for the eye of God was upon them, even their God. And, 1.
That baffled their enemies, infatuated and enfeebled them, and protected
the builders from their malicious designs. While we are employed in
God's work we are taken under his special protection; his eye is upon us
for good, seven eyes upon one stone in his temple; see [Zac
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009); [Zac
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#010). 2. That quickened them. The
elders of the Jews saw the eye of God upon them, to observe what they
did and own them in what they did well, and then they had courage enough
to face their enemies and to go on vigorously with their work,
notwithstanding all the opposition they met with. our eye upon God,
observing his eye upon us, will keep us to our duty and encourage us in
it when the difficulties are ever so discouraging.

III\. The account they sent to the king of this matter, in which we may
observe,

1\. How fully the elders of the Jews gave the Samaritans an account of
their proceedings. They, finding them both busy and prosperous, that all
hands were at work to run up this building and that it went on rapidly,
put these questions to them: - "By what authority do you do these
things, and who gave you that authority? Who set you to work? Have you
that which will bear you out?" To this they answered that they had
sufficient warrant to do what they did; for, (1.) "We are the servants
of the God of heaven and earth. The God we worship is not a local deity,
and therefore we cannot be charged with making a faction, or setting up
a sect, in building this temple to his honour: but we pay our homage to
a God on whom the whole creation depends, and therefore ought to be
protected and assisted by all and hindered by none." It is the wisdom as
well as duty of kings to countenance the servants of the God of heaven.
(2.) "We have a prescription to this house; it was built for the honour
of our God by Solomon many ages ago. It is no novel invention of our
own; we are but raising the foundations of many generations," [Isa
58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012). (3.) "It was to punish us for
our sins that we were, for a time, put out of the possession of this
house; not because the gods of the nations had prevailed against our
God, but because we had provoked him ([Ezr
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#012)), for which he delivered us and
our temple into the hands of the king of Babylon, but never intended
thereby to put a final period to our religion. We were only suspended
for a time, not deprived for ever." (4.) "We have the royal decree of
Cyrus to justify us and bear us out in what we do. He not only permitted
and allowed us, but charged and commanded us to build this house ([Ezr
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#013)), and to build it in its place
([Ezr 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#015)), the same place where it
had stood before." He ordered this, not only in compassion to the Jews,
but in veneration of their God, saying, He is the God. He also delivered
the vessels of the temple to one whom he entrusted to see them restored
to their ancient place and use, [Ezr
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#014). And they had these to show in
confirmation of what they alleged. (5.) "The building was begun
according to this order as soon as ever we had returned, so that we have
not forfeited the benefit of the order for want of pursuing it in time;
still it has been in building, but, because we have met with opposition,
it is not finished." But, observe, they mention not the falsehood and
malice of the former governors, nor make any complaint of them, though
they had cause enough, to teach us not to render bitterness for
bitterness, nor the most just reproach for that which is most unjust,
but to think it enough if we can obtain fair treatment for the future,
without an invidious reference to former injuries, [Ezr
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#016). This is the account they give of
their proceedings, not asking what authority they had to examine them,
nor upbraiding them with their idolatry, and superstitions, and medley
religion. Let us learn hence with meekness and fear to give a reason of
the hope that is in us ([Pe1 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015)),
rightly to understand, and then readily to declare, what we do in God's
service and why we do it.

2\. How fairly the Samaritans represented this to the king. (1.) They
called the temple at Jerusalem the house of the great God ([Ezr
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#008)); for though the Samaritans, as it
should seem, had yet gods many and lords many, they owned the God of
Israel to be the great God, who is above all gods. "It is the house of
the great God, and therefore we dare not oppose the building of it
without orders from thee." (2.) They told him truly what was done, not
stating, as their predecessors did, that they were fortifying the city
as if they intended war, but only that they were rearing the temple as
those that intended worship, [Ezr 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#008).
(3.) They fully represented their plea, told him what they had to say
for themselves, and were willing that the cause should be set in a true
light. (4.) They left it to the king to consult the records whether
Cyrus had indeed made such a decree, and then to give directions as he
should think fit, [Ezr 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#017). We have
reason to think that if Artaxerxes, in the foregoing chapter, had had
the Jews' cause as fairly represented to him as it was here to Darius,
he would not have ordered the work to be hindered. God's people could
not be persecuted if they were not belied, could not be baited if they
were not dressed up in bears' skins. Let but the cause of God and truth
be fairly stated, and fairly heard, and it will keep its ground.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 6](ezr006)

</div>
