<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr006)  [Next](ezr008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 7:0</span></span>

Ezra's precious name saluted us, at first, in the title of the book, but
in the history we have not met with it till this chapter introduces him
into public action in another reign, that of Artaxerxes. Zerubbabel and
Jeshua we will suppose, by this time, to have grown old, if not gone
off; nor do we hear any more of Haggai and Zechariah; they have finished
their testimony. What shall become of the cause of God and Israel when
these useful instruments are laid aside? Trust God, who has the residue
of the Spirit, to raise up others in their room. Ezra here, and Nehemiah
in the next book, are as serviceable in their days as those were in
theirs. Here is, I. An account, in general, of Ezra himself, and of his
expedition to Jerusalem for the public good ([Ezr
7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001)). II. A copy of the commission
which Artaxerxes gave him (v. 11-26). III. His thankfulness to God for
it ([Ezr 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#027), [Ezr
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#028)). The next chapter will give us a
more particular narrative of his associates, his journey, and his
arrival at Jerusalem.

[Ezra 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 7:1</span></span>

Here is, I. Ezra's pedigree. He was one of the sons of Aaron, a priest.
Him God chose to be an instrument of good to Israel, that he might put
honour upon the priesthood, the glory of which had been much eclipsed by
the captivity. He is said to be the son of Seraiah, that Seraiah, as is
supposed, whom the king of Babylon put to death when he sacked
Jerusalem, [Kg2 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#018), [Kg2
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#021). If we take the shortest
computation, it was seventy-five years since Seraiah died; many reckon
it much longer, and, because they suppose Ezra called out in the prime
of his time to public service, do therefore think that Seraiah was not
his immediate parent, but his grandfather or great-grandfather, but that
he was the first eminent person that occurred in his genealogy upwards,
which is carried up here as high as Aaron, yet leaving out many for
brevity-sake, which may be supplied from [Ch1
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#004), etc. He was a younger brother, or
his father was Jozadak, the father of Jeshua, so that he was not high
priest, but nearly allied to the high priest.

II\. His character. Though of the younger house, his personal
qualifications made him very eminent. 1. He was a man of great learning,
a scribe, a ready scribe, in the law of Moses, [Ezr
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#006). He was very much conversant with
the scriptures, especially the writings of Moses, had the words ready
and was well acquainted with the sense and meaning of them. It is to be
feared that learning ran low among the Jews in Babylon; but Ezra was
instrumental to revive it. The Jews say that he collected and collated
all the copies of the law he could find out, and published an accurate
edition of it, with all the prophetical books, historical and poetical,
that were given by divine inspiration, and so made up the canon of the
Old Testament, with the addition of the prophecies and histories of his
own time. If he was raised up of God, and qualified and inclined to do
this, all generations have reason to call him blessed, and to bless God
for him. God sent to the Jews prophets and scribes, [Mat
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#034). Ezra went under the latter
denomination. Now that prophecy was about to cease it was time to
promote scripture-knowledge, pursuant to the counsel of God by the last
of the prophets, [Mal 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004). Remember
the law of Moses. Gospel ministers are called scribes instructed to the
kingdom of heaven ([Mat 13:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052)), New
Testament scribes. It was a pity that such a worthy name as this should
be worn, as it was in the degenerate ages of the Jewish church, by men
who were professed enemies to Christ and his gospel (Woe unto you,
scribes and Pharisees), who were learned in the letter of the law, but
strangers to the spirit of it. 2. He was a man of great piety and holy
zeal ([Ezr 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#010)): He had prepared his
heart to seek the law of the Lord, etc. (1.) That which he chose for his
study was the law of the Lord. The Chaldeans, among whom he was born and
bred, were famed for literature, especially the study of the stars, to
which, being a studious man, we may suppose that Ezra was tempted to
apply himself. But he got over the temptation; the law of his God was
more to him than all the writings of their magicians and astrologers,
which he knew enough of with good reason to despise them. (2.) He sought
the law of the Lord, that is, he made it his business to enquire into
it, searched the scriptures, and sought the knowledge of God, of his
mind and will, in the scriptures, which is to be found there, but not
without seeking. (3.) He made conscience of doing according to it; he
set it before him as his rule, formed his sentiments and temper by it,
and managed himself in his whole conversation according to it. This use
we must make of our knowledge of the scriptures; for happy are we if we
do what we know of the will of God. (4.) He set himself to teach Israel
the statutes and judgments of that law. What he knew he was willing to
communicate for the good of others; for the ministration of the Spirit
is given to every man to profit withal. But observe the method: he first
learned and then taught, sought the law of the Lord and so laid up a
good treasure, and then instructed others and laid out what he had laid
up. He also first did and then taught, practised the commandments
himself and then directed others in the practice of them; thus his
example confirmed his doctrine. (5.) He prepared his heart to do all
this, or he fixed his heart. He took pains in his studies, and
thoroughly furnished himself for what he designed, and then put on
resolution to proceed and persevere in them, and thus he became a ready
scribe. Moses in Egypt, Ezra in Babylon, and both in captivity, were
wonderfully fitted for eminent services to the church.

III\. His expedition to Jerusalem for the good of his country: He went
up from Babylon ([Ezr 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#006)), and, in
four months' time, came to Jerusalem, [Ezr
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#008). It was strange that such a man as
he staid so long in Babylon after his brethren had gone up; but God sent
him not thither till he had work for him to do there; and none went but
those whose spirits God raised to go up. Some think that this Artaxerxes
was the same with that Darius whose decree we had (ch. 6), and that Ezra
came the very year after the temple was finished: that was the sixth
year, this the seventh (v. 8), so Dr. Lightfoot. My worthy and learned
friend, lately deceased, Mr. Talents, in his chronological tables,
places it about fifty-seven years after the finishing of the temple;
others further on. I have only to observe, 1. How kind the king was to
him. He granted him all his request, whatever he desired to put him into
a capacity to serve his country. 2. How kind his people were to him.
When he went many more went with him, because they desired not to stay
in Babylon when he had gone thence, and because they would venture to
dwell in Jerusalem when he had gone thither. 3. How kind his God was to
him. He obtained this favour from his king and country by the good hand
of the Lord that was upon him, v. 6, 9. Note, Every creature is that to
us which God makes it to be, and from him our judgment proceeds. As we
must see the events that shall occur in the hand of God, so we must see
the hand of God in the events that do occur, and acknowledge him with
thankfulness when we have reason to call it his good hand.

[Ezra 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ezr 7:11</span></span>

We have here the commission which the Persian emperor granted to Ezra,
giving him authority to act for the good of the Jews; and it is very
ample and full, and beyond what could have been expected. The commission
runs, we suppose, in the usual form: Artaxerxes, King of kings. This
however is too high a title for any mortal man to assume; he was indeed
king of some kings, but to speak as if he were king of all kings was to
usurp his prerogative who hath all power both in heaven and in earth. He
sends greeting to his trusty and well-beloved Ezra, whom he calls a
scribe of the law of the God of heaven ([Ezr
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#012)), a title which (it seems by
this) Ezra valued himself by, and desired no other, no, not when he was
advanced to the proconsular dignity. He reckoned it more his honour to
be a scribe of God's law than to be a peer or prince of the empire. Let
us observe the articles of this commission.

I. He gives Ezra leave to go up to Jerusalem, and as many of his
countrymen as pleased to go up with him, [Ezr
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#013). He and they were captives, and
therefore they would not quit his dominions without his royal license.

II\. He gives him authority to enquire into the affairs of Judah and
Jerusalem, [Ezr 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#014). The rule of his
enquiry was to be the law of his God, which was in his hand. He must
enquire whether the Jews, in their religion, had and did according to
that law - whether the temple was built, the priesthood was settled, and
the sacrifices were offered conformably to the divine appointment. If,
upon enquiry, he found any thing amiss, he must see to get it amended,
and, like Titus in Crete, must set in order the things that were
wanting, [Tit 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005). Thus is God's law
magnified and made honourable, and thus are the Jews restored to their
ancient privilege of governing themselves by that law, and are no longer
under the statutes that were not good, the statutes of their oppressors,
[Eze 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025).

III\. He entrusts him with the money that was freely given by the king
himself and his counsellors, and collected among his subjects, for the
service of the house of God, [Ezr
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#015), [Ezr
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#016).

1\. Let this be taken notice of, (1.) To the honour of God, as the one
only living and true God;' for even those that worshipped other gods
were so convinced of the sovereignty of the God of Israel that they were
willing to incur expenses in order to recommend themselves to his
favour. See [Psa 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012); [Psa
68:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#026). (2.) To the praise of this
heathen king, that he honoured the God of Israel though his worshippers
were a despicable handful of poor men, who were not able to bear the
charges of their own religion and were now his vassals, and that, though
he was not wrought upon to quit his own superstitions, yet he protected
and encouraged the Jews in their religion, and did not only say, Be you
warmed, and be you filled, but gave them such things as they needed.
(3.) To the reproach of the memory of the wicked kings of Judah. Those
that had been trained up in the knowledge and worship of the God of
Israel, and had his law and his prophets, often plundered and
impoverished the temple; but here a heathen prince enriched it. Thus
afterwards the gospel was rejected by the Jews, but welcomed by the
Gentiles. See [Rom 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011), Through
their fall salvation has come to the Gentiles. [Act
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046).

2\. We are here told that Ezra was entrusted, (1.) To receive this money
and to carry it to Jerusalem; for he was a man of known integrity, whom
they could confide in, that he would not convert to his own use the
least part of that which was given to the public. We find Paul going to
Jerusalem upon such an errand, to bring alms to his nation and
offerings, [Act 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#017). (2.) To lay out
this money in the best manner, in sacrifices to be offered upon the
altar of God ([Ezr 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#017)), and in
whatever else he or his brethren thought fit ([Ezr
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#018)), with this limitation only that
it should be after the will of their God, which they were better
acquainted with than the king was. Let the will of our God be always our
rule in our expenses, and particularly in what we lay out for his
service. God's work must always be done according to his will. Besides
money, he had vessels also given him for the service of the temple, [Ezr
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#019). Cyrus restored what of right
belonged to the temple, but these were given over and above: thus it
receiveth its own with usury. These he must deliver before the God of
Jerusalem, as intended for his honour, there where he had put his name.

IV\. He draws him a bill, or warrant rather, upon the treasurers on that
side the river, requiring them to furnish him with what he had occasion
for out of the king's revenues, and to place it to the king's account,
[Ezr 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#020), [Ezr
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#022). This was considerately done; for
Ezra, having yet to enquire into the sate of things, knew not what he
should have occasion for and was modest in his demand. It was also
kindly done, and evinced a great affection to the temple and a great
confidence in Ezra. It is the interest of princes and great men to use
their wealth and power for the support and encouragement of religion.
What else are great revenues good for but that they enable men to do
much good of this kind if they have but hearts to do it?

V. He charges him to let nothing be wanting that was requisite to be
done in or about the temple for the honour of the God of Israel.
Observe, in this charge ([Ezr 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#023)),
1. How honourably he speaks of God. He had called him before the God of
Jerusalem; but here, lest it should be thought that he looked upon him
as a local deity, he calls him twice, with great veneration, the God of
heaven. 2. How strictly he eyes the word and law of God, which, it is
likely, he had read and admired: "Whatsoever is commanded by your God"
(whose institutions, though he wrote himself King of kings, he would not
presume in the least iota or tittle to alter or add to) "let it be done,
let it be diligently done, with care and speed." And, 3. How
solicitously he deprecates the wrath of God: Why should there be wrath
against the realm? The neglect and contempt of religion bring the
judgments of God upon kings and kingdoms; and the likeliest expedient to
turn away his wrath, when it is ready to break out against a people, is
to support and encourage religion. Would we secure our peace and
prosperity? Let us take care that the cause of God be not starved.

VI\. He exempts all the ministers of the temple from paying taxes to the
government. From the greatest of the priests to the least of the
Nethinim, it shall not be lawful for the king's officers to impose that
toll, tribute, or custom upon them, which the rest of the king's
subjects paid, [Ezr 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#024). This put a
great honour upon them as free denizens of the empire, and would gain
them respect as favourites of the crown; and it gave them liberty to
attend their ministry with more cheerfulness and freedom. We suppose it
was only what they needed for themselves and their families, and the
maintenance of their ministry, that was hereby allowed to come to them
custom-free. If any of them should take occasion from this privilege to
meddle in trade and merchandise, they justly lost the benefit of it.

VII\. He empowers Ezra to nominate and appoint judges and magistrates
for all the Jews on that side the river, [Ezr
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#025), [Ezr
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#026). It was a great favour to the
Jews to have such nobles of themselves, and especially to have them of
Ezra's nomination. 1. All that knew the laws of Ezra's God (that is, all
that professed the Jewish religion) were to be under the jurisdiction of
these judges, which intimates that they were exempted from the
jurisdiction of the heathen magistrates. 2. These judges were allowed
and encouraged to make proselytes: Let them teach the laws of God to
those that do not know them. Though he would not turn Jew himself, he
cared not how many of his subjects did. 3. They were authorized to
enforce the judgments they gave, and the orders they made, conformable
to the law of God (which was hereby made the law of the king), with
severe penalties - imprisonment, banishment, fine, or death, according
as their law directed. They were not allowed to make new laws, but must
see the laws of God duly executed; and they were entrusted with the
sword in order that they might be a terror to evil doers. What could
Jehoshaphat, or Hezekiah, or David himself, as king, have done more for
the honour of God and the furtherance of religion?

[Ezra 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">ezr 7:27</span></span>

Ezra cannot proceed in his story without inserting his thankful
acknowledgement of the goodness of God to him and his people in this
matter. As soon as he has concluded the king's commission, instead of
subjoining, God save the king (though that would have been proper
enough), he adds, Blessed be the Lord; for we must in every thing give
thanks, and, whatever occurrences please us, we must own God's hand in
them, and praise his name. Two things Ezra blessed God for: - 1. For his
commission. We suppose he kissed the king's hand for it, but that was
not all: Blessed be God (says he) that put such a thing as this into the
king's heart. God can put things into men's hearts which would not arise
there of themselves, and into their heads too, both by his providence
and by his grace, in things pertaining both to life and godliness. If
any good appear to be in our own hearts, or in the hearts of others, we
must own it was God that put it there, and bless him for it; for it is
he that worketh in us both to will and to do that which is good. When
princes and magistrates act for the suppression of vice, and the
encouragement of religion, we must thank God that put it into their
hearts to do so, as much as if they had granted us some particular
favour. When God's house was built Ezra rejoiced in what was done to
beautify it. We read not of any orders given to paint or gild it, or to
garnish it with precious stones, but to be sure that the ordinances of
God were administered there constantly, and carefully, and exactly
according to the institution; and that was indeed the beautifying of the
temple. 2. For the encouragement he had to act in pursuance of his
commission ([Ezr 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#028)): He has
extended mercy to me. The king, in the honour he did him, we may
suppose, had an eye to his merit, and preferred him because he looked
upon him to be a very sensible ingenious man; but he himself ascribes
his preferment purely to God's mercy. It was this that recommended him
to the favour of his prince. Ezra himself was a man of courage, yet he
attributed his encouragement not to his own heart, but to God's hand: "I
was strengthened to undertake the services, as the hand of the Lord my
God was upon me to direct and support me." If God gives us his hand, we
are bold and cheerful; if he withdraws it, we are weak as water.
Whatever service we are enabled to do for God and our generation, God
must have all the glory of it. Strength for it is derived from him, and
therefore the praise of it must be given to him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 8](ezr008)

</div>
