<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr001)  [Next](ezr003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 2:0</span></span>

That many returned out of Babylon upon Cyrus's proclamation we were told
in the foregoing chapter; we have here a catalogue of the several
families that returned ([Ezr 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#001)). I.
The leaders ([Ezr 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#002)). II. The people
(v. 3-35). III. The priests, Levites, and retainers to the temple (v.
35-63). IV. The sum total, with an account of their retinue ([Ezr
2:64-67](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#064)). V. Their offerings to the
service of the temple ([Ezr 2:68-70](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#068)).

[Ezra 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 2:1</span></span>

We may observe here, 1. That an account was kept in writing of the
families that came up out of captivity, and the numbers of each family.
This was done for their honour, as part of their recompence for their
faith and courage, their confidence in God and their affection to their
own land, and to stir up others to follow their good example. Those that
honour God he will thus honour. The names of all those Israelites indeed
that accept the offer of deliverance by Christ shall be found, to their
honour, in a more sacred record than this, even in the Lamb's book of
life. The account that was kept of the families that came up from the
captivity was intended also for the benefit of posterity, that they
might know from whom they descended and to whom they were allied. 2.
That they are called children of the province. Judah, which had been an
illustrious kingdom, to which other kingdoms had been made provinces,
subject to it and dependent on it, was now itself made a province, to
receive laws and commissions from the king of Persia and to be
accountable to him. See how sin diminishes and debases a nation, which
righteousness would exalt. But by thus being made servants (as the
patriarchs by being sojourners in a country which was theirs by promise)
they were reminded of the better country, that is, the heavenly ([Heb
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#016)), a kingdom which cannot be
moved, or changed into a province. 3. That they are said to come every
one to his city, that is, the city appointed them, in which appointment
an eye, no doubt, was had to their former settlement by Joshua; and to
that, as near as might be, they returned: for it does not appear that
any others, at least any that were able to oppose them, had possessed
them in their absence. 4. That the leaders are first mentioned, v. 2.
Zerubbabel and Jeshua were their Moses and Aaron, the former their chief
prince, the latter their chief priest. Nehemiah and Mordecai are
mentioned here; some think not the same with the famous men we
afterwards meet with of those names: probably they were the same, but
afterwards returned to court for the service of their country. 5. Some
of these several families are named from the persons that were their
ancestors, others from the places in which they had formerly resided; as
with us many surnames are the proper names of persons, others of places.
6. Some little difference there is between the numbers of some of the
families here and in Neh. 7, where this catalogue is repeated, which
might arise from this, that some who had given in their names at first
to come afterwards drew back - said, I go, Sir, but went not, which
would lessen the number of the families they belonged to; others that
declined, at first, afterwards repented and went, and so increased the
number. 7. Here are two families that are called the children of Elam
(one [Ezr 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#007), another [Ezr
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#031)), and, which is strange, the
number of both is the same, 1254. 8. The children of Adonikam, which
signifies a high lord, were 666, just the number of the beast ([Rev
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#018)), which is there said to be the
number of a man, which, Mr. Hugh Broughton thinks, has reference to this
man. 9. The children of Bethlehem ([Ezr
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#021)) were but 123, though it was
David's city; for Bethlehem was little among the thousands of Judah, yet
there must the Messiah arise, [Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002). 10. Anathoth had been a famous
place in the tribe of Benjamin and yet here it numbered but 128 (v. 23),
which is to be imputed to the divine curse which the men of Anathoth
brought upon themselves by persecuting Jeremiah, who was of their city.
[Jer 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#021), [Jer
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#023), There shall be no remnant of
them, for I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth. And see [Isa
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#030), O poor Anathoth! Nothing brings
ruin on a people sooner than persecution.

[Ezra 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">ezr 2:36</span></span>

Here is an account, I. Of the priests that returned, and they were a
considerable number, about a tenth part of the whole company: for the
whole were above 42,000 ([Ezr 2:64](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#064)),
and four families of priests made up above 4200 ([Ezr
2:36-39](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#036)); thus was the tenth God's
part - a blessed decimation. Three of the fathers of the priests here
named were heads of courses, [Ch1
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#007), [Ch1
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#008), [Ch1
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#014). The fourth was Pashur, v. 38.
If these were of the posterity of that Pashur that abused Jeremiah ([Jer
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#001)), it is strange that so bad a man
should have so good a seed, and so numerous.

II\. Of the Levites. I cannot but wonder at the small number of them,
for, taking in both the singers and the porters ([Ezr
2:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#040)), they did not make 350. Time
was when the Levites were more forward to their duty than the priests
([Ch2 29:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#034)), but they were not so
now. If one place, one family, has the reputation for pious zeal now,
another may have it another time. The wind blows where it listeth, and
shifts its points.

III\. Of the Nethinim, who, it is supposed, were the Gibeonites, given
(so their name signifies) by Joshua first ([Jos
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#027)), and again by David ([Ezr
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#020)), when Saul had expelled them, to
be employed by the Levites in the work of God's house as hewers of wood
and drawers of water; and, with them, of the children of Solomon's
servants, whom he gave for the like use (whether they were Jews or
Gentiles does not appear) and who were here taken notice of among the
retainers of the temple and numbered with the Nethinim, [Ezr
2:55](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#055), [Ezr
2:58](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#058). Note, It is an honour to belong
to God's house, though in the meanest office there.

IV\. Of some that were looked upon as Israelites by birth, and others as
priests, and yet could not make out a clear title to the honour. 1.
There were some that could not prove themselves Israelites ([Ezr
2:59](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#059), [Ezr
2:60](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#060)), a considerable number, who
presumed they were of the seed of Jacob, but could not produce their
pedigrees, and yet would go up to Jerusalem, having an affection to the
house and people of God. These shamed those who were true-born
Israelites, and yet were not called Israelites indeed, who came out of
the waters of Judah ([Isa 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#001)), but
had lost the relish of those waters. 2. There were others that could not
prove themselves priests, and yet were supposed to be of the seed of
Aaron. What is not preserved in black and white will, in all likelihood,
be forgotten in a little time. Now we are here told, (1.) How they lost
their evidence. One of their ancestors married a daughter of Barzillai,
that great man whom we read of in David's time; he gloried in an
alliance to that honourable family, and, preferring that before the
dignity of his priesthood, would have his children called after
Barzillai's family, and their pedigree preserved in the registers of
that house, not of the house of Aaron, and so they lost it. In Babylon
there was nothing to be got by the priesthood, and therefore they cared
not for being akin to it. Those who think their ministry, or their
relation to ministers, a diminution or disparagement to them, forget who
it was that said, I magnify my office. (2.) What they lost with it. It
could not be taken for granted that they were priests when they could
not produce their proofs, but they were, as polluted, put from the
priesthood. Now that the priests had recovered their rights, and had the
altar to live upon again, they would gladly be looked upon as priests.
But they had sold their birthright for the honour of being gentlemen,
and therefore were justly degraded, and forbidden to eat of the most
holy things. Note, Christ will be ashamed of those that are ashamed of
him and his service. It was the tirshatha, or governor, that put them
under this sequestration, which some understand of Zerubbabel the
present governor, others of Nehemiah (who is so called, [Neh
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009), [Neh
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#001), and who gave this order when he
came some years after); but the prohibition was not absolute, it was
only a suspension, till there should be a high priest with Urim and
Thummin, by whom they might know God's mind in this matter. This, it
seems, was expected and desired, but it does not appear that ever they
were blessed with it under the second temple. They had the canon of the
Old Testament complete, which was better than Urim; and, by the want of
that oracle, they were taught to expect the Messiah the great Oracle,
which the Urim and Thummim was but a type of. Nor does it appear that
the second temple had the ark in it, either the old one or a new one.
Those shadows by degrees vanished, as the substance approached; and God,
by the prophet, intimates to his people that they should sustain no
damage by the want of the ark, [Jer
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#016), [Jer
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#017). In those days, when they shall
call Jerusalem the throne of the Lord, and all the nations shall be
gathered to it, they shall say no more, The ark of the covenant of the
Lord, neither shall it come to mind, for they shall do very well without
it.

[Ezra 2:64](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">ezr 2:64</span></span>

Here is, I. The sum total of the company that returned out of Babylon.
The particular sums before mentioned amount not quite to 30,000
(29,818), so that there were above 12,000 that come out into any of
those accounts, who, it is probable, were of the rest of the tribes of
Israel, besides Judah and Benjamin, that could not tell of what
particular family or city they were, but that they were Israelites, and
of what tribe. Now, 1. This was more than double the number that were
carried captive into Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar, so that, as in Egypt,
the time of their affliction was the time of their increase. 2. These
were but few to begin a nation with, and yet, by virtue of the old
promise made to their fathers, they multiplied so as before their last
destruction by the Romans, about 500 years after, to be a very numerous
people. When God says, "Increase and multiply," a little one shall
become a thousand.

II\. Their retinue. They were themselves little better than servants,
and therefore no wonder that their servants were comparatively but few
([Ezr 2:65](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#065)) and their beasts of burden
about as many, [Ezr 2:66](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#066), [Ezr
2:67](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#067). It was not with them now as in
days past. But notice is taken of 200 singing-men and women whom they
had among them, who, we will suppose, were intended (as those [Ch2
35:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#025)) to excite their mourning, for
it was foretold that they should, upon this occasion, go weeping ([Jer
50:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#004)), with ditties of lamentation.

III\. Their oblations. It is said ([Ezr
2:68](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#068), [Ezr
2:69](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#069)), 1. That they came to the house
of the Lord at Jerusalem; and yet that house, that holy and beautiful
house, was now in ruins, a heap of rubbish. But, like their father
Abraham, when the altar was gone they came with devotion to the place of
the altar ([Gen 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#004)); and it is the
character of the genuine sons of Zion that they favour even the dust
thereof, [Psa 102:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#014). 2. That they
offered freely towards the setting of it up in its place. That, it
seems, was the first house they talked of setting up; and though they
came off a journey, and were beginning the world (two chargeable
things), yet they offered, and offered freely, towards the building of
the temple. Let none complain of the necessary expenses of their
religion, but believe that when they come to balance the account they
will find that it clears the cost. Their offering was nothing in
comparison with the offerings of the princes in David's time; then they
offered by talents ([Ch1 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#007)), now by
drams, yet these drams, being after their ability, were as acceptable to
God as those talents, like the widow's two mites. The 61,000 drams of
gold amount, by Cumberland's calculation, to so many pounds of our money
and so many groats. Every maneh, or pound of silver, he reckons to be
sixty shekels (that is, thirty ounces), which we may reckon 7l. 10s. of
our money, so that this 5000 pounds of silver will be above 37,000l. of
our money. It seems, God had blessed them with an increase of their
wealth, as well as of their numbers, in Babylon; and, as God had
prospered them, they gave cheerfully to the service of his house. 3.
That they dwelt in their cities, [Ezr
2:70](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#070). Though their cities were out of
repair, yet, because they were their cities, such as God had assigned
them, they were content to dwell in them, and were thankful for liberty
and property, though they had little of pomp, plenty, or power. Their
poverty was a bad cause, but their unity and unanimity were a good
effect of it. Here was room enough for them all and all their substance,
so that there was no strife among them, but perfect harmony, a blessed
presage of their settlement, as their discords in the latter times of
that state were of their ruin.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 3](ezr003)

</div>
