<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr005)  [Next](ezr007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 6:0</span></span>

How solemnly the foundation of the temple was laid we read in [Ezr
3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001). How slowly the building went
on, and with how much difficulty, we found in ch. 4 and 5. But how
gloriously the topstone was at length brought forth with shoutings we
find in this chapter; and even we, at this distance of time, when we
read of it, may cry, "Grace, grace to it." As for God, his work is
perfect; it may be slow work, but it will be sure work. We have here, I.
A recital of the decree of Cyrus for the building of the temple ([Ezr
6:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#001)). II. The enforcing of that
decree by a new order from Darius for the perfecting of that work ([Ezr
6:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#006)). III. The finishing of it
thereupon ([Ezr 6:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#013)). IV. The
solemn dedication of it when it was built ([Ezr
6:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#016)), and the handselling of it
(as I may say) with the celebration of the passover ([Ezr
6:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#019)). And now we may say that in
Judah and Jerusalem things went well, very well.

[Ezra 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 6:1</span></span>

We have here, I. The decree of Cyrus for the building of the temple
repeated. To this the Samaritans referred because the Jews pleaded it,
and perhaps hoped it would not be found, and then their plea would be
over-ruled and a stop put to their work. Search was ordered to be made
for it among the records; for, it seems, the tribes had not taken care
to provide themselves with an authentic copy of it, which might have
stood them in good stead, but they must appeal to the original. It was
looked for in Babylon ([Ezr 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#001)),
where Cyrus was when he signed it. But, when it was not found there,
Darius did not make that a pretence to conclude that therefore there was
no such decree, and thereupon to give judgment against the Jews; but it
is probable, having himself heard that such a decree was certainly made,
he ordered the rolls in other places to be searched, and at length it
was found at Achmetha, in the province of the Medes, [Ezr
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#002). Perhaps some that durst not
destroy it, yet hid it there, out of ill will to the Jews, that they
might lose the benefit of it. But Providence so ordered that it came to
light; and it is here inserted, [Ezr
6:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#003). 1. Here is a warrant for the
building of the temple: Let the house of God at Jerusalem, yea, let that
house be built (so it may be read), within such and such dimensions, and
with such and such materials. 2. A warrant for the taking of the
expenses of the building out of the king's revenue, [Ezr
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#004). We do not find that they had
received what was here ordered them, the face of things at court being
soon changed. 3. A warrant for the restoring of the vessels and utensils
of the temple, which Nebuchadnezzar had taken away ([Ezr
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#005)), with an order that the priests,
the Lord's ministers, should return them all to their places in the
house of God.

II\. The confirmation of it by a decree of Darius, grounded upon it and
in pursuance of it.

1\. The decree of Darius is very explicit and satisfactory.

(1.) He forbids his officers to do any thing in opposition to the
building of the temple. The manner of expression intimates that he knew
they had a mind to hinder it: Be you far hence ([Ezr
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#006)); let the work of this house of
God alone, [Ezr 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#007). Thus was the
wrath of the enemy made to praise God and the remainder thereof did he
restrain.

(2.) He orders them out of his own revenue to assist the builders with
money, \[1.\] For carrying on the building, [Ezr
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#008). Herein he pursues the example of
Cyrus, [Ezr 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#004). \[2.\] For
maintaining the sacrifices there when it was built, [Ezr
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#009). He ordered that they should be
supplied with every thing they wanted both for burnt-offerings and
meat-offerings. He was content it should be a rent-charge upon his
revenue, and ordered it to be paid every day, and this without fail,
that they might offer sacrifices and prayers with them (for the
patriarchs, when they offered sacrifice, called on the name of the Lord,
so did Samuel, Elijah, and others) for the life (that is, the happiness
and prosperity) of the king and his sons, [Ezr
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#010). See here how he gives honour,
First, To Israel's God, whom he calls once and again the God of heaven.
Secondly, To his ministers, in ordering his commissioners to give out
supplies for the temple service at the appointment of the priests. Those
that thought to control them must now be, in this matter, at their
command. It was a new thing for God's priests to have such an interest
in the public money. Thirdly, To prayer: That they may pray for the life
of the king. He knew they were a praying people, and had heard that God
was nigh to them in all that which they called upon him for. He was
sensible he needed their prayers and might receive benefit by them, and
was kind to them in order that he might have an interest in their
prayers. It is the duty of God's people to pray for those that are in
authority over them, not only for the good and gentle, but also for the
forward; but they are particularly bound in gratitude to pray for their
protectors and benefactors; and it is the wisdom of princes to desire
their prayers, and to engage them. Let not the greatest princes despise
the prayers of the meanest saints; it is desirable to have them for us,
and dreadful to have them against us.

(3.) He enforces his decree with a penalty ([Ezr
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#011)): "Let none either oppose the
work and service of the temple or withhold the supports granted to it by
the crown upon pain of death. If any alter this decree, let him be
(hanged before his own door as we say), hanged upon a beam of his own
house, and, as an execrable man, let his house be made a dunghill."

(4.) He entails a divine curse upon all those kings and people that
should ever have any hand in the destruction of this house, [Ezr
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#012). What he would not do himself for
the protection of the temple he desired that God, to whom vengeance
belongs, would do. This bespeaks him zealous in the cause; and though
this temple was, at length, most justly destroyed by the righteous hand
of God, yet perhaps the Romans, who were the instruments of that
destruction, felt the effects of this curse, for that empire sensibly
declined ever after.

2\. From all this we learn, (1.) That the heart of kings is in the hand
of God, and he turns it which way soever he pleases; what they are he
makes them to be, for he is King of kings. (2.) That when God's time has
come for the accomplishing of his gracious purposes concerning his
church he will raise up instruments to promote them from whom such good
service was not expected. The earth sometimes helps the woman ([Rev
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#016)), and those are made use of for
the defence of religion who have little religion themselves. (3.) That
what is intended for the prejudice of the church has often, by the
overruling providence of God, been made serviceable to it, [Phi
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#012). The enemies of the Jews, in
appealing to Darius, hoped to get an order to suppress them, but,
instead of that, they got an order to supply them. Thus out of the eater
comes forth meat. The apocryphal Esdras (or Ezra), Book 1 ch. 3 and 4,
gives another account of this decree in favour of the Jews, that Darius
had vowed that if ever he came to the kingdom he would build the temple
at Jerusalem, and that Zerubbabel, who was one of his attendants
(whereas it is plain here that he was now at Jerusalem), for making an
ingenious discourse before him on that subject (Great is the truth and
will prevail), was told to ask what recompence he would, and asked only
for this order, in pursuance of the king's vow.

[Ezra 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ezr 6:13</span></span>

Here we have, I. The Jews' enemies made their friends. When they
received this order from the king they came with as much haste to
encourage and assist the work as their predecessors had done to put a
stop to it, [Ezr 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023). What the king
ordered they did, and, because they would not be thought to do it with
reluctance, they did it speedily, [Ezr
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#013). The king's moderation made them,
contrary to their own inclination, moderate too.

II\. The building of the temple carried on, and finished in a little
time, [Ezr 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014), [Ezr
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#015). Now the elders of the Jews built
with cheerfulness. For aught I know, the elders themselves laboured at
it with their own hands; and, if they did, it was no disparagement to
their eldership, but an encouragement to the other workmen. 1. They
found themselves bound to it by the commandment of the God of Israel,
who had given them power that they might use it in his service. 2. They
found themselves shamed into it by the commandment of the heathen kings,
Cyrus formerly, Darius now, and Artaxerxes some time after. Can the
elders of the Jews be remiss in this good work when these foreign
princes appear so warm in it? Shall native Israelites grudge their pains
and care about this building when strangers grudge not to be at the
expense of it? 3. They found themselves encouraged in it by the
prophesying of Haggai and Zechariah, who, it is likely, represented to
them (as bishop Patrick suggests) the wonderful goodness of God in
inclining the heart of the king of Persia to favour them thus. And now
the work went on so prosperously that, in four hears' time, it was
brought to perfection. As for God, his work is perfect. The gospel
church, that spiritual temple, is long in the building, but it will be
finished at last, when the mystical body is completed. Every believer is
a living temple, building up himself in his most holy faith. Much
opposition is given to this work by Satan and our own corruptions. We
trifle, and proceed in it with many stops and pauses; but he that has
begun the good work will see it performed, and will bring forth judgment
unto victory. Spirits of just men will be made perfect.

III\. The dedication of the temple. When it was built, being designed
only for sacred uses, they showed by an example how it should be used,
which (says bishop Patrick) is the proper sense of the word dedicate.
They entered upon it with solemnity and probably with a public
declaration of the separating of it from common uses and the surrender
of it to the honour of God, to be employed in his worship. 1. The
persons employed in this service were not only the priests and Levites
who officiated, but the children of Israel, some of each of the twelve
tribes, though Judah and Benjamin were the chief, and the rest of the
children of the captivity or transportation, which intimates that there
were many besides the children of Israel, of other nations, who
transported themselves with them, and became proselytes to their
religion, unless we read it, even the remnant of the children of the
captivity, and then, we may suppose, notice is hereby taken of their
mean and afflicted condition, because the consideration of that helped
to make them devout and serious in this and other religious exercises. A
sad change! The children of Israel have become children of the
captivity, and there appears but a remnant of them, according to that
prediction ([Isa 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003)), Shear-jashub -
The remnant shall return. 2. The sacrifices that were offered upon this
occasion were bullocks, rams, and lambs ([Ezr
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#017)), for burnt-offerings and
peace-offerings; not to be compared, in number, with what had been
offered at the dedication of Solomon's temple, but, being according to
their present ability, they were accepted, for, after a great trial of
affliction, the abundance of their joy, and their deep poverty, abounded
to the riches of their liberality, [Co2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#002). These hundreds were more to them
than Solomon's thousands were to him. But, besides these, they offered
twelve he-goats for sin-offerings, one for every tribe, to make
atonement for their sins, which they looked upon as necessary in order
to the acceptance of their services. Thus, by getting iniquity taken
away, they would free themselves from that which had been the sting of
their late troubles, and which, if not removed, would be a worm at the
root of their present comforts. 3. This service was performed with joy.
They were all glad to see the temple built and the concerns of it in so
good a posture. Let us learn to welcome holy ordinances with joy and
attend on them with pleasure. Let us serve the Lord with gladness.
Whatever we dedicate to God, let it be done with joy that he will please
to accept of it. 4. When they dedicated the house they settled the
household. Small comfort could they have in the temple without the
temple service, and therefore they set the priests in their divisions
and the Levites in their courses, [Ezr
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#018). Having set up the worship of God
in this dedication, they took care to keep it up, and made the book of
Moses their rule, to which they had an eye in this establishment. Though
the temple service could not now be performed with so much pomp and
plenty as formerly, because of their poverty, yet perhaps it was
performed with as much purity and close adherence to the divine
institution as ever, which was the true glory of it. No beauty like the
beauty of holiness.

IV\. The celebration of the passover in the newly-erected temple. Now
that they were newly delivered out of their bondage in Babylon it was
seasonable to commemorate their deliverance out of their bondage in
Egypt. Fresh mercies should put us in mind of former mercies. We may
suppose that they had kept the passover, after a sort, every year since
their return, for they had an altar and a tabernacle. But they were
liable to frequent disturbances from their enemies, were straitened for
room, and had not conveniences about them, so that they could not do it
with due solemnity till the temple was built; and now they made a joyful
festival of it, it falling out in the next month after the temple was
finished and dedicated, [Ezr 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#019).
Notice is here taken, 1. Of the purity of the priests and Levites that
killed the passover, [Ezr 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#020). In
Hezekiah's time the priests were many of them under blame for not
purifying themselves. But now it is observed, to their praise, that they
were purified together, as one man (so the word is); they were unanimous
both in their resolutions and in their endeavours to make and keep
themselves ceremonially clean for this solemnity; they joined together
in their preparations, that they might help one another, so that all of
them were pure, to a man. The purity of ministers adds much to the
beauty of their ministrations; so does their unity. 2. Of the proselytes
that communicated with them in this ordinance: All such as had separated
themselves unto them, had left their country and the superstitions of it
and cast in their lot with the Israel of God, and had turned from the
filthiness of the heathen of the land, both their idolatries and
immoralities, to seek the Lord God of Israel as their God, did eat the
passover. See how the proselytes, the converts, are described. They
separated themselves from the filthiness of sin and fellowship with
sinners, joined themselves with the Israel of God in conformity and
communion, and set themselves to seek the God of Israel; and those that
do so in sincerity, though strangers and foreigners, are welcome to eat
of the gospel feast, as fellow-citizens with the saints and of the
household of God. 3. Of the great pleasure and satisfaction wherewith
they kept the feast of unleavened bread, [Ezr
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#022). The Lord had made them joyful,
had given them both cause to rejoice and hearts to rejoice. It was now
about twenty years since the foundation of this temple was laid, and we
may suppose the old men that then wept at the remembrance of the first
temple were most of them dead by this time, so that now there were no
tears mingled with their joys. Those that are, upon good grounds,
joyful, have therefore reason to be thankful, because it is God that
makes them to rejoice. He is the fountain whence all the streams of our
joy flow. God has promised to all those who take hold of his covenant
that he will make them joyful in his house of prayer. The particular
occasion they had for joy at this time was that God had turned the heart
of the emperor to them, to strengthen their hands. If those that have
been, or who we feared would have been, against us, prove to be for us,
we may rejoice in it as a token for good, that our ways please the Lord
([Pro 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#007)), and he must have the
glory of it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 7](ezr007)

</div>
