<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr002)  [Next](ezr004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 3:0</span></span>

In the close of the foregoing chapter we left Israel in their cities,
but we may well imagine what a bad posture their affairs were in, the
ground untilled, the cities in ruins, all out of order; but here we have
an account of the early care they took about the re-establishment of
religion among them. Thus did they lay the foundation well, and begin
their work at the right end. I. They set up an altar, and offered
sacrifices upon it, kept the feasts, and contributed towards the
rebuilding of the temple ([Ezr 3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001)).
II. They laid the foundation of the temple with a mixture of joy and
sorrow ([Ezr 3:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#008)). This was the day
of small things, which was not to be despised, [Zac
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#010).

[Ezra 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 3:1</span></span>

Here is, I. A general assembly of the returned Israelites at Jerusalem,
in the seventh month, [Ezr 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001). We may
suppose that they came from Babylon in the spring, and must allow at
least four months for the journey, for so long Ezra and his company were
in coming, [Ezr 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#009). The seventh month
therefore soon came, in which many of the feasts of the Lord were to be
solemnized; and then they gathered themselves together by agreement
among themselves, rather than by the command of authority, to Jerusalem.
Though they had newly come to their cities, and had their hands full of
business there, to provide necessaries for themselves and their
families, which might have excused them from attending on God's altar
till the hurry was a little over, as many foolishly put off their coming
to the communion till they are settled in the world, yet such was their
zeal for religion, now that they had newly come from under correction
for their irreligion, that they left all their business in the country,
to attend God's altar; and (which is strange) in this pious zeal they
were all of a mind, they came as one man. Let worldly business be
postponed to the business of religion and it will prosper the better.

II\. The care which their leading men took to have an altar ready for
them to attend upon.

1\. Joshua and his brethren the priests, Zerubbabel and his brethren the
princes, built the altar of the God of Israel ([Ezr
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#002)), in the same place (it is likely)
where it had stood, upon the same bases, [Ezr
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#003). Bishop Patrick, observing that
before the temple was built there seems to have been a tabernacle
pitched for the divine service, as was in David's time, not on Mount
Moriah, but Mount Sion ([Ch1 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#023)),
supposes that this altar was erected there, to be sued while the temple
was in building. Let us learn hence, (1.) To begin with God. The more
difficult and necessitous our case is the more concerned we are to take
him along with us in all our ways. If we expect to be directed by his
oracles, let him be honoured by our offerings. (2.) To do what we can in
the worship of God when we cannot do what we would. They could not
immediately have a temple, but they would not be without an altar.
Abraham, wherever he came, built an altar; and wherever we come, though
we may perhaps want the benefit of the candlestick of preaching, and the
showbread of the eucharist, yet, if we bring not the sacrifices of
prayer and praise, we are wanting in our duty, for we have an altar that
sanctifies the gift ever ready.

2\. Observe the reason here given why they hastened to set up the altar:
Fear was upon them, because of the people of the land. They were in the
midst of enemies that bore ill will to them and their religion, for whom
they were an unequal match. And, (1.) Though they were so, yet they
built the altar (so some read it); they would not be frightened from
their religion by the opposition they were likely to meet with in it.
Never let the fear of man bring us into this snare. (2.) Because they
were so, therefore they set up the altar. Apprehension of danger should
stir us up to our duty. Have we many enemies? Then it is good to have
God our friend and to keep up our correspondence with him. This good use
we should make of our fears, we should be driven by them to our knees.
Even Saul would think himself undone if the enemy should come upon him
before he had made his supplication to God, [Sa1
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#012).

III\. The sacrifices they offered upon the altar. The altar was reared
to be used, and they used it accordingly. Let not those that have an
altar starve it.

1\. They began on the first day of the seventh month, [Ezr
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#006). It does not appear that they had
any fire from heaven to begin with, as Moses and Solomon had, but common
fire served them, as it did the patriarchs.

2\. Having begun, they kept up the continual burnt-offering ([Ezr
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#005)), morning and evening, [Ezr
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#003). They had known by sad experience
what it was to want the comfort of the daily sacrifice to plead in their
daily prayers, and now that it was revived they resolved not to let it
fall again. The daily lamb typified the Lamb of God, whose righteousness
must be our confidence in all our prayers.

3\. They observed all the set feasts of the Lord, and offered the
sacrifices appointed for each, and particularly the feast of
tabernacles, [Ezr 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#004), [Ezr
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#005). Now that they had received such
great mercy from God that joyful feast was in a special manner
seasonable. And now that they were beginning to settle in their cities
it might serve well to remind them of their fathers dwelling in tents in
the wilderness. That feast also which had a peculiar reference to gospel
times (as appears, [Zac 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#018)) was
brought, in a special manner, into reputation, now that those times drew
on. Of the services of this feast, which continued seven days and had
peculiar sacrifices appointed, it is said that they did as the duty of
every day required (see [Num 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#013),
[Num 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#017), etc.), Verbum die in die
suo - the word, or matter, of the day in its day (so it is in the
original) - a phrase that has become proverbial with those that have
used themselves to scripture-language. If the feast of tabernacles was a
figure of a gospel conversation, in respect of continual weanedness from
the world and joy in God, we may infer that it concerns us all to do the
work of the day in its day, according as the duty of the day requires,
that is, (1.) We must improve time, by finding some business to do every
day that will turn to a good account. (2.) We must improve opportunity,
by accommodating ourselves to that which is the proper business of the
present day. Every thing is beautiful in its season. The tenth day of
this month was the day of atonement, a solemn day, and very seasonable
now: it is very probable that they observed it, yet it is not mentioned,
nor indeed in all the Old Testament do I remember the least mention of
the observance of that day; as if it were enough that we have the law of
it in Lev. 16, and the gospel of it, which was the chief intention of
it, in the New Testament.

4\. They offered every man's free-will offering, [Ezr
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#005). The law required much, but they
brought more; for, though they had little wealth to support the expense
of their sacrifices, they had much zeal, and, we may suppose, spared at
their own tables that they might plentifully supply God's altar. Happy
are those that bring with them out of the furnace of affliction such a
holy heat as this.

IV\. The preparation they made for the building of the temple, [Ezr
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#007). This they applied themselves
immediately to; for, while we do what we can, we must still be aiming to
do more and better. Tyre and Sidon must now, as of old, furnish them
with workmen, and Lebanon with timber, orders for both which they had
from Cyrus. What God calls us to we may depend upon his providence to
furnish us for.

[Ezra 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ezr 3:8</span></span>

There was no dispute among the returned Jews whether they should build
the temple or no; that was immediately resolved on, and that it should
be done with all speed; what comfort could they take in their own land
if they had not that token of God's presence with them and the record of
his name among them? We have here therefore an account of the beginning
of that good work. Observe,

I. When it was begun-in the second month of the second year, as soon as
ever the season of the year would permit ([Ezr
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#008)), and when they had ended the
solemnities of the passover. They took little more than half a year for
making preparation of the ground and materials; so much were their
hearts upon it. Note, When any good work is to be done it will be our
wisdom to set about it quickly, and not to lose time, yea, though we
foresee difficulty and opposition in it. Thus we engage ourselves to it,
and engage God for us. Well begun (we say) is half ended.

II\. Who began it - Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and their brethren. Then the
work of God is likely to go on well when magistrates, ministers, and
people, are hearty for it, and agree in their places to promote it. It
was God that gave them one heart for this service, and it boded well.

III\. Who were employed to further it. They appointed the Levites to set
forward the work ([Ezr 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#008)), and they
did it by setting forward the workmen ([Ezr
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#009)), and strengthening their hands
with good and comfortable words. Note, Those that do not work themselves
may yet do good service by quickening and encouraging those that do
work.

IV\. How God was praised at the laying of the foundation of the temple
([Ezr 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#010), [Ezr
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#011)); the priests with the trumpets
appointed by Moses, and the Levites with the cymbals appointed by David,
made up a concert of music, not to please the ear, but to assist the
singing of that everlasting hymn which will never be out of date, and to
which our tongues should never be out of tune, God is good, and his
mercy endureth for ever, the burden of Ps. 136. Let all the streams of
mercy be traced up to the fountain. Whatever our condition is, how many
soever our griefs and fears, let it be owned that God is good; and,
whatever fails, that his mercy fails not. Let this be sung with
application, as here; not only his mercy endures for ever, but it
endures for ever towards Israel, Israel when captives in a strange land
and strangers in their own land. However it be, yet God is good to
Israel ([Psa 73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)), good to us. Let
the reviving of the church's interests, when they seemed dead, be
ascribed to the continuance of God's mercy for ever, for therefore the
church continues.

V. How the people were affected. A remarkable mixture of various
affections there was upon this occasion. Different sentiments there were
among the people of God, and each expressed himself according to his
sentiments, and yet there was no disagreement among them, their minds
were not alienated from each other nor the common concern retarded by
it. 1. Those that only knew the misery of having no temple at all
praised the Lord with shouts of joy when they saw but the foundation of
one laid, [Ezr 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#011). To them even this
foundation seemed great, and was as life from the dead; to their hungry
souls even this was sweet. They shouted, so that the noise was heard
afar off. Note, We ought to be thankful for the beginnings of mercy,
though we have not yet come to the perfection of it; and the foundations
of a temple, after long desolations, cannot but be fountains of joy to
every faithful Israelite. 2. Those that remembered the glory of the
first temple which Solomon built, and considered how far this was likely
to be inferior to that, perhaps in dimensions, certainly in magnificence
and sumptuousness, wept with a loud voice, [Ezr
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#012). If we date the captivity with
the first, from the fourth of Jehoiakim, it was about fifty-two years
since the temple was burnt; if from Jeconiah's captivity, it was but
fifty-nine. So that many now alive might remember it standing; and a
great mercy it was to the captives that they had the lives of so many of
their priests and Levites lengthened out, who could tell them what they
themselves remembered of the glory of Jerusalem, to quicken them in
their return. These lamented the disproportion between this temple and
the former. And, (1.) There was some reason for it; and if they turned
their tears into the right channel, and bewailed the sin that was the
cause of this melancholy change, they did well. Sin sullies the glory of
any church or people, and, when they find themselves diminished and
brought low, that must bear the blame. (2.) Yet it was their infirmity
to mingle those tears with the common joys and so to cast a damp upon
them. They despised the day of small things, and were unthankful for the
good they enjoyed, because it was not so much as their ancestors had,
though it was much more than they deserved. In the harmony of public
joys, let not us be jarring strings. It was an aggravation of the
discouragement they hereby gave to the people that they were priests and
Levites, who should have known and taught others how to be duly affected
under various providences, and not to let the remembrance of former
afflictions drown the sense of present mercies. This mixture of sorrow
and joy here is a representation of this world. Some are bathing in
rivers of joy, while others are drowned in floods of tears. In heaven
all are singing, and none sighing; in hell all are weeping and wailing,
and none rejoicing; but here on earth we can scarcely discern the shouts
of joy from the noise of the weeping. Let us learn to rejoice with those
that do rejoice and weep with those that weep, and ourselves to rejoice
as though we rejoiced not, and weep as though we wept not.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 4](ezr004)

</div>
