<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Galatians Index](gal.md)  
  [Previous](co2013)  [Next](gal001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001.md)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Epistle of St. Paul
to the Galatians

This epistle of Paul is directed not to the church or churches of a
single city, as some others are, but of a country or province, for so
Galatia was. It is very probable that these Galatians were first
converted to the Christian faith by his ministry; or, if he was not the
instrument of planting, yet at least he had been employed in watering
these churches, as is evident from this epistle itself, and also from
[Act 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023.md), where we find him going
over all the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order, strengthening all
the disciples. While he was with them, they had expressed the greatest
esteem and affection both for his person and ministry; but he had not
been long absent from them before some judaizing teachers got in among
them, by whose arts and insinuations they were soon drawn into a meaner
opinion both of the one and of the other. That which these false
teachers chiefly aimed at was to draw them off from the truth as it is
in Jesus, particularly in the great doctrine of justification, which
they grossly perverted, by asserting the necessity of joining the
observance of the law of Moses with faith in Christ in order to it: and,
the better to accomplish this their design, they did all they could to
lessen the character and reputation of the apostle, and to raise up
their own on the ruins of his, representing him as one who, if he was to
be owned as an apostle, yet was much inferior to others, and
particularly who deserved not such a regard as Peter, James, and John,
whose followers, it is likely, they pretended to be: and in both these
attempts they had but too great success. This was the occasion of his
writing this epistle, wherein he expresses his great concern that they
had suffered themselves to be so soon turned aside from the faith of the
gospel, vindicates his own character and authority as an apostle against
the aspersions of his enemies, showing that his mission and doctrine
were both divine, and that he was not, upon any account, behind the very
chief of the apostles, [Co2 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#005.md). He
then sets himself to assert and maintain the great gospel doctrine of
justification by faith without the works of the law, and to obviate some
difficulties that might be apt to arise in their minds concerning it:
and, having established this important doctrine, he exhorts them to
stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ had made them free, cautions
them against the abuse of this liberty, gives them several very needful
counsels and directions and then concludes the epistle by giving them a
just description of those false teachers by whom they had been ensnared,
and, on the contrary, of his own temper and behaviour. In all this his
great scope and design were to recover those who had been perverted, to
settle those who might be wavering, and to confirm such among them as
had kept their integrity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 1](gal001.md)

</div>
