<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen016)  [Next](gen018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 17:0</span></span>

This chapter contains articles of agreement covenanted and concluded
upon between the great Jehovah, the Father of mercies, on the one part,
and pious Abram, the father of the faithful, on the other part. Abram is
therefore called "the friend of God," not only because he was the man of
his counsel, but because he was the man of his covenant; both these
secrets were with him. Mention was made of this covenant ([Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018)), but here it is particularly
drawn up, and put into the form of a covenant, that Abram might have
strong consolation. Here are, I. The circumstances of the making of this
covenant, the time and manner ([Gen
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)), and the posture Abram was in
([Gen 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#003)). II. The covenant itself.
In the general scope of it ([Gen
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)). And, afterwards, in the
particular instances. 1. That he should be the father of many nations
([Gen 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#004), [Gen
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#006)), and, in token of this, his name
was changed ([Gen 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005)). 2. That God
would be a God to him and his seed, and would give them the land of
Canaan ([Gen 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007), [Gen
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008)). And the seal of this part of
the covenant was circumcision ([Gen
17:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#009)). 3. That he should have a son
by Sarai, and, in token thereof, her name was changed ([Gen
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#015), [Gen
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#016)). This promise Abram received
([Gen 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#017)). And his request for
Ishmael ([Gen 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#018)) was answered,
abundantly to his satisfaction ([Gen
17:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#019)). III. The circumcision of
Abram and his family, according to God's appointment ([Gen
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#023), etc.).

[Genesis 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 17:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The time when God made Abram this gracious visit: When he
was ninety-nine years old, full thirteen years after the birth of
Ishmael. 1. So long, it should seem, God's extraordinary appearances to
Abram were intermitted; and all the communion he had with God was only
in the usual was of ordinances and providences. Note, There are some
special comforts which are not the daily bread, no, not of the best
saints, but they are favoured with them now and then. On this side
heaven they have convenient food, but not a continual feast. 2. So long
the promise of Isaac was deferred. (1.) Perhaps to correct Abram's
over-hasty marrying of Hagar. Note, The comforts we sinfully anticipate
are justly delayed. (2.) That Abram and Sarai being so far stricken in
age God's power, in this matter, might be the more magnified, and their
faith the more tried. See [Deu 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036);
[Joh 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#006), [Joh
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#015). (3.) That a child so long
waited for might be an Isaac, a son indeed, [Isa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001).

II\. The way in which God made this covenant with him: The Lord appeared
to Abram, in the shechinah, some visible display of God's immediate
glorious presence with him. Note, God first makes himself known to us,
and gives us a sight of him by faith, and then takes us into his
covenant.

III\. The posture Abram put himself into upon this occasion: He fell on
his face while God talked with him, [Gen
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#003). 1. As one overcome by the
brightness of the divine glory, and unable to bear the sight of it,
though he had seen it several times before. Daniel and John did
likewise, though they were also acquainted with the visions of the
Almighty, [Dan 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017); [Dan
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#009), [Dan
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#015); [Rev
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017). Or, 2. As one ashamed of
himself, and blushing to think of the honours done to one so unworthy.
He looks upon himself with humility, and upon God with reverence, and,
in token of both, falls on his face, putting himself into a posture of
adoration. Note, (1.) God graciously condescends to talk with those whom
he takes into covenant and communion with himself. He talks with them by
his word, [Pro 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#022). He talks with
them by his Spirit, [Joh 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026). This
honour have all his saints. (2.) Those that are admitted into fellowship
with God are, and must be, very humble and very reverent in their
approaches to him. If we say we have fellowship with him, and the
familiarity breeds contempt, we deceive ourselves. (3.) Those that would
receive comfort from God must set themselves to give glory to God and to
worship at his footstool.

IV\. The general scope and summary of the covenant laid down as the
foundation on which all the rest was built; it is no other than the
covenant of grace still made with all believers in Jesus Christ, [Gen
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001). Observe here,

1\. What we may expect to find God to us: I am the Almighty God. By this
name he chose to make himself known to Abram rather than by his name
Jehovah, [Exo 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003). He used it to
Jacob, [Gen 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#003); [Gen
43:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#014); [Gen
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#003). It is the name of God that is
mostly used throughout the book of Job, at least in the discourses of
that book. After Moses, Jehovah is more frequently used, and this,
El-shaddai, very rarely; it bespeaks the almighty power of God, either,
(1.) As an avenger, from shôdeh he laid waste, so some; and they think
God took this title from the destruction of the old world. This is
countenanced by [Isa 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#006), and [Joe
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#015). Or, (2.) As a benefactor shin
for 'ăsher who, and day sufficient. He is a God that is enough; or, as
our old English translation reads it here very significantly, I am God
all-sufficient. Note, The God with whom we have to do is a God that is
enough. \[1.\] He is enough in himself; he is self-sufficient; he has
every thing, and he needs not any thing. \[2.\] He is enough to us, if
we be in covenant with him: we have all in him, and we have enough in
him, enough to satisfy our most enlarged desires, enough to supply the
defect of every thing else, and to secure to us a happiness for our
immortal souls. See [Psa 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005), [Psa
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006); [Psa
73:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#025).

2\. What God requires that we should be to him. The covenant is mutual:
Walk before me, and be thou perfect, that is, upright and sincere; for
herein the covenant of grace is well-ordered that sincerity is our
gospel perfection. Observe, (1.) That to be religious is to walk before
God in our integrity; it is to set God always before us, and to think,
and speak, and act, in every thing, as those that are always under his
eye. It is to have a constant regard to his word as our rule and to his
glory as our end in all our actions, and to be continually in his fear.
It is to be inward with him, in all the duties of religious worship, for
in them particularly we walk before God ([Sa1
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030)), and to be entire for him, in
all holy conversation. I know no religion but sincerity. (2.) That
upright walking with God is the condition of our interest in his
all-sufficiency. If we neglect him, or dissemble with him, we forfeit
the benefit and comfort of our relation to him. (3.) A continual regard
to God's all-sufficiency will have a great influence upon our upright
walking with him.

[Genesis 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 17:4</span></span>

The promise here is introduced with solemnity: "As for me," says the
great God, "behold, behold and admire it, behold and be assured of it,
my covenant is with thee;" as before ([Gen
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#002)), I will make my covenant. Note,
The covenant of grace is a covenant of God's own making; this he glories
in (as for me), and so may we. Now here,

I. It is promised to Abraham that he should be a father of many nations;
that is, 1. That his seed after the flesh should be very numerous, both
in Isaac and Ishmael, as well as in the sons of Keturah: something
extraordinary is doubtless included in this promise, and we may suppose
that the event answered to it, and that there have been, and are, more
of the children of men descended from Abraham than from any one man at
an equal distance with him from Noah, the common root. 2. That all
believers in every age should be looked upon as his spiritual seed, and
that he should be called, not only the friend of God, but the father of
the faithful. In this sense the apostle directs us to understand this
promise, [Rom 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#016), [Rom
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017). He is the father of those in
every nation that by faith enter into covenant with God, and (as the
Jewish writers express it) are gathered under the wings of the divine
Majesty.

II\. In token of this his name was changed from Abram, a high father, to
Abraham, the father of a multitude. This was, 1. To put an honour upon
him. It is spoken of as the glory of the church that she shall be called
by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name, [Isa
62:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#002). Princes dignify their favourites
by conferring new titles upon them; thus was Abraham dignified by him
that is indeed the fountain of honour. All believers have a new name,
[Rev 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#017). Some think it added to the
honour of Abraham's new name that a letter of the name Jehovah was
inserted into it, as it was a disgrace to Jeconiah to have the first
syllable of his name cut off, because it was the same as the first
syllable of the sacred name, [Jer
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#028). Believers are named from
Christ, [Eph 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015). 2. To encourage and
confirm the faith of Abraham. While he was childless perhaps even his
own name was sometimes an occasion of grief to him: why should he be
called a high father who was not a father at all? But now that God had
promised him a numerous issue, and had given him a name which signified
so much, that name was his joy. Note, God calls things that are not as
though they were. It is the apostle's observation upon this very thing,
[Rom 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017). He called Abraham the
father of a multitude because he should prove to be so in due time,
though as yet he had but one child.

[Genesis 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 17:7</span></span>

Here is, I. The continuance of the covenant, intimated in three things:
- 1. It is established; not to be altered nor revoked. It is fixed, it
is ratified, it is made as firm as the divine power and truth can make
it. 2. It is entailed; it is a covenant, not with Abraham only (then it
would die with him), but with his seed after him, not only his seed
after the flesh, but his spiritual seed. 3. It is everlasting in the
evangelical sense and meaning of it. The covenant of grace is
everlasting. It is from everlasting in the counsels of it, and to
everlasting in the consequences of it; and the external administration
of it is transmitted with the seal of it to the seed of believers, and
the internal administration of it by the Spirit of Christ's seed in
every age.

II\. The contents of the covenant: it is a covenant of promises,
exceedingly great and precious promises. Here are two which indeed are
all-sufficient: - 1. That God would be their God, [Gen
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007), [Gen
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008). All the privileges of the
covenant, all its joys and all its hopes, are summed up in this. A man
needs desire no more than this to make him happy. What God is himself,
that he will be to his people: his wisdom theirs, to guide and counsel
them; his power theirs, to protect and support them; his goodness
theirs, to supply and comfort them. What faithful worshippers can expect
from the God they serve believers shall find in God as theirs. This is
enough, yet not all. 2. That Canaan should be their everlasting
possession, [Gen 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008). God had before
promised this land to Abraham and his seed, [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018). But here, where it is promised
for an everlasting possession, surely it must be looked upon as a type
of heaven's happiness, that everlasting rest which remains for the
people of God, [Heb 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#009). This is that
better country to which Abraham had an eye, and the grant of which was
that which answered to the vast extent and compass of that promise, that
God would be to them a God; so that, if God had not prepared and
designed this, he would have been ashamed to be called their God, [Heb
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#016). As the land of Canaan was
secured to the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, so heaven is
secured to all his spiritual seed, by a covenant, and for a possession,
truly everlasting. The offer of this eternal life is made in the word,
and confirmed by the sacraments, to all that are under the external
administration of the covenant; and the earnest of it is given to all
believers, [Eph 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014). Canaan is here
said to be the land wherein Abraham was a stranger; and the heavenly
Canaan is a land to which we are strangers, for it does not yet appear
what we shall be.

III\. The token of the covenant, and that is circumcision, for the sake
of which the covenant is itself called the covenant of circumcision,
[Act 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#008). It is here said to be the
covenant which Abraham and his seed must keep, as a copy or counterpart,
[Gen 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#009), [Gen
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#010). It is called a sign and seal
([Rom 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011)), for it was, 1. A
confirmation to Abraham and his seed of those promises which were God's
part of the covenant, assuring them that they should be fulfilled, that
in due time Canaan would be theirs: and the continuance of this
ordinance, after Canaan was theirs, intimates that these promises looked
further to another Canaan, which they must still be in expectation of.
See [Heb 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#008). 2. An obligation upon
Abraham and his seed to that duty which was their port of the covenant;
not only to the duty of accepting the covenant and consenting to it, and
putting away the corruption of the flesh (which were more immediately
and primarily signified by circumcision), but, in general, to the
observance of all God's commands, as they should at any time hereafter
be intimated and made known to them; for circumcision made men debtors
to do the whole law, [Gal 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#003). Those
who will have God to be to them a God must consent and resolve to be to
him a people. Now, (1.) Circumcision was a bloody ordinance; for all
things by the law were purged with blood, [Heb
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022). See [Exo
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008). But, the blood of Christ being
shed, all bloody ordinances are now abolished; circumcision therefore
gives way to baptism. (2.) It was peculiar to the males, though the
women were also included in the covenant, for the man is the head of the
woman. In our kingdom, the oath of allegiance is required only from men.
Some think that the blood of the males only was shed in circumcision
because respect was had in it to Jesus Christ and his blood. (3.) It was
the flesh of the foreskin that was to be cut off, because it is by
ordinary generation that sin is propagated, and with an eye to the
promised seed, who was to come from the loins of Abraham. Christ having
not yet offered himself to us, God would have man to enter into covenant
by the offering of some part of his own body, and no part could be
better spared. It is a secret part of the body; for the true
circumcision is that of the heat: this honour God put upon an uncomely
part, [Co1 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#023), [Co1
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#024). (4.) The ordinance was to be
administered to children when they were eight days old, and not sooner,
that they might gather some strength, to be able to undergo the pain of
it, and that at least one sabbath might pass over them. (5.) The
children of the strangers, of whom the master of the family was the true
domestic owner, were to be circumcised ([Gen
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#012), [Gen
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#013)), which looked favourable upon
the Gentiles, who should in due time be brought into the family of
Abraham, by faith. See [Gal 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#014). (6.)
The religious observance of this institution was required under a very
severe penalty, [Gen 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#014). The
contempt of circumcision was a contempt of the covenant; if the parents
did not circumcise their children, it was at their peril, as in the case
of Moses, [Exo 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#024), [Exo
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#025). With respect to those that were
not circumcised in their infancy, if, when they grew up, they did not
themselves come under this ordinance, God would surely reckon with them.
If they cut not off the flesh of their foreskin, God would cut them off
from their people. It is a dangerous thing to make light of divine
institutions, and to live in the neglect of them.

[Genesis 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 17:15</span></span>

Here is, I. The promise made to Abraham of a son by Sarai, that son in
whom the promise made to him should be fulfilled, that he should be the
father of many nations; for she also shall be a mother of nations, and
kings of people shall be of her, [Gen
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#016). Note, 1. God reveals the
purposes of his good-will to his people by degrees. God had told Abraham
long before that he should have a son, but never till now that he should
have a son by Sarai. 2. The blessing of the Lord makes fruitful, and
adds no sorrow with it, no such sorrow as was in Hagar's case. "I will
bless her with the blessing of fruitfulness, and then thou shalt have a
son of her." 3. Civil government and order are a great blessing to the
church. It is promised, not only that people, but kings of people,
should be of her; not a headless rout, but a well-modelled well-governed
society.

II\. The ratification of this promise was the change of Sarai's name
into Sarah ([Gen 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#015)), the same
letter being added to her name that was to Abraham's, and for the same
reasons. Sarai signifies my princess, as if her honour were confined to
one family only. Sarah signifies a princess - namely, of multitudes, or
signifying that from her should come the Messiah the prince, even the
prince of the kings of the earth.

III\. Abraham's joyful, thankful, entertainment of this gracious
promise, [Gen 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#017). Upon this
occasion he expressed, 1. Great humility: He fell on his face. Note, The
more honours and favours God confers upon us the lower we should be in
our own eyes, and the more reverent and submissive before God. 2. Great
joy: He laughed. It was a laughter of delight, not of distrust. Note,
Even the promises of a holy God, as well as his performances, are the
joys of holy souls; there is the joy of faith as well as the joy of
fruition. Now it was that Abraham rejoiced to see Christ's day. Now he
saw it and was glad ([Joh 8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056)); for,
as he saw heaven in the promise of Canaan, so he saw Christ in the
promise of Isaac. 3. Great admiration: Shall a child be born to him that
is a hundred years old? He does not here speak of it as at all doubtful
(for we are sure that he staggered not at the promise, [Rom
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#020)), but as very wonderful and that
which could not be effected but by the almighty power of God, and as
very kind, and a favour which was the more affecting and obliging for
this, that it was extremely surprising, [Psa
126:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001), [Psa
126:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#002).

IV\. Abraham's prayer for Ishmael: O that Ishmael might live before
thee! [Gen 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#018). This he speaks, not
as desiring that Ishmael might be preferred before the son he should
have by Sarah; but, dreading lest he should be abandoned and forsaken of
God, he puts up this petition on his behalf. Now that God is talking
with him he thinks he has a very fair opportunity to speak a good word
for Ishmael, and he will not let it slip. Note, 1. Though we ought not
to prescribe to God, yet he gives us leave, in prayer, to be humbly free
with him, and particular in making known our requests, [Phi
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006). Whatever is the matter of our
care and fear should be spread before God in prayer. 2. It is the duty
of parents to pray for their children, for all their children, as Job,
who offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all, [Job
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005). Abraham would not have it thought
that, when God promised him a son by Sarah, which he so much desired,
then his son by Hagar was forgotten; no, still he bears him upon his
heart, and shows a concern for him. The prospect of further favours must
not make us unmindful of former favours. 3. The great thing we should
desire of God for our children is that they may live before him, that
is, that they may be kept in covenant with him, and may have grace to
walk before him in their uprightness. Spiritual blessings are the best
blessings, and those for which we should be most earnest with God, both
for ourselves and others. Those live well that live before God.

V. God's answer to his prayer; and it is an answer of peace. Abraham
could not say that he sought God's face in vain.

1\. Common blessings are secured to Ishmael ([Gen
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#020)): As for Ishmael, whom thou art
in so much care about, I have heard thee; he shall find favour for thy
sake; I have blessed him, that is, I have many blessings in store for
him. (1.) His posterity shall be numerous: I will multiply him
exceedingly, more than his neighbours. This is the fruit of the
blessing, as that, [Gen 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028). (2.)
They shall be considerable: Twelve princes shall he beget. We may
charitably hope that spiritual blessings also were bestowed upon him,
though the visible church was not brought out of his loins and the
covenant was not lodged in his family. Note, Great plenty of outward
good things is often given to those children of godly parents who are
born after the flesh, for their parents' sake.

2\. Covenant blessings are reserved for Isaac, and appropriated to him,
[Gen 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#019), [Gen
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#021). If Abraham, in his prayer for
Ishmael, meant that he would have the covenant made with him, and the
promised seed to come from him, then God did not answer him in the
letter, but in that which was equivalent, nay, which was every way
better. (1.) God repeats to him the promise of a son by Sarah: She shall
bear thee a son indeed. Note, Even true believers need to have God's
promises doubled and repeated to them, that they may have strong
consolation, [Heb 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018). Again,
Children of the promise are children indeed. (2.) He names that child -
calls him Isaac, laughter, because Abraham rejoiced in spirit when this
son was promised him. Note, If God's promises be our joy, his mercies
promised shall in due time be our exceeding joy. Christ will be laughter
to those that look for him; those that now rejoice in hope shall shortly
rejoice in having that which they hope for: this is laughter that is not
mad. (3.) He entails the covenant upon that child: I will establish my
covenant with him. Note, God takes whom he pleases into covenant with
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. See [Rom
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008), [Rom
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018). Thus was the covenant settled
between God and Abraham, with its several limitations and remainders,
and then the conference ended: God left off talking with him, and the
vision disappeared, God went up from Abraham. Note, Our communion with
God here is broken and interrupted; in heaven it will be a continual and
everlasting feast.

[Genesis 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 17:23</span></span>

We have here Abraham's obedience to the law of circumcision. He himself
and all his family were circumcised, so receiving the token of the
covenant and distinguishing themselves from other families, that had no
part nor lot in the matter. 1. It was an implicit obedience: He did as
God had said to him, and did not ask why or wherefore. God's will was
not only a law to him, but a reason; he did it because God told him. 2.
It was a speedy obedience: In the self-same day, [Gen
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#023), [Gen
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#026). Sincere obedience is not
dilatory, [Psa 119:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#060). While the
command is yet sounding in our ears, and the sense of duty is fresh, it
is good to apply ourselves to it immediately, lest we deceive ourselves
by putting it off to a more convenient season. 3. It was a universal
obedience: He did not circumcise his family and excuse himself, but set
them an example; nor did he take the comfort of the seal of the covenant
to himself only, but desired that all his might share with him in it.
This is a good example to masters of families; they and their houses
must serve the Lord. Though God's covenant was not established with
Ishmael, yet he was circumcised; for children of believing parents, as
such, have a right to the privileges of the visible church, and the
seals of the covenant, whatever they may prove afterwards. Ishmael is
blessed, and therefore circumcised. 4. Abraham did this though much
might be objected against it. Though circumcision was painful, - though
to grown men it was shameful, - though, while they were sore and unfit
for action, their enemies might take advantage against them, as Simeon
and Levi did against the Shechemites, - though Abraham was ninety-nine
years old, and had been justified and accepted of God long since, -
though so strange a thing done religiously might be turned to his
reproach by the Canaanite and the Perizzite that dwelt then in the land,
- yet God's command was sufficient to answer these and a thousand such
objection: what God requires we must do, not conferring with flesh and
blood.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 18](gen018)

</div>
