<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen019)  [Next](gen021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 20:0</span></span>

We are here returning to the story of Abraham; yet that part of it which
is here recorded is not to his honour. The fairest marbles have their
flaws, and, while there are spots in the sun, we must not expect any
thing spotless under it. The scripture, it should be remarked, is
impartial in relating the blemishes even of its most celebrated
characters. We have here, I. Abraham's sin in denying his wife, and
Abimelech's sin thereupon in taking her ([Gen
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001), [Gen
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#002)). II. God's discourse with
Abimelech in a dream, upon this occasion, wherein he shows him his error
([Gen 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003)), accepts his plea ([Gen
20:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#004)), and directs him to make
restitution ([Gen 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007)). III.
Abimelech's discourse with Abraham, wherein he chides him for the cheat
he had put upon him ([Gen 20:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#008)),
and Abraham excuses it as well as he can ([Gen
20:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#011)). IV. The good issue of the
story, in which Abimelech restores Abraham his wife ([Gen
20:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#014)), and Abraham, by prayer,
prevails with God for the removal of the judgment Abimelech was under
([Gen 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017), [Gen
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#018)).

[Genesis 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 20:1</span></span>

Here is, 1. Abraham's removal from Mamre, where he had lived nearly
twenty years, into the country of the Philistines: He sojourned in
Gerar, [Gen 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001). We are not told upon
what occasion he removed, whether terrified by the destruction of Sodom,
or because the country round was for the present prejudiced by it, or,
as some of the Jewish writers say, because he was grieved at Lot's
incest with his daughters, and the reproach which the Canaanites cast
upon him and his religion, for his kinsman's sake: doubtless there was
some good cause for his removal. Note, In a world where we are strangers
and pilgrims we cannot expect to be always in the same place. Again,
Wherever we are, we must look upon ourselves but as sojourners. 2. His
sin in denying his wife, as before ([Gen
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#013)), which was not only in itself
such an equivocation as bordered upon a lie, and which, if admitted as
lawful, would be the ruin of human converse and an inlet to all
falsehood, but was also an exposing of the chastity and honour of his
wife, of which he ought to have been the protector. But, besides this,
it had here a two-fold aggravation: - (1.) He had been guilty of this
same sin before, and had been reproved for it, and convinced of the
folly of the suggestion which induced him to it; yet he returns to it.
Note, It is possible that a good man may, not only fall into sin, but
relapse into the same sin, through the surprise and strength of
temptation and the infirmity of the flesh. Let backsliders repent then,
but not despair, [Jer 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#022). (2.)
Sarah, as it should seem, was now with child of the promised seed, or,
at least, in expectation of being so quickly, according to the word of
God; he ought therefore to have taken particular care of her now, as
[Jdg 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#004). 3. The peril that Sarah was
brought into by this means: The king of Gerar sent, and took her to his
house, in order to the taking of her to his bed. Note, The sin of one
often occasions the sin of others; he that breaks the hedge of God's
commandments opens a gap to he knows not how many; the beginning of sin
is as the letting forth of water.

[Genesis 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 20:3</span></span>

It appears by this that God revealed himself by dreams (which evidenced
themselves to be divine and supernatural) not only to his servants the
prophets, but even to those who were out of the pale of the church and
covenant; but then, usually, it was with some regard to God's own people
as in Pharaoh's dream, to Joseph, in Nebuchadnezzar's, to Daniel, and
here, in Abimelech's, to Abraham and Sarah, for he reproved this king
for their sake, [Psa 105:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#014), [Psa
105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015).

I. God gives him notice of his danger ([Gen
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003)), his danger of sin, telling him
that the woman is a man's wife, so that if he take her he will wrong her
husband; his danger of death for this sin: Thou art a dead man; and
God's saying so of a man makes him so. Note, Every wilful sinner ought
to be told that he is a dead man, as the condemned malefactor, and the
patient whose disease is mortal, are said to be so. If thou art a bad
man, certainly thou art a dead man.

II\. He pleads ignorance that Abraham and Sarah had agreed to impose
upon him, and not to let him know that they were any more than brother
and sister, [Gen 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#006). See what
confidence a man may have towards God when his heart condemns him not,
[Jo1 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#021). If our consciences witness
to our integrity, and that, however we may have been cheated into a
snare, we have not knowingly and wittingly sinned against God, it will
be our rejoicing in the day of evil. He pleads with God as Abraham had
done, [Gen 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023). Wilt thou slay a
righteous nation? [Gen 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#004). Not such
a nation as Sodom, which was indeed justly destroyed, but a nation
which, in this matter, was innocent.

III\. God gives a very full answer to what he had said.

1\. He allows his plea, and admits that what he did he did in the
integrity of his heart: Yea, I know it, [Gen
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#006). Note, It is matter of comfort to
those that are honest that God knows their honesty, and will acknowledge
it, though perhaps men that are prejudiced against them either cannot be
convinced of it or will not own that they are.

2\. He lets him know that he was kept from proceeding in the sin merely
by the good hand of God upon him: I withheld thee from sinning against
me. Abimelech was hereby kept from doing wrong, Abraham from suffering
wrong, and Sarah from both. Note, (1.) There is a great deal of sin
devised and designed that is never executed. As bad as things are in the
world, they are not so bad as the devil and wicked men would have them.
(2.) It is God that restrains men from doing the ill they would do. It
is not from him that there is sin, but it is from him that there is not
more sin, either by his influence upon men's minds, checking their
inclination to sin, or by his providence, taking away the opportunity to
sin. (3.) It is a great mercy to be hindered from committing sin; of
this God must have the glory, whoever is the instrument, [Sa1
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#032), [Sa1
25:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#033).

3\. He charges him to make restitution: Now therefore, not that thou art
better informed, restore the man his wife, [Gen
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007). Note, Ignorance will excuse no
longer than it continues. If we have entered upon a wrong course through
ignorance this will not excuse our knowingly persisting in it, [Lev
5:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#003). The reasons why he must be just
and kind to Abraham are, (1.) Because he is a prophet, near and dear to
God, for whom God does in a particular manner concern himself. God
highly resents the injuries done to his prophets, and takes them as done
to himself. (2.) Being a prophet, he shall pray for thee; this is a
prophet's reward, and a good reward it is. It is intimated that there
was great efficacy in the prayers of a prophet, and that good men should
be ready to help those with their prayers that stand in need of them,
and should make, at least, this return for the kindnesses that are done
them. Abraham was accessory to Abimelech's trouble, and therefore was
obliged in justice to pray for him. (3.) It is at thy peril if thou do
not restore her: Know thou that thou shalt surely die. Note, He that
does wrong, whoever he is, prince or peasant, shall certainly receive
for the wrong which he has done, unless he repent and make restitution,
[Col 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#025). No injustice can be made
passable with God, no, not by Caesar's image stamped upon it.

[Genesis 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 20:8</span></span>

Abimelech, being thus warned of God in a dream, takes the warning, and,
as one truly afraid of sin and its consequences, he rises early to obey
the directions given him.

I. He has a caution for his servants, [Gen
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#008). Abraham himself could not be
more careful than he was to command his household in this matter. Note,
Those whom God has convinced of sin and danger ought to tell others what
God has done for their souls, that they also may be awakened and brought
to a like holy fear.

II\. He has a chiding for Abraham. Observe,

1\. The serious reproof which Abimelech gave to Abraham, [Gen
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#009), [Gen
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#010). His reasoning with Abraham upon
this occasion was very strong, and yet very mild. Nothing could be said
better; he does not reproach him, nor insult over him, does not say, "Is
this your profession? I see, though you will not swear, you will lie. If
these be prophets, I will beg to be freed from the sight of them:" but
he fairly represents the injury Abraham had done him, and calmly
signifies his resentment of it. (1.) He calls that sin which he now
found he had been in danger of a great sin. Note, Even the light of
nature teaches men that the sin of adultery is a very great sin: be it
observed, to the shame of many who call themselves Christians, and yet
make a light matter of it. (2.) He looks upon it that both himself and
his kingdom would have been exposed to the wrath of God if he had been
guilty of this sin, though ignorantly. Note, The sins of kings often
prove the plagues of kingdoms; rulers should therefore, for their
people's sake, dread sin. (3.) He charges Abraham with doing that which
was not justifiable, in disowning his marriage. This he speaks of
justly, and yet tenderly; he does not call him a liar and cheat, but
tells him he had done deeds that ought not to be done. Note,
Equivocation and dissimulation, however they may be palliated, are very
bad things, and by no means to be admitted in any case. (4.) He takes it
as a very great injury to himself and his family that Abraham had thus
exposed them to sin: "What have I offended thee? If I had been thy worst
enemy, thou couldst not have done me a worse turn, nor taken a more
effectual course to be revenged on me." Note, We ought to reckon that
those do us the greatest unkindness in the world that any way tempt us
or expose us to sin, though they may pretend friendship, and offer that
which is grateful enough to corrupt nature. (5.) He challenges him to
assign a cause for his suspecting them as a dangerous people for an
honest man to live among: "What sawest thou, that thou hast done this
thing? [Gen 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#010). What reason hadst
thou to think that if we had known her to be thy wife thou wouldst have
been exposed to any danger by it?" Note, A suspicion of our goodness is
justly reckoned a greater affront than a slight upon our greatness.

2\. The poor excuse that Abraham made for himself.

(1.) He pleaded the bad opinion he had of the place, [Gen
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#011). He thought within himself
(though he could not give any good reason for his thinking so), "Surely
the fear of God is not in this place, and then they will slay me."
\[1.\] Little good is to be expected where no fear of God is. See [Psa
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#001). \[2.\] There are many places and
persons that have more of the fear of God in them than we think they
have: perhaps they are not called by our dividing name, they do not wear
our badges, they do not tie themselves to that which we have an opinion
of; and therefore we conclude they have not the fear of God in their
hearts, which is very injurious both of Christ and Christians, and makes
us obnoxious to God's judgment, [Mat
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001). \[3.\] Uncharitableness and
censoriousness are sins that are the cause of many other sins. When men
have once persuaded themselves concerning such and such that they have
not the fear of God, they think this will justify them in the most
unjust and unchristian practices towards them. Men would not do ill if
they did not first think ill.

(2.) He excused it from the guilt of a downright lie by making it out
that, in a sense, she was his sister, [Gen
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#012). Some think she was own sister
to Lot, who is called his brother Lot ([Gen
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#016)), though he was his nephew; so
Sarah is called his sister. But those to whom he said, She is my sister,
understood that she was so his sister as not to be capable of being his
wife; so that it was an equivocation, with an intent to deceive.

(3.) He clears himself from the imputation of an affront designed to
Abimelech in it by alleging that it had been his practice before,
according to an agreement between him and his wife, when they first
became sojourners ([Gen 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#013)): "When
God caused me to wander from my father's house, then we settled this
matter." Note, \[1.\] God is to be acknowledged in all our wanderings.
\[2.\] Those that travel abroad, and converse much with strangers, as
they have need of the wisdom of the serpent, so it is requisite that
that wisdom be ever tempered with the innocence of the dove. It may, for
aught I know, be suggested that God denied to Abraham to punish them for
this sinful compact if they will not own their marriage, why should God
own it? But we may suppose that, after this reproof which Abimelech gave
them, they agreed never to do so again, and then presently we read ([Gen
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#001), [Gen
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#002)) that Sarah conceived.

[Genesis 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 20:14</span></span>

Here is, I. The kindness of a prince which Abimelech showed to Abraham.
See how unjust Abraham's jealousies were. He fancied that if they knew
that Sarah was his wife they would kill him; but, when they did know it,
instead of killing him they were kind to him, frightened at least to be
so by the divine rebukes they were under. 1. He gives him his royal
licence to dwell where he pleased in his country, courting his stay
because he gives him his royal gifts ([Gen
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#014)), sheep and oxen, and ([Gen
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#016)) a thousand pieces of silver.
This he gave when he restored Sarah, either, \[1.\] By way of
satisfaction for the wrong he had offered to do, in taking her to his
house: when the Philistines restored the ark, being plagued for
detaining it, they sent a present with it. The law appointed that when
restitution was made something should be added to it, [Lev
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#005). Or, \[2.\] To engage Abraham's
prayers for him; not as if prayers should be bought and sold, but we
should endeavour to be kind to those of whose spiritual things we reap,
[Co1 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#011). Note, It is our wisdom to
get and keep an interest with those that have an interest in heaven, and
to make those our friends who are the friends of God. \[3.\] He gives to
Sarah good instruction, tells her that her husband (her brother he calls
him, to upbraid her with calling him so) must be to her for a covering
of the eyes, that is, she must look at no other, nor desire to be looked
at by any other. Note, Yoke-fellows must be to each other for a covering
of the eyes. The marriage-covenant is a covenant with the eyes, like
Job's, [Job 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001).

II\. The kindness of a prophet which Abraham showed to Abimelech: he
prayed for him, [Gen 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017), [Gen
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#018). This honour God would put upon
Abraham that, though Abimelech had restored Sarah, yet the judgment he
was under should be removed upon the prayer of Abraham, and not before.
Thus God healed Miriam, when Moses, whom she had most affronted, prayed
for her ([Num 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#013)), and was
reconciled to Job's friends when Job, whom they had grieved, prayed for
them ([Job 42:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#008)), and so did, as it
were, give it under his hand that he was reconciled to them. Note, The
prayers of good men may be a kindness to great men, and ought to be
valued.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 21](gen021)

</div>
