<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen036)  [Next](gen038) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 37](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 37:0</span></span>

At this chapter begins the story of Joseph, who, in every subsequent
chapter but one to the end of this book, makes the greatest figure. He
was Jacob's eldest son by his beloved wife Rachel, born, as many eminent
men were, of a mother that had been long barren. His story is so
remarkably divided between his humiliation and his exaltation that we
cannot avoid seeing something of Christ in it, who was first humbled and
then exalted, and, in many instances, so as to answer the type of
Joseph. It also shows the lot of Christians, who must through many
tribulations enter into the kingdom. In this chapter we have, I. The
malice his brethren bore against him. They hated him, 1. Because he
informed his father of their wickedness ([Gen
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#001), [Gen
37:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#002)). 2. Because his father loved him
([Gen 37:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#003), [Gen
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#004)). 3. Because he dreamed of his
dominion over them ([Gen 37:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#005)). II.
The mischiefs his brethren designed and did to him. 1. The kind visit he
made them gave an opportunity ([Gen
37:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#012)). 2. They designed to slay
him, but determined to starve him ([Gen
37:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#018)). 3. They changed their
purpose, and sold him for a slave ([Gen
37:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025)). 4. They made their father
believe that he was torn in pieces ([Gen
37:29-35](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#029)). 5. He was sold into Egypt
to Potiphar ([Gen 37:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#036)). And all this
was working together for good.

[Genesis 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 37:1</span></span>

Moses has no more to say of the Edomites, unless as they happen to fall
in Israel's way; but now applies himself closely to the story of Jacob's
family: These are the generations of Jacob. His is not a bare barren
genealogy as that of Esau ([Gen 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001)),
but a memorable useful history. Here is, 1. Jacob a sojourner with his
father Isaac, who has yet living, [Gen
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#001). We shall never be at home, till
we come to heaven. 2. Joseph, a shepherd, feeding the flock with his
brethren, [Gen 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#002). Though he was his
father's darling, yet he was not brought up in idleness or delicacy.
Those do not truly love their children that do not inure them to
business, and labour, and mortification. The fondling of children is
with good reason commonly called the spoiling of them. Those that are
trained up to do nothing are likely to be good for nothing. 3. Joseph
beloved by his father ([Gen 37:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#003)),
partly for his dear mother's sake that was dead, and partly for his own
sake, because he was the greatest comfort of his old age; probably he
waited on him, and was more observant of him than the rest of his sons;
he was the son of the ancient so some; that is, when he was a child, he
was as grave and discreet as if he had been an old man, a child, but not
childish. Jacob proclaimed his affection to him by dressing him finer
than the rest of his children: He made him a coat of divers colours,
which probably was significant of further honors intended him. Note,
Though those children are happy that have that in them which justly
recommends them to their parents' particular love, yet it is the
prudence of parents not to make a difference between one child and
another, unless there be a great and manifest cause given for it by the
children's dutifulness or undutifulness; paternal government must be
impartial, and managed with a steady hand. 4. Joseph hated by his
brethren, (1.) Because his father loved him; when parents make a
difference, children soon take notice of it, and it often occasions
feuds and quarrels in families. (2.) Because he brought to his father
their evil report. Jacob's sons did that, when they were from under his
eye, which they durst not have done if they had been at home with him;
but Joseph gave his father an account of their bad carriage, that he
might reprove and restrain them; not as a malicious tale-bearer, to sow
discord, but as a faithful brother, who, when he durst not admonish them
himself, represented their faults to one that had authority to admonish
them. Note, \[1.\] It is common for friendly monitors to be looked upon
as enemies. Those that hate to be reformed hate those that would reform
them, [Pro 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#008). \[2.\] It is common
for those that are beloved of God to be hated by the world; whom Heaven
blesses, hell curses. To those to whom God speaks comfortably wicked men
will not speak peaceably. It is said here of Joseph, the lad was with
the sons of Bilhah; some read it, and he was servant to them, they made
him their drudge.

[Genesis 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 37:5</span></span>

Here, I. Joseph relates the prophetical dreams he had, [Gen
37:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#006), [Gen
37:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#007), [Gen
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#009), [Gen
37:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#010). Though he was now very young
(about seventeen years old), yet he was pious and devout, and
well-inclined, and this fitted him for God's gracious discoveries of
himself to him. Joseph had a great deal of trouble before him, and
therefore God gave him betimes this prospect of his advancement, to
support and comfort him under the long and grievous troubles with which
he was to be exercised. Thus Christ had a joy set before him, and so
have Christians. Note, God has ways of preparing his people beforehand
for the trials which they cannot foresee, but which he has an eye to in
the comforts with which he furnishes them. His dreams were, 1. That his
brethren's sheaves all bowed to his, intimating upon what occasion they
should be brought to do homage to him, namely, in seeking to him for
corn; their empty sheaves should bow to his full one. 2. That the sun,
and moon, and eleven stars, did obeisance to him, [Gen
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#009). Joseph was more of a prophet
than a politician, else he would have kept this to himself, when he
could not but know that his brethren did already hate him and that this
would but the more exasperate them. But, if he told it in his
simplicity, yet God directed it for the mortification of his brethren.
Observe, Joseph dreamed of his preferment, but he did not dream of his
imprisonment. Thus many young people, when they are setting out in the
world, think of nothing but prosperity and pleasure, and never dream of
trouble.

II\. His brethren take it very ill, and are more and more enraged
against him ([Gen 37:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#008)): Shalt thou
indeed reign over us? See here, 1. How truly they interpreted his dream,
that he should reign over them. Those become the expositors of his dream
who were enemies to the accomplishment of it, as in Gideon's story ([Jdg
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#013), [Jdg
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#014)); they perceived that he spoke of
them, [Mat 21:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#045). The event exactly
answered to this interpretation, [Gen
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#006), etc. 2. How scornfully they
resented it: "Shalt thou, who are but one, reign over us, who are many?
Thou, who are the youngest, over us who are older?" Note, The reign and
dominion of Jesus Christ, our Joseph, have been, and are, despised and
striven against by a carnal and unbelieving world, who cannot endure to
think that this man should reign over them. The dominion also of the
upright, in the morning of the resurrection, is thought of with the
utmost disdain.

III\. His father gives him a gentle rebuke for it, yet observes the
saying, [Gen 37:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#010), [Gen
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#011). Probably he checked him for it,
to lessen the offence which his brethren would be apt to take at it; yet
he took notice of it more than he seemed to do: he insinuated that it
was but an idle dream, because his mother was brought in, who had been
dead some time since; whereas the sun, moon, and eleven stars, signify
no more than the whole family that should have a dependence upon him,
and be glad to be beholden to him. Note, The faith of God's people in
God's promises is often sorely shaken by their misunderstanding the
promises and then suggesting the improbabilities that attend the
performance; but God is doing his own work, and will do it, whether we
understand him aright or no. Jacob, like Mary ([Luk
2:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#051)), kept these things in his heart,
and no doubt remembered them long afterwards, when the event answered to
the prediction.

[Genesis 37:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 37:12</span></span>

Here is, I. The kind visit which Joseph, in obedience to his father's
command, made to his brethren, who were feeding the flock at Shechem,
many miles off. Some suggest that they went thither on purpose,
expecting that Joseph would be sent to see them, and that then they
should have an opportunity to do him a mischief. However, Joseph and his
father had both of them more of the innocence of the dove than of the
wisdom of the serpent, else he had never come thus into the hands of
those that hated him: but God designed it all for good. See in Joseph an
instance, 1. Of dutifulness to his father. Though he was his father's
darling, yet he was made, and was willing to be, his father's servant.
How readily does he wait his father's orders! Here I am, [Gen
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#013). Note, Those children that are
best beloved by their parents should be most obedient to their parents;
and then their love is well-bestowed and well-returned. 2. Of kindness
to his brethren. Though he knew they hated him and envied him, yet he
made no objections against his father's commands, either from the
distance of the place or the danger of the journey, but cheerfully
embraced the opportunity of showing his respect to his brethren. Note,
It is a very good lesson, though it is learnt with difficulty and rarely
practised, to love those that hate us; if our relations do not their
duty to us, yet we must not be wanting in our duty to them. This is
thank-worthy. Joseph was sent by his father to Shechem, to see whether
his brethren were well there, and whether the country had not risen upon
them and destroyed them, in revenge of their barbarous murder of the
Shechemites some years before. But Joseph, not finding them there, went
to Dothan, which showed that he undertook this journey, not only in
obedience to his father (for then he might have returned when he missed
them at Shechem, having done what his father told him), but out of love
to his brethren, and therefore he sought diligently till he found them.
Thus, let brotherly love continue, and let us give proofs of it.

II\. The bloody and malicious plot of his brethren against him, who
rendered good for evil, and, for his love, were his adversaries.
Observe, 1. How deliberate they were in the contrivance of this
mischief: when they saw him afar off, they conspired against him, [Gen
37:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#018). It was not in a heat, or upon a
sudden provocation, that they thought to slay him, but from malice
prepense, and in cold blood. Note, Whosoever hateth his brother is a
murderer; for he will be one if he have an opportunity, [Jo1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015). Malice is a most mischievous
thing, and is in danger of making bloody work where it is harboured and
indulged. The more there is of a project and contrivance in a sin the
worse it is; it is bad to do evil, but worse to devise it. 2. How cruel
they were in their design; nothing less than his blood would satisfy
them: Come, and let us slay him, [Gen
37:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#020). Note, The old enmity hunts for
the precious life. It is the blood-thirsty that hate the upright ([Pro
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#010)), and it is the blood of the
saints that the harlot is drunk with. 3. How scornfully they reproached
him for his dreams ([Gen 37:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#019)): This
dreamer cometh; and ([Gen 37:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#020)), We
shall see what will become of his dreams. This shows what it was that
fretted and enraged them. They could not endure to think of doing homage
to him; this was what they were plotting to prevent by the murder of
him. Note, Men that fret and rage at God's counsels are impiously aiming
to defeat them; but they imagine a vain thing, [Psa
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001). God's counsels will stand. 4.
How they agreed to keep one another's counsel, and to cover the murder
with a lie: We will say, Some evil beast hath devoured him; whereas in
thus consulting to devour him they proved themselves worse than the most
evil beasts; for evil beasts prey not on those of their own kind, but
they were tearing a piece of themselves.

III\. Reuben's project to deliver him, [Gen
37:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#021), [Gen
37:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#022). Note, God can raise up friends
for his people, even among their enemies; for he has all hearts in his
hands. Reuben, of all the brothers, had most reason to be jealous of
Joseph, for he was the first-born, and so entitled to those
distinguishing favours which Jacob was conferring on Joseph; yet he
proves his best friend. Reuben's temper seems to have been soft and
effeminate, which had betrayed him to the sin of uncleanness; while the
temper of the next two brothers, Simeon and Levi, was fierce, which
betrayed them to the sin of murder, a sin which Reuben startled at the
thought of. Note, Our natural constitution should be guarded against
those sins to which it is most inclinable, and improved (as Reuben's
here) against those sins to which it is most averse. Reuben made a
proposal which they thought would effectually answer their intention of
destroying Joseph, and yet which he designed should answer his intention
of rescuing Joseph out of their hands and restoring him to his father,
probably hoping thereby to recover his father's favour, which he had
lately lost; but God overruled all to serve his own purpose of making
Joseph an instrument to save much people alive. Joseph was here a type
of Christ. Though he was the beloved Son of his Father, and hated by a
wicked world, yet the Father sent him out of his bosom to visit us in
great humility and love. He came from heaven to earth, to seek and save
us; yet then malicious plots were laid against him. He came to his own,
and his own not only received him not, but consulted against him: This
is the heir, come let us kill him; Crucify him, crucify him. This he
submitted to, in pursuance of his design to redeem and save us.

[Genesis 37:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 37:23</span></span>

We have here the execution of their plot against Joseph. 1. They
stripped him, each striving to seize the envied coat of many colours,
[Gen 37:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#023). Thus, in imagination, they
degraded him from the birthright, of which perhaps this was the badge,
grieving him, affronting their father, and making themselves sport,
while they insulted over him. "Now, Joseph, where is the fine coat?"
Thus our Lord Jesus was stripped of his seamless coat, and thus his
suffering saints have first been industriously divested of their
privileges and honours, and then made the off-scouring of all things. 2.
They went about to starve him, throwing him into a dry pit, to perish
there with hunger and cold, so cruel were their tender mercies, [Gen
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#024). Note, Where envy reigns pity is
banished, and humanity itself is forgotten, [Pro
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#004). So full of deadly poison is
malice that the more barbarous any thing is the more grateful it is. Now
Joseph begged for his life, in the anguish of his soul ([Gen
42:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#021)), entreated, by all imaginable
endearments, that they would be content with his coat and spare his
life. He pleads innocence, relation, affection, submission; he weeps and
makes supplication, but all in vain. Reuben alone relents and intercedes
for him, [Gen 42:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#022). But he cannot
prevail to save Joseph from the horrible pit, in which they resolve he
shall die by degrees, and be buried alive. Is this he to whom his
brethren must do homage? Note, God's providences often seem to
contradict his purposes, even then they are serving them, and working at
a distance towards the accomplishment of them. 3. They slighted him when
he was in distress, and were not grieved for the affliction of Joseph;
for when he was pining away in the pit, bemoaning his own misery, and
with a languishing cry calling to them for pity, they sat down to eat
bread, [Gen 37:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025). (1.) They felt no
remorse of conscience for the sin; if they had, it would have spoiled
their appetite for their meat, and the relish of it. Note, A great force
put upon conscience commonly stupefies it, and for the time deprives it
both of sense and speech. Daring sinners are secure ones. But the
consciences of Joseph's brethren, though asleep now, were roused long
afterwards, [Gen 42:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#021). (2.) They were
now pleased to think how they were freed from the fear of their
brother's dominion over them, and that, on the contrary, they had turned
the wheel upon him. They made merry over him, as the persecutors over
the two witnesses that had tormented them, [Rev
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010). Note, Those that oppose God's
counsels may possibly prevail so far as to think they have gained their
point, and yet be deceived. 4. They sold him. A caravan of merchants
very opportunely passed by (Providence so ordering it), and Judah made
the motion that they should sell Joseph to them, to be carried far
enough off into Egypt, where, in all probability, he would be lost, and
never heard of more. (1.) Judah proposed it in compassion to Joseph
([Gen 37:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#026)): "What profit is it if we
slay our brother? it will be less guilt, and more gain, to sell him."
Note, When we are tempted to sin, we should consider the
unprofitableness of it. It is what there is nothing to be got by. (2.)
They acquiesced in it, because they thought that if he were sold for a
slave he would never be a lord, if sold into Egypt he would never be
their lord; yet all this was working towards it. Note, The wrath of man
shall praise God, and the remainder of wrath he will restrain, [Psa
76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010). Joseph's brethren were
wonderfully restrained from murdering him, and their selling him was as
wonderfully turned to God's praise. As Joseph was sold by the
contrivance of Judah for twenty pieces of silver, so was our Lord Jesus
for thirty, and by one of the same name too, Judas. Reuben (it seems)
had gone away from his brethren, when they sold Joseph, intending to
come round some other way to the pit, and to help Joseph out of it, and
return him safely to his father. This was a kind project, but, if it had
taken effect, what had become of God's purpose concerning his preferment
in Egypt? Note, There are many devices in man's heart, many devices of
the enemies of God's people to destroy them and of their friends to help
them, which perhaps are both disappointed, as these were; but the
counsel of the Lord, that shall stand. Reuben thought himself undone,
because the child was sold: I, whither shall I go? [Gen
37:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#030). He being the eldest, his father
would expect from him an accounts of Joseph; but, as it proved, they
would all have been undone if he had not been sold.

[Genesis 37:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 37:31</span></span>

I. Joseph would soon be missed, great enquiry would be made for him, and
therefore his brethren have a further design, to make the world believe
that Joseph was torn in pieces by a wild beast; and this they did, 1. To
clear themselves, that they might not be suspected to have done him any
mischief. Note, We have all learned of Adam to cover our transgression,
[Job 31:33](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#033). When the devil has taught
men to commit one sin, he then teaches them to conceal it with another,
theft and murder with lying and perjury; but he that covers his sin
shall not prosper long. Joseph's brethren kept their own and one
another's counsel for some time, but their villany came to light at
last, and it is here published to the world, and the remembrance of it
transmitted to every age. 2. To grieve their good father. It seems
designed by them on purpose to be revenged upon him for his
distinguishing love of Joseph. It was contrived on purpose to create the
utmost vexation to him. They sent him Joseph's coat of many colours,
with one colour more than it had had, a bloody colour, [Gen
37:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#032). They pretended they had found
it in the fields, and Jacob himself must be scornfully asked, Is this
thy son's coat? Now the badge of his honour is the discovery of his
fate; and it is rashly inferred from the bloody coat that Joseph,
without doubt, is rent in pieces. Love is always apt to fear the worst
concerning the person beloved; there is a love that casteth out fear,
but that is a perfect love. Now let those that know the heart of a
parent suppose the agonies of poor Jacob, and put their souls into his
soul's stead. How strongly does he represent to himself the direful idea
of Joseph's misery! Sleeping or waking, he imagines he sees the wild
beast setting upon Joseph, thinks he hears his piteous shrieks when the
lion roared against him, makes himself tremble and grow chill, many a
time, when he fancies how the beast sucked his blood, tore him limb from
limb, and left no remains of him, but the coat of many colours, to carry
the tidings. And no doubt it added no little to the grief that he had
exposed him, by sending him, and sending him all alone, on this
dangerous journey, which proved so fatal to him. This cuts him to the
heart, and he is ready to look upon himself as an accessory to the death
of his son. Now, (1.) Endeavours were used to comfort him. His sons
basely pretended to do it ([Gen
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#035)); but miserable hypocritical
comforters were they all. Had they really desired to comfort him, they
might easily have done it, by telling him the truth, "Joseph is alive,
he is indeed sold into Egypt, but it will be an easy thing to send
thither and ransom him." This would have loosened his sackcloth, and
girded him with gladness presently. I wonder their countenances did not
betray their guilt, and with what face they could pretend to condole
with Jacob on the death of Joseph, when they knew he was alive. Note,
The heart is strangely hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. But, (2.)
It was all in vain: Jacob refused to be comforted, [Gen
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#035). He was an obstinate mourner,
resolved to go down to the grave mourning. It was not a sudden transport
of passion, like that of David, Would God I had died for thee, my son,
my son! But, like Job, he hardened himself in sorrow. Note, \[1.\] Great
affection to any creature does not prepare for so much the greater
affliction, when it is either removed from us or embittered to us.
Inordinate love commonly ends in immoderate grief; as much as the sway
of the pendulum throws one way, so much it will throw the other way.
\[2.\] Those consult neither the comfort of their souls nor the credit
of their religion that are determined in their sorrow upon any occasion
whatsoever. We must never say, "We will go to our grave mourning,"
because we know not what joyful days Providence may yet reserve for us,
and it is our wisdom and duty to accommodate ourselves to Providence.
\[3.\] We often perplex ourselves with imaginary troubles. We fancy
things worse than they are, and then afflict ourselves more than we
need. Sometimes there needs no more to comfort us than to undeceive us:
it is good to hope the best.

II\. The Ishmaelites and Midianites having bought Joseph only to make
their market of him, here we have him sold again (with gain enough to
the merchants, no doubt) to Potiphar, [Gen
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#036). Jacob was lamenting the loss of
his life; had he known all he would have lamented, though not so
passionately, the loss of liberty. Shall Jacob's freeborn son exchange
the best robe of his family for the livery of an Egyptian lord, and all
the marks of servitude? How soon was the land of Egypt made a house of
bondage to the seed of Jacob! Note, It is the wisdom of parents not to
bring up their children too delicately, because they know not to what
hardships and mortifications Providence may reduce them before they die.
Jacob little thought that ever his beloved Joseph would be thus bought
and sold for a servant.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 38](gen038)

</div>
