<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen046)  [Next](gen048) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 47](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 47:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have instances, I. Of Joseph's kindness and affection
to his relations, presenting his brethren first and then his father to
Pharaoh ([Gen 47:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#001)), settling them
in Goshen, and providing for them there ([Gen
47:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#011), [Gen
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#012)), and paying his respects to his
father when he sent for him ([Gen
47:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#027)). II. Of Joseph's justice
between prince and people in a very critical affair, selling Pharaoh's
corn to his subjects with reasonable profits to Pharaoh, and yet without
any wrong to them ([Gen 47:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#013), etc.).
Thus he approved himself wise and good, both in his private and in his
public capacity.

[Genesis 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 47:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The respect which Joseph, as a subject, showed to his
prince. Though he was his favourite, and prime-minister of state, and
had had particular orders from him to send for his father down to Egypt,
yet he would not suffer him to settle till he had given notice of it to
Pharaoh, [Gen 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#001). Christ, our
Joseph, disposes of his followers in his kingdom as it is prepared of
his Father, saying, It is not mine to give, [Mat
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023).

II\. The respect which Joseph, as a brother, showed to his brethren,
notwithstanding all the unkindness he had formerly received from them.

1\. Though he was a great man, and they were comparatively mean and
despicable, especially in Egypt, yet he owned them. Let those that are
rich and great in the world learn hence not to overlook nor despise
their poor relations. Every branch of the tree is not a top branch; but,
because it is a lower branch, is it therefore not of the tree? Our Lord
Jesus, like Joseph here, is not ashamed to call us brethren.

2\. They being strangers and no courtiers, he introduced some of them to
Pharaoh, to kiss his hand, as we say, intending thereby to put an honour
upon them among the Egyptians. Thus Christ presents his brethren in the
court of heaven, and improves his interest for them, though in
themselves unworthy and an abomination to the Egyptians. Being presented
to Pharaoh, according to the instructions which Joseph had given them,
they tell him, (1.) What was their business - that they were shepherds,
[Gen 47:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#003). Pharaoh asked them (and
Joseph knew it would be one of his first questions, [Gen
46:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#033)), What is your occupation? He
takes it for granted they had something to do, else Egypt should be no
place for them, no harbour for idle vagrants. If they would not work,
they should not eat of his bread in this time of scarcity. Note, All
that have a place in the world should have an employment in it according
to their capacity, some occupation or other, mental or manual. Those
that need not work for their bread must yet have something to do, to
keep them from idleness. Again, Magistrates should enquire into the
occupation of their subjects, as those that have the care of the public
welfare; for idle people are as drones in the hive, unprofitable burdens
of the commonwealth. (2.) What was their business in Egypt - to sojourn
in the land ([Gen 47:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#004)), not to settle
there for ever, only to sojourn there for a time, while the famine so
prevailed in Canaan, which lay high, that it was not habitable for
shepherds, the grass being burnt up much more than in Egypt, which lay
low, and where the corn chiefly failed, while there was tolerably good
pasture.

3\. He obtained for them a grant of a settlement in the land of Goshen,
[Gen 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#005), [Gen
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#006). This was an instance of
Pharaoh's gratitude to Joseph; because he had been such a blessing to
him and his kingdom, he would be kind to his relations, purely for his
sake. He offered them preferment as shepherds over his cattle, provided
they were men of activity; for it is the man who is diligent in his
business that shall stand before kings. And, whatever our profession or
employment is, we should aim to be excellent in it, and to prove
ourselves ingenious and industrious.

III\. The respect Joseph, as a son, showed to his father.

1\. He presented him to Pharaoh, [Gen
47:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#007). And here,

(1.) Pharaoh asks Jacob a common question: How old art thou? [Gen
47:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#008). A question usually put to old
men, for it is natural to us to admire old age and to reverence it ([Lev
19:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#032)), as it is very unnatural and
unbecoming to despise it, [Isa 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#005).
Jacob's countenance, no doubt, showed him to be very old, for he had
been a man of labour and sorrow; in Egypt people were not so long-lived
as in Canaan, and therefore Pharaoh looks upon Jacob with wonder; he was
as a show in his court. When we are reflecting upon ourselves, this
should come into the account, "How old are we?"

(2.) Jacob gives Pharaoh an uncommon answer, [Isa
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009). He speaks as becomes a patriarch,
with an air of seriousness, for the instruction of Pharaoh. Though our
speech be not always of grace, yet it must thus be always with grace.
Observe here, \[1.\] He calls his life a pilgrimage, looking upon
himself as a stranger in this world, and a traveller towards another
world: this earth his inn, not his home. To this the apostle refers
([Heb 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013)), They confessed that they
were strangers and pilgrims. He not only reckoned himself a pilgrim now
that he was in Egypt, a strange country in which he never was before;
but his life, even in the land of his nativity, was a pilgrimage, and
those who so reckon it can the better bear the inconvenience of
banishment from their native soil; they are but pilgrims still, and so
they were always. \[2.\] He reckons his life by days; for, even so, it
is soon reckoned, and we are not sure of the continuance of it for a day
to an end, but may be turned out of this tabernacle at less than an
hour's warning. Let us therefore number our days ([Psa
90:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#012)), and measure them, [Psa
39:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004). \[3.\] The character he gives of
them is, First, That they were few. Though he had now lived 130 years,
they seemed to him but a few days, in comparison with the days of
eternity, the eternal God, and the eternal state, in which a thousand
years (longer than ever any man lived) are but as one day. Secondly,
That they were evil. This is true concerning man in general, he is of
few days, and full of trouble ([Job
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001)); and, since his days are evil,
it is well they are few. Jacob's life, particularly, had been made up of
evil days; and the pleasantest days of his life were yet before him.
Thirdly, That they were short of the days of his fathers, not so many,
not so pleasant, as their days. Old age came sooner upon him than it had
done upon some of his ancestors. As the young man should not be proud of
his strength or beauty, so the old man should not be proud of his age,
and the crown of his hoary hairs, though others justly reverence it; for
those who are accounted very old attain not to the years of the
patriarchs. The hoary head is a crown of glory only when it is found in
the way of righteousness.

(3.) Jacob both addresses himself to Pharaoh and takes leave of him with
a blessing ([Gen 47:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#007)): Jacob blessed
Pharaoh, and again, [Gen 47:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#010), which
was not only an act of civility (he paid him respect and returned him
thanks for his kindness), but an act of piety - he prayed for him, as
one having the authority of a prophet and a patriarch. Though in worldly
wealth Pharaoh was the greater, yet, in interest with God, Jacob was the
greater; he was God's anointed, [Psa
105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015). And a patriarch's blessing was
not a thing to be despised, no, not by a potent prince. Darius valued
the prayers of the church for himself and for his sons, [Ezr
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#010). Pharaoh kindly received Jacob,
and, whether in the name of a prophet or no, thus he had a prophet's
reward, which sufficiently recompensed him, not only for his courteous
converse with him, but for all the other kindnesses he showed to him and
his.

2\. He provided well for him and his, placed him in Goshen ([Gen
47:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#011)), nourished him and all his with
food convenient for them, [Gen 47:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#012).
This bespeaks, not only Joseph a good man, who took this tender care of
his poor relations, but God a good God, who raised him up for this
purpose, and put him into a capacity of doing it, as Esther came to the
kingdom for such a time as this. What God here did for Jacob he has, in
effect, promised to do for all his, that serve him and trust in him.
[Psa 37:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#019), In the days of famine they
shall be satisfied.

[Genesis 47:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 47:13</span></span>

Care being taken of Jacob and his family, the preservation of which was
especially designed by Providence in Joseph's advancement, an account is
now given of the saving of the kingdom of Egypt too from ruin; for God
is King of nations as well as King of saints, and provideth food for all
flesh. Joseph now returns to the management of that great trust which
Pharaoh had lodged in his hand. It would have been pleasing enough to
him to have gone and lived with his father and brethren in Goshen; but
his employment would not permit it. When he had seen his father, and
seen him well settled, he applied himself as closely as ever to the
execution of his office. Note, Even natural affection must give way to
necessary business. Parents and children must be content to be absent
one from another, when it is necessary, on either side, for the service
of God or their generation. In Joseph's transactions with the Egyptians
observe,

I. The great extremity that Egypt, and the parts adjacent, were reduced
to by the famine. There was no bread, and they fainted ([Gen
47:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#013)), they were ready to die, [Gen
47:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#015), [Gen
47:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#019). 1. See here what a dependence
we have upon God's providence. If its usual favours are suspended but
for a while, we die, we perish, we all perish. All our wealth would not
keep us from starving if the rain of heaven were but withheld for two or
three years. See how much we lie at God's mercy, and let us keep
ourselves always in his love. 2. See how much we smart by our own
improvidence. If all the Egyptians had done for themselves in the seven
years of plenty as Joseph did for Pharaoh, they had not been now in
these straits; but they regarded not the warning they had of the years
of famine, concluding that tomorrow shall be as this day, next year as
this, and much more abundant. Note, Because man knows not his time (his
time of gathering when he has it) therefore his misery is great upon him
when the spending time comes, [Ecc
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#006), [Ecc
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#007). 3. See how early God put a
difference between the Egyptians and the Israelites, as afterwards in
the plagues, [Exo 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#022); [Exo
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#004), [Exo
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#026); [Exo
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#023). Jacob and his family, though
strangers, were plentifully fed on free cost, while the Egyptians were
dying for want. See [Isa 65:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#013), My
servants shall eat, but you shall be hungry. Happy art thou, O Israel.
Whoever wants, God's children shall not, [Psa
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#010).

II\. The price they had come up to, for their supply, in this exigency.
1. They parted with all their money which they had hoarded up, [Gen
47:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#014). Silver and gold would not feed
them, they must have corn. All the money of the kingdom was by this
means brought into the exchequer. 2. When the money failed, they parted
with all their cattle, those for labour, as the horses and asses, and
those for food, as the flocks and the herds, [Gen
47:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#017). By this it should seem that we
may better live upon bread without flesh than upon flesh without bread.
We may suppose they parted the more easily with their cattle because
they had little or no grass for them; and now Pharaoh saw in reality
what he had before seen in vision, nothing but lean kine. 3. When they
had sold their stocks off their land, it was easy to persuade themselves
(rather than starve) to sell their land too; for what good would that do
them, when they had neither corn to sow it nor cattle to eat of it? They
therefore sold that next, for a further supply of corn. 4. When their
land was sold, so that they had nothing to live on, they must of course
sell themselves, that they might live purely upon their labour, and hold
their lands by the base tenure of villenage, at the courtesy of the
crown. Note, Skin for skin, and all that a man hath, even liberty and
property (those darling twins), will he give for his life; for life is
sweet. There are few (though perhaps there are some) who would even dare
to die rather than live in slavery, and dependence on an arbitrary
power. And perhaps there are those who, in that case, could die by the
sword, in a heat, who yet could not deliberately die by famine, which is
much worse, [Lam 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#009). Now it was a
great mercy to the Egyptians that, in this distress, they could have
corn at any rate; if they had all died for hunger, their lands perhaps
would have escheated to the crown of course, for want of heirs; they
therefore resolved to make the best of bad.

III\. The method which Joseph took to accommodate the matter between
prince and people, so that the prince might have his just advantage, and
yet the people not be quite ruined. 1. For their lands, he needed not
come to any bargain with them while the years of famine lasted; but when
these were over (for God will not contend for ever, nor will he be
always wroth) he came to an agreement, which it seems both sides were
pleased with, that the people should occupy and enjoy the lands, as he
thought fit to assign them, and should have seed to sow them with out of
the king's stores, for their own proper use and behoof, yielding and
paying only a fifth part of the yearly profits as a chief rent to the
crown. This became a standing law, [Gen
47:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#026). And it was a very good bargain
to have food for their lands, when otherwise they and theirs must have
starved, and then to have their lands again upon such easy terms. Note,
Those ministers of state are worthy of double honour, both for wisdom
and integrity, that keep the balance even between prince and people, so
that liberty and property may not intrench upon prerogative, nor the
prerogative bear hard upon liberty and property: in the multitude of
such counsellors there is safety. If afterwards the Egyptians thought it
hard to pay so great a duty to the king out of their lands, they must
remember, not only how just, but how kind, the first imposing of it was.
They might thankfully pay a fifth where all was due. It is observable
how faithful Joseph was to him that appointed him. He did not put the
money into his own pocket, nor entail the lands upon his own family; but
converted both entirely to Pharaoh's use; and therefore we do not find
that his posterity went out of Egypt any richer than the rest of their
poor brethren. Those in public trusts, if they raise great estates, must
take heed that it be not at the expense of a good conscience, which is
much more valuable. 2. For their persons, he removed them to cities,
[Gen 47:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#021). He transplanted them, to
show Pharaoh's sovereign power over them, and that they might, in time,
forget their titles to their lands, and be the more easily reconciled to
their new condition of servitude. The Jewish writers say, "He removed
them thus from their former habitations because they reproached his
brethren as strangers, to silence which reproach they were all made, in
effect, strangers." See what changes a little time may make with a
people, and how soon God can empty those from vessel to vessel who had
settled upon their lees. How hard soever this seems to have been upon
them, they themselves were at this time sensible of it as a very great
kindness, and were thankful they were not worse used: Thou hast saved
our lives, [Gen 47:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#025). Note, There is
good reason that the Saviour of our lives should be the Master of our
lives. "Thou hast saved us; do what thou wilt with us."

IV\. The reservation he made in favour of the priests. They were
maintained on free cost, so that they needed not to sell their lands,
[Gen 47:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#022). All people will thus walk
in the name of their God; they will be kind to those that attend the
public service of their God, and that minister to them in holy things;
and we should, in like manner, honour our God, by esteeming his
ministers highly in love for their work's sake.

[Genesis 47:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 47:27</span></span>

Observe, 1. The comfort Jacob lived in ([Gen
47:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#027), [Gen
47:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#028)); while the Egyptians were
impoverished in their own land, Jacob was replenished in a strange land.
He lived seventeen years after he came into Egypt, far beyond his own
expectation. Seventeen years he had nourished Joseph (for so old he was
when he was sold from him, [Gen 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#002)),
and now, by way of requital, seventeen years Joseph nourished him.
Observe how kindly Providence ordered Jacob's affairs, that when he was
old, and least able to bear care or fatigue, he had least occasion for
it, being well provided for by his son without his own forecast. Thus
God considers the frame of his people. 2. The care Jacob died in. At
last the time drew nigh that Israel must die, [Gen
47:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#029). Israel, a prince with God, that
had power over the angel and prevailed, yet must yield to death. There
is no remedy, he must die: it is appointed for all men, therefore for
him; and there is no discharge in that war. Joseph supplied him with
bread, that he might not die by famine; but this did not secure him from
dying by age or sickness. He died by degrees; his candle was not blown
out, but gradually burnt down to the socket, so that he saw, at some
distance, the time drawing nigh. Note, It is an improvable advantage to
see the approach of death before we feel its arrests, that we may be
quickened to do what our hand finds to do with all our might: however,
it is not far from any of us. Now Jacob's care, as he saw the day
approaching, was about his burial, not the pomp of it (he was no way
solicitous about that), but the place of it. (1.) He would be buried in
Canaan. This he resolved on, not from mere humour, because Canaan was
the land of his nativity, but in faith, because it was the land of
promise (which he desired thus, as it were, to keep possession of, till
the time should come when his posterity should be masters of it), and
because it was a type of heaven, that better country which he that said
these things declared plainly that he was in expectation of, [Heb
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#014). He aimed at a good land, which
would be his rest and bliss on the other side death. (2.) He would have
Joseph sworn to bring him thither to be buried ([Gen
47:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#029), [Gen
47:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#031)), that Joseph, being under such
a solemn obligation to do it, might have that to answer to the
objections which otherwise might have been made against it, and for the
greater satisfaction of Jacob now in his dying minutes. Nothing will
better help to make a death-bed easy than the certain prospect of a rest
in Canaan after death. (3.) When this was done Israel bowed himself upon
the bed's head, yielding himself, as it were, to the stroke of death
("Now let it come, and it shall be welcome"), or worshipping God, as it
is explained, [Heb 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#021), giving God
thanks for all his favours, and particularly for this, that Joseph was
ready, not only to put his hand upon his eyes to close them, but under
his thigh to give him the satisfaction he desired concerning his burial.
Thus those that go down to the dust should, with humble thankfulness,
bow before God, the God of their mercies, [Psa
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#029).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 48](gen048)

</div>
