<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen013)  [Next](gen015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 14:0</span></span>

We have four things in the story of this chapter. I. A war with the king
of Sodom and his allies ([Gen
14:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001)). II. The captivity of Lot in
that war ([Gen 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#012)). III. Abram's
rescue of Lot from that captivity, with the victory he obtained over the
conquerors ([Gen 14:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013)). IV.
Abram's return from the expedition ([Gen
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#017)), with an account of what
passed, 1. Between him and the king of Salem ([Gen
14:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018)). 2. Between him and the king
of Sodom ([Gen 14:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#021)). So that here
we have that promise to Abram in part fulfilled, that God would make his
name great.

[Genesis 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 14:1</span></span>

We have here an account of the first war that ever we read of in
scripture, which (though the wars of the nations make the greatest
figure in history) we should not have had the history of if Abram and
Lot had not been concerned in it. Now, concerning this war, we may
observe,

I. The parties engaged in it. The invaders were four kings, two of them
no less than kings of Shinar and Elam (that is, Chaldea and Persia), yet
probably not the sovereign princes of those great kingdoms in their own
persons, but either officers under them, or rather the heads and leaders
of some colonies which came out of those great nations, and settled
themselves near Sodom, but retained the names of the countries from
which they had their origin. The invaded were the kings of five cities
that lay near together in the plain of Jordan, namely, Sodom, Gomorrah,
Admah, Zeboiim, and Zoar. Four of them are named, but not the fifth, the
king of Zoar or Bela, either because he was much more mean and
inconsiderable or because he was much more wicked and inglorious than
the rest, and worthy to be forgotten.

II\. The occasion of this war was the revolt of the five kings from
under the government of Chedorlaomer. Twelve years they served him.
Small joy they had of their fruitful land, while thus they were
tributaries to a foreign power, and could not call what they had their
own. Rich countries are a desirable prey, and idle luxurious countries
are an easy prey, to growing greatness. The Sodomites were the posterity
of Canaan whom Noah had pronounced a servant to Shem, from whom Elam
descended; thus soon did that prophecy begin to e fulfilled. In the
thirteenth year, beginning to be weary of their subjection, they
rebelled, denied their tribute, and attempted to shake off the yoke and
retrieve their ancient liberties. In the fourteenth year, after some
pause and preparation, Chedorlaomer, in conjunction with his allies, set
himself to chastise and reduce the rebels, and, since he could not have
it otherwise, to fetch his tribute from them on the point of his sword.
Note, Pride, covetousness, and ambition, are the lusts from which wars
and fightings come. To these insatiable idols the blood of thousands has
been sacrificed.

III\. The progress and success of the war. The four kings laid the
neighbouring countries waste and enriched themselves with the spoil of
them ([Gen 14:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005)), upon the alarm of
which it had been the wisdom of the king of Sodom to submit, and desire
conditions of peace; for how could he grapple with an enemy thus flushed
with victory? But he would rather venture the utmost extremity than
yield, and it sped accordingly. Quos Deus destruet eos dementat - Those
whom God means to destroy he delivers up to infatuation. 1. The forces
of the king of Sodom and his allies were routed; and, it should seem,
many of them perished in the slime-pits who had escaped the sword, [Gen
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#010). In all places we are surrounded
with deaths of various kinds, especially in the field of battle. 2. The
cities were plundered, [Gen 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#011). All
the goods of Sodom, and particularly their stores and provisions of
victuals, were carried off by the conquerors. Note, When men abuse the
gifts of a bountiful providence to gluttony and excess, it is just with
God, and his usual way, by some judgment or other to strip them of that
which they have so abused, [Hos 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#008),
[Hos 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#009). 3. Lot was carried captive,
[Gen 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#012). They took Lot among the
rest, and his goods. Now Lot may here be considered, (1.) As sharing
with his neighbours in this common calamity. Though he was himself a
righteous man, and (which is here expressly noticed) Abram's brother's
son, yet he was involved with the rest in all this trouble. Note, All
things come alike to all, [Ecc 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#002).
The best of men cannot promise themselves an exemption from the greatest
troubles in this life; neither from our own piety nor our relation to
those that are the favourites of heaven will be our security, when God's
judgments are abroad. Note, further, Many an honest man fares the worse
for his wicked neighbours. It is therefore our wisdom to separate
ourselves, or at least to distinguish ourselves, from them ([Co2
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017)), and so deliver ourselves, [Rev
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004). (2.) As smarting for the foolish
choice he made of a settlement here. This is plainly intimated when it
is said, They took Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom. So near a
relation of Abram should have been a companion and disciple of Abram,
and should have abode by his tents; but, if he choose to dwell in Sodom,
he must thank himself if he share in Sodom's calamities. Note, When we
go out of the way of our duty we put ourselves from under God's
protection, and cannot expect that the choices which are made by our
lusts should issue to our comfort. Particular mention is made of their
taking Lot's goods, those goods which had occasioned his contest with
Abram and his separation from him. Note, It is just with God to deprive
us of those enjoyments by which we have suffered ourselves to be
deprived of our enjoyment of him.

[Genesis 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 14:13</span></span>

We have here an account of the only military action we ever find Abram
engaged in, and this he was prompted to, not by his avarice or ambition,
but purely by a principle of charity; it was not to enrich himself, but
to help his friend. Never was any military expedition undertaken,
prosecuted, and finished, more honourably than this of Abram's. Here we
have,

I. The tidings brought him of his kinsman's distress. Providence so
ordered it that he now sojourned not far off, that he might be a very
present help. 1. He is here called Abram the Hebrew, that is, the son
and follower of Heber, in whose family the profession of the true
religion was kept up in that degenerate age. Abram herein acted like a
Hebrew - in a manner not unworthy of the name and character of a
religious professor. 2. The tidings were brought by one that had escaped
with his life for a prey. Probably he was a Sodomite, and as bad as the
worst of them; yet knowing Abram's relation to Lot, and concern for him,
he implores his help, and hopes to speed for Lot's sake. Note, The worst
of men, in the day of their trouble, will be glad to claim acquaintance
with those that are wise and good, and so get an interest in them. The
rich man in hell called Abram Father; and the foolish virgins made court
to the wise for a share of their oil.

II\. The preparations he made for this expedition. The cause was plainly
good, his call to engage in it was clear, and therefore, with all speed,
he armed his trained servants, born in his house, to the number of three
hundred and eighteen - a great family, but a small army, about as many
as Gideon's that routed the Midianites, [Jdg
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#007). He drew out his trained servants,
or his catechised servants, not only instructed in the art of war, which
was then far short of the perfection which later and worse ages have
improved it to, but instructed in the principles of religion; for Abram
commanded his household to keep the way of the Lord. This shows that
Abram was, 1. A great man, who had so many servants depending upon him,
and employed by him, which was not only his strength and honour, but
gave him a great opportunity of doing good, which is all that is truly
valuable and desirable in great places and great estates. 2. A good man,
who not only served God himself, but instructed all about him in the
service of God. Note, Those that have great families have not only many
bodies, but many souls besides their own, to take care of and provide
for. Those that would be found the followers of Abram must see that
their servants be catechised servants. 3. A wise man for, though he was
a man of peace, yet he disciplined his servants for war, not knowing
what occasion he might have, some time or other, so to employ them.
Note, Though our holy religion teaches us to be for peace, yet it does
not forbid us to provide for war.

III\. His allies and confederates in this expedition. He prevailed with
his neighbours, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre (with whom he kept up a fair
correspondence) to go along with him. It was his prudence thus to
strengthen his own troops with their auxiliary forces; and probably they
saw themselves concerned, in interest, to act, as they could, against
this formidable power, lest their own turn should be next. Note, 1. It
is our wisdom and duty to behave ourselves so respectfully and
obligingly towards all men as that, whenever there is occasion, they may
be willing and ready to do us a kindness. 2. Those who depend on God's
help, yet, in times of distress, ought to make use of men's help, as
Providence offers it; else they tempt God.

IV\. His courage and conduct were very remarkable. 1. There was a great
deal of bravery in the enterprise itself, considering the disadvantages
he lay under. What could one family of husbandmen and shepherds do
against the armies of four princes, who now came fresh from blood and
victory? It was not a vanquished, but a victorious army, that he was to
pursue; nor was he constrained by necessity to this daring attempt, but
moved to it by generosity; so that, all things considered, it was, for
aught I know, as great an instance of true courage as ever Alexander or
Caesar was celebrated for. Note, Religion tends to make men, not
cowardly, but truly valiant. The righteous is bold as a lion. The true
Christian is the true hero. 2. There was a great deal of policy in the
management of it. Abram was no stranger to the stratagems of war: He
divided himself, as Gideon did his little army ([Jdg
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#016)), that he might come upon the
enemy from several quarters at once, and so make his few seem a great
many; he made his attack by night, that he might surprise them. Note,
Honest policy is a good friend both to our safety and to our usefulness.
The serpent's head (provided it be nothing akin to the old serpent) may
well become a good Christian's body, especially if it have a dove's eye
in it, [Mat 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016).

V. His success was very considerable, [Gen
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#015), [Gen
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#016). He defeated his enemies, and
rescued his friends; and we do not find that he sustained any loss.
Note, Those that venture in a good cause, with a good heart, are under
the special protection of a good God, and have reason to hope for a good
issue. Again, It is all one with the Lord to save by many or by few,
[Sa1 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#006). Observe,

1\. He rescued his kinsman; twice here he is called his brother Lot. The
remembrance of the relation that was between them, both by nature and
grace, made him forget the little quarrel that had been between them, in
which Lot had by no means acted well towards Abram. Justly might Abram
have upbraided Lot with his folly in quarrelling with him and removing
from him, and have told him that he was well enough served, he might
have known when he was well off; but, in the charitable breast of pious
Abram, it is all forgiven and forgotten, and he takes this opportunity
to give a real proof of the sincerity of his reconciliation. Note, (1.)
We ought to be ready, whenever it is in the power of our hands, to
succour and relieve those that are in distress, especially our relations
and friends. A brother is born for adversity, [Pro
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#017). A friend in need is a friend
indeed. (2.) Though others have been wanting in their duty to us, yet we
must not therefore deny our duty to them. Some have said that they can
more easily forgive their enemies than their friends; but we shall see
ourselves obliged to forgive both if we consider, not only that our God,
when we were enemies, reconciled us, but also that he passeth by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage, [Mic
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018).

2\. He rescued the rest of the captives, for Lot's sake, though they
were strangers to him and such as he was under no obligation to at all;
nay, though they were Sodomites, sinners before the Lord exceedingly,
and though, probably, he might have recovered Lot alone by ransom, yet
he brought back all the women, and the people, and their goods, [Gen
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#016). Note, As we have opportunity we
must do good to all men. Our charity must be extensive, as opportunity
offers itself. Wherever God gives life, we must not grudge the help we
can give to support it. God does good to the just and unjust, and so
must we, [Mat 5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045). This victory which
Abram obtained over the kings the prophet seems to refer to, [Isa
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002), Who raised up the righteous man
from the east, and made him rule over kings? And some suggest that, as
before he had a title to this land by grant, so now by conquest.

[Genesis 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 14:17</span></span>

This paragraph begins with the mention of the respect which the king of
Sodom paid to Abram at his return from the slaughter of the kings; but,
before a particular account is given of this, the story of Melchizedek
is briefly related, concerning whom observe,

I. Who he was. He was king of Salem and priest of the most high God; and
other glorious things are said of him, [Heb
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001), etc. 1. The rabbin, and most of
our rabbinical writers, conclude that Melchizedek was Shem the son of
Noah, who was king and priest to those that descended from him,
according to the patriarchal model. But this is not at all probable; for
why should his name be changed? And how came he to settle in Canaan? 2.
Many Christian writers have thought that this was an appearance of the
Son of God himself, our Lord Jesus, known to Abram, at this time, by
this name, as afterwards, Hagar called him by another name, [Gen
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#013). He appeared to him as a
righteous king, owning a righteous cause, and giving peace. It is
difficult to imagine that any mere man should be said to be without
father, without mother, and without descent, having neither beginning of
days nor end of life, [Heb 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003). It is
witnessed of Melchizedek that he liveth, and that he abideth a priest
continually ([Gen 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#003), [Gen
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#008)); nay ([Gen
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013), [Gen
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014)), the apostle makes him of whom
these things are spoken to be our Lord who sprang out of Judah. It is
likewise difficult to think that any mere man should, at this time, be
greater than Abram in the things of God, that Christ should be a priest
after the order of any mere man, and that any human priesthood should so
far excel that of Aaron as it is certain that Melchizedek's did. 3. The
most commonly received opinion is that Melchizedek was a Canaanitish
prince, that reigned in Salem, and kept up the true religion there; but,
if so, why his name should occur here only in all the story of Abram,
and why Abram should have altars of his own and not attend the altars of
his neighbour Melchizedek who was greater than he, seem unaccountable.
Mr. Gregory of Oxford tells us that the Arabic Catena, which he builds
much upon the authority of, gives this account of Melchizedek, That he
was the son of Heraclim, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, and that his
mother's name was Salathiel, the daughter of Gomer, the son of Japheth,
the son of Noah.

II\. What he did. 1. He brought forth bread and wine, for the
refreshment of Abram and his soldiers, and in congratulation of their
victory. This he did as a king, teaching us to do good and to
communicate, and to be given to hospitality, according to our ability;
and representing the spiritual provisions of strength and comfort which
Christ has laid up for us in the covenant of grace for our refreshment,
when we are wearied with our spiritual conflicts. 2. As priest of the
most high God, he blessed Abram, which we may suppose a greater
refreshment to Abram than his bread and wine were. Thus God, having
raised up his Son Jesus, has sent him to bless us, as one having
authority; and those whom he blesses are blessed indeed. Christ went to
heaven when he was blessing his disciples ([Luk
24:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#051)); for this is what he ever lives
to do.

III\. What he said, [Gen 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#019), [Gen
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#020). Two things were said by him: -
1. He blessed Abram from God: Blessed be Abram, blessed of the most high
God, [Gen 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#019). Observe the titles he
here gives to God, which are very glorious. (1.) The most high God,
which bespeaks his absolute perfections in himself and his sovereign
dominion over all the creatures; he is King of kings. Note, It will
greatly help both our faith and our reverence in prayer to eye God as
the most high God, and to call him so. (2.) Possessor of heaven and
earth, that is, rightful owner, and sovereign Lord, of all the
creatures, because he made them. This bespeaks him a great God, and
greatly to be praised ([Psa 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001)), and
those a happy people who have an interest in his favour and love. 2. He
blessed God for Abram ([Gen 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#020)):
and blessed be the most high God. Note, (1.) In all our prayers, we must
praise God, and join hallelujahs with all our hosannahs. These are the
spiritual sacrifices we must offer up daily, and upon particular
occasions. (2.) God, as the most high God, must have the glory of all
our victories, [Exo 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#015); [Sa1
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#010), [Sa1
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#012); [Jdg
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#001), [Jdg
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#002); [Ch2
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#021). In them he shows himself higher
than our enemies ([Exo 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#011)), and
higher than we; for without him we could do nothing. (3.) We ought to
give thanks for others' mercies as for our own, triumphing with those
that triumph. (4.) Jesus Christ, our great high priest, is the Mediator
both of our prayers and praises, and not only offers up ours, but his
own for us. See [Luk 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021).

IV\. What was done to him: Abram gave him tithes of all, that is, of the
spoils, [Heb 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#004). This may be looked
upon, 1. As a gratuity presented to Melchizedek, by way of return for
his tokens of respect. Note, Those that receive kindness should show
kindness. Gratitude is one of nature's laws. 2. As an offering vowed and
dedicated to the most high God, and therefore put into the hands of
Melchizedek his priest. Note, (1.) When we have received some signal
mercy from God, it is very fit that we should express our thankfulness
by some special act of pious charity. God must always have his dues out
of our substance, especially when, by any particular providence, he has
either preserved or increased it to us. (2.) That the tenth of our
increase is a very fit proportion to be set apart for the honour of God
and the service of his sanctuary. (3.) That Jesus Christ, our great
Melchizedek, is to have homage done him, and to be humbly acknowledged
by every one of us as our king and priest; and not only the tithe of
all, but all we have, must be surrendered and given up to him.

[Genesis 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 14:21</span></span>

We have here an account of what passed between Abram and the king of
Sodom, who succeeded him that fell in the battle ([Gen
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#010)), and thought himself obliged to
do this honour to Abram, in return for the good services he had done
him. Here is,

I. The king of Sodom's grateful offer to Abram ([Gen
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#021)): Give me the soul, and take
thou the substance; so the Hebrew reads it. Here he fairly begs the
persons, but as freely bestows the goods on Abram. Note, 1. Where a
right is dubious and divided, it is wisdom to compound the matter by
mutual concessions rather than to contend. The king of Sodom had an
original right both to the persons and to the goods, and it would bear a
debate whether Abram's acquired right by rescue would supersede his
title and extinguish it; but, to prevent all quarrels, the king of Sodom
makes this fair proposal. 2. Gratitude teaches us to recompense to the
utmost of our power those that have undergone fatigues, run hazards, and
been at expense for our service and benefit. Who goes a warfare at his
own charges? [Co1 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007). Soldiers
purchase their pay dearer than any labourers, and are well worthy of it,
because they expose their lives.

II\. Abram's generous refusal of this offer. He not only resigned the
persons to him, who, being delivered out of the hand of their enemies,
ought to have served Abram, but he restored all the goods too. He would
not take from a thread to a shoe-latchet, not the least thing that had
ever belonged to the king of Sodom or any of his. Note, A lively faith
enables a man to look upon the wealth of this world with a holy
contempt, [Jo1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004). What are all the
ornaments and delights of sense to one that has God and heaven ever in
his eye? He resolves even to a thread and a shoe-latchet; for a tender
conscience fears offending in a small matter. Now,

1\. Abram ratifies this resolution with a solemn oath: I have lifted up
my hand to the Lord that I will not take any thing, [Gen
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022). Here observe, (1.) The titles
he gives to God, The most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth,
the same that Melchizedek had just now used, [Gen
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#019). Note, It is good to learn of
others how to order our speech concerning God, and to imitate those who
speak well in divine things. This improvement we are to make of the
conversation of devout good men, we must learn to speak after them. (2.)
The ceremony used in this oath: I have lifted up my hand. In religious
swearing we appeal to God's knowledge of our truth and sincerity and
imprecate his wrath if we swear falsely, and the lifting up of the hand
is very significant and expressive of both. (3.) The matter of the oath,
namely, that he would not take any reward from the king of Sodom, was
lawful, but what he was not antecedently obliged to. \[1.\] Probably
Abram vowed, before he went to the battle, that, if God would give him
success, he would, for the glory of God and the credit of his
profession, so far deny himself and his own right as to take nothing of
the spoils to himself. Note, the vows we have made when we are in
pursuit of a mercy must be carefully and conscientiously kept when we
have obtained the mercy, though they were made against our interest. A
citizen of Zion, if he has sworn, whether it be to God or man, though it
prove to his own hurt, yet he changeth not, [Psa
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004). Or, \[2.\] Perhaps Abram, now
when he saw cause to refuse the offer made him, at the same time
confirmed his refusal with this oath, to prevent further importunity.
Note, First, There may be good reason sometimes why we should debar
ourselves of that which is our undoubted right, as St. Paul, [Co1
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#013); [Co1
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#012). Secondly, That strong
resolutions are of good use to put by the force of temptations.

2\. He backs his refusal with a good reason: Lest thou shouldest say, I
have made Abram rich, which would reflect reproach, (1.) Upon the
promise and covenant of God, as if they would not have enriched Abram
without the spoils of Sodom. And, (2.) Upon the piety and charity of
Abram, as if all he had in his eye, when he undertook that hazardous
expedition, was to enrich himself. Note, \[1.\] We must be very careful
that we give no occasion to others to say things which they ought not.
\[2.\] The people of God must, for their credit's sake, take heed of
doing any thing that looks mean or mercenary, or that savours of
covetousness and self-seeking. Probably Abram knew the king of Sodom to
be a proud and scornful man, and one that would be apt to turn such a
thing as this to his reproach afterwards, though most unreasonably. When
we have to do with such men, we have need to act with particular
caution.

3\. He limits his refusal with a double proviso, [Gen
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#024). In making vows, we ought
carefully to insert the necessary exceptions, that we may not afterwards
say before the angel, It was an error, [Ecc
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#006). Abram here excepts, (1.) The food
of his soldiers; they were worthy of their meat while they trod out the
corn. This would give no colour to the king of Sodom to say that he had
enriched Abram. (2.) The shares of his allies and confederates: Let them
take their portion. Note, Those who are strict in restraining their own
liberty yet ought not to impose those restraints upon the liberties of
others, nor to judge of them accordingly. We must not make ourselves the
standard to measure others by. A good man will deny himself that liberty
which he will not deny another, contrary to the practice of the
Pharisees, [Mat 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#004). There was not
the same reason why Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre, should quit their right,
that there was why Abram should. They did not make the profession that
he made, nor were they, as he was, under the obligation of a vow. They
had not the hopes that Abram had of a portion in the other world, and
therefore, by all means, let them take their portion of this.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 15](gen015)

</div>
