<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen048)  [Next](gen050) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 49](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 49:0</span></span>

This chapter is a prophecy; the likest to it we have yet met with was
that of Noah, [Gen 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#025), etc. Jacob is
here upon his death-bed, making his will. He put it off till now,
because dying men's words are apt to make deep impressions, and to be
remembered long: what he said here, he could not say when he would, but
as the Spirit gave him utterance, who chose this time, that divine
strength might be perfected in his weakness. The twelve sons of Jacob
were, in their day, men of renown, but the twelve tribes of Israel,
which descended and were denominated from them, were much more renowned;
we find their names upon the gates of the New Jerusalem, [Rev
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012). In the prospect of this their
dying father says something remarkable of each son, or of the tribe that
bore his name. Here is, I. The preface ([Gen
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001), [Gen
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#002)). II. Th prediction concerning
each tribe (v. 3-28). III. The charge repeated concerning his burial
([Gen 49:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#029)). IV. His death ([Gen
49:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#033)).

[Genesis 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 49:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The preface to the prophecy, in which, 1. The congregation
is called together ([Gen 49:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#002)): Gather
yourselves together; let them all be sent for from their several
employments, to see their father die, and to hear his dying words. It
was a comfort to Jacob, now that he was dying, to see all his children
about him, and none missing, though he had sometimes thought himself
bereaved. It was of use to them to attend him in his last moments, that
they might learn of him how to die, as well as how to live: what he said
to each he said in the hearing of all the rest; for we may profit by the
reproofs, counsels, and comforts, that are principally intended for
others. His calling upon them once and again to gather together
intimated both a precept to them to unite in love, (to keep together,
not to mingle with the Egyptians, not to forsake the assembling of
themselves together,) and a prediction that they should not be separated
from each other, as Abraham's sons and Isaac's were, but should be
incorporated, and all make one people. 2. A general idea is given of the
intended discourse ([Gen 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001)): That I
may tell you that which shall befal you (not your persons, but your
posterity) in the latter days; this prediction would be of use to those
that came after them, for the confirming of their faith and the guiding
of their way, on their return to Canaan, and their settlement there. We
cannot tell our children what shall befal them or their families in this
world; but we can tell them, from the word of God, what will befal them
in the last day of all, according as they conduct themselves in this
world. 3. Attention is demanded ([Gen
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#002)): "Hearken to Israel your father;
let Israel, that has prevailed with God, prevail with you." Note,
Children must diligently hearken to what their godly parents say,
particularly when they are dying. Hear, you children, the instruction of
a father, which carries with it both authority and affection, [Pro
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#001).

II\. The prophecy concerning Reuben. He begins with him ([Gen
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003), [Gen
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004)), for he was the firstborn; but
by committing uncleanness with his father's wife, to the great reproach
of the family to which he ought to have been an ornament, he forfeited
the prerogatives of the birthright; and his dying father here solemnly
degrades him, though he does not disown nor disinherit him: he shall
have all the privileges of a son, but not of a firstborn. We have reason
to think Reuben had repented of his sin, and it was pardoned; yet it was
a necessary piece of justice, in detestation of the villany, and for
warning to others, to put this mark of disgrace upon him. Now according
to the method of degrading, 1. Jacob here puts upon him the ornaments of
the birthright ([Gen 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003)), that he
and all his brethren might see what he had forfeited, and, in that,
might see the evil of the sin: as the firstborn, he was his father's
joy, almost his pride, being the beginning of his strength. How welcome
he was to his parents his name bespeaks, Reuben, See a son. To him
belonged the excellency of dignity above his brethren, and some power
over them. Christ Jesus is the firstborn among many brethren, and to
him, of right, belong the most excellent power and dignity: his church
also, through him, is a church of firstborn. 2. He then strips him of
these ornaments ([Gen 49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004)), lifts him
up, that he may cast him down, by that one word, "Thou shalt not excel;
a being thou shalt have as a tribe, but not an excellency." No judge,
prophet, nor prince, is found of that tribe, nor any person of renown
except Dathan and Abiram, who were noted for their impious rebellion
against Moses. That tribe, as not aiming to excel, meanly chose a
settlement on the other side Jordan. Reuben himself seems to have lost
all that influence upon his brethren to which his birthright entitled
him; for when he spoke unto them they would not hear, [Gen
42:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#022). Those that have not
understanding and spirit to support the honours and privileges of their
birth will soon lose them, and retain only the name of them. The
character fastened upon Reuben, for which he is laid under this mark of
infamy, is that he was unstable as water. (1.) His virtue was unstable;
he had not the government of himself and his own appetites: sometimes he
would be very regular and orderly, but at other times he deviated into
the wildest courses. Note, Instability is the ruin of men's excellency.
Men do not thrive because they do not fix. (2.) His honour consequently
was unstable; it departed from him, vanished into smoke, and became as
water spilt upon the ground. Note, Those that throw away their virtue
must not expect to save their reputation. Jacob charges him particularly
with the sin for which he was thus disgraced: Thou went est up to thy
father's bed. It was forty years ago that he had been guilty of this
sin, yet now it is remembered against him. Note, As time will not of
itself wear off the guilt of any sin from the conscience, so there are
some sins whose stains it will not wipe off from the good name,
especially seventh-commandment sins. Reuben's sin left an indelible mark
of infamy upon his family, a dishonour that was a wound not to be healed
without a scar, [Pro 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#032), [Pro
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#033). Let us never do evil, and then
we need not fear being told of it.

[Genesis 49:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 49:5</span></span>

These were next in age to Reuben, and they also had been a grief and
shame to Jacob, when they treacherously and barbarously destroyed the
Shechemites, which he here remembers against them. Children should be
afraid of incurring their parents' just displeasure, lest they fare the
worse for it long afterwards, and, when they would inherit the blessing,
be rejected. Observe, 1. The character of Simeon and Levi: they were
brethren in disposition; but, unlike their father, they were passionate
and revengeful, fierce and uncontrollable; their swords, which should
have been only weapons of defence, were (as the margin reads it, [Gen
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#005)) weapons of violence, to do wrong
to others, not to save themselves from wrong. Note, It is no new thing
for the temper of children to differ very much from that of their
parents. We need not think this strange: it was so in Jacob's family. It
is not in the power of parents, no, not by education, to form the
dispositions of their children; Jacob bred his sons to every thing that
was mild and quiet, and yet they proved to be thus furious. 2. A proof
of this is the murder of the Shechemites, which Jacob deeply resented at
the time ([Gen 34:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#030)) and still
continued to resent. They slew a man, Shechem himself, and many others;
and, to effect that, they digged down a wall, broke the houses, to
plunder them, and murder the inhabitants. Note, The best governors
cannot always restrain those under their charge from committing the
worst villanies. And when two in a family are mischievous they commonly
make one another so much the worse, and it were wisdom to part them.
Simeon and Levi, it is probable, were most active in the wrong done to
Joseph, to which some think Jacob has here some reference; for in their
anger they would have slain that man. Observe what a mischievous thing
self-will is in young people: Simeon and Levi would not be advised by
their aged and experienced father; no, they would be governed by their
own passion rather than by his prudence. Young people would better
consult their own interests if they would less indulge their own will.
3. Jacob's protestation against this barbarous act of theirs: O my soul,
come not thou into their secret. Hereby he professes not only his
abhorrence of such practices in general, but his innocence particularly
in that matter. Perhaps he had been suspected as, under-hand, aiding and
abetting; he therefore thus solemnly expresses his detestation of the
fact, that he might not die under that suspicion. Note, Our soul is our
honour; by its powers and faculties we are distinguished from, and
dignified above, the beasts that perish. Note, further, We ought, from
our hearts, to detest and abhor all society and confederacy with bloody
and mischievous men. We must not be ambitious of coming into their
secret, or knowing the depths of Satan. 4. His abhorrence of those
brutish lusts that led them to this wickedness: Cursed be their anger.
He does not curse their persons, but their lusts. Note, (1.) Anger is
the cause and original of a great deal of sin, and exposes us to the
curse of God, and his judgment, [Mat
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022). (2.) We ought always, in the
expressions of our zeal, carefully to distinguish between the sinner and
the sin, so as not to love nor bless the sin for the sake of the person,
nor to hate nor curse the person for the sake of the sin. 5. A token of
displeasure which he foretels their posterity should lie under for this:
I will divide them. The Levites were scattered throughout all the
tribes, and Simeon's lot lay not together, and was so strait that many
of the tribe were forced to disperse themselves in quest of settlements
and subsistence. This curse was afterwards turned into a blessing to the
Levites; but the Simeonites, for Zimri's sin ([Num
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#014)), had it bound on. Note,
Shameful dispersions are the just punishment of sinful unions and
confederacies.

[Genesis 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 49:8</span></span>

Glorious things are here said of Judah. The mention of the crimes of the
three elder of his sons had not so put the dying patriarch out of humour
but that he had a blessing ready for Judah, to whom blessings belonged.
Judah's name signifies praise, in allusion to which he says, Thou art he
whom thy brethren shall praise, [Gen
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008). God was praised for him ([Gen
29:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#035)), praised by him, and praised in
him; and therefore his brethren shall praise him. Note, Those that are
to God for a praise shall be the praise of their brethren. It is
prophesied that, 1. The tribe of Judah should be victorious and
successful in war: Thy hand shall be in the neck of thy enemies. This
was fulfilled in David, [Psa 18:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#040). 2.
It should be superior to the rest of the tribes; not only in itself more
numerous and illustrious, but having a dominion over them: Thy father's
children shall bow down before thee. Judah was the lawgiver, [Psa
60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007). That tribe led the van through
the wilderness, and in the conquest of Canaan, [Jdg
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#002). The prerogatives of the
birthright which Reuben had forfeited, the excellence of dignity and
power, were thus conferred upon Judah. Observe, "Thy brethren shall bow
down before thee, and yet shall praise thee, reckoning themselves happy
in having so wise and bold a commander." Note, Honour and power are then
a blessing to those that have them when they are not grudged and envied,
but praised and applauded, and cheerfully submitted to. 3. It should be
a strong and courageous tribe, and so qualified for command and
conquest: Judah is a lion's whelp, [Gen
49:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009). The lion is the king of beasts,
the terror of the forest when he roars; when he seizes his prey, none
can resist him; when he goes up from the prey, none dare pursue him to
revenge it. By this it is foretold that the tribe of Judah should become
very formidable, and should not only obtain great victories, but should
peaceably and quietly enjoy what was obtained by those victories - that
they should make war, not for the sake of war, but for the sake of
peace. Judah is compared, not to a lion rampant, always tearing, always
raging, always ranging; but to a lion couchant, enjoying the
satisfaction of his power and success, without creating vexation to
others: this is to be truly great. 4. It should be the royal tribe, and
the tribe from which Messiah the Prince should come: The sceptre shall
not depart from Judah, till Shiloh come, [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010). Jacob here foresees and
foretels, (1.) That the sceptre should come into the tribe of Judah,
which was fulfilled in David, on whose family the crown was entailed.
(2.) That Shiloh should be of this tribe - his seed, that promised seed,
in whom the earth should be blessed: that peaceable and prosperous one,
or the Saviour, so others translate it, he shall come of Judah. Thus
dying Jacob, at a great distance, saw Christ's day, and it was his
comfort and support on his death-bed. (3.) That after the coming of the
sceptre into the tribe of Judah it should continue in that tribe, at
least a government of their own, till the coming of the Messiah, in
whom, as the king of the church, and the great high priest, it was fit
that both the priesthood and the royalty should determine. Till the
captivity, all along from David's time, the sceptre was in Judah, and
subsequently the governors of Judea were of that tribe, or of the
Levites that adhered to it (which was equivalent), till Judea became a
province of the Roman empire, just at the time of our Saviour's birth,
and was at that time taxed as one of the provinces, [Luk
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001). And at the time of his death the
Jews expressly owned, We have no king but Caesar. Hence it is undeniably
inferred against the Jews that our Lord Jesus is he that should come,
and that we are to look for no other; for he came exactly at the time
appointed. Many excellent pens have been admirable well employed in
explaining and illustrating this famous prophecy of Christ. 5. It should
be a very fruitful tribe, especially that it should abound with milk for
babes, and wine to make glad the heart of strong men ([Gen
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#011), [Gen
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#012)) - vines so common in the
hedge-rows and so strong that they should tie their asses to them, and
so fruitful that they should load their asses from them - wine as
plentiful as water, so that the men of that tribe should be very
healthful and lively, their eyes brisk and sparkling, their teeth white.
Much of what is here said concerning Judah is to be applied to our Lord
Jesus. (1.) He is the ruler of all his father's children, and the
conqueror of all his father's enemies; and he it is that is the praise
of all the saints. (2.) He is the lion of the tribe of Judah, as he is
called with reference to this prophecy ([Rev
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005)), who, having spoiled
principalities and powers, went up a conqueror, and couched so as none
can stir him up, when he sat down on the right hand of the Father. (3.)
To him belongs the sceptre; he is the lawgiver, and to him shall the
gathering of the people be, as the desire of all nations ([Hag
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007)), who, being lifted up from the
earth, should draw all men unto him ([Joh
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032)), and in whom the children of
God that are scattered abroad should meet as the centre of their unity,
[Joh 11:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#052). (4.) In him there is
plenty of all that which is nourishing and refreshing to the soul, and
which maintains and cheers the divine life in it; in him we may have
wine and milk, the riches of Judah's tribe, without money and without
price, [Isa 55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001).

[Genesis 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 49:13</span></span>

Here we have Jacob's prophecy concerning six of his sons.

I. Concerning Zebulun ([Gen 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013)),
that his posterity should have their lot upon the seacoast, and should
be merchants, and mariners, and traders at sea. This was fulfilled when,
two or three hundred years after, the land of Canaan was divided by lot,
and the border of Zebulun went up towards the sea, [Jos
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#011). Had they chosen their lot
themselves, or Joshua appointed it, we might have supposed it done with
design to make Jacob's words good; but, being done by lot, it appears
that it was divinely disposed, and Jacob divinely inspired. Note, The
lot of God's providence exactly agrees with the plan of God's counsel,
like a true copy with the original. If prophecy says, Zebulun shall be a
haven of ships, Providence will so plant him. Note, 1. God appoints the
bounds of our habitation. 2. It is our wisdom and duty to accommodate
ourselves to our lot and to improve it. If Zebulun dwell at the haven of
the sea, let him be for a haven of ships.

II\. Concerning Issachar, [Gen 49:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#014),
[Gen 49:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#015). 1. That the men of that
tribe should be strong and industrious, fit for labour and inclined to
labour, particularly the toil of husbandry, like the ass, that patiently
carries his burden, and, by using himself to it, makes it the easier.
Issachar submitted to two burdens, tillage and tribute. It was a tribe
that took pains, and, thriving thereby, was called upon for rents and
taxes. 2. That they should be encouraged in their labour by the goodness
of the land that should fall to their lot. (1.) He saw that rest at home
was good. Note, The labour of the husbandman is really rest, in
comparison with that of soldiers and seamen, whose hurries and perils
are such that those who tarry at home in the most constant service have
no reason to envy them. (2.) He saw that the land was pleasant, yielding
not only pleasant prospects to charm the eye of the curious, but
pleasant fruits to recompense his toils. Many are the pleasures of a
country life, abundantly sufficient to balance the inconveniences of it,
if we can but persuade ourselves to think so, Issachar, in prospect of
advantage, bowed his shoulders to bear: let us, with an eye of faith,
see the heavenly rest to be good, and that land of promise to be
pleasant; and this will make our present services easy, and encourage us
to bow our shoulder to them.

III\. Concerning Dan, [Gen 49:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#016), [Gen
49:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#017). What is said concerning Dan has
reference either, 1. To that tribe in general, that though Dan was one
of the sons of the concubines yet he should be a tribe governed by
judges of his own as well as other tribes, and should, by art, and
policy, and surprise, gain advantages against his enemies, like a
serpent suddenly biting the heel of the traveller. Note, In God's
spiritual Israel there is no distinction made of bond or free, [Col
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#011). Dan shall be incorporated by as
good a charter as any of the other tribes. Note, also, Some, like Dan,
may excel in the subtlety of the serpent, as others, like Judah, in the
courage of the lion; and both may do good service to the cause of God
against the Canaanites. Or it may refer, 2. To Samson, who was of that
tribe, and judged Israel, that is, delivered them out of the hands of
the Philistines, not as the other judges, by fighting them in the field,
but by the vexations and annoyances he gave them underhand: when he
pulled the house down under the Philistines that were upon the roof of
it, he made the horse throw his rider.

Thus was Jacob going on with his discourse; but now, being almost spent
with speaking, and ready to faint and die away, he relieves himself with
those words which come in as a parenthesis ([Gen
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#018)), I have waited for thy
salvation, O Lord! as those that are fainting are helped by taking a
spoonful of a cordial, or smelling at a bottle of spirits; or, if he
must break off here, and his breath will not serve him to finish what he
intended, with these words he pours out his soul into the bosom of his
God, and even breathes it out. Note, The pious ejaculations of a warm
and lively devotion, though sometimes they may be incoherent, are not
therefore to be censured as impertinent; that may be uttered
affectionately which does not come in methodically. It is no absurdity,
when we are speaking to men, to lift up our hearts to God. The salvation
he waited for was Christ, the promised seed, whom he had spoken of, [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010). Now that he was going to be
gathered to his people, he breathes after him to whom the gathering of
the people shall be. The salvation he waited for was also heaven, the
better country, which he declared plainly that he sought ([Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013), [Heb
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#014)), and continued seeking, now
that he was in Egypt. Now that he is going to enjoy the salvation he
comforts himself with this, that he had waited for the salvation. Note,
It is the character of a living saint that he waits for the salvation of
the Lord. Christ, as our way to heaven, is to be waited on: and heaven,
as our rest in Christ, is to be waited for. Again, It is the comfort of
a dying saint thus to have waited for the salvation of the Lord; for
then he shall have what he has been waiting for: long-looked-for will
come.

IV\. Concerning Gad, [Gen 49:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#019). He
alludes to his name, which signifies a troop, foresees the character of
that tribe, that it should be a warlike tribe, and so we find ([Ch1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008)); the Gadites were men of war fit
for the battle. He foresees that the situation of that tribe on the
other side Jordan would expose it to the incursions of its neighbours,
the Moabites and Ammonites; and, that they might not be proud of their
strength and valour, he foretels that the troops of their enemies
should, in many skirmishes, overcome them; yet, that they might not be
discouraged by their defeats, he assures them that they should overcome
at the last, which was fulfilled when, in Saul's time and David's, the
Moabites and Ammonites were wholly subdued: see [Ch1
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#018), etc. Note, The cause of God and
his people, though it may seem for a time to be baffled and run down,
will yet be victorious at last. Vincimur in praelio, sed non in bello -
We are foiled in a battle, but not in a campaign. Grace in the soul is
often foiled in its conflicts, troops of corruption overcome it, but the
cause is God's, and grace will in the issue come off conqueror, yea,
more than conqueror, [Rom 8:37](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#037).

V. Concerning Asher ([Gen 49:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#020)), that
it should be a very rich tribe, replenished not only with bread for
necessity, but with fatness, with dainties, royal dainties (for the king
himself is served of the field, [Ecc
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#009)), and these exported out of Asher
to other tribes, perhaps to other lands. Note, The God of nature has
provided for us not only necessaries but dainties, that we might call
him a bountiful benefactor; yet, whereas all places are competently
furnished with necessaries, only some places afford dainties. Corn is
more common than spices. Were the supports of luxury as universal as the
supports of life, the world would be worse than it is, and that it needs
not be.

VI\. Concerning Naphtali ([Gen 49:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#021)),
a tribe that carries struggles in its name; it signifies wrestling, and
the blessing entailed upon it signifies prevailing; it is a hind let
loose. Though we find not this prediction so fully answered in the event
as some of the rest, yet, no doubt, it proved true that those of this
tribe were, 1. As the loving hind (for that is her epithet, [Pro
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#019)), friendly and obliging to one
another and to other tribes; their converse remarkably kind and
endearing. 2. As the loosened hind, zealous for their liberty. 3. As the
swift hind ([Psa 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#033)), quick in
despatch of business; and perhaps, 4. As the trembling, timorous in
times of public danger. It is rare that those that are most amiable to
their friends are most formidable to their enemies. 5. That they should
be affable and courteous, their language refined, and they complaisant,
giving goodly words. Note, Among God's Israel there is to be found a
great variety of dispositions, contrary to each other, yet all
contributing to the beauty and strength of the body, Judah like a lion,
Issachar like an ass, Dan like a serpent, Naphtali like a hind. Let not
those of different tempers and gifts censure one another, nor envy one
another, any more than those of different statures and complexions.

[Genesis 49:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 49:22</span></span>

He closes with the blessings of his best beloved sons, Joseph and
Benjamin; with these he will breathe his last.

I. The blessing of Joseph, which is very large and full. He is compared
([Gen 49:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022)) to a fruitful bouth, or
young tree; for God had made him fruitful in the land of his affliction;
he owned it. [Gen 41:52](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#052). His two sons
were as branches of a vine, or other spreading plant, running over the
wall. Note, God can make those fruitful, great comforts to themselves
and others, who have been looked upon as dry and withered. More is
recorded in the history concerning Joseph than concerning any other of
Jacob's sons; and therefore what Jacob says of him is historical as well
as prophetical. Observe,

1\. The providences of God concerning Joseph, [Gen
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#023), [Gen
49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024). These are mentioned to the
glory of God, and for the encouragement of Jacob's faith and hope, that
God had blessings in store for his seed. Here observe (1.) Joseph's
straits and troubles, [Gen 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#023).
Though he now lived at ease and in honour, Jacob reminds him of the
difficulties he had formerly waded through. He had had many enemies,
here called archers, being skilful to do mischief, masters of their art
of persecution. They hated him: there persecution begins. They shot
their poisonous darts at him, and thus they sorely grieved him. His
brethren, in his father's house, were very spiteful towards him, mocked
him, stripped him, threatened him, sold him, thought they had been the
death of him. His mistress, in the house of Potiphar, sorely grieved
him, and shot at him, when she impudently assaulted his chastity
(temptations are fiery darts, thorns in the flesh, sorely grievous to
gracious souls); when she prevailed not in this, she hated him, and shot
at him by her false accusations, arrows against which there is little
fence but the hold God has in the consciences of the worst of men.
Doubtless he had enemies in the court of Pharaoh, that envied his
preferment, and sought to undermine him. (2.) Joseph's strength and
support under all these troubles ([Gen
49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024)): His bow abode in strength,
that is, his faith did not fail, but he kept his ground, and came off a
conqueror. The arms of his hands were made strong, that is, his other
graces did their part, his wisdom, courage, and patience, which are
better than weapons of war. In short, he maintained both his integrity
and his comfort through all his trials; he bore all his burdens with an
invincible resolution, and did not sink under them, nor do any thing
unbecoming him. (3.) The spring and fountain of this strength; it was by
the hands of the mighty God, who was therefore able to strengthen him,
and the God of Jacob, a God in covenant with him, and therefore engaged
to help him. All our strength for the resisting of temptations, and the
bearing of afflictions, comes from God: his grace is sufficient, and his
strength is perfected in our weakness. (4.) The state of honour and
usefulness to which he was subsequently advanced: Thence (from this
strange method of providence) he became the shepherd and stone, the
feeder and supporter, of God's Israel, Jacob and his family. Herein
Joseph was a type, \[1.\] Of Christ; he was shot at and hated, but borne
up under his sufferings ([Isa 50:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007)),
and was afterwards advanced to be the shepherd and stone. \[2.\] Of the
church in general, and particular believers; hell shoots its arrows
against the saints, but Heaven protects and strengthens them, and will
crown them.

2\. The promises of God to Joseph. See how these are connected with the
former: Even by the God of thy father Jacob, who shall help thee, [Gen
49:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#025). Note, Our experiences of God's
power and goodness in strengthening us hitherto are our encouragements
still to hope for help from him; he that has helped us will help: we may
build much upon our Eben-ezers. See what Joseph may expect from the
Almighty, even the God of his father. (1.) He shall help thee in
difficulties and dangers which may yet be before thee, help thy seed in
their wars. Joshua came from him, who commanded in chief in the wars of
Canaan. (2.) He shall bless thee; and he only blesses indeed. Jacob
prays for a blessing upon Joseph, but the God of Jacob commands the
blessing. Observe the blessings conferred on Joseph. \[1.\] Various and
abundant blessings: Blessings of heaven above (rain in its season, and
fair weather in its season, and the benign influences of the heavenly
bodies); blessings of the deep that lieth under this earth, which,
compared with the upper world, is but a great deep, with subterraneous
mines and springs. Spiritual blessings are blessings of heaven above,
which we ought to desire and seek for in the first place, and to which
we must give the preference; while temporal blessings, those of this
earth, must lie under in our account and esteem. Blessings of the womb
and the breasts are given when children are safely born and comfortably
nursed. In the word of God, by which we are born again, and nourished up
([Pe1 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023); [Pe1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002)), there are to the new man
blessings both of the womb and the breasts. \[2.\] Eminent and
transcendent blessings, which prevail above the blessings of my
progenitors, [Gen 49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026). His father
Isaac had but one blessing, and, when he had given that to Jacob, he was
at a loss for a blessing to bestow upon Esau; but Jacob had a blessing
for each of his twelve sons, and now, at the latter end, a copious one
for Joseph. The great blessing entailed upon that family was increase,
which did not so immediately and so signally follow the blessings which
Abraham and Isaac gave to their sons as it followed the blessing which
Jacob gave to his; for, soon after his death, they multiplied
exceedingly. \[3.\] Durable and extensive blessings: Unto the utmost
bounds of the everlasting hills, including all the productions of the
most fruitful hills, and lasting as long as they last, [Isa
54:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#010). Note, the blessings of the
everlasting God include the riches of the everlasting hills, and much
more. Well, of these blessings it is here said, They shall be, so it is
a promise, or, Let them be, so it is a prayer, on the head of Joseph, to
which let them be as a crown to adorn it and a helmet to protect it.
Joseph was separated from his brethren (so we read it) for a time; yet,
as others read it, he was a Nazarite among his brethren, better and more
excellent than they. Note, It is no new thing for the best men to meet
with the worst usage, for Nazarites among their brethren to be cast out
and separated from their brethren; but the blessing of God will make it
up to them.

II\. The blessing of Benjamin ([Gen
49:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#027)): He shall raven as a wolf; it
is plain by this that Jacob was guided in what he said by a spirit of
prophecy, and not by natural affection; else he would have spoken with
more tenderness of his beloved son Benjamin, concerning whom he only
foresees and foretels this, that his posterity should be a warlike
tribe, strong and daring, and that they should enrich themselves with
the spoils of their enemies - that they should be active and busy in the
world, and a tribe as much feared by their neighbours as any other: In
the morning, he shall devour the prey, which he seized and divided over
night. Or, in the first times of Israel, they shall be noted for
activity, though many of them left-handed, [Jdg
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#015); [Jdg
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#016). Ehud the second judge, and Saul
the first king, were of this tribe; and so also in the last times Esther
and Mordecai, by whom the enemies of the Jews were destroyed, were of
this tribe. The Benjamites ravened like wolves when they desperately
espoused the cause of the men of Gibeah, those men of Belial, [Jdg
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#014). Blessed Paul was of this tribe
([Rom 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001); [Phi
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#005)); and he did, in the morning of
his day, devour the prey as a persecutor, but, in the evening, divided
the spoil as a preacher. Note, God can serve his own purposes by the
different tempers of men; the deceived and the deceiver are his.

[Genesis 49:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 49:28</span></span>

Here is, I. The summing up of the blessings of Jacob's sons, [Gen
49:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#028). Though Reuben, Simeon, and Levi
were put under the marks of their father's displeasure, yet he is said
to bless them every one according to his blessing; for none of them were
rejected as Esau was. Note, Whatever rebukes of God's word or providence
we are under at any time, yet, as long as we have an interest in God's
covenant, a place and a name among his people, and good hopes of a share
in the heavenly Canaan, we must account ourselves blessed.

II\. The solemn charge Jacob gave them concerning his burial, which is a
repetition of what he had before given to Joseph. See how he speaks of
death, now that he is dying: I am to be gathered unto my people, [Gen
49:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#029). Note, It is good to represent
death to ourselves under the most desirable images, that the terror of
it may be taken off. Though it separates us from our children and our
people in this world, it gathers us to our fathers and to our people in
the other world. Perhaps Jacob uses this expression concerning death as
a reason why his sons should bury him in Canaan; for, says he, "I am to
be gathered unto my people, my soul must go to the spirits of just men
made perfect: and therefore bury me with my fathers, Abraham and Isaac,
and their wives," [Gen 49:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#031). Observe,
1. His heart was very much upon it, not so much from a natural affection
to his native soil as from a principle of faith in the promise of God,
that Canaan should be the inheritance of his seed in due time. Thus he
would keep up in his sons a remembrance of the promised land, and not
only would have their acquaintance with it renewed by a journey thither
on that occasion, but their desire towards it and their expectation of
it preserved. 2. He is very particular in describing the place both by
the situation of it and by the purchase Abraham had made of it for a
burying-place, [Gen 49:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#030), [Gen
49:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#032). He was afraid lest his sons,
after seventeen years' sojourning in Egypt, had forgotten Canaan, and
even the burying-place of their ancestors there, or lest the Canaanites
should dispute his title to it; and therefore he specifies it thus
largely, and the purchase of it, even when he lies a-dying, not only to
prevent mistakes, but to show how mindful he was of that country. Note,
It is, and should be, a great pleasure to dying saints to fix their
thoughts upon the heavenly Canaan, and the rest they hope for there
after death.

III\. The death of Jacob, [Gen 49:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#033).
When he had finished both his blessing and his charge (both which are
included in the commanding of his sons), and so had finished his
testimony, he addressed himself to his dying work. 1. He put himself
into a posture for dying; having before seated himself upon the
bed-side, to bless his sons (the spirit of prophecy bringing fresh oil
to his expiring lamp, [Dan 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#019)),
when that work was done, he gathered up his feet into the bed, that he
might lie along, not only as one patiently submitting to the stroke, but
as one cheerfully composing himself to rest, now that he was weary. I
will lay me down, and sleep. 2. He freely resigned his spirit into the
hand of God, the Father of spirits: He yielded up the ghost. 3. His
separated soul went to the assembly of the souls of the faithful, which,
after they are delivered from the burden of the flesh, are in joy and
felicity: he was gathered to his people. Note, If God's people be our
people, death will gather us to them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 50](gen050)

</div>
