<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen029)  [Next](gen031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 30:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have an account of the increase, I. Of Jacob's
family. Eight children more we find registered in this chapter; Dan and
Naphtali by Bilhah, Rachel's maid ([Gen
30:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001)). Gad and Asher by Zilpah,
Leah's maid ([Gen 30:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#009)). Issachar,
Zebulun, and Dinah, by Leah ([Gen
30:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#014)). And, last of all, Joseph,
by Rachel ([Gen 30:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#022)). II. Of
Jacob's estate. He makes a new bargain with Laban ([Gen
30:25-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#025)). And in the six years'
further service he did to Laban God wonderfully blessed him, so that his
stock of cattle became very considerable ([Gen
30:35-43](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#035)). Herein was fulfilled the
blessing with which Isaac dismissed him ([Gen
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#003)), "God make thee fruitful, and
multiply thee." Even these small matters concerning Jacob's house and
field, though they seem inconsiderable, are improvable for our learning.
For the scriptures were written, not for princes and statesmen, to
instruct them in politics; but for all people, even the meanest, to
direct them in their families and callings: yet some things are here
recorded concerning Jacob, not for imitation, but for admonition.

[Genesis 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 30:1</span></span>

We have here the bad consequences of that strange marriage which Jacob
made with the two sisters. Here is,

I. An unhappy disagreement between him and Rachel ([Gen
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001), [Gen
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#002)), occasioned, not so much by her
own barrenness as by her sister's fruitfulness. Rebekah, the only wife
of Isaac, was long childless, and yet we find no uneasiness between her
and Isaac; but here, because Leah bears children, Rachel cannot live
peaceably with Jacob.

1\. Rachel frets. She envied her sister, [Gen
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001). Envy is grieving at the good of
another, than which no sin is more offensive to God, nor more injurious
to our neighbour and ourselves. She considered not that it was God that
made the difference, and that though, in this single instance her sister
was preferred before her, yet in other things she had the advantage. Let
us carefully watch against all the risings and workings of this passion
in our minds. Let not our eye be evil towards any of our fellow-servants
because our master's is good. But this was not all; she said to Jacob,
Give me children, or else I die. Note, We are very apt to err in our
desires of temporal mercies, as Rachel here. (1.) One child would not
content her; but, because Leah has more than one, she must have more
too: Give me children. (2.) Her heart is inordinately set upon it, and,
if she have not what she would have, she will throw away her life, and
all the comforts of it. "Give them to me, or else I die," that is, "I
shall fret myself to death; the want of this satisfaction will shorten
my days." Some think she threatens Jacob to lay violent hands upon
herself, if she could not obtain this mercy. (3.) She did not apply to
God by prayer, but to Jacob only, forgetting that children are a
heritage of the Lord, [Psa 127:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#003). We
wrong both God and ourselves when our eye is more to men, the
instruments of our crosses and comforts, than to God the author. Observe
a difference between Rachel's asking for this mercy and Hannah's, [Sa1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#010), etc. Rachel envied; Hannah wept.
Rachel must have children, and she died of the second; Hannah prayed for
one child, and she had four more. Rachel is importunate and peremptory;
Hannah is submissive and devout. If thou wilt give me a child, I will
give him to the Lord. Let Hannah be imitated, and not Rachel; and let
our desires be always under the direction and control of reason and
religion.

2\. Jacob chides, and most justly. He loved Rachel, and therefore
reproved her for what she said amiss, [Gen
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#002). Note, Faithful reproofs and
products and instances of true affection, [Psa
141:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005); [Pro
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#005), [Pro
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#006). Job reproved his wife when she
spoke the language of the foolish women, [Job
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010). See [Co1
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#016). He was angry, not at the person,
but at the sin; he expressed himself so as to show this displeasure.
Note, sometimes it is requisite that a reproof should be given warm,
like a medical potion; not too hot, lest it scald the patient; yet not
cold, lest it prove ineffectual. It was a very grave and pious reply
which Jacob gave to Rachel's peevish demand: Am I in God's stead? The
Chaldee paraphrases it well, Dost thou ask sons of me? Oughtest thou not
to ask them from before the Lord? The Arabic reads it, "Am I above God?
can I give thee that which God denies thee?" This was said like a plain
man. Observe, (1.) He acknowledges the hand of God in the affliction
which he was a sharer with her in: He hath withheld the fruit of the
womb. Note, Whatever we want, it is God that withholds it, a sovereign
Lord, most wise, holy, and just, that may do what he will with his own,
and is debtor to no man, that never did, nor ever can do, any wrong to
any of his creatures. The keys of the clouds, of the heart, of the
grave, and of the womb, are four keys which God had in his hand, and
which (the rabbin say) he entrusts neither with angels nor seraphim. See
[Rev 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007). [Job
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#010); [Job
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#014). (2.) He acknowledges his own
inability to alter what God had appointed: "Am I in God's stead? What!
dost thou make a god of me?" Deos qui rogat ille facit - He to whom we
offer supplications is to us a god. Note, \[1.\] There is no creature
that is, or can be, to us, in God's stead. God may be to us instead of
any creature, as the sun instead of the moon and stars; but the moon and
all the stars will not be to us instead of the sun. No creature's
wisdom, power, and love, will be to us instead of God's. \[2.\] It is
therefore our sin and folly to place any creature in God's stead, and to
place that confidence in any creature which is to be placed in God only.

II\. An unhappy agreement between him and the two handmaids.

1\. At the persuasion of Rachel, he took Bilhah her handmaid to wife,
that, according to the usage of those times, his children by her might
be adopted and owned as her mistress's children, [Gen
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#003), etc. She would rather have
children by reputation than none at all, children that she might fancy
to be her own, and call her own, though they were not so. One would
think her own sister's children were nearer akin to her than her maid's,
and she might with more satisfaction have made them her own if she had
so pleased; but (so natural is it for us all to be fond of power)
children that she had a right to rule were more desirable to her than
children that she had more reason to love; and, as an early instance of
her dominion over the children born in her apartment, she takes a
pleasure in giving them names that carry in them nothing but marks of
emulation with her sister, as if she had overcome her, (1.) At law. She
calls the first son of her handmaid Dan (judgement), saying, "God hath
judged me" ([Gen 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#006)), that is,
"given sentence in my favour." (2.) In battle. she calls the next
Naphtali (wrestlings), saying, I have wrestled with my sister, and have
prevailed ([Gen 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#008)); as if all
Jacob's sons must be born men of contention. See what roots of
bitterness envy and strife are, and what mischief they make among
relations.

2\. At the persuasion of Leah, he took Zilpah her handmaid to wife also,
[Gen 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#009). Rachel had done that absurd
and preposterous thing of giving her maid to her husband, in emulation
with Leah; and now Leah (because she missed one year in bearing
children) does the same, to be even with her, or rather to keep before
her. See the power of jealousy and rivalship, and admire the wisdom of
the divine appointment, which unites one man and one woman only; for God
hath called us to peace and purity, [Co1
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#015). Two sons Zilpah bore to Jacob,
whom Leah looked upon herself as entitled to, in token of which she
called one Gad ([Gen 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#011)), promising
herself a little troop of children; and children are the militia of a
family, they fill the quiver, [Psa
127:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#004), [Psa
127:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#005). The other she called Asher
(happy), thinking herself happy in him, and promising herself that her
neighbours would think so too: The daughters will call me blessed, [Gen
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#013). Note, It is an instance of the
vanity of the world, and the foolishness bound up in our hearts, that
most people value themselves and govern themselves more by reputation
than either by reason or religion; they think themselves blessed if the
daughters do but call them so. There was much amiss in the contest and
competition between these two sisters, yet God brought good out of this
evil; for, the time being now at hand when the seed of Abraham must
begin to increase and multiply, thus Jacob's family was replenished with
twelve sons, heads of the thousands of Israel, from whom the celebrated
twelve tribes descended and were named.

[Genesis 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 30:14</span></span>

Here is, I. Leah fruitful again, after she had, for some time, left off
bearing. Jacob, it should seem, associated more with Rachel than with
Leah. The law of Moses supposes it a common case that, if a man had two
wives, one would be beloved and the other hated, [Deu
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#015). But at length Rachel's strong
passions betrayed her into a bargain with Leah that Jacob should return
to her apartment. Reuben, a little lad, five or six years old, playing
in the field, found mandrakes, dudaim. It is uncertain what they were,
the critics are not agreed about them; we are sure they were some
rarities, either fruits or flowers that were very pleasant to the smell,
[Sol 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#013). Note, The God of nature has
provided, not only for our necessities, but for our delights; there are
products of the earth in the exposed fields, as well as in the planted
protected gardens, that are very valuable and useful. How plentifully is
nature's house furnished and her table spread! Her precious fruits offer
themselves to be gathered by the hands of little children. It is a
laudable custom of the devout Jews, when they find pleasure, suppose in
eating an apple, to lift their hearts, and say, "Blessed be he that made
this fruit pleasant!" Or, in smelling a flower, "Blessed be he that made
this flower sweet." Some think these mandrakes were jessamine flowers.
Whatever they were, Rachel could not see them in Leah's hands, where the
child had placed them, but she must covet them. She cannot bear the want
of these pretty flowers, but will purchase them at any rate. Note, There
may be great sin and folly in the inordinate desire of a small thing.
Leah takes this advantage (as Jacob had of Esau's coveting his red
pottage) to obtain that which was justly due to her, but to which Rachel
would not otherwise have consented. Note, Strong passions often thwart
one another, and those cannot but be continually uneasy that are hurried
on by them. Leah is overjoyed that she shall have her husband's company
again, that her family might yet further be built up, which is the
blessing she desires and devoutly prays for, as is intimated, [Gen
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#017), where it is said, God hearkened
unto Leah. The learned bishop Patrick very well suggests here that the
true reason of this contest between Jacob's wives for his company, and
their giving him their maids to be his wives, was the earnest desire
they had to fulfil the promise made to Abraham (and now lately renewed
to Jacob), that his seed should be as the stars of heaven for multitude,
and that in one seed of his, the Messiah, all the nations of the earth
should be blessed. And he thinks it would have been below the dignity of
this sacred history to take such particular notice of these things if
there had not been some such great consideration in them. Leah was now
blessed with two sons; the first she called Issachar (a hire), reckoning
herself well repaid for her mandrakes, nay (which is a strange
construction of the providence) rewarded for giving her maid to her
husband. Note, We abuse God's mercy when we reckon that his favours
countenance and patronize our follies. The other she called Zebulun
(dwelling), owning God's bounty to her: God has endowed me with a good
dowry, [Gen 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#020). Jacob had not
endowed her when he married her, nor had he wherewithal in possession;
but she reckons a family of children not a bill of charges, but a good
dowry, [Psa 113:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#009). She promises
herself more of her husband's company now that she had borne him six
sons, and that, in love to his children at least, he would often visit
her lodgings. Mention is made ([Gen
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#021)) of the birth of a daughter,
Dinah, because of the following story concerning her, ch. 34. Perhaps
Jacob had other daughters, though their names are not registered.

II\. Rachel fruitful at last ([Gen
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#022)): God remembered Rachel, whom he
seemed to have forgotten, and hearkened to her whose prayers had been
long denied; and then she bore a son. Note, As God justly denies the
mercy we have been inordinately desirous of, so sometimes he graciously
grants, at length, that which we have long waited for. He corrects our
folly, and yet considers our frame, and does not contend for ever.
Rachel called her son Joseph, which in Hebrew is akin to two words of a
contrary signification, Asaph (abstulit), He has taken away my reproach,
as if the greatest mercy she had in this son was that she had saved her
credit; and Jasaph (addidit), The Lord shall add to me another son,
which may be looked upon either as the language of her inordinate desire
(she scarcely knows how to be thankful for one unless she may be sure of
another), or of her faith - she takes this mercy as an earnest of
further mercy. "Has God given me his grace? I may call it Joseph, and
say, He shall add more grace! Has he given me his joy? I may call it
Joseph, and say, He will give me more joy. Has he begun, and shall he
not make an end?"

[Genesis 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 30:25</span></span>

We have here,

I. Jacob's thoughts of home. He faithfully served his time out with
Laban, even his second apprenticeship, though he was an old man, had a
large family to provide for, and it was high time for him to set up for
himself. Though Laban's service was hard, and he had cheated him in the
first bargain he had made, yet Jacob honestly performs his engagements.
Note, A good man, though he swear to his own hurt, will not change. And
though others have deceived us this will not justify us in deceiving
them. Our rule is to do as we would be done by, not as we are done by.
Jacob's term having expired, he begs leave to be gone, [Gen
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#025). Observe, 1. He retained his
affection for the land of Canaan, not only because it was the land of
his nativity, and his father and mother were there, whom he longed to
see, but because it was the land of promise; and, in token of his
dependence upon the promise of it, though he sojourn in Haran he can by
no means think of settling there. Thus should we be affected towards our
heavenly country, looking upon ourselves as strangers here, viewing the
heavenly country as our home, and longing to be there, as soon as the
days of our service upon earth are numbered and finished. We must not
think of taking root here, for this is not our place and country, [Heb
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#014). 2. He was desirous to go to
Canaan, though he had a great family to take with him, and no provision
yet made for them. He had got wives and children with Laban, but nothing
else; yet he does not solicit Laban to give him either a portion with
his wives or the maintenance of some of his children. No, all his
request is, Give me my wives and my children, and send me away, [Gen
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#025), [Gen
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#026). Note, Those that trust in God,
in his providence and promise, though they have great families and small
incomes, can cheerfully hope that he who sends mouths will send meat. He
who feeds the brood of the ravens will not starve the seed of the
righteous.

II\. Laban's desire of his stay, [Gen
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#027). In love to himself, not to
Jacob or to his wives or children, Laban endeavours to persuade him to
continue his chief shepherd, entreating him, by the regard he bore him,
not to leave him: If I have found favour in thy eyes, tarry. Note,
Churlish selfish men know how to give good words when it is to serve
their own ends. Laban found that his stock had wonderfully increased
with Jacob's good management, and he owns it, with very good expressions
of respect both to God and Jacob: I have learned by experience that the
Lord has blessed me for thy sake. Observe, 1. Laban's learning: I have
learned by experience. Note, There is many a profitable good lesson to
be learned by experience. We are very unapt scholars if we have not
learned by experience the evil of sin, the treachery of our own hearts,
the vanity of the world, the goodness of God, the gains of godliness,
and the like. 2. Laban's lesson. He owns, (1.) That his prosperity was
owing to God's blessing: The Lord has blessed me. Note, worldly men, who
choose their portion in this life, are often blessed with an abundance
of this world's goods. Common blessings are given plentifully to many
that have no title to covenant-blessings. (3.) That Jacob's piety had
brought that blessing upon him: The Lord has blessed me, not for my own
sake (let not such a man as Laban, that lives without God in the world,
think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord, [Jam
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#007)), but for thy sake. Note, \[1.\]
Good men are blessings to the places where they live, even where they
live meanly and obscurely, as Jacob in the field, and Joseph in the
prison, [Gen 39:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#023). \[2.\] God often
blesses bad men with outward mercies for the sake of their godly
relations, though it is seldom that they have either the wit to see it
or the grace to own it, as Laban did here.

III\. The new bargain they came upon. Laban's craft and covetousness
took advantage of Jacob's plainness, honesty, and good-nature; and,
perceiving that Jacob began to be won upon by his fair speeches, instead
of making him a generous offer and bidding high, as he ought to have
done, all things considered, he puts it upon him to make his demands
([Gen 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#028)): Appoint me thy wages,
knowing he would be very modest in them, and would ask less than he
could for shame offer. Jacob accordingly makes a proposal to him, in
which,

1\. He shows what reason he had to insist upon so much, considering,
(1.) That Laban was bound in gratitude to do well for him, because he
had served him not only faithfully, but very successfully, [Gen
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#030). Yet here observe how he speaks,
like himself, very modestly. Laban had said, The Lord has blessed me for
thy sake; Jacob will not say so, but, The Lord has blessed thee since my
coming. Note, Humble saints take more pleasure in doing good than in
hearing of it again. (2.) That he himself was bound in duty to take care
of his own family: Now, when shall I provide for my own house also?
Note, Faith and charity, though they are excellent things, must not take
us off from making necessary provisions for our own support, and the
support of our families. We must, like Jacob, trust in the Lord and do
good, and yet we must, like him, provide for our own houses also; he
that does not the latter is worse than an infidel, [Ti1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#008).

2\. He is willing to refer himself to the providence of God, which, he
knew, extends itself to the smallest things, even the colour of the
cattle; and he will be content to have for his wages the sheep and goats
of such and such a colour, speckled, spotted, and brown, which should
hereafter be brought forth, [Gen
30:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#032), [Gen
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#033). This, he thinks, will be a most
effectual way both to prevent Laban's cheating him and to secure himself
from being suspected of cheating Laban. Some think he chose this colour
because in Canaan it was generally most desired and delighted in; their
shepherds in Canaan are called Nekohim ([Amo
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)), the word here used for speckled;
and Laban was willing to consent to this bargain because he thought if
the few he has that were now speckled and spotted were separated from
the rest, which by agreement was to be done immediately, the body of the
flock which Jacob was to tend, being of one colour, either all black or
all white, would produce few or none of mixed colours, and so he should
have Jacob's service for nothing, or next to nothing. According to this
bargain, those few that were party-coloured were separated, and put into
the hands of Laban's sons, and sent three days' journey off; so great
was Laban's jealously lest any of them should mix with the rest of the
flock, to the advantage of Jacob. And now a fine bargain Jacob has made
for himself! Is this his providing for his own house, to put it upon
such an uncertainty? If these cattle bring forth, as usually cattle do,
young ones of the same colour with themselves, he must still serve for
nothing, and be a drudge and a beggar all the days of his life; but he
knows whom he has trusted, and the event showed, (1.) That he took the
best way that could be taken with Laban, who otherwise would certainly
have been too hard for him. And, (2.) That it was not in vain to rely
upon the divine providence, which owns and blesses honest humble
diligence. Those that find men whom they deal with unjust and unkind
shall not find God so, but, some way or other, he will recompense the
injured, and be a good pay-master to those that commit their cause to
him.

[Genesis 30:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">gen 30:37</span></span>

Here is Jacob's honest policy to make his bargain more advantageous to
himself than it was likely to be. If he had not taken some course to
help himself, it would have been a bad bargain indeed, which he knew
Laban would never consider, or rather would be well pleased to see him a
loser by, so little did Laban consult any one's interest but his own.
Now Jacob's contrivances were, 1. To set peeled sticks before the cattle
where they were watered, that, looking much at those unusual
party-coloured sticks, by the power of imagination they might bring
forth young ones in like manner party-coloured, [Gen
30:37-39](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#037). Probably this custom was
commonly used by the shepherds of Canaan, who coveted to have their
cattle of this motley colour. Note, It becomes a man to be master of his
trade, whatever it is, and to be not only industrious, but ingenious in
it, and to be versed in all its lawful arts and mysteries; for what is a
man but his trade? There is a discretion which God teaches the
husbandman (as plain a trade as that is), and which he ought to learn,
[Isa 28:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#026). 2. When he began to have a
stock of ringstraked and brown, he contrived to set them first, and to
put the faces of the rest towards them, with the same design as in the
former contrivance; but would not let his own, that were of one colour,
[Gen 30:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#040). Strong impressions, it
seems, are made by the eye, with which therefore we have need to make a
covenant. 3. When he found that his project succeeded, through the
special blessing of God upon it, he contrived, by using it only with the
stronger cattle, to secure to himself those that were most valuable,
leaving the feebler to Laban, [Gen
30:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#041), [Gen
30:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#042). Thus Jacob increased
exceedingly ([Gen 30:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#043)), and grew
very rich in a little time. This success of his policy, it is true, was
not sufficient to justify it, if there had been any thing fraudulent or
unjust in it, which we are sure there was not, for he did it by divine
direction ([Gen 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#012)); nor was there
any thing in the thing itself but the honest improvement of a fair
bargain, which the divine providence wonderfully prospered, both in
justice to Jacob whom Laban had wronged and dealt hardly with and in
pursuance of the particular promises made to him of the tokens of the
divine favour, Note, Those who, while their beginning is small, are
humble and honest, contented and industrious, are in a likely way to see
their latter end greatly increasing. He that is faithful in a little
shall be entrusted with more. He that is faithful in that which is
another man's shall be entrusted with something of his own. Jacob, who
had been a just servant, became a rich master.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 31](gen031)

</div>
