<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen021)  [Next](gen023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 22:0</span></span>

We have here the famous story of Abraham's offering up his son Isaac,
that is, his offering to offer him, which is justly looked upon as one
of the wonders of the church. Here is, I. The strange command which God
gave to Abraham concerning it ([Gen
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001), [Gen
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#002)). II. Abraham's strange obedience
to this command ([Gen 22:3-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#003)) III.
The strange issue of this trial. 1. The sacrificing of Isaac was
countermanded ([Gen 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#011), [Gen
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#012)). 2. Another sacrifice was
provided ([Gen 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#013), [Gen
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#014)). 3. The covenant was renewed
with Abraham hereupon ([Gen 22:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#015)).
Lastly, an account of some of Abraham's relations ([Gen
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#020), etc.)

[Genesis 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 22:1</span></span>

Here is the trial of Abraham's faith, whether it continued so strong, so
vigorous, so victorious, after a long settlement in communion with God,
as it was at first, when by it he left his country: then it was made to
appear that he loved God better than his father; now that he loved him
better than his son. Observe here,

I. The time when Abraham was thus tried ([Gen
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001)): After these things, after all
the other exercises he had had, all the hardships and difficulties he
had gone through. Now, perhaps, he was beginning to think the storms had
all blown over; but, after all, this encounter comes, which is sharper
than any yet. Note, Many former trials will not supersede nor secure us
from further trials; we have not yet put off the harness, [Kg1
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#011). See [Psa
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006), [Psa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007).

II\. The author of the trial: God tempted him, not to draw him to sin,
so Satan tempts (if Abraham had sacrificed Isaac, he would not have
sinned, his orders would have justified him, and borne him out), but to
discover his graces, how strong they were, that they might be found to
praise, and honour, and glory, [Pe1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007). Thus God tempted Job, that he
might appear not only a good man, but a great man. God did tempt
Abraham; he did lift up Abraham, so some read it; as a scholar that
improves well is lifted up, when he is put into a higher form. Note,
Strong faith is often exercised with strong trials and put upon hard
services.

III\. The trial itself. God appeared to him as he had formerly done,
called him by name, Abraham, that name which had been given him in
ratification of the promise. Abraham, like a good servant, readily
answered, "Here am I; what says my Lord unto his servant?" Probably he
expected some renewed promise like those, [Gen
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001), and [Gen
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001). But, to his great amazement,
that which God has to say to him is, in short, Abraham, Go kill thy son;
and this command is given him in such aggravating language as makes the
temptation abundantly more grievous. When God speaks, Abraham, no doubt,
takes notice of every word, and listens attentively to it; and every
word here is a sword in his bones: the trial is steeled with trying
phrases. Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that he should afflict? No,
it is not; yet, when Abraham's faith is to be tried, God seems to take
pleasure in the aggravation of the trial, [Gen
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#002). Observe,

1\. The person to be offered. (1.) "Take thy son, not thy bullocks and
thy lambs;" how willingly would Abraham have parted with them by
thousands to redeem Isaac! "No, I will take no bullock out of thy house,
[Psa 50:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#009). I must have thy son: not
thy servant, no, not the steward of thy house, that shall not serve the
turn; I must have thy son." Jephthah, in pursuance of a vow, offered a
daughter; but Abraham must offer his son, in whom the family was to be
built up. "Lord, let it be an adopted son;" "No, (2.) Thy only son; thy
only son by Sarah." Ishmael was lately cast out, to the grief of
Abraham; and now Isaac only was left, and must he go too? Yes, (3.)
"Take Isaac, him, by name, thy laughter, that son indeed," [Gen
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#019). Not "Send for Ishmael back, and
offer him;" no, it must be Isaac. "But, Lord, I love Isaac, he is to me
as my own soul. Ishmael is not, and wilt thou take Isaac also? All this
is against me:" Yea, (4.) That son whom thou lovest. It was a trial of
Abraham's love to God, and therefore it must be in a beloved son, and
that string must be touched most upon: in the Hebrew it is expressed
more emphatically, and, I think, might very well be read thus: Take now
that son of thine, that only one of thine, whom thou lovest, that Isaac.
God's command must overrule all these considerations.

2\. The place: In the land of Moriah, three days' journey off; so that
he might have time to consider it, and, if he did it, must do it
deliberately, that it might be a service the more reasonable and the
more honourable.

3\. The manner: Offer him for a burnt-offering. He must not only kill
his son, but kill him as a sacrifice, kill him devoutly, kill him by
rule, kill him with all that pomp and ceremony, with all that sedateness
and composure of mind, with which he used to offer his burnt-offerings.

[Genesis 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 22:3</span></span>

We have here Abraham's obedience to this severe command. Being tried, he
offered up Isaac, [Heb 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#017). Observe,

I. The difficulties which he broke through in this act of obedience.
Much might have been objected against it; as, 1. It seemed directly
against an antecedent law of God, which forbids murder, under a severe
penalty, [Gen 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#005), [Gen
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006). Now can the unchangeable God
contradict himself? He that hates robbery for burnt-offering ([Isa
61:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#008)) cannot delight in murder for it.
2. How would it consist with natural affection to his own son? It would
be not only murder, but the worst of murders. Cannot Abraham be obedient
but he must be unnatural? If God insist upon a human sacrifice, is there
none but Isaac to be the offering, and none but Abraham to be the
offerer? Must the father of the faithful be the monster of all fathers?
3. God gave him no reason for it. When Ishmael was to be cast out, a
just cause was assigned, which satisfied Abraham; but here Isaac must
die, and Abraham must kill him, and neither the one nor the other must
know why or wherefore. If Isaac had been to die a martyr for the truth,
or his life had been the ransom of some other life more precious, it
would have been another matter; of if he had died as a criminal, a rebel
against God or his parents, as in the case of the idolater ([Deu
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#008), [Deu
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#009)), or the stubborn son ([Deu
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#018), [Deu
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#019)), it might have passed as a
sacrifice to justice. But the case is not so: he is dutiful, obedient,
hopeful, son. "Lord, what profit is there in his blood?" 4. How would
this consist with the promise? Was it not said that in Isaac shall thy
seed be called? But what comes of that seed, if this pregnant bud be
broken off so soon? 5. How should he ever look Sarah in the face again?
With what face can he return to her and his family with the blood of
Isaac sprinkled on his garments and staining all his raiment? "Surely a
bloody husband hast thou been to me" would Sarah say (as [Exo
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#025), [Exo
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#026)), and it would be likely to
alienate her affections for ever both from him and from his God. 6. What
would the Egyptians say, and the Canaanites and the Perizzites who dwelt
then in the land? It would be an eternal reproach to Abraham, and to his
altars. "Welcome nature, if this be grace." These and many similar
objection might have been made; but he was infallibly assured that it
was indeed a command of God and not a delusion, and this was sufficient
to answer them all. Note, God's commands must not be disputed, but
obeyed; we must not consult with flesh and blood about them ([Gal
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015), [Gal
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016)), but with a gracious obstinacy
persist in our obedience to them.

II\. The several steps of obedience, all which help to magnify it, and
to show that he was guided by prudence, and governed by faith, in the
whole transaction.

1\. He rises early, [Gen 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#003).
Probably the command was given in the visions of the night, and early
the next morning he set himself about the execution of it - did not
delay, did not demur, did not take time to deliberate; for the command
was peremptory, and would not admit a debate. Note, Those that do the
will of God heartily will do it speedily; while we delay, time is lost
and the heart hardened.

2\. He gets things ready for a sacrifice, and, as if he himself had been
a Gibeonite, it should seem, with his own hands he cleaves the wood for
the burnt-offering, that it might not be to seek when the sacrifice was
to be offered. Spiritual sacrifices must thus be prepared for.

3\. It is very probable that he said nothing about it to Sarah. This is
a journey which she must know nothing of, lest she prevent it. There is
so much in our own hearts to hinder our progress in duty that we have
need, as much as may be, to keep out of the way of other hindrances.

4\. He carefully looked about him, to discover the place appointed for
this sacrifice, to which God had promised by some sign to direct him.
Probably the direction was given by an appearance of the divine glory in
the place, some pillar of fire reaching from heaven to earth, visible at
a distance, and to which he pointed when he said ([Gen
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#005)), "We will go yonder, where you
see the light, and worship."

5\. He left his servants at some distance off ([Gen
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#005)), lest they should interpose, and
create him some disturbance in his strange oblation; for Isaac was, no
doubt, the darling of the whole family. Thus, when Christ was entering
upon his agony in the garden, he took only three of his disciples with
him, and left the rest at the garden door. Note, It is our wisdom and
duty, when we are going to worship God, to lay aside all those thoughts
and cares which may divert us from the service, leave them at the bottom
of the hill, that we may attend on the Lord without distraction.

6\. He obliged Isaac to carry the wood (both to try his obedience in a
smaller matter first, and that he might typify Christ, who carried his
own cross, [Joh 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017)), while he
himself, though he knew what he did, with a steady and undaunted
resolution carried the fatal knife and fire, [Gen
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#006). Note, Those that through grace
are resolved upon the substance of any service or suffering for God must
overlook the little circumstances which make it doubly difficult to
flesh and blood.

7\. Without any ruffle or disorder, he talks it over with Isaac, as if
it had been but a common sacrifice that he was going to offer, [Gen
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#007), [Gen
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#008).

(1.) It was a very affecting question that Isaac asked him, as they were
going together: My father, said Isaac; it was a melting word, which, one
would think, would strike deeper into the breast of Abraham than his
knife could into the breast of Isaac. He might have said, or thought, at
least, "Call me not thy father who am now to be thy murderer; can a
father be so barbarous, so perfectly lost to all the tenderness of a
father?" Yet he keeps his temper, and keeps his countenance, to
admiration; he calmly waits for his son's question, and this is it:
Behold the fire and the wood, but where is the lamb? See how expert
Isaac was in the law and custom of sacrifices. This it is to be
well-catechised: this is, \[1.\] A trying question to Abraham. How could
he endure to think that Isaac was himself the lamb? So it is, but
Abraham, as yet, dares not tell him so. Where God knows the faith to be
armour of proof, he will laugh at the trial of the innocent, [Job
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#023). \[2.\] It is a teaching question
to us all, that, when we are going to worship God, we should seriously
consider whether we have every thing ready, especially the lamb for a
burnt-offering. Behold, the fire is ready, the Spirit's assistance and
God's acceptance; the wood is ready, the instituted ordinances designed
to kindle our affections (which indeed, without the Spirit, are but like
wood without fire, but the Spirit works by them); all things are now
ready, but where is the lamb? Where is the heart? Is that ready to be
offered up to God, to ascend to him as a burnt-offering?

(2.) It was a very prudent answer which Abraham gave him: My son, God
will provide himself a lamb. This was the language, either, \[1.\] Of
his obedience. "We must offer the lamb which God has appointed now to be
offered;" thus giving him this general rule of submission to the divine
will, to prepare him for the application of it to himself very quickly.
Or, \[2.\] Of his faith. Whether he meant it so or not, this proved to
be the meaning of it; a sacrifice was provided instead of Isaac. Thus,
First, Christ, the great sacrifice of atonement, was of God's providing;
when none in heaven or earth could have found a lamb for that
burnt-offering, God himself found the ransom, [Psa
89:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020). Secondly, All our sacrifices of
acknowledgment are of God's providing too. It is he that prepares the
heart, [Psa 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#017). The broken and
contrite spirit is a sacrifice of God ([Psa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)), of his providing.

8\. With the same resolution and composedness of mind, after many
thoughts of heart, he applies himself to the completing of this
sacrifice, [Gen 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#009), [Gen
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#010). He goes on with a holy
wilfulness, after many a weary step, and with a heavy heart he arrives
at length at the fatal place, builds the altar (an altar of earth, we
may suppose, the saddest that ever he built, and he had built many a
one), lays the wood in order for his Isaac's funeral pile, and now tells
him the amazing news: "Isaac, thou art the lamb which God has provided."
Isaac, for aught that appears, is as willing as Abraham; we do not find
that he raised any objection against it, that he petitioned for his
life, that he attempted to make his escape, much less that he struggled
with his aged father, or made any resistance: Abraham does it, God will
have it done, and Isaac has learnt to submit to both, Abraham no doubt
comforting him with the same hopes with which he himself by faith was
comforted. Yet it is necessary that a sacrifice be bound. The great
sacrifice, which in the fullness of time was to be offered up, must be
bound, and therefore so must Isaac. But with what heart could tender
Abraham tie those guiltless hands, which perhaps had often been lifted
up to ask his blessing, and stretched out to embrace him, and were now
the more straitly bound with the cords of love and duty! However, it
must be done. Having bound him, he lays him upon the altar, and his hand
upon the head of his sacrifice; and now, we may suppose, with floods of
tears, he gives, and takes, the final farewell of a parting kiss:
perhaps he takes another for Sarah from her dying son. This being done,
he resolutely forgets the bowels of a father, and puts on the awful
gravity of a sacrificer. With a fixed heart, and an eye lifted up to
heaven, he takes the knife, and stretches out his hand to give a fatal
cut to Isaac's throat. Be astonished, O heavens! at this; and wonder, O
earth! Here is an act of faith and obedience, which deserves to be a
spectacle to God, angels, and men. Abraham's darling, Sarah's laughter,
the church's hope, the heir of promise, lies ready to bleed and die by
his own father's hand, who never shrinks at the doing of it. Now this
obedience of Abraham in offering up Isaac is a lively representation,
(1.) Of the love of God to us, in delivering up his only-begotten Son to
suffer and die for us, as a sacrifice. It pleased the Lord himself to
bruise him. See [Isa 53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010); [Zac
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007). Abraham was obliged, both in
duty and gratitude, to part with Isaac, and parted with him to a friend;
but God was under no obligations to us, for we were enemies. (2.) Of our
duty to God, in return for that love. We must tread in the steps of this
faith of Abraham. God, by his word, calls us to part with all for
Christ, - all our sins, though they have been as a right hand, or a
right eye, or an Isaac - all those things that are competitors and
rivals with Christ for the sovereignty of the heart ([Luk
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#026)); and we must cheerfully let
them all go. God, by his providence, which is truly the voice of God,
calls us to part with an Isaac sometimes, and we must do it with a
cheerful resignation and submission to his holy will, [Sa1
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#018).

[Genesis 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 22:11</span></span>

Hitherto this story has been very melancholy, and seemed to hasten
towards a most tragical period; but here the sky suddenly clears up, the
sun breaks out, and a bright and pleasant scene opens. The same hand
that had wounded and cast down here heals and lifts up; for, though he
cause grief, he will have compassion. The angel of the Lord, that is,
God himself, the eternal Word, the angel of the covenant, who was to be
the great Redeemer and comforter, he interposed, and gave a happy issue
to this trial.

I. Isaac is rescued, [Gen 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#011), [Gen
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#012). The command to offer him was
intended only for trial, and it appearing, upon trial, that Abraham did
indeed love God better than he loved Isaac, the end of the command was
answered; and therefore the order is countermanded, without any
reflection at all upon the unchangeableness of the divine counsels: Lay
not thy hand upon the lad. Note, 1. Our creature-comforts are most
likely to be continued to us when we are most likely to be continued to
us when we are most willing to resign them up to God's will. 2. God's
time to help and relieve his people is when they are brought to the
greatest extremity. The more imminent the danger is, and the nearer to
be put in execution, the more wonderful and the more welcome is the
deliverance.

II\. Abraham is not only approved, but applauded. He obtains an
honourable testimony that he is righteous: Now know I that thou fearest
God. God knew it before, but now Abraham had given a most memorable
evidence of it. He needed do no more; what he had done was sufficient to
prove the religious regard he had to God and his authority. Note, 1.
When God, by his providence, hinders the performance of our sincere
intentions in his services, he graciously accepts the will for the deed,
and the honest endeavour, though it come short of finishing. 2. The best
evidence of our fearing God is our being willing of serve and honour him
with that which is dearest to us, and to part with all to him or for
him.

III\. Another sacrifice is provided instead of Isaac, [Gen
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#013). Now that the altar was built,
and the wood laid in order, it was necessary that something should be
offered. For, 1. God must be acknowledged with thankfulness for the
deliverance of Isaac; and the sooner the better, when here is an altar
ready. 2. Abraham's words must be made good: God will provide himself a
lamb. God will not disappoint those expectations of his people which are
of his own raising; but according to their faith it is to them. Thou
shalt decree a thing, and it shall be established. 3. Reference must be
had to the promised Messiah, the blessed seed. (1.) Christ was
sacrificed in our stead, as this ram instead of Isaac, and his death was
our discharge. "Here am I (said he,) let these go their way." (2.)
Though that blessed seed was lately promised, and now typified by Isaac,
yet the offering of him up should be suspended till the latter end of
the world: and in the mean time the sacrifice of beasts should be
accepted, as this ram was, as a pledge of that expiation which should
one day be made by that great sacrifice. And it is observable that the
temple, the place of sacrifice, was afterwards built upon this mount
Moriah ([Ch2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#001)); and mount Calvary,
where Christ was crucified, was not far off.

IV\. A new name is given to the place, to the honour of God, and for the
encouragement of all believers, to the end of the world, cheerfully to
trust in God in the way of obedience: Jehovah-jireh, The Lord will
provide ([Gen 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#014)), probably
alluding to what he had said ([Gen
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#008)), God will provide himself a
lamb. I was not owing to any contrivance of Abraham, nor was it in
answer to his prayer, though he was a distinguished intercessor; but it
was purely the Lord's doing. Let it be recorded for the generations to
come, 1. That the Lord will see; he will always have his eye upon his
people in their straits and distresses, that he may come in with
seasonable succour in the critical juncture. 2. That he will be seen, be
seen in the mount, in the greatest perplexities of his people. He will
not only manifest, but magnify, his wisdom, power, and goodness, in
their deliverance. Where God sees and provides, he should be seen and
praised. And, perhaps, it may refer to God manifest in the flesh.

[Genesis 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 22:15</span></span>

Abraham's obedience was graciously accepted; but this was not all: here
we have it recompensed, abundantly recompensed, before he stirred from
the place; probably while the ram he had sacrificed was yet burning God
sent him this gracious message, renewed and ratified his covenant with
him. All covenants were made by sacrifice, so was this by the typical
sacrifices of Isaac and the ram. Very high expressions of God's favour
to Abraham are employed in this confirmation of the covenant with him,
expressions exceeding any he had yet been blessed with. Note,
Extraordinary services shall be crowned with extraordinary honours and
comforts; and favours in the promise, though not yet performed, ought to
be accounted real and valuable recompences. Observe, 1. God is pleased
to make mention of Abraham's obedience as the consideration of the
covenant; and he speaks of it with an encomium: Because thou hast done
this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son, [Gen
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016). He lays a strong emphasis on
this, and ([Gen 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)) praises it as
an act of obedience: in it thou hast obeyed my voice, and to obey is
better than sacrifice. Not that this was a proportionable consideration,
but God graciously put this honour upon that by which Abraham had
honoured him. 2. God now confirmed the promise with an oath. It was said
and sealed before; but now it is sworn: By myself have I sworn; for he
could swear by no greater, [Heb 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013).
Thus he interposed himself by an oath, as the apostle expresses it, [Heb
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#017). He did (to speak with reverence)
even pawn his own life and being upon it (As I live), that by all those
immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, he and his
might have strong consolation. Note, If we exercise faith, God will
encourage it. Improve the promises, and God will ratify them. 3. The
particular promise here renewed is that of a numerous offspring:
Multiplying, I will multiply thee, [Gen
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017). Note, Those that are willing to
part with any thing for God shall have it made up to them with
unspeakable advantage. Abraham has but one son, and is willing to part
with that one, in obedience to God. "Well," said God, "thou shalt be
recompensed with thousands and millions." What a figure does the seed of
Abraham make in history! How numerous, how illustrious, were his known
descendants, who, to this day, triumph in this, that they have Abraham
to their father! Thus he received a thousand-fold in this life, [Mat
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029). 4. The promise, doubtless,
points at the Messiah, and the grace of the gospel. This is the oath
sworn to our father Abraham, which Zacharias refers to, [Luk
1:73](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#073), etc. And so here is a promise,
(1.) Of the great blessing of the Spirit: In blessing, I will bless
thee, namely, with that best of blessings the Gift of the Holy Ghost;
the promise of the Spirit was that blessing of Abraham which was to come
upon the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, [Gal
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#014). (2.) Of the increase of the
church that believers, his spiritual seed, should be numerous as the
stars of heaven. (3.) Of spiritual victories: Thy seed shall possess the
gate of his enemies. Believers, by their faith, overcome the world, and
triumph over all the powers of darkness, and are more than conquerors.
Probably Zacharias refers to this part of the oath ([Luk
1:74](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074)), That we, being delivered out of
the hand of our enemies, might serve him without fear. But the crown of
all is the last promise. (4.) Of the incarnation of Christ: In thy see,
one particular person that shall descend from thee (for he speaks not of
many, but of one, as the apostle observers, [Gal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016)), shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed, or shall bless themselves, as the phrase is, [Isa
65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016). In him all may be happy if they
will, and all that belong to him shall be so, and shall think themselves
so. Christ is the great blessing of the world. Abraham was ready to give
up his son for a sacrifice to the honour of God, and, on that occasion,
God promised to give his Son a sacrifice for the salvation of man.

[Genesis 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 22:20</span></span>

This is recorded here, 1. To show that though Abraham saw his own family
highly dignified with peculiar privileges, admitted into covenant, and
blessed with the entail of the promise, yet he did not look with
contempt and disdain upon his relations, but was glad to hear of the
increase and prosperity of their families. 2. To make way for the
following story of the marriage of Isaac to Rebekah, a daughter of this
family.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 23](gen023)

</div>
