<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Habakkuk Index](hab)  
  [Previous](hab001)  [Next](hab003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Habakkuk Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)

[Habakkuk](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hab 2:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have an answer expected by the prophet ([Hab
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)), and returned by the Spirit of
God, to the complaints which the prophet made of the violences and
victories of the Chaldeans in the close of the foregoing chapter. The
answer is, I. That after God has served his own purposes by the
prevailing power of the Chaldeans, has tried the faith and patience of
his people, and distinguished between the hypocrites and the sincere
among them, he will reckon with the Chaldeans, will humble and bring
down, not only that proud monarch Nebuchadnezzar, but that proud
monarchy, for their boundless and insatiable thirst after dominion and
wealth, for which they themselves should at length be made a prey ([Hab
2:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002)). II. That not they only, but
all other sinners like them, should perish under a divine woe. 1. Those
that are covetous, are greedy of wealth and honours ([Hab
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#009), [Hab
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#011)). 2. Those that are injurious and
oppressive, and raise estates by wrong and rapine ([Hab
2:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#012)). 3. Those that promote
drunkenness that they may expose their neighbours to shame ([Hab
2:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015)). 4. Those that worship idols
([Hab 2:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#018)).

[Habakkuk 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hab 2:1</span></span>

Here, I. The prophet humbly gives his attendance upon God ([Hab
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)): "I will stand upon my watch, as
a sentinel on the walls of a besieged city, or on the borders of an
invaded country, that is very solicitous to gain intelligence. I will
look up, will look round, will look within, and watch to see what he
will say unto me, will listen attentively to the words of his mouth and
carefully observe the steps of his providence, that I may not lose the
least hint of instruction or direction. I will watch to see what he will
say in me" (so it may be read), "what the Spirit of prophecy in me will
dictate to me, by way of answer to my complaints." Even in a ordinary
way, God not only speaks to us by his word, but speaks in us by our own
consciences, whispering to us, This is the way, walk in it; and we must
attend to the voice of God in both. The prophet's standing upon his
tower, or high place, intimates his prudence, in making use of the helps
and means he had within his reach to know the mind of God, and to be
instructed concerning it. Those that expect to hear from God must
withdraw from the world, and get above it, must raise their attention,
fix their thought, study the scriptures, consult experiences and the
experienced, continue instant in prayer, and thus set themselves upon
the tower. His standing upon his watch intimates his patience, his
constancy and resolution; he will wait the time, and weather the point,
as a watchman does, but he will have an answer; he will know what God
will say to him, not only for his own satisfaction, but to enable him as
a prophet to give satisfaction to others, and answer their exceptions,
when he is reproved or argued with. Herein the prophet is an example to
us. 1. When we are tossed and perplexed with doubts concerning the
methods of Providence, are tempted to think that it is fate, or fortune,
and not a wise God, that governs the world, or that the church is
abandoned, and God's covenant with his people cancelled and laid aside,
then we must take pains to furnish ourselves with considerations proper
to clear this matter; we must stand upon our watch against the
temptation, that it may not get ground upon us, must set ourselves upon
the tower, to see if we can discover that which will silence the
temptation and solve the objected difficulties, must do as the psalmist,
consider the days of old and make a diligent search ([Psa
77:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#006)), must go into the sanctuary of
God, and there labour to understand the end of these things ([Psa
73:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017)); we must not give way to our
doubts, but struggle to make the best of our way out of them. 2. When we
have been at prayer, pouring out our complaints and requests before God,
we must carefully observe what answers God gives by his word, his
Spirit, and his providences, to our humble representations; when David
says, I will direct my prayer unto thee, as an arrow to the mark, he
adds, I will look up, will look after my prayer, as a man does after the
arrow he has shot, [Psa 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#003). We must
hear what God the Lord will speak, [Psa
85:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#008). 3. When we go to read and hear
the word of God, and so to consult the lively oracles, we must set
ourselves to observe what God will thereby say unto us, to suit our
case, what word of conviction, caution, counsel, and comfort, he will
bring to our souls, that we may receive it, and submit to the power of
it, and may consider what we shall answer, what returns we shall make to
the word of God, when we are reproved by it. 4. When we are attacked by
such as quarrel with God and his providence as the prophet here seems to
have been - beset, besieged, as in a tower, by hosts of objectors - we
should consider how to answer them, fetch our instructions from God,
hear what he says to us for our satisfaction, and have that ready to say
to others, when we are reproved, to satisfy them, as a reason of the
hope that is in us ([Pe1 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015)), and
beg of God a mouth and wisdom, and that it may be given us in that same
hour what we shall speak.

II\. God graciously gives him the meeting; for he will not disappoint
the believing expectations of his people that wait to hear what he will
say unto them, but will speak peace, will answer them with good words
and comfortable words, [Zac 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#013). The
prophet had complained of the prevalence of the Chaldeans, which God had
given him a prospect of; now, to pacify him concerning it, he here gives
him a further prospect of their fall and ruin, as Isaiah, before this,
when he had foretold the captivity in Babylon, foretold also the
destruction of Babylon. Now, this great and important event being made
known to him by a vision, care is taken to publish the vision, and
transmit it to the generations to come, who should see the
accomplishment of it.

1\. The prophet must write the vision, [Hab
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002). Thus, when St. John had a vision
of the New Jerusalem, he was ordered to write, [Rev
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#005). He must write it, that he might
imprint it on his own mind, and make it more clear to himself, but
especially that it might be notified to those in distant places and
transmitted to those in future ages. What is handed down by tradition is
easily mistaken and liable to corruption; but what is written is reduced
to a certainty, and preserved safe and pure. We have reason to bless God
for written visions, that God has written to us the great things of his
prophets as well as of his law. He must write the vision, and make it
plain upon tables, must write it legibly, in large characters, so that
he who runs may read it, that those who will not allow themselves
leisure to read it deliberately may not avoid a cursory view of it.
Probably, the prophets were wont to write some of the most remarkable of
their predictions in tables, and to hang them up in the temple, [Isa
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001). Now the prophet is told to write
this very plain. Note, Those who are employed in preaching the word of
God should study plainness as much as may be, so as to make themselves
intelligible to the meanest capacities. The things of our everlasting
peace, which God has written to us, are made plain, they are all plain
to him that understands ([Pro 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#009)),
and they are published with authority; God himself has prefixed his
imprimatur to them; he has said, Make them plain.

2\. The people must wait for the accomplishment of the vision ([Hab
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003)): "The vision is yet for an
appointed time to come. You shall now be told of your deliverance by the
breaking of the Chaldeans' power, and that the time of it is fixed in
the counsel and decree of God. There is an appointed time, but it is not
near; it is yet to be deferred a great while;" and that comes in here as
a reason why it must be written, that it may be reviewed afterwards and
the event compared with it. Note, God has an appointed time for his
appointed work, and will be sure to do the work when the time comes; it
is not for us to anticipate his appointments, but to wait his time. And
it is a great encouragement to wait with patience, that, though the
promised favour be deferred long, it will come at last, and be an
abundant recompence to us for our waiting: At the end it shall speak and
not lie. We shall not be disappointed of it, for it will come at the
time appointed; nor shall we be disappointed in it, for it will fully
answer our believing expectations. The promise may seem silent a great
while, but at the end it shall speak; and therefore, though it tarry
longer than we expected, yet we must continue waiting for it, being
assured it will come, and willing to tarry until it does come. The day
that God has set for the deliverance of his people, and the destruction
of his and their enemies, is a day, (1.) That will surely come at last;
it is never adjourned sine die - without fixing another day, but it will
without fail come at the fixed time and the fittest time. (2.) It will
not tarry, for God is not slack, as some count slackness ([Pe2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009)); though it tarry past our time,
yet it does not tarry past God's time, which is always the best time.

3\. This vision, the accomplishment of which is so long waited for, will
be such an exercise of faith and patience as will try and discover men
what they are, [Hab 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004). (1.) There
are some who will proudly disdain this vision, whose hearts are so
lifted up that they scorn to take notice of it; if God will work for
them immediately, they will thank him, but they will not give him
credit; their hearts are lifted up towards vanity, and, since God puts
them off, they will shift for themselves and not be beholden to him;
they think their own hands sufficient for them, and God's promise is to
them an insignificant thing. That man's soul that is thus lifted up is
not upright in him; it is not right with God, is not as it should be.
Those that either distrust or despise God's all-sufficiency will not
walk uprightly with him, [Gen 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001).
But, (2.) Those who are truly good, and whose hearts are upright with
God, will value the promise, and venture their all upon it; and, in
confidence of the truth of it, will keep close to God and duty in the
most difficult trying times, and will then live comfortably in communion
with God, dependence on him, and expectation of him. The just shall live
by faith; during the captivity good people shall support themselves, and
live comfortably, by faith in these precious promises, while the
performance of them is deferred. The just shall live by his faith, by
that faith which he acts upon the word of God. This is quoted in the New
Testament ([Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017); [Gal
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011); [Heb
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#038)), for the proof of the great
doctrine of justification by faith only and of the influence which the
grace of faith has upon the Christian life. Those that are made just by
faith shall live, shall be happy here and for ever; while they are here,
they live by it; when they come to heaven faith shall be swallowed up in
vision.

[Habakkuk 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hab 2:5</span></span>

The prophet having had orders to write the vision, and the people to
wait for the accomplishment of it, the vision itself follows; and it is,
as divers other prophecies we have met with, the burden of Babylon and
Babylon's king, the same that was said to pass over and offend, [Hab
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011). It reads the doom, some think,
of Nebuchadnezzar, who was principally active in the destruction of
Jerusalem, or of that monarchy, or of the whole kingdom of the
Chaldeans, or of all such proud and oppressive powers as bear hard upon
any people, especially upon God's people. Observe,

I. The charge laid down against this enemy, upon which the sentence is
grounded, [Hab 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005). The lusts of the
flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life, are the entangling
snares of men, and great men especially; and we find him that led Israel
captive himself led captive by each of these. For, 1. He is sensual and
voluptuous, and given to his pleasures: He transgresses by wine.
Drunkenness is itself a transgression, and is the cause of abundance of
transgression. We read of those that err through wine, [Isa
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#007). Belshazzar (in whom particularly
this prophecy had its accomplishment) was in the height of his
transgression by wine when the hand-writing upon the wall signed the
warrant for his immediate execution, pursuant to this sentence, [Dan
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001). 2. He is haughty and imperious:
He is a proud man, and his pride is a certain presage of his fall coming
on. If great men be proud men, the great God will make them know he is
above them. His transgressing by wine is made the cause of his arrogance
and insolence: therefore he is a proud man. When a man is drunk, though
he makes himself as mean as a beast, yet he thinks himself as great as a
king, and prides himself in that by which he shames himself. We find the
crown of pride upon the head of the drunkards of Ephraim, and a woe to
both, [Isa 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001). 3. He is covetous and
greedy of wealth, and this is the effect of his pride; he thinks himself
worthy to enjoy all, and therefore makes it his business to engross all.
The Chaldean monarchy aimed to be a universal one. He keeps not at home,
is not content with his own, which he has an incontestable title to, but
thinks it too little, and so enjoys it not, nor takes the comfort he
might in his own palace, in his own dominion. His sin is his punishment,
his ambition is his perpetual uneasiness. Though the home be a palace,
yet to a discontented mind it is a prison. He enlarges his desire as
hell, or the grave, which daily receives the body of the dead, and yet
still cries, Give, give; he is as death, which continues to devour, and
cannot be satisfied. Note, It is the sin and folly of many who have a
great deal of the wealth of this world that they do not know when they
have enough, but the more they have the more they would have, and the
more eager they are for it. And it is just with God that the desires
which are insatiable should still be unsatisfied; it is the doom passed
on those that love silver that they shall never be satisfied with it,
[Ecc 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#010). Those that will not be
content with their allotments shall not have the comfort of their
achievements. This proud prince is still gathering to him all nations,
and heaping to him all people, invading their rights, seizing their
properties, and they must not be unless they will be his, and under his
command. One nation will not satisfy him unless he has another, and then
another, and all at last; as those in a lower sphere, to gratify the
same inordinate desire, lay house to house, and field to field, that
they may be placed alone in the earth, [Isa
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#008). And it is hard to say which is
more to be pitied, the folly of such ambitious princes as place their
honour in enlarging their dominions, and not in ruling them well, or the
misery of those nations that are harassed and pulled to pieces by them.

II\. The sentence passed upon him ([Hab
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#006)): Shall not all these take up a
parable against him? His doom is,

1\. That, since pride has been his sin, disgrace and dishonour shall be
his punishment, and he shall be loaded with contempt, shall be laughed
at and despised by all about him, as those that look big, and aim high,
deserve to be, and commonly are, when they are brought down and baffled.

2\. That, since he has been abusive to his neighbours, those very
persons whom he has abused shall be the instruments of his disgrace: All
those shall take up a taunting proverb against him. They shall have the
pleasure of insulting over him and he the shame of being trampled upon
by them. Those that shall triumph in the fall of this great tyrant are
here furnished with a parable, and a taunting proverb, to take up
against him. He shall say (he that draws up the insulting ditty shall
say thus), Ho, he that increases that which is not his! Aha! what has
become of him now? So it may be read in a taunting way. Or, He shall
say, that is, the just, who lives by his faith, he to whom the vision is
written and made plain, with the help of that shall say this, shall
foretel the enemy's fall, even when he sees him flourishing, and
suddenly curse his habitation, even when he is taking root, [Job
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#003). He shall indeed denounce woes
against him.

(1.) Here is a woe against him for increasing his own possessions by
invading his neighbour's rights, [Hab
2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#006). He increases that which is not
his, but other people's. Note, No more of what we have is to be reckoned
ours than what we came honestly by; nor will it long be ours, for wealth
gotten by vanity will be diminished. Let not those that thrive in the
world be too forward to bless themselves in it, for, if they do not
thrive lawfully, they are under a woe. See here, \[1.\] What this
prosperous prince is doing; he is lading himself with thick clay. Riches
are but clay, thick clay; what are gold and silver but white and yellow
earth? Those that travel through thick clay are both retarded and
dirtied in their journey; so are those that go through the world in the
midst of an abundance of the wealth of it; but, as if that were not
enough, what fools are those that load themselves with it, as if this
trash would be their treasure! They burden themselves with continual
care about it, with a great deal of guilt in getting, saving, and
spending it, and with a heavy account which they must give of it another
day. They overload their ship with this thick clay, and so sink it and
themselves into destruction and perdition. \[2.\] See what people say of
him, while he is thus increasing his wealth; they cry, "How long? How
long will it be ere he has enough?" They cry to God, "How long wilt thou
suffer this proud oppressor to trouble the nations?" Or they say to one
another, "See how long it will last, how long he will be able to keep
what he gets thus dishonestly." They dare not speak out, but we know
what they mean when they say, How long? \[3.\] See what will be in the
end hereof. What he has got by violence from others, others shall take
by violence from him. The Medes and Persians shall make a prey of the
Chaldeans, as they have done of other nations, [Hab
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#007), [Hab
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#008). "There shall be those that will
bite thee and vex thee; those from whom thou didst not fear any danger,
that seemed asleep, shall rise up and awake to be a plague to thee. They
shall rise up suddenly when thou are most secure, and least prepared to
receive the shock and ward off the blow. Shall they not rise up
suddenly? No doubt they shall, and thou thyself hast reason to expect
it, to be dealt with as thou hast dealt with others, that thou shalt be
for booties unto them, as others have been unto thee, that, according to
the law of retaliation, as thou hast spoiled many nations so thou shalt
thyself be spoiled ([Hab 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#008)); all the
remnant of the people shall spoil thee." The king of Babylon thought he
had brought all the nations round about him so low that none of them
would be able to make reprisals upon him; but though they were but a
remnant of people, a very few left, yet these shall be sufficient to
spoil him, when God has such a controversy with him, First, For men's
blood, and the thousands of lives that have been sacrificed to his
ambition and revenge, especially for the blood of Israelites, which is
in a special manner precious to God. Secondly, For the violence of the
land, his laying waste so many countries, and destroying the fruits of
the earth, especially in the land of Israel. Thirdly, For the violence
of the city, the many cities that he had turned into ruinous heaps,
especially Jerusalem the holy city, and of all that dwelt therein, who
were ruined by him. Note, The violence done by proud men to advance and
enrich themselves will be called over again (and must be accounted for)
another day, by him to whom vengeance belongs.

(2.) Here is a woe against him for coveting still more, and aiming to be
still higher, [Hab 2:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#009). The crime
for which this woe is denounced is much the same with that in the
foregoing article - an insatiable desire of wealth and honour; it is
coveting an evil covetousness to his house, that is, grasping at an
abundance for his family. Note, Covetousness is a very evil thing in a
family; it brings disquiet and uneasiness into it (he that is greedy of
gain troubles his own house), and, which is worse, it brings the curse
of God upon it and upon all the affairs of it. Woe to him that gains an
evil gain; so the margin reads it. There is a lawful gain, which by the
blessing of God may be a comfort to a house (a good man leaves an
inheritance to his children's children), but what is got by fraud and
injustice is ill-got, and will be poor gain, will not only do no good to
a family, but will bring poverty and ruin upon it. Now observe, \[1.\]
What this covetous wretch aims at; it is to set his nest on high, to
raise his family to some greater dignity than it had before arrived at,
or to set it, as he apprehends, out of the reach of danger, that he may
be delivered from the power of evil, that it may not be in the power of
the worst of his enemies to do him a mischief nor so much as to disturb
his repose. Note, It is common for men to pretend it as an excuse for
their covetousness and ambition that they only consult their own safety,
and aim to secure themselves; and yet they do but deceive themselves
when they think their wealth will be a strong city to them, and a high
wall, for it is so only in their own conceit, [Pro
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#011). \[2.\] What he will get by it:
Thou hast consulted, not safety, but shame, to thy house, by cutting off
many people, [Hab 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#010). Note, An
estate raised by iniquity is a scandal to a family. Those that cut off,
or undermine, others, to make room for themselves, that impoverish
others to enrich themselves, do but consult shame to their houses, and
fasten upon them a mark of infamy. Yet that is not the worst of it:
"Thou hast sinned against thy own soul, hast brought that under guilt
and wrath, and endangered that." Note, Those that do wrong to their
neighbour do a much greater wrong to their own souls. But if the sinner
pleads, Not guilty, and thinks he has managed his frauds and violence
with so much art and contrivance that they cannot be proved upon him,
let him know that if there be no other witnesses against him the stone
shall cry out of the wall against him, and the beam out of the timber in
the roof shall answer it, shall second it, shall witness it, that the
money and materials wherewith he built the house were unjustly gotten,
[Hab 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#011). The stones and timber cry
to heaven for vengeance, as the whole creation groans under the sin of
man and waits to be delivered from that bondage of corruption.

(3.) Here is a woe against him for building a town and a city by blood
and extortion ([Hab 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#012)): He builds a
town, and is him-self lord of it; he establishes a city, and makes it
his royal seat. So Nebuchadnezzar did ([Dan
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#030)): Is not this great Babylon that
I have built for the house of the kingdom? But it is built with the
blood of his own subjects, whom he has oppressed, and the blood of his
neighbours, whom he has unjustly invaded; it is established by iniquity,
by the unrighteous laws that are made for the security of it. Woe to him
that does so; for the towns and cities thus built can never be
established; they will fall, and their founders be buried in the ruins
of them. Babylon, which was built by blood and iniquity, did not
continue long; its day soon came to fall; and then this woe took effect,
when that prophecy, which is expressed as a history ([Isa
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#009)), proved a history indeed:
Babylon has fallen, has fallen! And the destruction of that city was,
\[1.\] The shame of the Chaldeans, who had taken so much pains, and were
at such a vast expense, to fortify it ([Hab
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#013)): Is it not of the Lord of hosts
that the people who have laboured so hard to defend that city shall
labour in the very fire, shall see the out-works which they confided in
the strength of set on fire, and shall labour in vain to save them? Or
they, in their pursuits of worldly wealth and honour, put themselves to
great fatigue, and ran a great hazard, as those that labour in the fire
do. The worst that can be said of the labourers in God's vineyards is
that they have borne the burden and heat of the day ([Mat
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#012)); but those that are eager in
their worldly pursuits labour in the very fire, make themselves perfect
slaves to their lusts. There is not a greater drudge in the world than
he that is under the power of reigning covetousness. And what comes of
it? Though they take a world of pains they are but poorly paid for it;
for, after all, they weary themselves for very vanity; they were told it
was vanity, and when they find themselves disappointed of it, and
disappointed in it, they will own it is worse than vanity, it is
vexation of spirit. \[2.\] It was the honour of God, as a God of
impartial justice and irresistible power; for by the ruin of the
Chaldean monarchy (which all the world could not but take notice of) the
earth was filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, [Hab
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#014). The Lord is known by these
judgments which he executes, especially when he is pleased to look upon
proud men and abase them, for he thereby proves himself to be God alone,
[Job 40:11](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#011), [Job
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#012). See what good God brings out of
the staining and sinking of earthly glory; he thereby manifests and
magnifies his own glory, and fills the earth with the knowledge of it as
plentifully as the waters cover the sea, which lie deep, spread far, and
shall not be dried up until time shall be no more. Such is the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ given by the gospel
([Co2 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)), and such was the knowledge
of his glory by the miraculous ruin of Babylon. Note, Such as will not
be taught the knowledge of God's glory by the judgments of his mouth
shall be made to know and acknowledge it by the judgments of his hand.

[Habakkuk 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">hab 2:15</span></span>

The three foregoing articles, upon which the woes here are grounded, are
very near akin to each other. The criminals charged by them are
oppressors and extortioners, that raise estates by rapine and injustice;
and it is mentioned here again ([Hab
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#017)), the very same that was said
[Hab 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#008), for that is the crime upon
which the greatest stress is laid; it is because of men's blood,
innocent blood, barbarously and unjustly shed, which is a provoking
crying thing; it is for the violence of the land, of the city, and of
all that dwell therein, which God will certainly reckon for, sooner or
later, as the asserter of right and the avenger of wrong.

But here are two articles more, of a different nature, which carry a woe
to all those in general to whom they belong, and particularly to the
Babylonian monarchs, by whom the people of God were taken and held
captives.

I. The promoters of drunkenness stand here impeached and condemned.
Belshazzar was one of those; he was so, remarkably that very night that
the prophecy of this chapter was fulfilled in the period of his life and
kingdom, when he drank wine before a thousand of his lords ([Dan
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001)), began the healths, and forced
them to pledge him. And perhaps it was one reason why the succeeding
monarchs of Persia made it a law of their kingdom that in drinking none
should compel, but they should do according to every man's pleasure (as
we find, [Est 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#008)), because they had
seen in the kings of Babylon the mischievous consequences of forcing
healths and making people drunk. But the woe here stands firm and very
fearful against all those, whoever they are, who are guilty of this sin
at any time, and in any place, from the stately palace (where that was)
to the paltry ale-house. Observe,

1\. Who the sinner is that is here articled against; it is he that makes
his neighbour drunk, [Hab 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015). To
give a neighbour drink who is in want, who is thirsty and poor, though
it be but a cup of cold water to a disciple, in the name of a disciple,
to give drink to weary traveller, nay, and to give strong drink to him
that is ready to perish, and wine to those that are heavy of heart, is a
piece of charity which is required of us, and shall be recompensed to
us. I was thirsty, and you gave me drink. But to give a neighbour drink
who has enough already, and more than enough, with design to intoxicate
him, that he may expose himself, may talk foolishly, and make himself
ridiculous, may disclose his own secret concerns, or be drawn in to
agree to a bad bargain for himself - this is abominable wickedness; and
those who are guilty of it, who make a practice of it, and take a pride
and pleasure in it, are rebels against God in heaven, and his sacred
laws, factors for the devil in hell, and his cursed interests, and
enemies to men on earth, and their honour and welfare; they are like the
son of Nebat, who sinned and made Israel to sin. To entice others to
drunkenness, to put the bottle to them, that they may be allured to it
by its charms, by looking on the wine when it is red and gives its
colour in the cup, or to force them to it, obliging them by the rules of
the club (and club-laws indeed they are) to drink so many glasses, and
so filled, is to do what we can, and perhaps more than we know of,
towards the murder both of soul and body; and those that do so have a
great deal to answer for.

2\. What the sentence is that is here passed upon him. There is a woe to
him ([Hab 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015)), and a punishment
([Hab 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#016)) that shall answer to the
sin. (1.) Does he put the cup of drunkenness into the hand of his
neighbour? The cup of fury, the cup of trembling, the cup of the Lord's
right hand, shall be turned unto him; the power of God shall be armed
against him. That cup which had gone round among the nations, to make
them a desolation, an astonishment, and a hissing, which had made them
stumble and fall, so that they could rise no more, shall at length be
put into the hand of the king of Babylon, as was foretold, [Jer
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015), [Jer
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#016), [Jer
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#018), [Jer
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#026), [Jer
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#027). Thus the New Testament Babylon,
which had made the nations drunk with the cup of her fornications, shall
have blood given her to drink, for she is worthy, [Rev
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003), [Rev
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006). (2.) Does he take a pleasure in
putting his neighbour to shame? He shall himself be loaded with
contempt: "Thou art filled with shame for glory, with shame instead of
glory, or art filled now with shame more than ever thou wast with glory;
and the glory thou hast been filled with shall but serve to make thy
shame the more grievous to thyself, and the more ignominious in the eyes
of others. Thou also shalt drink of the cup of trembling, and shalt
expose thyself by thy fear and cowardice, which shall be as the
uncovering of thy nakedness, to thy shame; and all about thee shall load
thee with disgrace, for shameful spewing shall be on thy glory, on that
which thou hast most prided thyself in, thy dignity, wealth, and
dominion; those whom thou hast made drunk shall themselves spew upon it.
For the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee, and the spoil of beasts
([Hab 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#017)); thou shalt be hunted and
run down with as much violence as ever any wild beasts in Lebanon were,
shall be spoiled as they are, and thy fall made a sport of; for thou art
as one of the beasts that made them afraid, and therefore they triumph
when they have got the mastery of thee." Or, "It is because of the
violence thou hast done to Lebanon, that is, the land of Israel ([Deu
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#025)) and the temple ([Zac
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001)), that God now reckons with thee;
that is the sin that now covers thee."

II\. The promoters of idolatry stand here impeached and condemned; and
this also was a sin that Babylon was notoriously guilty of; it was the
mother of harlots. Belshazzar, in his revels, praised his idols. And for
this, here is a woe against them, and in them against all others that do
likewise, particularly the New Testament Babylon. Now see here,

1\. What they do to promote idolatry; they are mad upon their idols; so
the Chaldeans are said to be, [Jer
50:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#038). For, (1.) They have a great
variety of idols, their graven images and molten images, that people may
take their choice, which they like best. (2.) They are very nice and
curious in the framing of them: The maker of the work has performed his
part admirably well, the fashioner of his fashion (so it is in the
margin), that contrived the model in the most significant manner. (3.)
They are at great expense in beautifying and adorning them: They lay
them over with gold and silver; because these are things people love and
dote upon wherever they meet with them, they dress up their idols in
them, the more effectually to court the adoration of the children of
this world. (4.) They have great expectations from them: The maker of
the work trusts therein as his god, puts a confidence in it, and gives
honour to it as his god. The worshippers of God give honour to him, by
offering up their prayers to him, and waiting to receive instructions
and directions from him; and these honours they give to their idols.
\[1.\] They pray to them: They say to the wood, Awake for our relief,
"awake to hear our prayers;" and to the dumb stone, "Arise, and save
us," as the church prays to her God, Awake, O Lord! arise, [Psa
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#023). They own their image to be a
god by praying to it. Deliver me, for thou art my God, [Isa
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#017). Deos qui rogat ille facit -
That to which a man addresses petitions is to him a god. \[2.\] They
consult them as oracles, and expect to be directed and dictated to by
them: They say to the dumb stone, though it cannot speak, yet it shall
teach. What the wicked demon, or no less wicked priest, speaks to them
from the image, they receive with the utmost veneration, as of divine
authority, and are ready to be governed by it. Thus is idolatry planted
and propagated under the specious show of religion and devotion.

2\. How the extreme folly of this is exposed. God, by Isaiah, when he
foretold the deliverance of his people out of Babylon, largely showed
the shameful stupidity and sottishness of idolaters, and so he does here
by the prophet, on the like occasion. (1.) Their images, when they have
made them, are but mere matter, which is the meanest lowest rank of
being; and all the expense they are at upon them cannot advance them one
step above that. They are wholly void both of sense and reason, lifeless
and speechless (the idol is a dumb idol, a dumb stone, and there is no
breath at all in the midst of it), so that the most minute animal, that
has but breath and motion, is more excellent then they. They have not so
much as the spirit of a beast. (2.) It is not in their power to do their
worshippers any good ([Hab 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#018)): What
profits the graven image? Though it be mere matter, if it were cast into
some other form it might be serviceable to some purpose or other of
human life; but, as it is made a god of, it is of no profit at all, nor
can do its worshippers the least kindness. Nay, (3.) It is so far from
profiting them that it puts a cheat upon them, and keeps them under the
power of a strong delusion; they say, It shall teach, but it is a
teacher of lies; for it represents God as having a body, as being
finite, visible, and dependent, whereas he is a Spirit, infinite,
invisible, and independent, and it confirms those that become vain in
their imaginations in the false notions they have of God, and makes the
idea of God to be a precarious thing, and what every man pleases. If we
may say to the works of our hands, You are our gods, we may say so to
any of the creatures of our own fancy, though the chimera be ever so
extravagant. An image is a doctrine of vanities; it is falsehood, and a
work of errors, [Jer 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#008), [Jer
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#014), [Jer
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#015). It is therefore easy to see
what the religion of those is, and what they aim at, who recommend those
teachers of lies as laymen's books, which they are to study and govern
themselves by, when they have locked up from them the book of the
scriptures in an unknown tongue.

3\. How the people of God triumph in him, and therewith support
themselves, when the idolaters thus shame themselves ([Hab
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#020)): But the Lord is in his holy
temple. (1.) Our rock is not as their rock, [Deu
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#031). Theirs are dumb idols; ours is
Jehovah, a living God, who is what he is, and not, as theirs, what men
please to make him. He is in his holy temple in heaven, the residence of
his glory, where we have access to him in the way, not which we have
invented, but which he himself has instituted. Compare [Psa
115:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#003), But our God is in the heavens,
and [Psa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004). (2.) The multitude of
their gods which they set up, and take so much pains to support, cannot
thrust out our God; he is, and will be, in his holy temple still, and
glorious in holiness. They have laid waste his temple at Jerusalem; but
he has a temple above that is out of the reach of their rage and malice,
but within the reach of his people's faith and prayers. (3.) Our God
will make all the world silent before him, will strike the idolaters as
dumb as their idols, convincing them of their folly, and covering them
with shame. He will silence the fury of the oppressors, and check their
rage against his people. (4.) It is the duty of his people to attend him
with silent adorings ([Psa 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001)), and
patiently to wait for his appearing to save them in his own way and
time. Be still, and know that he is God, [Zac
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Habakkuk Chapter 3](hab003)

</div>
