<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb006)  [Next](heb008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 7:0</span></span>

The doctrine of the priestly office of Christ is so excellent in itself,
and so essential a part of the Christian faith, that the apostle loves
to dwell upon it. Nothing made the Jews so fond of the Levitical
dispensation as the high esteem they had of their priesthood, and it was
doubtless a sacred and most excellent institution; it was a very severe
threatening denounced against the Jews ([Hos
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004)), that the children of Israel
should abide many days without a prince or priest, and without a
sacrifice, and with an ephod, and without teraphim. Now the apostle
assures them that by receiving the Lord Jesus they would have a much
better high priest, a priesthood of a higher order, and consequently a
better dispensation or covenant, a better law and testament; this he
shows in this chapter, where, I. We have a more particular account of
Melchisedec ([Heb 7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001)). II. The
superiority of his priesthood to that of Aaron ([Heb
7:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#004)). III. An accommodation of all
to Christ, to show the superior excellency of his person, office, and
covenant ([Heb 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011) to the end).

[Hebrews 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 7:1</span></span>

The foregoing chapter ended with a repetition of what had been cited
once and again before out of [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004), Jesus, a high priest for ever,
after the order of Melchisedec. Now this chapter is as a sermon upon
that text; here the apostle sets before them some of the strong meat he
had spoken of before, hoping they would by greater diligence be better
prepared to digest it.

I. The great question that first offers itself is, Who was this
Melchisedec? All the account we have of him in the Old Testament is in
[Gen 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018), etc., and in [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004). Indeed we are much in the dark
about him; God has thought fit to leave us so, that this Melchisedec
might be a more lively type of him whose generation none can declare. If
men will not be satisfied with what is revealed, they must rove about in
the dark in endless conjectures, some fancying him to have been an
angel, others the Holy Ghost; but,

1\. The opinions concerning him that are best worthy our consideration
are these three: - (1.) Therabbin, and most of the Jewish writers, think
he was Shem the son of Noah who was king and priest to their ancestors,
after the manner of the other patriarchs; but it is not probable that he
should thus change his name. Besides, we have no account of his settling
in the land of Canaan. (2.) Many Christian writers have thought him to
be Jesus Christ himself, appearing by a special dispensation and
privilege to Abraham in the flesh, and who was known to Abraham by the
name Melchisedec, which agrees very well to Christ, and to what is said,
[Joh 8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056), Abraham saw his day and
rejoiced. Much may be said for this opinion, and what is said in [Heb
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003) does not seem to agree with any
mere man; but then it seems strange to make Christ a type of himself.
(3.) The most general opinion is that he was a Canaanite king, who
reigned in Salem, and kept up religion and the worship of the true God;
that he was raised to be a type of Christ, and was honoured by Abraham
as such.

2\. But we shall leave these conjectures, and labour to understand, as
far as we can, what is here said of him by the apostle, and how Christ
is represented thereby, [Heb 7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001).
(1.) Melchisedec was a king, and so is the Lord Jesus - a king of God's
anointing; the government is laid upon his shoulders, and he rules over
all for the good of his people. (2.) That he was king of righteousness:
his name signifies the righteous king. Jesus Christ is a rightful and a
righteous king - rightful in his title, righteous in his government. He
is the Lord our righteousness; he has fulfilled all righteousness, and
brought in an everlasting righteousness, and he loves righteousness and
righteous persons, and hates iniquity. (3.) He was king of Salem, that
is, king of peace; first king of righteousness, and after that king of
peace. So is our Lord Jesus; he by his righteousness made peace, the
fruit of righteousness is peace. Christ speaks peace, creates peace, is
our peace-maker. (4.) He was priest of the most high God, qualified and
anointed in an extraordinary manner to be his priest among the Gentiles.
So is the Lord Jesus; he is the priest of the most high God, and the
Gentiles must come to God by him; it is only through his priesthood that
we can obtain reconciliation and remission of sin. (5.) He was without
father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of
days nor end of life, [Heb 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003). This
must not be understood according to the letter; but the scripture has
chosen to set him forth as an extraordinary person, without giving us
his genealogy, that he might be a fitter type of Christ, who as man was
without father, as God without mother; whose priesthood is without
descent, did not descend to him from another, nor from him to another,
but is personal and perpetual. (6.) That he met Abraham returning from
the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him. The incident is recorded
[Gen 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018), etc. He brought forth
bread and wine to refresh Abraham and his servants when they were weary;
he gave as a king, and blessed as a priest. Thus our Lord Jesus meets
his people in their spiritual conflicts, refreshes them, renews their
strength, and blesses them. (7.) That Abraham gave him a tenth part of
all ([Heb 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#002)), that is, as the
apostle explains it, of all the spoils; and this Abraham did as an
expression of his gratitude for what Melchisedec had done for him, or as
a testimony of his homage and subjection to him as a king, or as an
offering vowed and dedicated to God, to be presented by his priest. And
thus are we obliged to make all possible returns of love and gratitude
to the Lord Jesus for all the rich and royal favours we receive from
him, to pay our homage and subjection to him as our King, and to put all
our offerings into his hands, to be presented by him to the Father in
the incense of his own sacrifice. (8.) That this Melchisedec was made
like unto the Son of God, and abideth a priest continually. He bore the
image of God in his piety and authority, and stands upon record as an
immortal high priest; the ancient type of him who is the eternal and
only-begotten of the Father, who abideth a priest for ever.

II\. Let us now consider (as the apostle advises) how great this
Melchisedec was, and how far his priesthood was above that of the order
of Aaron ([Heb 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#004), [Heb
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#005), etc.): Now consider how great
this man was, etc. The greatness of this man and his priesthood appears,
1. From Abraham's paying the tenth of the spoils unto him; and it is
well observed that Levi paid tithes to Melchisedec in Abraham, [Heb
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#009). Now Levi received the office of
the priesthood from God, and was to take tithes of the people, yet even
Levi paid tithes to Melchisedec, as to a greater and higher priest than
himself; therefore that high priest who should afterwards appear, of
whom Melchisedec was a type, must be much superior to any of the
Levitical priests, who paid tithes, in Abraham, to Melchisedec. And now
by this argument of persons doing things that are matters of right or
injury in the loins of their predecessors we have an illustration how we
may be said to have sinned in Adam, and fallen with him in his first
transgression. We were in Adam's loins when he sinned, and the guilt and
depravity contracted by the human nature when it was in our first
parents are equitably imputed and derived to the same nature as it is in
all other persons naturally descended from them. They justly adhere to
the nature, and it must be by an act of grace if ever they be taken
away. 2. From Melchisedec's blessing of Abraham, who had the promises;
and, without contradiction, the less is blessed of the greater, [Heb
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#006), [Heb
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#007). Here observe, (1.) Abraham's
great dignity and felicity - that he had the promises. He was one in
covenant with God, to whom God had given exceedingly great and precious
promises. That man is rich and happy indeed who has an estate in bills
and bonds under God's own hand and seal. These promises are both of the
life that now is and of that which is to come; this honour have all
those who receive the Lord Jesus, in whom all the promises are yea and
amen. (2.) Melchisedec's greater honour - in that it was his place and
privilege to bless Abraham; and it is an uncontested maxim that the less
is blessed of the greater, [Heb 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#007).
He who gives the blessing is greater than he who receives it; and
therefore Christ, the antitype of Melchisedec, the meriter and Mediator
of all blessings to the children of men, must be greater than all the
priests of the order of Aaron.

[Hebrews 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 7:11</span></span>

Observe the necessity there was of raising up another priest, after the
order of Melchisedec and not after the order of Aaron, by whom that
perfection should come which could not come by the Levitical priesthood,
which therefore must be changed, and the whole economy with it, [Heb
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011), [Heb
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#012), etc. Here,

I. It is asserted that perfection could not come by the Levitical
priesthood and the law. They could not put those who came to them into
the perfect enjoyment of the good things they pointed out to them; they
could only show them the way.

II\. That therefore another priest must be raised up, after the order of
Melchisedec, by whom, and his law of faith, perfection might come to all
who obey him; and, blessed be God, that we may have perfect holiness and
perfect happiness by Christ in the covenant of grace, according to the
gospel, for we are complete in him.

III\. It is asserted that the priesthood being changed there must of
necessity be a change of the law; there being so near a relation between
the priesthood and the law, the dispensation could not be the same under
another priesthood; a new priesthood must be under a new regulation,
managed in another way, and by rules proper to its nature and order.

IV\. It is not only asserted, but proved, that the priesthood and law
are changed, [Heb 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#013), [Heb
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#014). The priesthood and law by which
perfection could not come are abolished, and a priest has arisen, and a
dispensation is now set up, by which true believers may be made perfect.
Now that there is such a change is obvious.

1\. There is a change in the tribe of which the priesthood comes.
Before, it was the tribe of Levi; but our great high priest sprang out
of Judah, of which tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning the priesthood,
[Heb 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#014). This change of the family
shows a real change of the law of the priesthood.

2\. There is a change in the form and order of making the priests.
Before, in the Levitical priesthood, they were made after the law of a
carnal commandment; but our great high priest was made after the power
of an endless life. The former law appointed that the office should
descend, upon the death of the father, to his eldest son, according to
the order of carnal or natural generation; for none of the high priests
under the law were without father or mother, or without descent: they
had not life and immortality in themselves. They had both beginning of
days and end of life; and so the carnal commandment, or law of
primogeniture, directed their succession, as it did in matters of civil
right and inheritance. But the law by which Christ was constituted a
priest, after the order of Melchisedec, was the power of an endless
life. The life and immortality which he had in himself were his right
and title to the priesthood, not his descent from former priests. This
makes a great difference in the priesthood, and in the economy too, and
gives the preference infinitely to Christ and the gospel. The very law
which constituted the Levitical priesthood supposed the priests to be
weak, frail, dying, creatures, not able to preserve their own natural
lives, but who must be content and glad to survive in their posterity
after the flesh; much less could they, by any power or authority they
had, convey spiritual life and blessedness to those who came to them.
But the high priest of our profession holds his office by that innate
power of endless life which he has in himself, not only to preserve
himself alive, but to communicate spiritual and eternal life to all
those who duly rely upon his sacrifice and intercession. Some thing the
law of the carnal commandment refers to the external rites of
consecration, and the carnal offerings that were made; but the power of
an endless life to the spiritual living sacrifices proper to the gospel,
and the spiritual and eternal privileges purchased by Christ, who was
consecrated by the eternal Spirit of life that he received without
measure.

3\. There is a change in the efficacy of the priesthood. The former was
weak and unprofitable, made nothing perfect; the latter brought in a
better hope, by which we draw near to God, [Heb
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#018), [Heb
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#019). The Levitical priesthood brought
nothing to perfection: it could not justify men's persons from guilt; it
could not sanctify them from inward pollution; it could not cleanse the
consciences of the worshippers from dead works; all it could do was to
lead them to the antitype. But the priesthood of Christ carries in it,
and brings along with it, a better hope; it shows us the true foundation
of all the hope we have towards God for pardon and salvation; it more
clearly discovers the great objects of our hope; and so it tends to work
in us a more strong and lively hope of acceptance with God. By this hope
we are encouraged to draw nigh unto God, to enter into a covenant-union
with him, to live a life of converse and communion with him. We may now
draw near with a true heart, and with the full assurance of faith,
having our minds sprinkled from an evil conscience. The former
priesthood rather kept men at a distance, and under a spirit of bondage.

4\. There is a change in God's way of acting in this priesthood. He has
taken an oath to Christ, which he never did to any of the order of
Aaron. God never gave them any such assurance of their continuance,
never engaged himself by oath or promise that theirs should be an
everlasting priesthood, and therefore gave them no reason to expect the
perpetuity of it, but rather to look upon it as a temporary law. But
Christ was made a priest with the oath of God: The Lord hath sworn, and
will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec, [Heb 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#021). Here God has
upon oath declared the immutability, excellency, efficacy, and eternity,
of the priesthood of Christ.

5\. There is a change in that covenant of which the priesthood was a
security and the priest a surety; that is, a change in the dispensation
of that covenant. The gospel dispensation is more full, free,
perspicuous, spiritual, and efficacious, than that of the law. Christ is
in this gospel covenant a surety for us to God and for God to us, to see
that the articles be performed on both parts He, as surety, has united
the divine and human nature together in his own person, and therein
given assurance of reconciliation; and he has, as surety, united God and
man together in the bond of the everlasting covenant. He pleads with men
to keep their covenant with god, and he pleads with God that he will
fulfil his promises to men, which he is always ready to do in a way
suitable to his majesty and glory, that is, through a Mediator.

6\. There is a remarkable change in the number of the priests under
these different orders. In that of Aaron there was a multitude of
priests, of high priests, not at once, but successively; but in this of
Christ there is but one and the same. The reason is plain, The Levitical
priests were many, because they were not suffered to continue by reason
of death. Their office, how high and honourable soever, could not secure
them from dying; and, as one died, another must succeed, and after a
while must give place to a third, till the number had become very great.
But this our high priest continues for ever, and his priesthood is
aparabaton - an unchangeable one, that does not pass from one to
another, as the former did; it is always in the same hand. There can be
no vacancy in this priesthood, no hour nor moment in which the people
are without a priest to negotiate their spiritual concerns in heaven.
Such a vacancy might be very dangerous and prejudicial to them; but this
is their safety and happiness, that this ever-living high priest is able
to save to the utmost - in all times, in all cases, in every juncture -
all who come to God by him, [Heb 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025).
So that here is a manifest alteration much for the better.

7\. There is a remarkable difference in the moral qualifications of the
priests. Those who were of the order of Aaron were not only mortal men,
but sinful men, who had their sinful as well as natural infirmities;
they needed to offer up sacrifices first for their own sins and then for
the people. But our high priest, who was consecrated by the word of the
oath, needed only to offer up once for the people, never at all for
himself; for he has not only an immutable consecration to his office,
but an immutable sanctity in his person. He is such a high priest as
became us, holy, harmless, and undefiled, etc., [Heb
7:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026). Here observe, (1.) Our case,
as sinners, needed a high priest to make satisfaction and intercession
for us. (2.) No priest could be suitable or sufficient for our
reconciliation to God but one who was perfectly righteous in his own
person; he must be righteous in himself, or he could not be a
propitiation for our sin, or our advocate with the Father. (3.) The Lord
Jesus was exactly such a high priest as we wanted, for he has a personal
holiness, absolutely perfect. Observe the description we have of the
personal holiness of Christ expressed in various terms, all of which
some learned divines consider as relating to his perfect purity. \[1.\]
He is holy, perfectly free from all the habits or principles of sin, not
having the least disposition to it in his nature; no sin dwells in him,
though it does in the best of Christians, not the least sinful
inclination \[2.\] He is harmless, perfectly free from all actual
transgression, has done no violence, nor is there any deceit in his
mouth, never did the least wrong to God or man. \[3.\] He is undefiled,
he was never accessory to other men's sins. It is a difficult thing to
keep ourselves pure, so as not to partake in the guilt of other men's
sins, by contributing in some way towards them, or not doing what we
ought to prevent them. Christ was undefiled; though he took upon him the
guilt of our sins, yet he never involved himself in the fact and fault
of them. \[4.\] He is separate from sinners, not only in his present
state (having entered as our high priest into the holiest of all, into
which nothing defiled can enter), but in his personal purity: he has no
such union with sinners, either natural or federal, as can devolve upon
him original sin. This comes upon us by virtue of our natural and
federal union with the first Adam, we descending from him in the
ordinary way. But Christ was, by his ineffable conception in the virgin,
separate from sinners; though he took a true human nature, yet the
miraculous way in which it was conceived set him upon a separate footing
from all the rest of mankind. \[5.\] He is made higher than the heavens.
Most expositors understand this concerning his state of exaltation in
heaven, at the right hand of God, to perfect the design of his
priesthood. But Dr. Goodwin thinks this may be very justly referred to
the personal holiness of Christ, which is greater and more perfect than
the holiness of the hosts of heaven, that is, the holy angels
themselves, who, though they are free from sin, yet are not in
themselves free from all possibility of sinning. And therefore we read,
God putteth no trust in his holy ones, and he chargeth his angels with
folly ([Job 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018)), that is, with
weakness and peccability. They may be angels one hour and devils
another, as many of them were; and that the holy angels shall not now
fall does not proceed from an indefectibility of nature, but from the
election of God; they are elect angels. It is very probable that this
explanation of the words, made higher than the heavens, may be thought
too much strained, and that it ought to be understood of the dignity of
Christ's state, and not the perfect holiness of his person; and the
rather because it is said he was made higher genomenos; but it is well
known that this word is used in a neutral sense, as where it is said,
genesthē ho Theos alēthēs - Let God be true. The other characters in the
verse plainly belong to the personal perfection of Christ in holiness,
as opposed to the sinful infirmities of the Levitical priests; and it
seems congruous to think this must do so too, if it may be fairly taken
in such a sense; and it appears yet more probable, since the validity
and prevalency of Christ's priesthood in [Heb
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#027) are placed in the impartiality
and disinterestedness of it. He needed not to offer up for himself: it
was a disinterested mediation; he mediated for that mercy for others
which he did not need for himself; had he needed it himself, he had been
a party, and could not have been a Mediator - a criminal, and could not
have been an advocate for sinners. Now, to render his mediation the more
impartial and disinterested, it seems requisite not only that he had no
present need of that favour for himself which he mediated for in behalf
of others, but that he never could stand in need of it. Though he needed
it not today, yet if he knew he might be in such circumstances as to
need it tomorrow, or at any future time, he must have been thought to
have had some eye upon his own interest, and therefore could not act
with impartial regard and pure zeal for the honour of God on one hand,
and tender pure compassion for poor sinners on the other. I pretend not
here to follow the notes of our late excellent expositor, into whose
labours we have entered, but have taken the liberty to vindicate this
notion of the learned Dr. Goodwin from the exceptions that I know have
been made to it; and I have the rather done it because, if it will hold
good, it gives us further evidence how necessary it was that the
Mediator should be God, since no mere creature is of himself possessed
of that impeccability which will set him above all possible need of
favour and mercy for himself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 8](heb008)

</div>
