<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos005)  [Next](hos007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 6:0</span></span>

The closing words of the foregoing chapter gave us some hopes that God
and his Israel, notwithstanding their sins and his wrath, might yet be
happily brought together again, that they would seek him and he would be
found of them; now this chapter carries that matter further, and some
join the beginning of this chapter with the end of that, "They will seek
me early," saying, "Come and let us return." But God doth again complain
of the wickedness of this people; for, though some did repent and
reform, the greater part continued obstinate. Observe, I. Their
resolution to return to God, and the comforts wherewith they encourage
themselves in their return ([Hos
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001)). II. The instability of many of
them in their professions and promises of repentance, and the severe
course which God therefore took with them ([Hos
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004), [Hos
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#005)). III. The covenant God made with
them, and his expectations from them ([Hos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)); their violation of that covenant
and frustrating those expectations ([Hos
6:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#007)).

[Hosea 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 6:1</span></span>

These may be taken either as the words of the prophet to the people,
calling them to repentance, or as the words of the people to one
another, exciting and encouraging one another to seek the Lord, and to
humble themselves before him, in hopes of finding mercy with him. God
had said, In their affliction they will seek me; now the prophet, and
the good people his friends, would strike while the iron was hot, and
set in with the convictions their neighbours seemed to be under. Note,
Those who are disposed to turn to God themselves should do all they can
to excite, and engage, and encourage others to return to him. Observe,

I. What it is they engage to do: "Come, and let us return to the Lord,
[Hos 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001). Let us go no more to the
Assyrian, nor send to king Jareb; we have had enough of that. But let us
return to the Lord, return to the worship of him from our idolatries,
and to our hope in him from all our confidences in the creature." Note,
It is the great concern of those who have revolted from God to return to
him. And those who have gone from him by consent, and in a body, drawing
one another to sin, should by consent, and in a body, return to him,
which will be for his glory and their mutual edification.

II\. What inducements and encouragements to do this they fasten upon, to
stir up one another with.

1\. The experience they had had of his displeasure: "Let us return to
him, for he has torn, he has smitten. We have been torn, and it was he
that tore us; we have been smitten, and it was he that smote us.
Therefore let us return to him, because it is for our revolts from him
that he has torn and smitten us in anger, and we cannot expect that he
should be reconciled to us till we return to him; and for this end he
has afflicted us thus, that we might be wrought upon to return to him.
His hand will be stretched out still against us if the people turn not
to him that smites them," [Isa 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012),
[Isa 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013). Note, The consideration of
the judgments of God upon us and our land, especially when they are
tearing judgments, should awaken us to return to God by repentance, and
prayer, and reformation.

2\. The expectation they had of his favour: "He that has torn will heal
us, he that has smitten will bind us up," as the skilful surgeon with a
tender hand binds up the broken bone or bleeding wound. Note, The same
providence of God that afflicts his people relieves them, and the same
Spirit of God that convinces the saints comforts them; that which is
first a Spirit of bondage is afterwards a Spirit of adoption. This is an
acknowledgement of the power of God (he can heal though we be ever so
ill torn), and of his mercy (he will do it); nay, therefore he has torn
that he may heal. Some think this points particularly to the return of
the Jews out of Babylon, when they sought the Lord, and joined
themselves to him, in the prospect of his gracious return to them in a
way of mercy. Note, It will be of great use to us, both for our support
under our afflictions and for our encouragement in our repentance, to
keep up good thoughts of God and of his purposes and designs concerning
us. Now this favour of God which they are here in expectation of is
described in several instances: -

(1.) They promise themselves that their deliverance out of their
troubles should be to them as life from the dead ([Hos
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002)): "After two days he will revive
us (that is, in a short time, in a day or two), and the third day, when
it is expected that the dead body should putrefy and corrupt, and be
buried out of our sight, then will he raise us up, and we shall live in
his sight, we shall see his face with comfort and it shall be reviving
to us. Though he forsake for a small moment, he will gather with
everlasting kindness." Note, The people of God may not only be torn and
smitten, but left for dead, and may lie so a great while; but they shall
not always lie so, nor shall they long lie so; God will in a little time
revive them; and the assurance given them of this should engage them to
return and adhere to him. But this seems to have a further reference to
the resurrection of Jesus Christ; and the time limited is expressed by
two days and the third day, that it may be a type and figure of Christ's
rising the third day, which he is said to do according to the
scriptures, according to this scripture; for all the prophets testified
of the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow. Let us see
and admire the wisdom and goodness of God, in ordering the prophet's
words so that when he foretold the deliverance of the church out of her
troubles he should at the same time point out our salvation by Christ,
which other salvations were both figures and fruits of; and, though they
might not be aware of this mystery in the words, yet now that they are
fulfilled in the letter of them in the resurrection of Christ it is a
confirmation to our faith that this is he that should come, and we are
to look for no other. And it is every way suitable that a prophecy of
Christ's rising should be thus expressed, "He will raise us up, and we
shall live," for Christ rose as the first-fruits, and we revive with
him, we live through him; he rose for our justification, and all
believers are said to be risen with Christ. See [Isa
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019). And it would serve for a
comfort to the church then, and an assurance that God would raise them
out of their low estate, for in his fulness of time he would raise his
Son from the grave, who would be the life and glory of his people
Israel. Note, A regard by faith to a rising Christ is a great support to
a suffering Christian, and gives abundant encouragement to a repenting
returning sinner; for he has said, Because I live, you shall live also.

(2.) That then they shall improve in the knowledge of God ([Hos
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003)): Then shall we know, if we follow
on to know, the Lord. Then, when God returns in mercy to his people and
designs favour for them, he will, as a pledge and fruit of his favour,
give them more of the knowledge of himself; the earth shall be full of
that knowledge, [Isa 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009). Knowledge
shall be increased, [Dan 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004). All
shall know God, [Jer 31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034). We shall
know, we shall follow to know, the Lord, (so the words are); and it may
be taken as the fruit of Christ's resurrection, and the life we live in
God's sight by him, that we shall have not only greater means of
knowledge, but grace to improve in knowledge by those means. Note, When
God designs mercy for a people he gives them a heart to know him, [Jer
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#007). Those that have risen with
Christ have the spirit of wisdom and revelation given them. And if we
understand our living in his sight, as the Chaldee paraphrast does, of
the day of the resurrection of the dead, it fitly follows, We shall
know, we shall follow to know, the Lord; for in that day we shall see
him be perfected, and yet be eternally increasing. Or, taking it as we
read it, If we follow on to know, we have here, \[1.\] A precious
blessing promised: Then shall we know, shall know the Lord, then when we
return to God; those that come to God shall be brought into an
acquaintance with him. When we are designed to live in his sight, then
he gives us to know him; for this is life eternal to know God, [Joh
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003). \[2.\] The way and means of
obtaining this blessing. We must follow on to know him. We must value
and esteem the knowledge of God as the best knowledge, we must cry after
it, and dig for it ([Pro 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#003), [Pro
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#004)), must seek and intermeddle with
all wisdom ([Pro 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#001)), and must
proceed in our enquiries after this knowledge and our endeavours to
improve in it. And, if we do the prescribed duty, we have reason to
expect the promised mercy, that we shall know more and more of God, and
be at last perfect in this knowledge.

(3.) That then they shall abound in divine consolations: His going forth
is prepared as the morning, that is, the returns of his favour, which he
had withdrawn from us when he went and returned to his place. His
out-goings again are prepared and secured to us as firmly as the return
of the morning after a dark night, and we expect it, as those do that
wait for the morning after a long night, and are sure that it will come
at the time appointed and will not fail; and the light of his
countenance will be both welcome to us and growing upon us, unto the
perfect day, as the light of the morning is. He shall come to us, and be
welcome to us, as the rain, as the latter and former rain unto the
earth, which refreshes it and makes it fruitful. Now this looks further
than their deliverance out of captivity, and, no doubt, was to have its
full accomplishment in Christ, and the grace of the gospel. The Old
Testament saints followed on to know him, earnestly looked for
redemption in Jerusalem; and at length the out-goings of divine grace in
him, in his going forth to visit this world, were \[1.\] As the morning
to this earth when it is dark for he went forth as the sun of
righteousness, and in him the day-spring from on high visited us. His
going forth was prepared as the morning, for he came in the fulness of
time; John Baptist was his fore-runner, nay, he was himself the bright
and morning star. \[2.\] As the rain to this earth when it is dry. He
shall come down as the rain upon the mown grass, [Psa
72:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#006). In him showers of blessings
descend upon this world, which give seed to the sower and bread to the
eater, [Isa 55:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#010). And the favour of
God in Christ is what is said of the king's favour, like the cloud of
the latter rain, [Pro 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#015). The grace
of God in Christ is both the latter and the former rain, for by it the
good work of our fruit-bearing is both begun and carried on.

[Hosea 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 6:4</span></span>

Two things, two evil things, both Judah and Ephraim are here charged
with, and justly accused of: -

I. That they were not firm to their own convictions, but were unsteady,
unstable as water, [Hos 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004), [Hos
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#005). O Ephraim! what shall I do unto
thee? O Judah! what shall I do unto thee? This is a strange expression.
Can Infinite Wisdom be at a loss what to do? Can it be nonplussed, or
put upon taking new measures? By no means; but God speaks after the
manner of men, to show how absurd and unreasonable they were, and how
just his proceedings against them were. Let them not complain of him as
harsh and severe in tearing them, and smiting them, as he has done; for
what else should he do? What other course could he take with them? God
had tried various methods with them (What could have been done more to
his vineyard than he had done? [Isa
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004)), and very loth he was to let
things go to extremity; he reasons with himself (as [Hos
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#009)), How shall I give thee up,
Ephraim? God would have done them good, but they were not qualified for
it: "What shall I do unto thee? What else can I do but cast thee off,
when I cannot in honour save thee?" Note, God never destroys sinners
till he sees there is no other way with them. See here, 1. What their
conduct was towards God: Their goodness, or kindness, was as the morning
cloud. Some understand it of their kindness to themselves and their own
souls, in their repentance; it is indeed mercy to ourselves to repent of
our sins, but they soon retracted that kindness to themselves, undid it
again, and wronged their own souls as much as ever. But it is rather to
be taken for their piety and religion; what good appeared in them
sometimes, it soon vanished and disappeared again, as the morning cloud
and the early dew. Such was the goodness of Israel in Jehu's time, and
of Judah in Hezekiah's and Josiah's time; it was soon gone. In time of
drought the morning-cloud promises rain, and the early dew is some
present refreshment to the earth; but the cloud is dispersed (and
hypocrites are compared to clouds without water, [Jde
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#012)) and the dew does not soak into
the ground, but is drawn back again into the air, and the earth is
parched still. What shall he do with them? Shall he accept their
goodness? No, for it passes away; and factum non dicitur quod non
perseverat - that which does not continue can scarcely be said to be
done. Note, That goodness will never be either pleasing to God or
profitable to ourselves which is as the morning cloud and the early dew.
When men promise fair and do not perform, when they begin well in
religion and do not hold on, when they leave their first love and their
first works, or, though they do not quite cast off religion, are yet
unsteady, uneven, and inconstant in it, then is their goodness as the
morning cloud and the early dew. 2. What course God had taken with them
([Hos 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#005)): "Therefore, because they
were so rough and ill-shapen, I have hewn them by the prophets, as
timber or stone is hewn for use; I have slain them by the words of my
mouth." What the prophets did was done by the word of God in their
mouths, which never returned void. By it they thought themselves slain,
were ready to say that the prophets killed them, or cut them to the
heart when they dealt faithfully with them. (1.) The prophets hewed them
by convictions of sin, endeavouring to cut off their transgressions from
them. They were uneven in religion ([Hos
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004)), therefore God hewed them. The
hearts of sinners are not only as stone, but as rough stone, which
requires a great deal of pains to bring it into shape, or as knotty
timber, that is not squared without a great deal of difficulty;
ministers' work is to hew them, and God by the minister hews them, for
with the froward will he show himself froward. And there are those whom
ministers must rebuke sharply; every word should cut, and though the
chips fly in the face of the workman, though the reproved fly in the
face of the reprover and reckon him an enemy because he tells the truth,
yet he goes on with his work. (2.) They slew them by the denunciations
of wrath, foretelling that they should be slain, as Ezekiel is said to
destroy the city when he prophesied of the destruction of it, [Eze
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#003). And God accomplished that which
was foretold: "I have slain them by my judgments, according to the words
of my mouth." Note, The word of God will be the death either of the sin
or of the sinner, a savour either of life unto life or of death unto
death. Some read it, "I have hewn the prophets, and slain them by the
words of my mouth, that is, I have employed them in laborious service
for the people's good, which has wasted their strength; they have spent
themselves, and hews away all their spirits, in their work, and in
hazardous service, which has cost many of them their lives." Note,
Ministers are the tools which God makes use of in working upon people;
and, though with many they labour in vain, yet God will reckon for the
wearing out of his tools. (3.) God was hereby justified in the severest
proceedings against them afterwards. His prophets had taken a great deal
of pains with them, had admonished them of their sin and warned them of
their danger, but the means used had not the desired effect; some good
impressions perhaps were made for the present, but they wore off, and
passed away as the morning cloud, and now they cannot charge God with
severity if he bring upon them the miseries threatened. The prophet
turns to him and acknowledges, Thy judgments are as the light that goes
forth, evidently just and righteous. Note, Though sinners be not
reclaimed by the pains that ministers take with them, yet thereby God
will be justified when he speaks and clear when he judges. See [Mat
11:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#017).

II\. That they were not faithful to God's covenant with them, [Hos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006), [Hos
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#007). Here observe,

1\. What the covenant was that God made with them, and upon what terms
they should obtain his favour and be accepted of him ([Hos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)): I desired mercy and not
sacrifice (that is, rather than sacrifice), and insisted upon the
knowledge of God more than upon burnt-offerings. Mercy here is the same
word which in [Hos 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004) is rendered
goodness - chesed - piety, sanctity; it is put for all practical
religion; it is the same with charity in the New Testament, the reigning
love of God and our neighbour, and this accompanied with and flowing
from the knowledge of God, as he has revealed himself in his word, a
firm belief that he is, and is the rewarder of those that diligently
seek him, a good affection to divine things guided by a good judgment,
which cannot but produce a very good conversation; this is that which
God by his covenant requires, and not sacrifice and offering. This is
fully explained, [Jer 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022), [Jer
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#023). I spoke not to your fathers
concerning burnt-offerings (that was the smallest of the matters I spoke
to them of, and on which the least stress was laid), but this I said,
Obey my voice, [Mic 6:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006). To love God
and our neighbour is better than all burnt offering and sacrifice, [Mar
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#033); [Psa
51:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016), [Psa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017). Not but that sacrifice and
offering were required, and to be paid, and had their use, and, when
they were accompanied with mercy and the knowledge of God, were
acceptable to him, but, without them, God regarded them not, he despised
them, [Isa 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010), [Isa
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011). Perhaps this is mentioned here
to show a difference between the God whom they deserted and the gods
whom they went over to. The true God aimed at nothing but that they
should be good men, and live good lives for their own good, and the
ceremony of honouring him with sacrifices was one of the smallest
matters of his law; whereas the false gods required that only; let their
priests and altars be regaled with sacrifices and offerings, and the
people might live as they listed. What fools were those then that left a
God who aimed at giving his worshippers a new nature, for gods who aimed
at nothing but making themselves a new name! It is mentioned likewise to
show that God's controversy with them was not for the omission of
sacrifices (I will not reprove thee for them, [Psa
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#008)), but because there was no
justice, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God, among them ([Hos
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#001)), and to teach us all that the
power of godliness is the main thing God looks at and requires, and
without it the form of godliness is of no avail. Serious piety in the
heart and life is the one thing needful, and, separate from that, the
performances of devotion, though ever so plausible, ever so costly, are
of no account. Our Saviour quotes this to show that moral duties are to
be preferred before rituals whenever they come in competition, and to
justify himself in eating with publicans and sinners, because it was in
mercy to the souls of men, and in healing on the sabbath day, because it
was in mercy to the bodies of men, to which the ceremony of singularity
in eating and the sabbath-rest must give way, [Mat
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013); [Mat
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#007).

2\. How little they had regarded this covenant, though it was so well
ordered in all things, though they, and not God, would be the gainers by
it. See here what came of it.

(1.) In general, they broke with God, and proved unfaithful; there were
good things committed to them to keep, the jewels of mercy and piety,
and the knowledge of God, in the cabinet of sacrifice and
burnt-offering, but they betrayed their trust, kept the cabinet, but
pawned the jewels for the gratification of a base lust, and this is that
for which God has justly a quarrel with them ([Hos
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#007)): They, like men, have
transgressed the covenant, that covenant which God made with them; they
have broken the conditions of it, and so forfeited the benefit of it. By
casting off mercy and the knowledge of God, and other instances of
disobedience, \[1.\] They had contracted the guilt of perjury and
covenant-breaking; they were like men that transgress a covenant by
which they had solemnly bound themselves, which is a thing that all the
world cries out shame on; men that have done so deserve not again to be
valued, or trusted, or dealt with. "There, in that thing, they have
dealt treacherously against me; they have been perfidious, base, and
false children, in whom is no faith, though I depended upon their being
children that would not lie." \[2.\] In this they had but acted like
themselves, like men, who are generally false and fickle, and in whose
nature (their corrupt nature) it is to deal treacherously; all men are
liars, and they are like the rest of that degenerate race, all gone
aside, [Psa 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002), [Psa
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003). They have transgressed the
covenant like men (like the Gentiles that transgressed the covenant of
nature), like mean men (the word here used is sometimes put for men of
low degree); they have dealt deceitfully, like base men that have no
sense of honour. \[3.\] Herein they trod in the steps of our first
parents: They, like Adam, have transgressed the covenant (so it might
very well be read); as he transgressed the covenant of innocency, so
they transgressed the covenant of grace, so treacherously, so foolishly;
there in paradise he violated his engagements to God, and there in
Canaan, another paradise, they violated their engagements. And by their
treacherous dealing they, like Adam, have ruined themselves and theirs.
Note, Sin is so much the worse the more there is in it of the similitude
of Adam's transgression, [Rom 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014).
\[4.\] Low thoughts of God and of his authority and favour were at the
bottom of all this; for so some read it: They have transgressed the
covenant, as of a man, as if it had been but the covenant of a man, that
stood upon even ground with them, as if the commands of the covenant
were but like those of a man like themselves, and the kindness conveyed
by it no more valuable than that of a man. There is something sacred and
binding in a man's covenant (as the apostle shows, [Gal
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#015)), but much more in the covenant
of God, which yet they made small account of; and there in that covenant
they dealt treacherously, promised fair, but performed nothing. Dealing
treacherously with God is here called dealing treacherously against him,
for it is both an affront and an opposition. Deserters are traitors, and
will be so treated; the revolting heart is a rebellious heart.

(2.) Some particular instances of their treachery are here given: There
they dealt treacherously, that is, in the places hereafter named \[1.\]
Look on the other side Jordan, to the country which lay most exposed to
the insults of the neighbouring nations, and where therefore the people
were concerned to keep themselves under the divine protection, and yet
there you will find the most daring provocations of the divine Majesty,
[Hos 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#008). Gilead, which lay in the lot
of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh, was a city of the workers of
iniquity. Wickedness was the trade that was driven there; the country
was called Gilead, but it was all called a city, because they were all
as it were incorporated in one society of rebels against God. Or (as
most think) Ramoth Gilead is the city here meant, one of the three
cities of refuge on the other side Jordan, and a Levites' city; the
inhabitants of it, though of the sacred tribe, were workers of iniquity,
contrived it, and practised it. Note, It is bad indeed when a Levites'
city is a city of those that work iniquity, when those that are to
preach good doctrine live bad lives. Particularly it is polluted with
blood, as if that were a sin which the wicked Levites were in a special
manner guilty of. In popish countries the clergy are observed to be the
most bloody persecutors. Or, as it was a city of refuge, by abusing the
power it had to judge of murders it became polluted with blood. They
would, for a bribe, protect those that were guilty of wilful murder,
whom they ought to have put to death, and would deliver those to the
avenger of blood who were guilty but of chance-medley, if they were poor
and had nothing to give them; and both these ways they were polluted
with blood. Note, Blood defiles the land where it is shed, and where no
inquisition is made or no vengeance taken for it. See how the best
institutions, that are ever so well designed to keep the balance even
between justice and mercy, are capable of being abused and perverted to
the manifest prejudice and violation of both. \[2.\] Look among those
whose business it was to minister in holy things, and they were as bad
as the worst and as vile as the vilest ([Hos
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#009)): The company of priests are so,
not here and there one that is the scandal of his order, but the whole
order and body of them, the priests go all one way by consent, with one
shoulder (as the word is), one and all; and they make one another worse,
more daring, and fierce, and impudent, in sin, more crafty and more
cruel. A company of priests will say and do that in conspiracy which
none of them would dare to say or do singly. The companies of priests
were as troops of robbers, as banditti, or gangs of highwaymen, that cut
men's throats to get their money. First, They were cruel and
blood-thirsty. They murder those that they have a pique against, or that
stand in their way; nothing less will satisfy them. Secondly, They were
cunning. They laid wait for men, that they might have a fair opportunity
to compass their mischievous malicious designs; thus the company of
priests laid wait for Christ to take him, saying, Not on the feast-day.
Thirdly, They were concurring as one man: They murder in the way; in the
highway, where travellers should be safe, there they murder by consent,
aiding and abetting one another in it. See how unanimous wicked people
are in doing mischief; and should not good people be so then in doing
good? They murder in the way to Shechem (so the margin reads it, as a
proper name) such as were going to Jerusalem (for that way Shechem lay)
to worship. Or in the way to Shechem (some think) means in the same
manner that their father Levi, with Simeon his brother, murdered the
Shechemites (Gen. 34), by fraud and deceit; and some understand it of
their destroying the souls of men by drawing them to sin. Fourthly, They
did it with contrivance: They commit lewdness; the word signifies such
wickedness as is committed with deliberation, and of malice prepense, as
we say. The more there is of device and design in sin the worse it is.
\[3.\] Look into the body of the people, take a view of the whole house
of Israel, and they are all alike ([Hos
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#010)): I have seen a horrible thing in
the house of Israel, and, though it be ever so artfully managed, God
discovers it, and will discover it to them; and who can deny that which
God himself says that he has seen? There is the whoredom of Ephraim,
both corporal and spiritual whoredom; there it is too plain to be
denied. Note, The sin of sinners, especially sinners of the house of
Israel, has enough in it to make them tremble, for it is a horrible
thing, it is amazing, and it is threatening, enough to make them blush,
for Israel is thereby defiled and rendered odious in the sight of God.
\[4.\] Look into Judah, and you find them sharing with Israel ([Hos
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#011)): Also, O Judah! he has set a
harvest for thee; thou must be reckoned with as well as Ephraim; thou
art ripe for destruction too, and the time, even the set time, of thy
destruction is hastening on, when thou that hast ploughed iniquity, and
sown wickedness, shalt reap the same. The general judgment is compared
to a harvest ([Mat 13:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#039)), so are
particular judgments, [Joe 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#013); [Rev
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015). I have appointed a time to call
thee to account, even when I returned the captivity of my people, that
is, when those captives of Judah which were taken by the men of Israel
were restored, in obedience to the command of God sent them by Oded the
prophet, [Ch2 28:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#008). When God spared
them that time he set them a harvest, that is, he designed to reckon
with them another time for all together. Note, Preservations from
present judgments, if a good use be not made of them, are but
reservations for greater judgments.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 7](hos007)

</div>
