<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hosea Index](hos.md)  
  [Previous](hos000)  [Next](hos002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001.md)

The mind of God is revealed to this prophet, and by him to the people,
in the first three chapters, by signs and types, but afterwards only by
discourse. In this chapter we have, I. The general title of the whole
book ([Hos 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001).md). II. Some particular
instructions which he was ordered to give to the people of God. 1. He
must convince them of their sin in going a whoring from God, by marrying
a wife of whoredoms ([Hos 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002.md), [Hos
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#003).md). 2. He must foretel the ruin
coming upon them for their sin, in the names of his sons, which
signified God's disowning and abandoning them ([Hos
1:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#004.md), [Hos
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#008.md), [Hos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009).md). 3. He must speak comfortable to
the kingdom of Judah, which still retained the pure worship of God, and
assure them of the salvation of the Lord ([Hos
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007).md). 4. He must give an intimation of
the great mercy God had in store both for Israel and Judah, in the
latter days ([Hos 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010.md), [Hos
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011).md), for in this prophecy many
precious promises of mercy are mixed with the threatenings of wrath.

[Hosea 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 1:1</span></span>

1\. Here is the prophet's name and surname; which he himself, as other
prophets, prefixes to his prophecy, for the satisfaction of all that he
is ready to attest what he writes to be of God; he sets his hand to it,
as that which he will stand by. His name, Hosea, or Hoshea (for it is
the very same with Joshua's original name), signifies a saviour; for
prophets were instruments of salvation to the people of God, so are
faithful ministers; they help to save many a soul from death, by saving
it from sin. his surname was Ben-Beeri, or the son of Beeri. As with us
now, so with them then, some had their surname from their place, as
Micah the Morashite, Nahum the Elkoshite; others from their parents, as
Joel the son of Bethuel, and here Hosea the son of Beeri. And perhaps
they made use of that distinction when the eminence of their parents was
such as would bring honour upon them; but it is a groundless conceit of
the Jews that where a prophet's father is names he also was a prophet.
Beeri signifies a well, which may put us in mind of the fountain of life
and living waters from which prophets are drawn and must be continually
drawing. 2. Here are his authority and commission: The word of the Lord
came to him. It was to him; it came with power and efficacy to him; it
was revealed to him as a real thing, and not a fancy or imagination of
his own, in some such way as God then discovered himself to his servants
the prophets. What he said and wrote was by divine inspiration; it was
by the word of the Lord, as St. Paul speaks concerning that which he had
purely by revelation, [Th1 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015.md).
Therefore this book was always received among the canonical books of the
Old Testament, which is confirmed by what is quoted out of it in the New
Testament, [Mat 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#015.md); [Mat
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013.md); [Mat
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#007.md); [Rom
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025.md), [Rom
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#026.md); [Pe1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010.md). For the word of the Lord endures
for ever. 3. Here is a particular account of the times in which he
prophesied - in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of
Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel. We
have only this general date of his prophecy; and not the date of any
particular part of it, as, before, in Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and
Daniel, and, afterwards, in Haggai and Zechariah. Here is only one king
of Israel named, though there were many more within this time, because,
having mentioned the kings of Judah, there was no necessity of naming
the other; and, they being all wicked, he took no pleasure in naming
them, nor would do them the honour. Now by this account here given of
the several reigns in which Hosea prophesied (and it should seem the
word of the Lord still came to him, more or less, at times, throughout
all these reigns) it appears, (1.) That he prophesied a long time, that
he began when he was very young, which gave him the advantage of
strength and sprightliness, and that he continued at his work till he
was very old, which gave him the advantage of experience and authority.
It was a great honour to him to be thus long employed in such good work,
and a great mercy to the people to have a minister so long among them
that so well knew their state, and naturally cared for it, one they had
been long used to and who therefore was the more likely to be useful to
them. And yet, for aught that appears, he did but little good among
them; the longer they enjoyed him the less they regarded him; they
despised his youth first, and afterwards his age. (2.) That he passed
through a variety of conditions. Some of these kings were very good,
and, it is likely, countenanced and encouraged him; others were very
bad, who (we may suppose) frowned upon him and discouraged him; and yet
he was still the same. God's ministers must expect to pass through
honour and dishonour, evil report and good report, and must resolve in
both to hold fast their integrity and keep close to their work. (3.)
That he began to prophesy at a time when the judgments of God were
abroad, when God was himself contending in a more immediate way with
that sinful people, who fell into the hands of the Lord, before they
were turned over into the hands of man; for in the days of Uzziah, and
of Jeroboam his contemporary, the dreadful earthquake was, mentioned
[Zac 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005.md) and [Amo
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001.md). And then was the plague of
locusts, [Joe 1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#002.md); [Amo
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001.md); [Hos
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#003.md). The rod of God is sent to enforce
the word and the word of God is sent to explain the rod, yet neither
prevails till God by his Spirit opens the ear to instruction and
discipline. (4.) That he began to prophesy in Israel at a time when
their kingdom was in a flourishing prosperous condition, for so it was
in the reign of Jeroboam the second, as we find [Kg2
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025.md), He restored the coast of
Israel, and God saved them by his hand; yet then Hosea boldly tells them
of their sins and foretels their destruction. Men are not to be
flattered in their sinful ways because they prosper in the world, but
even then must be faithfully reproved, and plainly told that their
prosperity will not be their security, nor will it last long if they go
on still in their trespasses.

[Hosea 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 1:2</span></span>

These words, The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea, may refer
either, 1. To that glorious set of prophets which was raised up about
this time. About this time there lived and prophesied Joel, Amos, Micah,
Jonah, Obadiah, and Isaiah; but Hosea was the first of them that
foretold the destruction of Israel; the beginning of this word of the
Lord was by him. We read in the history of this Jeroboam here named
([Kg2 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#027).md) that the Lord had not yet
said he would blot out the name of Israel, but soon after he said he
would, and Hosea was the man that began to say it, which made it so much
the harder task to him, to be the first that should carry an unpleasing
message and some time before any were raised up to second him. Or,
rather, 2. To Hosea's own prophecies. This was the first message God
sent him upon to this people, to tell them that they were an evil and an
adulterous generation. He might have desired to be excused from dealing
so roughly with them till he had gained authority and reputation, and
some interest in their affections. No; he must begin with this, that
they might know what to expect from a prophet of the Lord. Nay, he must
not only preach this to them, but he must write it, and publish it, and
leave it upon record as a witness against them. Now here,

I. The prophet must, as it were in a looking-glass, show them their sin,
and show it to be exceedingly sinful, exceedingly hateful. The prophet
is ordered to take unto him a wife of whoredoms and children of
whoredoms, [Hos 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002.md). And he did so,
[Hos 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#003.md). He married a woman of ill
fame, Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, not one that had been married and
had committed adultery, for then she must have been put to death, but
one that had lived scandalously in the single state. To marry such a one
was not malum in se - evil in itself, but only malum per accidens -
incidentally an evil, not prudent, decent, or expedient, and therefore
forbidden to the priests, and which, if it were really done, would be an
affliction to the prophet (it is threatened as a curse on Amaziah that
his wife should be a harlot, [Amo
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#017).md), but not a sin when God
commanded it for a holy end; nay, if commanded, it was his duty, and he
must trust God with his reputation. But most commentators think that it
was done in vision, or that it is no more than a parable; and that was a
way of teaching commonly used among the ancients, particularly prophets;
what they meant of others they transferred to themselves in a figure, as
St. Paul speaks, [Co1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#006.md). He must
take a wife of whoredoms, and have such children by her as every one
would suspect, though born in wedlock, to be children of whoredoms,
begotten in adultery, because it is too common for those who have lived
lewdly in the single state to live no better in the married state. "Now"
(saith God) "Hosea, this people is to me such a dishonour, and such a
grief and vexation, as a wife of whoredoms and children of whoredoms
would be to thee. For the land has committed great whoredoms." In all
instances of wickedness they had departed from the Lord; but their
idolatry especially is the whoredom they are here charged with. Giving
that glory to any creature which is due to God alone is such an injury
and affront to God as for a wife to embrace the bosom of a stranger is
to her husband. It is especially so in those that have made a profession
of religion, and have been taken into covenant with God; it is breaking
the marriage-bond; it is a heinous odious sin, and, as much as any
thing, besots the mind and takes away the heart. Idolatry is great
whoredom, worse than any other; it is departing from the Lord, to whom
we lie under greater obligations than any wife does or can do to her
husband. The land has committed whoredom; it is not here and there a
particular person that is guilty of idolatry, but the whole land is
polluted with it; the sin has become national, the disease epidemical.
What an odious thing would it be for the prophet, a holy man, to have a
whorish wife, and children whorish like her! What an exercise would it
be of his patience, and, if she persisted in it, what could be expected
but that he should give her a bill of divorce! And is it not then much
more offensive to the holy God to have such a people as this to be
called by his name and have a place in his house? How great is his
patience with them! And how justly may he cast them off! It was as if he
should have married Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, who probably was at
that time a noted harlot. The land of Israel was like Gomer the daughter
of Diblaim. Gomer signifies corruption; Diblaim signifies two cakes, or
lumps of figs; this denotes that Israel was near to ruin, and that their
luxury and sensuality were the cause of it. They were as the evil figs
that could not be eaten, they were so evil. It intimates sin to be the
daughter of plenty and destruction the daughter of the abuse of plenty.
Some give this sense of the command here given to the prophet: "Go, take
thee a wife of whoredoms, for, if thou shouldst go to seek for an honest
modest woman, thou wouldst not find any such, for the whole land, and
all the people of it, are given to whoredom, the usual concomitant of
idolatry."

II\. The prophet must, as it were through a perspective glass, show them
their ruin; and this he does in the names given to the children born of
this adulteress; for as lust, when it has conceived, brings forth sin,
so sin, when it is finished, brings forth death.

1\. He foretels the fall of the royal family in the name he is appointed
to give to his first child, which was a son: Call his name Jezreel, [Hos
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#004.md). We find that the prophet Isaiah
gave prophetical names to his children ([Isa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003.md); [Isa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003).md), so this prophet here. Jezreel
signifies the seed of God (so they should have been); but it signifies
also the scattered of God; they shall be as sheep on the mountains that
have no shepherds. Call them not Israel, which signifies dominion, they
have lost all the honour of that name; but call them Jezreel, which
signifies dispersion, for those that have departed from the Lord will
wander endlessly. Hitherto they have been scattered as seek; let them
now be scattered as chaff. Jezreel was the name of one of the royal
seats of the kings of Israel; it was a beautiful city, seated in a
pleasant valley, and it is with allusion to that city that this child is
called Jezreel, for yet a little while and I will avenge the blood of
Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, from whom the present king, Jeroboam,
was lineally descended. The house of Jehu smarted for the sins of Jehu,
for God often lays up men's iniquity for their children and visits it
upon them. It is the kingdom of the house of Israel, which may be meant
either of the present royal family, that of Jehu, which God did quickly
cause to cease (for the son of this Jeroboam, Zechariah, reigned but six
months, and he was the last of Jehu's race), or of the whole kingdom in
general, which continued corrupt and wicked, and which was made to cease
in the reign of Hoshea, about seventy years after; and with God that is
but a little while. Note, Note, Neither the pomp of kings nor the power
of kingdoms can secure them from God's destroying judgments, if they
continue to rebel against him. (2.) What is the ground of this
controversy: I will revenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu,
the blood which Jehu shed at Jezreel, when by commission from God and in
obedience to his command, he utterly destroyed the house of Ahab, and
all that were in alliance with it, with all the worshippers of Baal. God
approved of what he did ([Kg2 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#030).md):
Thou has done well in executing that which is right in my eyes; and yet
here God will avenge that blood upon the house of Jehu, when the time
has expired during which it was promised that his family should reign,
even to the fourth generation. But how comes the same action to be both
rewarded and punished? Very justly; the matter of it was good; it was
the execution of a righteous sentence passed upon the house of Ahab,
and, as such, it was rewarded; but Jehu did it not in a right manner; he
aimed at his own advancement, not at the glory of God, and mingled his
own resentments with the execution of God's justice. He did it with a
malice against the sinners, but not with any antipathy to the sin; for
he kept up the worship of the golden calves, and took no heed to walk in
the law of God, [Kg2 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#031.md). And
therefore when the measure of the iniquity of his house was full, and
God came to reckon with them, the first article in the account is (and,
being first, it is put for all the rest) for the blood of the house of
Ahab, here called the blood of Jezreel. Thus when the house of Baasha
was rooted out it was because he did like the house of Jeroboam, and
because he killed him, [Kg1 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#007.md).
Note, Those that are entrusted with the administration of justice are
concerned to see to it that they do it from a right principle and with a
right intention, and that they do not themselves live in those sins
which they punish in others, lest even their just executions should be
reckoned for, another day, as little less than murders. (3.) How far the
controversy shall proceed; it shall be not a correction, but a
destruction. Some make those words, I will visit, or appoint, the blood
of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, to signify, not as we read it the
revenging of that bloodshed, but the repeating of that bloodshed: "I
will punish the house of Jehu, as I punished the house of Ahab, because
Jehu did not take warning by the punishment of his predecessors, but
trod in the steps of their idolatry. And after the house of Jehu is
destroyed I will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel; I
will begin to bring it down, though now it flourish." After the death of
Zechariah, the last of the house of Jehu, the kingdom of the ten tribes
went to decay, and dwindled sensibly. And, in order to the ruin of it,
it is threatened ([Hos 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#005).md), I will
break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel; the strength of the
warriors of Israel, so the Chaldee. God will disable them either to
defend themselves or to resist their enemies. And the bow abiding in
strength, and being renewed in the hand, intimates a growing power, so
the breaking of the bow intimates a sinking ruined power. The bow shall
be broken in the valley of Jezreel, where, probably, the armoury was;
or, it may be, in that valley some battle was fought, wherein the
kingdom of Israel was very much weakened. Note, There is no fence
against God's controversy; when he comes forth against a people their
strong bows are soon broken and their strong-holds broken down. In the
valley of Jezreel they shed that blood which the righteous God would in
that very place avenge upon them; as some notorious malefactors are
hanged in chains just where the villainy they suffer for was
perpetrated, that the punishment may answer the sin.

2\. He foretels God's abandoning the whole nation in the name he gives
to the second child. This was a daughter, as the former was a son, to
intimate that both sons and daughters had corrupted their way. Some make
to signify that Israel grew effeminate, and was thereby enfeebled and
made weak. Call the name of this daughter Lo-ruhamah - not beloved (so
it is translated [Rom 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025).md), or not
having obtained mercy, so it is translated [Pe1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010.md). It comes all to one. This reads
the doom of the house of Israel: I will no more have mercy upon them. It
intimates that God had shown them great mercy, but they had abused his
favours, and forfeited them, and now he would show them favour no more.
Note, Those that forsake their own mercies for lying vanities have
reason to expect that their own mercies should forsake them, and that
they should be left to their lying vanities, [Jon
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#008.md). Sin turns away the mercy of God
even from the house of Israel, his own professing people, whose case is
sad indeed when God says that he will no more have mercy upon them. And
then it follows, I will utterly take them away, will utterly remove them
(so some), will utterly pluck them up, so others. Note, When the streams
of mercy are stopped we can expect no other than that the vials of wrath
should be opened. Those whom God will no more have mercy upon shall be
utterly taken away, as dross and dung. The word for taking away
sometimes signifies to forgive sin; and some take it in that sense here:
I will no more have mercy upon them, though in pardoning I have pardoned
them heretofore. Though God has borne long, he will not bear always,
with a people that hate to be reformed. Or, I will no more have mercy
upon them, that I should in any wise pardon them, or (as our margin
reads it) that I should altogether pardon them. If pardoning mercy is
denied, no other mercy can be expected, for that opens the door to all
the rest. Some make this to speak comfort: I will no more have mercy
upon them till in pardoning I shall pardon them, that is, till the
Redeemer comes to Zion to turn away ungodliness from Jacob. The Chaldee
reads it, But, if they repent, in pardoning I will pardon them. Even the
greatest sinners, if in time they bethink themselves and return, will
find that there is forgiveness with God.

III\. He must show them what mercy God had in store for the house of
Judah, at the same time that he was thus contending with the house of
Israel ([Hos 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007).md): But I will have
mercy upon the house of Judah. Note, Though some are justly cast off for
their disobedience, yet God will always secure to himself a remnant that
shall be the vessels and monuments of mercy. When divine justice is
glorified in some, yet there are others in whom free grace is glorified.
And, though some through unbelief are broken off, yet God will have a
church in this world till the end of time. It aggravates the rejection
of Israel that God will have mercy on Judah, and not on them, and
magnifies God's mercy to Judah that, though they also have done
wickedly, yet God did not reject them, as he rejected Israel: I will
have mercy upon them and will save them. Note, Our salvation is owing
purely to God's mercy, and not to any merit of our own. Now,

1\. This, without doubt, refers to the temporal salvations which God
wrought for Judah in a distinguishing way, the favours shown to them and
not to Israel. When the Assyrian armies had destroyed Samaria, and
carried the ten tribes away into captivity, they proceeded to besiege
Jerusalem; but God had mercy on the house of Judah, and saved them by
the vast slaughter which an angel made, in one night, in the camp of the
Assyrians; then they were saved by the Lord their God immediately, and
not by sword or bow. When the ten tribes were continued in their
captivity, and their land was possessed by others, they being utterly
taken away, God had mercy on the house of Judah and saved them, and,
after seventy years, brought them back, not by might or power, but by
the Spirit of the Lord of hosts, [Zac
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#006.md). I will save them by the Lord
their God, that is, by myself. God will be exalted in his own strength,
will take the work into his own hands. That salvation is sure which he
undertakes to be the author of; for, if he will work, none shall hinder.
And that salvation is most acceptable which he does by himself. So the
Lord alone did lead him. The less there is of man in any salvation, and
the more of God, the brighter it shines and the sweeter it tastes. I
will save them in the word of the Lord (so the Chaldee), for the sake of
Christ, the eternal word, and by his power. I will save them not by bow
nor by sword, that is, (1.) They shall be saved when they are reduced to
so low an ebb that they have neither bow nor sword to defend themselves
with, [Jdg 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#008.md); [Sa1
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#022). (2..md) They shall be saved by the
Lord when they are brought off from trusting to their own strength and
their weapons of war, [Psa 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#006). (3..md)
They shall be saved easily, without the trouble of sword and bow, [Hos
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007.md). [Isa
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005.md), I will save them by the Lord
their God. In the calling him their God, he upbraids the ten tribes who
had cast him off from being theirs, for which reason he had cast them
off, and intimates what was the true reason why he had mercy,
distinguishing mercy, for the house of Judah, and saved them: it was in
pursuance of his covenant with them as the Lord their God, and in
recompence for their faithful adherence to him and to his word and
worship. But,

2\. This may refer also to the salvation of Judah from idolatry, which
qualified and prepared them for their other salvations. And this is
indeed a salvation by the Lord their God; it is wrought only by the
power of his grace, and can never be wrought by sword or bow. Just at
the time that the kingdom of Israel was utterly taken away, under
Hoshea, the kingdom of Judah was gloriously reformed, under Hezekiah,
and was therefore preserved; and in Babylon God saved them from their
idolatry first, and then from their captivity.

3\. Some make this promise to look forward to the great salvation which,
in the fulness of time, was to be wrought out by the Lord our God, Jesus
Christ, who came into the world to save his people from their sins.

[Hosea 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 1:8</span></span>

We have here a prediction,

I. Of the rejection of Israel for a time, which is signified by the name
of another child that Hosea had by his adulterous spouse, [Hos
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#008.md), [Hos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009.md). And still we must observe that
those children whose names carried these direful omens in them to Israel
were all children of whoredoms ([Hos
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002).md), all born of the harlot that
Hosea married, to intimate that the ruin of Israel was the natural
product of the sin of Israel. If they had not first revolted from God,
they would never have been rejected by him; God never leaves any till
they first leave him. Here is, 1. The birth of this child: When she had
weaned her daughter, she conceived and bore a son. Notice is taken of
the delay of the birth of this child, which was to carry in its name a
certain presage of their utter rejection, to intimate God's patience
with them, and his unwillingness to proceed to extremity. Some think
that her bearing another son signifies that people's persisting in their
wickedness; lust still conceived and brought forth sin. They added to do
evil (so the Chaldee paraphrase expounds it); they were old in
adulteries, and obstinate. 2. The name given him: Call him Lo-ammi - Not
my people. When they were told that God would no more have mercy on them
they regarded it not, but buoyed up themselves with this conceit, that
they were God's people, whom he could not but have mercy on. And
therefore he plucks that staff from under them, and disowns all relation
to them: You are not my people, and I will not be your God. "I will not
be yours (so the word it); I will be in no relation to you, will have
nothing to do with you; I will not be your King, your Father, your
patron and protector." We supply it very well with that which includes
all, "I will not be your God; I will not be to you what I have been, nor
what you vainly expect I should be, nor what I would have been if you
had kept close to me." Observe, "You are not my people; you do not act
as becomes my people; you are not observant of me and obedient to me, as
my people should be; you are not my people, but the people of this and
the other dunghill-deity; and therefore I will not own you for my
people, will not protect you, will not put in any claim to you, not
demand you, not deliver you out of the hands of those that have seized
you; let them take you; you are none of mine. You will not have me to be
your God, but pay your homage to the pretenders, and therefore I will
not be your God; you shall have no interest in me, shall expect no
benefit from me." Note, Our being taken into covenant with God is owing
purely to him and to his grace, for then it begins on his side: I will
be to them a God, and then they shall be to me a people; we love him
because he first loved us. But our being cast out of covenant is owing
purely to ourselves and our own folly. The breach is on man's side: You
are not my people, and therefore I will not be your God; if God hate
any, it is because they first hated him. This was fulfilled in Israel
when they were utterly taken away into the land of Assyria, and their
place knew them no more. They were no longer God's people, for they lost
the knowledge and worship of him; no prophets were sent to them, no
promises made to them, as were to the two tribes in their captivity;
nay, they were no longer a people, but, for aught that appears, were
mingled with the nations into which they were carried, and lost among
them.

II\. Of the reduction and restoration of Israel in the fulness of time.
Here, as before, mercy is remembered in the midst of wrath; the
rejection, as it shall not be total, so it shall not be final ([Hos
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010.md), [Hos
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011).md): Yet the number of the children
of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea. See how the same hand that
wounded is stretched forth to heal, and how tenderly he that has torn
binds up; though God cause grief by his threatenings, yet he will have
compassion, and will gather with everlasting kindness. They are very
precious promises which are here made concerning the Israel of God, and
which may be of use to us now.

1\. Some think that these promises had their accomplishment in the
return of the Jews out of their captivity in Babylon, when many of the
ten tribes joined themselves to Judah, and took the benefit of the
liberty which Cyrus proclaimed, came up in great numbers out of the
several countries into which they were dispersed, to their own land,
appointed Zerubbabel their head, and coalesced into one people, whereas
before they had been two distinct nations. And in their own land, where
God had by his prophets disowned and rejected them as none of his, he
would by his prophets own them and appear for them as his children; and
from all parts of the country they should come up to the temple to
worship. And we have reason to think that, though this promise has a
further reference, yet it was graciously intended and piously used for
the support and comfort of the captives in Babylon, as giving them a
general assurance of mercy which God had in store for them and their
land; their nation could not be destroyed so long as this blessing was
in it, was in reserve for it.

2\. Some think that these promises will not have their accomplishment,
at least not in full, till the general conversion of the Jews in the
latter days, which is expected yet to come, when the vast incredible
numbers of Jews, that are now dispersed as the sand of the sea, shall be
brought to embrace the faith of Christ and be incorporated in the
gospel-church. Then, and not till then, God will own them as his people,
his children, even there where they had lain under the dismal tokens of
their rejection. The Jewish doctors look upon this promise as not having
had its accomplishment yet. But,

3\. It is certain that this promise had its accomplishment in the
setting up of the kingdom of Christ, by the preaching of the gospel, and
the bringing in both of Jews and Gentiles to it, for to this these words
are applied by St. Paul ([Rom 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025.md),
[Rom 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#026).md), and by St. Peter when he
writes to the Jews of the dispersion, [Pe1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010.md). Israel here is the
gospel-church, the spiritual Israel ([Gal
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016).md), all believers who follow the
steps, and inherit the blessing of faithful Abraham, who is the father
of all that believe, whether Jews or Gentiles, [Rom
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011.md), [Rom
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#012.md). Now let us see what is promised
concerning this Israel.

(1.) That it shall greatly multiply, and the numbers of it be increased;
it shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor
numbered. Though Israel according to the flesh be diminished and made
few, the spiritual Israel shall be numerous, shall be innumerable. In
the vast multitudes that by the preaching of the gospel have been
brought to Christ, both in the first ages of Christianity and ever
since, this promise is fulfilled, thousands out of every tribe in
Israel, and out of other nations, a multitude which no man can number,
[Rev 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#004.md), [Rev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009.md); [Gal
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#027.md). In this the promise made to
Abraham, when God called him Abraham the high father of a multitude, had
its full accomplishment ([Gen 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005).md),
and that [Gen 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017.md). Some observe that
they are here compared to the sand of the sea, not only for their
numbers, but as the sand of the sea serves for a boundary to the waters,
that they shall not overflow the earth, so the Israelites indeed are a
wall of defence to the places where they live, to keep off judgments.
God can do nothing against Sodom while Lot is there.

(2.) That God will renew his covenant with the gospel-Israel, and will
incorporate it a church to himself, by as full and ample a charter as
that whereby the Old Testament church was incorporated; nay, and its
privileges shall be much greater: "In the place where it was said unto
them, You are not my people, there shall you be again admitted into
covenant, and owned as my people." The abandoned Gentiles in their
respective places, and the rejected Jews in theirs, shall be favoured
and blessed. There, where the fathers were cast off for their unbelief,
the children, upon their believing, shall be taken in. This is a blessed
resurrection, the making of those the people of God that were not a
people. Nay, but the privilege is enlarged; now it is not only, You are
my people, as formerly, but You are the sons of the living God, whether
by birth you were Jews or Gentiles. Israel under the law was God's son,
his first-born, but then they were as children under age; now, under the
gospel, they have grown up both to greater understanding and greater
liberty, [Gal 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001.md), [Gal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#002.md). Note, \[1.\] It is the
unspeakable privilege of all believers that they have the living God for
their Father, the ever-living God, and may look upon themselves as his
children by grace and adoption. \[2.\] The sonship of believers shall be
owned and acknowledged; it shall be said to them, for their comfort and
satisfaction, nay, and it shall be said for their honour in the hearing
of the world, You are the sons of the living God. Let not the saints
disquiet themselves; let not others despise them; for, sooner or later,
there shall be a manifestation of the children of God, and all the world
shall be made to know their excellency and the value God has for them.
\[3.\] It will add much to their comfort, very much to their honour,
when they are dignified with the tokens of God's favour in that very
place where they had long lain under the tokens of his displeasure. This
speaks comfort to the believing Gentiles, that they need not go up to
Jerusalem, to be received and owned as God's children; no, they may stay
where they are, and in that place, though it be in the remotest corner
of the earth, in that place where they were at a distance, where it was
said to them, "You are not God's people," but are separated from them
([Isa 56:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003.md), [Isa
56:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#006).md), even there, without leaving
their country and kindred, they may by faith receive the Spirit of
adoption, witnessing with their spirits that "they are the children of
God."

(3.) That those who had been at variance should be happily brought
together ([Hos 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011).md): Then shall the
children of Judah and the children of Israel be gathered together. This
uniting of Judah and Israel, those two kingdoms that were now so much at
variance, biting and devouring one another, is mentioned only as a
specimen, or one instance, of the happy effect of the setting up of
Christ's kingdom in the world, the bringing of those that had been at
the greatest enmity one against another to a good understanding one of
another and a good affection one to another. This was literally
fulfilled when the Galileans, who inhabited that part of the country
which belonged to the ten tribes, and probably for the most part
descended from them, so heartily joined with those that were probably
called Jews (that were of Judea) in following Christ and embracing his
gospel; and his first disciples were partly Jews and partly Galileans.
The first that were blessed with the light of the gospel were of the
land of Zebulun and Naphtali ([Mat
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#015).md); and, though there was no
good-will at all between the Jews and the Galileans, yet, upon their
believing in Christ, they were happily consolidated, and there were no
remains of the former disaffection they had to one another; nay, when
the Samaritans believed, though between them and the Jews there was a
much greater enmity, yet in Christ there was a perfect unanimity, [Act
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#014.md). Thus Judah and Israel were
gathered together; yet this was but a type of the much more celebrated
coalition between Jews and Gentiles, when, by the death of Christ, the
partition-wall of the ceremonial law was taken down. See [Eph
2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014.md). Christ died, to gather
together in one all the children of God that were scattered abroad, [Joh
11:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051.md); [Eph
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010.md).

(4.) That Jesus Christ should be the centre of unity to all God's
spiritual Israel. They shall all agree to appoint to themselves one
head, which can be no other than he whom God has appointed, even Christ.
Note, Jesus Christ is the head of the church, the one only head of it,
not only a head of government, as of the body politic, but a head of
vital influence, as of the natural body. To believe in Christ is to
appoint him to ourselves for our head, that is, to consent to God's
appointment, and willingly commit ourselves to his guidance and
government; and this in concurrence and communion with all good
Christians that make him their head; so that, though they are many, yet
in him they are one, and so become one with each other. Qui conveniunt
in aliquo tertio inter se conveniunt - Those who agree with a third
agree with each other.

(5.) That, having appointed Christ for their head, they shall come up
out of the land; they shall come, some of all sorts, from all parts, to
join themselves to the church, as, under the Jewish economy, they came
up from all corners of the land of Israel to Jerusalem, to worship ([Psa
122:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#004).md), Thither the tribes go up, to
which there is a plain allusion in that prophecy of the accession of the
Gentiles to the church ([Isa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003).md),
Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord. It denotes not a
local remove (for they are said to be in the same place, [Hos
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010).md), but a change of their mind, a
spiritual ascent to Christ. They shall come up from the earth (so it may
be read); for those who have given up themselves to Christ as their head
take their affections off from this earth, and the things of it, to set
them upon things above ([Col 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001.md), [Col
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002).md); for they are not of the world
([Joh 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#019).md), but have their
conversation in heaven. They shall come up out of the land, though it be
the land of their nativity; they shall, in affection, come out from it,
that they may follow the Lamb withersoever he goes. Thus the learned Dr.
Pocock takes it.

(6.) That, when all this comes to pass, great shall be the day of
Jezreel. Though great is the day of Jezreel's affliction (so some
understand it), yet great shall be the day of Jezreel's glory. This
shall be Israel's day; the day shall be their own, after their enemies
have long had their day. Israel is here called Jezreel, the seed of God,
the holy seed ([Isa 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013).md), the
substance of the land. This seed is now sown in the earth, and buried
under the clods; but great shall be its day when the harvest comes.
Great was the church's day when there were added to it daily such as
should be saved; then did the Almighty do great things for it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 2](hos002.md)

</div>
