<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa060)  [Next](isa062) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 61](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 61:0</span></span>

In this chapter, I. We are sure to find the grace of Christ, published
by himself to a lost world in the everlasting gospel, under the type and
figure of Isaiah's province, which was to foretel the deliverance of the
Jews out of Babylon ([Isa 61:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)). II.
We think we find the glories of the church of Christ, its spiritual
glories, described under the type and figure of the Jews' prosperity
after their return out of their captivity 1. It is promised that they
decays of the church shall be repaired ([Isa
61:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#004)). 2. That those from without
shall be made serviceable to the church ([Isa
61:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#005)). 3. That the church shall be a
royal priesthood, maintained by the riches of the Gentiles ([Isa
61:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#006)). 4. That she shall have honour
and joy in lieu of all her shame and sorrow ([Isa
61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007)). 5. That her affairs shall
prosper ([Isa 61:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#008)). 6. That
prosperity shall enjoy these blessings ([Isa
61:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#009)). 7. That righteousness and
salvation shall be the eternal matter of the church's rejoicing and
thanksgiving ([Isa 61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010), [Isa
61:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#011)). If the Jewish church was ever
thus blessed, much more shall the Christian church be so, and all that
belong to it.

[Isaiah 61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 61:1</span></span>

He that is the best expositor of scripture has no doubt given us the
best exposition of these verses, even our Lord Jesus himself, who read
this in the synagogue at Nazareth (perhaps it was the lesson for the
day) and applied it entirely to himself, saying, This day is this
scripture fulfilled in your ears ([Luk
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#017), [Luk
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018), [Luk
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#021)); and the gracious words which
proceeded out of his mouth, in the opening of this text, were admired by
all that heard them. As Isaiah was authorized and directed to proclaim
liberty to the Jews in Babylon, so was Christ, God's messenger, to
publish a more joyful jubilee to a lost world. And here we are told,

I. How he was fitted and qualified for this work: The Spirit of the Lord
God is upon me, [Isa 61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001). The
prophets had the Spirit of God moving them at times, both instructing
them what to say and exciting them to say it. Christ had the Spirit
always resting on him without measure; but to the same intent that the
prophets had, as a Spirit of counsel and a Spirit of courage, [Isa
11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001). When he entered upon the
execution of his prophetical office the Spirit, as a dove, descended
upon him, [Mat 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016). This Spirit which
was upon him he communicated to those whom he sent to proclaim the same
glad tidings, saying to them, when he gave them their commission,
Receive you the Holy Ghost, thereby ratifying it.

II\. How he was appointed and ordained to it: The Spirit of God is upon
me, because the Lord God has anointed me. What service God called him to
he furnished him for; therefore he gave him his Spirit, because he had
by a sacred and solemn unction set him apart to this great office, as
kings and priests were of old destined to their offices by anointing.
Hence the Redeemer was called the Messiah, the Christ, because he was
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows. He has sent me; our
Lord Jesus did not go unsent; he had a commission from him that is the
fountain of power; the Father sent him and gave him commandment. This is
a great satisfaction to us, that, whatever Christ said, he had a warrant
from heaven for; his doctrine was not his, but his that sent him.

III\. What the work was to which he was appointed and ordained.

1\. He was to be a preacher, was to execute the office of a prophet. So
well pleased was he with the good-will God showed towards men through
him that he would himself be the preacher of it, that an honour might
thereby be put upon the ministry of the gospel and the faith of the
saints might be confirmed and encouraged. He must preach good tidings
(so gospel signified) to the meek, to the penitent, and humble, and poor
in spirit; to them the tidings of a Redeemer will be indeed good
tidings, pure gospel, faithful sayings, and worthy of all acceptation.
The poor are commonly best disposed to receive the gospel ([Jam
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005)), and it is likely to profit us
when it is received with meekness, as it ought to be; to such Christ
preached good tidings when he said, Blessed are the meek.

2\. He was to be a healer. He was sent to bind up the broken-hearted, as
pained limbs are rolled to give them ease, as broken bones and bleeding
wounds are bound up, that they may knit and close again. Those whose
hearts are broken for sin, who are truly humbled under the sense of
guilt and dread of wrath, are furnished in the gospel of Christ with
that which will make them easy and silence their fears. Those only who
have experienced the pains of a penitential contrition may expect the
pleasure of divine cordials and consolations.

3\. He was to be a deliverer. He was sent as a prophet to preach, as a
priest to heal, and as a king to issue out proclamations and those of
two kinds: - (1.) Proclamations of peace to his friends: He shall
proclaim liberty to the captives (as Cyrus did to the Jews in captivity)
and the opening of the prison to those that were bound. Whereas, by the
guilt of sin, we are bound over to the justice of God, are his lawful
captives, sold for sin till payment be made of that great debt, Christ
lets us know that he has made satisfaction to divine justice for that
debt, that his satisfaction is accepted, and if we will plead that, and
depend upon it, and make over ourselves and all we have to him, in a
grateful sense of the kindness he has done us, we may be faith sue out
our pardon and take the comfort of it; there is, and shall be, no
condemnation to us. And whereas, by the dominion of sin in us, we are
bound under the power of Satan, sold under sin, Christ lets us know that
he has conquered Satan, has destroyed him that had the power of death
and his works, and provided for us grace sufficient to enable us to
shake off the yoke of sin and to loose ourselves from those bands of our
neck. The Son is ready by his Spirit to make us free; and then we shall
be free indeed, not only discharged from the miseries of captivity, but
advanced to all the immunities and dignities of citizens. This is the
gospel proclamation, and it is like the blowing of the jubilee-trumpet,
which proclaimed the great year of release ([Lev
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#009), [Lev
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#040)), in allusion to which it is
here called the acceptable year of the Lord, the time of our acceptance
with God, which is the origin of our liberties; or it is called the year
of the Lord because it publishes his free grace, to his own glory, and
an acceptable year because it brings glad tidings to us, and what cannot
but be very acceptable to those who know the capacities and necessities
of their own souls. (2.) Proclamations of war against his enemies.
Christ proclaims the day of vengeance of our God, the vengeance he
takes, \[1.\] On sin and Satan, death and hell, and all the powers of
darkness, that were to be destroyed in order to our deliverances; these
Christ triumphed over in his cross, having spoiled and weakened them,
shamed them, and made a show of them openly, therein taking vengeance on
them for all the injury they had done both to God and man, [Col
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015). \[2.\] On those of the children
of men that stand it out against those fair offers. They shall not only
be left, as they deserve, in their captivity, but be dealt with as
enemies; we have the gospel summed up, [Mar
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016), where that part of it, He that
believes shall be saved, proclaims the acceptable year of the Lord to
those that will accept of it; but the other part, He that believes not
shall be damned, proclaims the day of vengeance of our God, that
vengeance which he will take on those that obey not the gospel of Jesus
Christ, [Th2 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008).

4\. He was to be a comforter, and so he is as preacher, healer, and
deliverer; he is sent to comfort all who mourn, and who, mourning, seek
to him, and not to the world, for comfort. Christ not only provides
comfort for them, and proclaims it, but he applies it to them; he does
by his Spirit comfort them. There is enough in him to comfort all who
mourn, whatever their sore or sorrow is; but this comfort is sure to
those who mourn in Zion, who sorrow after a godly sort, according to
God, for his residence is in Zion, - who mourn because of Zion's
calamities and desolations, and mingle their tears by a holy sympathy
with those of all God's suffering people, though they themselves are not
in trouble; such tears God has a bottle for ([Psa
56:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008)), such mourners he has comfort in
store for. As blessings out of Zion are spiritual blessings, so mourners
in Zion are holy mourners, such as carry their sorrows to the throne of
grace (for in Zion was the mercy-seat) and pour them out as Hannah did
before the Lord. To such as these Christ has appointed by his gospel,
and will give by his Spirit ([Isa
61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003)), those consolations which will
not only support them under their sorrows, but turn them into songs of
praise. He will give them, (1.) Beauty for ashes. Whereas they lay in
ashes, as was usual in times of great mourning, they shall not only be
raised out of their dust, but made to look pleasant. Note, The holy
cheerfulness of Christians is their beauty and a great ornament to their
profession. Here is an elegant paronomasia in the original: He will give
them pheer - beauty, for epher - ashes; he will turn their sorrow into
joy as quickly and as easily as you can transpose a letter; for he
speaks, and it is done. (2.) The oil of joy, which make the face to
shine, instead of mourning, which disfigures the countenance and makes
it unlovely. this oil of joy the saints have from that oil of gladness
with which Christ himself was anointed above his fellows, [Heb
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#009). (3.) The garments of praise, such
beautiful garments as were worn on thanksgiving-days, instead of the
spirit of heaviness, dimness, or contraction - open joys for secret
mournings. The spirit of heaviness they keep to themselves (Zion's
mourners weep in secret); but the joy they are recompensed with they are
clothed with as with a garment in the eye of others. Observe, Where God
gives the oil of joy he gives the garment of praise. Those comforts
which come from God dispose the heart to, and enlarge the heart in,
thanksgivings to God. Whatever we have the joy of God must have the
praise and glory of.

5\. He was to be a planter; for the church is God's husbandry. Therefore
he will do all this for his people, will cure their wounds, release them
out of bondage, and comfort them in their sorrows, that they may be
called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that they may
be such and be acknowledged to be such, that they may be ornaments to
God's vineyard and may be fruitful in the fruits of righteousness, as
the branches of God's planting, [Isa
60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021). All that Christ does for us is
to make us God's people, and some way serviceable to him as living
trees, planted in the house of the Lord, and flourishing in the courts
of our God; and all this that he may be glorified - that we may be
brought to glorify him by a sincere devotion and an exemplary
conversation (for herein is our Father glorified, that we bring broth
much fruit), that others also may take occasion from God's favour
shining on his people, and his grace shining in them, to praise him, and
that he may be for ever glorified in his saints.

[Isaiah 61:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 61:4</span></span>

Promises are here made to the Jews now returned out of captivity, and
settled again in their own land, which are to be extended to the gospel
church, and all believers, who through grace are delivered out of
spiritual thraldom; for they are capable of being spiritually applied.

I. It is promised that their houses shall be rebuilt ([Isa
61:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#004)), that their cities shall be
raised out of the ruins in which they had long lain, and be fitted up
for their use again: They shall build the old wastes; the old wastes
shall be built, the waste cities shall be repaired, the former
desolations, even the desolations of many generations, which it was
feared would never be repaired, shall be raised up. The setting up of
Christianity in the world repaired the decays of natural religion and
raised up those desolations both of piety and honesty which had been for
many generations the reproach of mankind. An unsanctified soul is like a
city that is broken down and has no walls, like a house in ruins; but by
the power of Christ's gospel and grace it is repaired, it is put in
order again, and fitted to be a habitation of God through the Spirit.
And they shall do this, those that are released out of captivity; for we
are brought out of the house of bondage that we may serve God, both in
building up ourselves to his glory and in helping to build up his church
on earth.

II\. Those that were so lately servants themselves, working for their
oppressors and lying at their mercy, shall now have servants to do their
work for them and be at their command, not of their brethren (they are
all the Lord's freemen), but of the strangers, and the sons of the
alien, who shall keep their sheep, till their ground, and dress their
gardens, the ancient employments of Abel, Cain, and Adam: Strangers
shall feed your flocks, [Isa 61:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#005).
When, by the grace of God, we attain to a holy indifference as to all
the affairs of this world, buying as though we possessed not - when,
though our hands are employed about them, our hearts are not entangled
with them, but reserved entire for God and his service - then the sons
of the alien are our ploughmen and vine-dressers.

III\. They shall not only be released out of their captivity, but highly
preferred and honourably employed ([Isa
61:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#006)): "While the strangers are
keeping your flocks, you shall be keeping the charge of the sanctuary;
instead of being slaves to your task-masters, you shall be named the
priests of the Lord, a high and holy calling." Priests were princes'
peers, and in Hebrew were called by the same name. You shall be the
ministers of our God, as the Levites were. Note, Those whom God sets at
liberty he sets to work; he delivers them out of the hands of their
enemies that they may serve him, [Luk
1:74](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074), [Luk
1:75](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#075); [Psa
116:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016). But his service is perfect
freedom, nay, it is the greatest honour. When God brought Israel out of
Egypt he took them to be to him a kingdom of priests, [Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006). And the gospel church is a royal
priesthood, [Pe1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009). All believers
are made to our God kings and priests; and they ought to conduct
themselves as such in their devotions and in their whole conversation,
with holiness to the Lord written upon their foreheads, that men may
call them the priests of the Lord.

IV\. The wealth and honour of the Gentile converts shall redound to the
benefit and credit of the church, [Isa
61:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#006). The Gentiles shall be brought
into the church. Those that were strangers shall become fellow-citizens
with the saints; and with themselves they shall bring all they have, to
be devoted to the glory of God and used in his service; and the priests,
the Lord's ministers, shall have the advantage of it. It will be a great
strengthening and quickening, as well as a comfort and encouragement, to
all good Christians, to see the Gentiles serving the interests of God's
kingdom. 1. They shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, not which they
have themselves seized by violence, but which are fairly and honourably
presented to them, as gifts brought to the altar, which the priests and
their families lived comfortably upon. It is not said, "You shall hoard
the riches of the Gentiles, and treasure them," but, "You shall eat
them;" for there is nothing better in riches than to use them and to do
good with them. 2. They shall boast themselves in their glory. Whatever
was the honour of the Gentiles converts before their conversion - their
nobility, estates, learning, virtue, or places of trust and power - it
shall all turn to the reputation of the church to which they have joined
themselves; and whatever is their glory after their conversion - their
holy zeal and strictness of conversation, their usefulness, their
patient suffering, and all the displays of that blessed change which
divine grace has made in them - shall be very much for the glory of God
and therefore all good men shall glory in it.

V. They shall have abundance of comfort and satisfaction in their own
bosoms, [Isa 61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007). The Jews no doubt
were thus privileged after their return; they were in a new world, and
now knew how to value their liberty and property, the pleasures of which
were continually fresh and blooming. Much more do all those rejoice whom
Christ has brought into the glorious liberty of God's children,
especially when the privileges of their adoption shall be completed in
the resurrection of the body. 1. They shall rejoice in their portion;
they shall not only have their own again, but (which is a further gift
of God) they shall have the comfort of it, and a heart to rejoice in it,
[Ecc 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#013). Though the houses of the
returned Jews, as well as their temple, be much inferior to what they
were before the captivity, yet they shall be well pleased with them and
thankful for them. It is a portion in their land, their own land, the
holy land, Immanuel's land, and therefore they shall rejoice in it,
having so lately known what it was to be strangers in a strange land.
Those that have God and heaven for their portion have reason to say that
they have a worthy portion and to rejoice in it. 2. Everlasting joy
shall be unto them, that is, a joyful state of their people, which shall
last long, much longer than the captivity had lasted. Yet that joy of
the Jewish nation was so much allayed, so often interrupted, and so soon
brought to an end, that we must look for the accomplishment of this
promise in the spiritual joy which believers have in God and the eternal
joy they hope for in heaven. 3. This shall be a double recompence to
them, and more than double, for all the reproach and vexation they have
lain under in the land of their captivity: "For your shame you shall
have double honour, and in your land you shall possess double wealth, to
what you lost; the blessing of God upon it, and the comfort you shall
have in it, shall make an abundant reparation for all the damages you
have received. You shall be owned not only as God's sons, but as his
first-born ([Exo 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022)), and therefore
entitled to a double portion." As the miseries of their captivity were
so great that in them they are said to have received double for all
their sins ([Isa 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)), so the joys of
their return shall be so great that in them they shall receive double
for all their shame. The former is applicable to the fulness of Christ's
satisfaction, in which God received double for all our sins; the latter
to the fulness of heaven's joys, in which we shall receive more than
double for all our services and sufferings. Job's case illustrates this:
when God turned again his captivity, he gave him twice as much as he had
before.

VI\. God will be their faithful guide and a God in covenant with them
([Isa 61:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#008)): I will direct their work
in truth. God by his providence will order their affairs for the best,
according to the word of his truth. He will guide them in the ways of
true prosperity, by the rules of true policy. He will by his grace
direct the works of good people in the right way, the true way that
leads to happiness; he will direct them to be done in sincerity and then
they are pleasing to him. God desires truth in the inward parts; and, if
we do our works in truth, he will make an everlasting covenant with us;
for to those that walk before him and are upright he will certainly be a
God all-sufficient. Now, as a reason both of this and of the foregoing
promise, that God will recompense to them double for their shame, those
words come in, in the former part of the verse, I the Lord love
judgment. He loves that judgment should be done among men, both between
magistrates and subjects and between neighbour and neighbour, and
therefore he hates all injustice; and, when wrongs are done to his
people by their oppressors and persecutors, he is displeased with them,
not only because they are done to his people, but because they are
wrongs, and against the eternal rules of equity. If men do not do
justice, he loves to do judgment himself in giving redress to those that
suffer wrong and punishing those that do wrong. God pleads his people's
injured cause, not only because he is jealous for them, but because he
is jealous for justice. To illustrate this, it is added that he hates
robbery for burnt-offering. He hates injustice even in his own people,
who honour him with what they have in their burnt-offerings, much more
does he hate it when it is against his own people; if he hates robbery
when it is for burnt-offerings to himself, much more when it is for
burnt-offerings to idols, and when not only his people are robbed of
their estates, but he is robbed of his offerings. It is a truth much to
the honour of God that ritual services will never atone for the
violation of moral precepts, nor will it justify any man's robbery to
say, "It was for burnt-offerings," or Corban - It is a gift. Behold, to
obey is better than sacrifice, to do justly and love mercy better than
thousands of rams; nay, that robbery is most of all hateful to God which
is covered with this pretence, for it makes the righteous God to be the
patron of unrighteousness. Some make this a reason of the rejection of
the Jews upon the bringing in of the Gentiles ([Isa
61:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#006)), because they were so corrupt in
their morals, and, while they tithed mint and cummin, made nothing of
judgment and mercy ([Mat 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023)),
whereas God loves judgment and insists upon that, and he hates both
robbery for burnt offerings and burnt-offerings for robbery too, as that
of the Pharisees, who made long prayers that they might the more
plausibly devour widows' houses. Others read these words thus: I hate
rapine by iniquity, that is, the spoil which the enemies of God's people
had unjustly made of them; God hated this, and therefore would reckon
with them for it.

VII\. God will entail a blessing upon their posterity after them ([Isa
61:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#009)): Their seed (the children of
those persons themselves that are now the blessed of the Lord, or their
successors in profession, the church's seed) shall be accounted to the
Lord for a generation, [Psa 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#030). 1.
They shall signalize themselves and make their neighbours to take notice
of them: They shall be known among the Gentiles, shall distinguish
themselves by the gravity, seriousness, humility, and cheerfulness of
their conversation, especially by that brotherly love by which all men
shall know them to be Christ's disciples. And, they thus distinguishing
themselves, God shall dignify them, by making them the blessings of
their age and instruments of his glory, and by giving them remarkable
tokens of his favour, which shall make them eminent and gain them
respect from all about them. Let the children of godly parents love in
such a manner that they may be known to be such, that all who observe
them may see in them the fruits of a good education, and an answer to
the prayers that were put up for them; and then they may expect that God
will make them known, by the fulfilling of that promise to them, that
the generation of the upright shall be blessed. 2. God shall have the
glory of this, for every one shall attribute it to the blessing of God;
all that see them shall see so much of the grace of God in them, and his
favour towards them, that they shall acknowledge them to be the seed
which the Lord has blessed and doth bless, for it includes both. See
what it is to be blessed of God. Whatever good appears in any it must be
taken notice of as the fruit of God's blessing and he must be glorified
in it.

[Isaiah 61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 61:10</span></span>

Some make this the song of joy and praise to be sung by the prophet in
the name of Jerusalem, congratulating her on the happy change of her
circumstances in the accomplishment of the foregoing promises; others
make it to be spoken by Christ in the name of the New Testament church
triumphing in gospel grace. We may take in both, the former as a type of
the latter. We are here taught to rejoice with holy joy, to God's
honour, 1. In the beginning of this good work, the clothing of the
church with righteousness and salvation, [Isa
61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010). Upon this account I will
greatly rejoice in the Lord. Those that rejoice in God have cause to
rejoice greatly, and we need not fear running into an extreme in the
greatness of our joy when we make God the gladness of our joy. The first
gospel song begins like this, My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my
spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour, [Luk
1:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#046), [Luk
1:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#047). There is just matter for this
joy, and all the reason in the world why it should terminate in God; for
salvation and righteousness are wrought out and brought in, and the
church is clothed with them. The salvation God wrought for the Jews, and
that righteousness of his in which he appeared for them, and that
reformation which appeared among them, made them look as glorious in the
eyes of all wise men as if they had been clothed in robes of state or
nuptial garments. Christ has clothed his church with an eternal
salvation (and that is truly great) by clothing it with the
righteousness both of justification and sanctification. The clean linen
is the righteousness of saints, [Rev
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008). Observe how these tow are put
together; those, and those only, shall be clothed with the garments of
salvation hereafter that are covered with the robe of righteousness now:
and those garments are rich and splendid clothing, like the priestly
garments (for so the word signifies) with which the bridegroom decks
himself. The brightness of the sun itself is compared to them. [Psa
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005), He is as a bridegroom coming out
of his chamber, completely dressed. Such is the beauty of God's grace in
those that are clothed with the robe of righteousness, that by the
righteousness of Christ are recommended to God's favour and by the
sanctification of the Spirit have God's image renewed upon them; they
are decked as a bride to be espoused to God, and taken into covenant
with him; they are decked as a priest to be employed for God, and taken
into communion with him. 2. In the progress and continuance of this good
work, [Isa 61:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#011). It is not like a day
of triumph, which is glorious for the present, but is soon over. No; the
righteousness and salvation with which the church is clothed are durable
clothing; so they are said to be, [Isa
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#018). The church, when she is
pleasing herself with the righteousness and salvation that Jesus Christ
has clothed her with, rejoices to think that these inestimable blessings
shall both spring for future ages and spread to distant regions. (1.)
They shall spring forth for ages to come, as the fruits of the earth
which are produced very year, from generation to generation. As the
earth, even that which lies common, brings forth her bud, the tender
grass at the return of the year, and as the garden enclosed causes the
things that are sown in it to spring forth in their season, so duly, so
constantly, so powerfully, and with such advantage to mankind will the
Lord God cause righteousness and praise to spring forth, by virtue of
the covenant of grace, as, in the former case, by virtue of the covenant
of providence. See what the promised blessings are - righteousness and
praise (for those that are clothed with righteousness show forth the
praises of him that clothed them); these shall spring forth under the
influence of the dew of divine grace. Though it may sometimes be winter
with the church, when those blessings seem to wither and do not appear,
yet the root of them is fixed, a spring-time will come, when through the
reviving beams of the approaching Sun of righteousness they shall
flourish again. (2.) They shall spread far, and spring forth before all
the nations; the great salvation shall be published and proclaimed to
all the world and the ends of the earth shall see it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 62](isa062)

</div>
