<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa015)  [Next](isa017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 16:0</span></span>

This chapter continues and concludes the burden of Moab. In it, I. The
prophet gives good counsel to the Moabites, to reform what was amiss
among them, and particularly to be kind to God's people, as the
likeliest way to prevent the judgments before threatened ([Isa
16:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)). II. Fearing they would not
take this counsel (they were so proud), he goes on to foretel the
lamentable devastation of their country, and the confusion they should
be brought to, and this within three years ([Isa
16:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006)).

[Isaiah 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 16:1</span></span>

God has made it to appear that he delights not in the ruin of sinners by
telling them what they may do to prevent the ruin; so he does here to
Moab.

I. He advises them to be just to the house of David, and to pay the
tribute they had formerly covenanted to pay to the kings of his line
([Isa 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)): Send you the lamb to the
ruler of the land. David made the Moabites tributaries to him, [Sa2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002). They became his servants, and
brought gifts. Afterwards they paid their tribute to the kings of Israel
([Kg2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004)), and paid it in lambs. Now
the prophet requires them to pay it to Hezekiah. Let it be raised and
levied from all parts of the country, from Selah, a frontier city of
Moab on the one side, to the wilderness, a boundary of the kingdom on
the other side: and let it be sent, where it should be sent, to the
mount of the daughter of Zion, the city of David. Some take it as an
advice to send a lamb for a sacrifice to God, the ruler of the earth (so
it may be read), the Lord of the whole earth, ruler of all lands, the
land of Moab as well as the land of Israel, "Send it to the temple built
on Mount Zion." And some think it is in this sense spoken ironically,
upbraiding the Moabites with their folly in delaying to repent and make
their peace with God. "Now you would be glad to send a lamb to Mount
Zion, to make the God of Israel your friend; but it is too late: the
decree has gone forth, the consumption is determined, and the daughters
of Moab shall be cast out as a wandering bird," [Isa
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#002). I rather take it as good advice
seriously given, like that of Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar when he was
reading him his doom, [Dan 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#027). Break
off thy sins by righteousness, if it may be a lengthening of thy
tranquillity. And it is applicable to the great gospel duty of
submission to Christ, as the ruler of the land, and our ruler: "Send him
the lamb, the best you have, yourselves a living sacrifice. When you
come to God, the great ruler, come in the name of the Lamb, the Lamb of
God. For else it shall be" (so we may read it) "that, as a wandering
bird cast out of the nest, so shall the daughters of Moab be. If you
will not pay your quit-rent, your just tribute to the king of Judah, you
shall be turned out of your houses: The daughters of Moab (the country
villages, or the women of your country) shall flutter about the fords of
Arnon, attempting that way to make their escape to some other land, like
a wandering bird thrown out of the nest half-fledged." Those that will
not submit to Christ, nor be gathered under the shadow of his wings,
shall be as a bird that wanders from her nest, that shall either be
snatched up by the next bird of prey or shall wander endlessly in
continual frights. Those that will not yield to the fear of God shall be
made to yield to the fear of every thing else.

II\. He advises them to be kind to the seed of Israel ([Isa
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#003)): "Take counsel, call a
convention, and consult among yourselves what is fit to be done in the
present critical juncture; and you will find it your best way to execute
judgment, to reverse all the unrighteous decrees you have made, by which
you have put hardships upon the people of God, and, in token of your
repentance for them, study now how to oblige them, and this shall be
accepted of God more than all burnt-offering and sacrifice."

1\. The prophet foresaw some storm coming upon the people of God,
perhaps the good people of the ten tribes, or of the two and a half on
the other side Jordan, whose country joined to that of Moab, and who, by
the merciful providence of God, escaped the fury of the Assyrian army,
had their lives given them for a prey, and were reserved for better
times, but were put to the utmost extremity to shift for their own
safety. The danger and trouble they were in were like the scorching heat
at noon; the face of the spoiler was very fierce upon them and the
oppressor and extortioner were ready to swallow them up after stripping
them of what they had.

2\. He bespeaks a shelter for them in the land of Moab, when their own
land was made too hot for them. This judgment they must execute; thus
wisely must they do for themselves, and thus kindly must they deal with
the people of God. If they would themselves continue in their
habitations, let them now open their doors to the distressed dispersed
members of God's church, and be to them like a cool shade to those that
bear the burden and heat of the day. Let them not discover those that
absconded among them, nor deliver them up to the pursuers that made
search for them: "Betray not him that wandereth, nor deliver him up" (as
the Edomites did, [Oba 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#013), [Oba
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#014)), "but hide the outcasts." This
was that good work by which Rahab's faith was justified, and proved to
be sincere, [Heb 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#031). "Nay, do not
only hide them for a time, but, if there be occasion, let them be
naturalized: Let my outcasts dwell with thee, Moab ([Isa
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#004)); find a lodging for them and be
thou a covert to them. Let them be taken under the protection of the
government, though they are but poor, and likely to be a charge to
thee." Note, (1.) It is often the lot even of those who are Israelites
indeed to be outcasts, driven out of house and harbour by persecution or
war, [Heb 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037). (2.) God owns them
when men reject and disown them. They are outcasts, but they are my
outcasts. The Lord knows those that are his wherever he finds them, even
where no one else knows them. (3.) God will find a rest and shelter for
his outcasts; for, though they are persecuted, they are not forsaken. He
will himself be their dwelling-place if they have no other, and in him
they shall be at home. (4.) God can, when he pleases, raise up friends
for his people even among Moabites, when they can find none in all the
land of Israel that can and dare shelter them. The earth often helps the
woman, [Rev 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#016). (5.) Those that
expect to find favour when they are in trouble themselves must show
favour to those that are in trouble; and what service is done to God's
outcasts shall no doubt be recompensed one way or other.

3\. He assures them of the mercy God had in store for his people. (1.)
That they should not long need their kindness, or be troublesome to
them: For the extortioner is almost at an end already, and the spoiler
ceases. God's people shall not be long outcasts; they shall have
tribulation ten days ([Rev 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010)), and
that is all. The spoiler would never cease spoiling if he might have his
will; but God has him in a chain. Hitherto he shall go, but no further.
(2.) That they should, ere long, be in a capacity to return their
kindness ([Isa 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#005)): "Though the
throne of the ten tribes be sunk and overturned, yet the throne of David
shall be established in mercy, by the mercy they receive from God and
the mercy they show to others; and by the same methods may your throne
be established if you please." It would engage great men to be kind to
the people of God if they would but observe, as they easily might, how
often such conduct brings the blessing of God upon kingdoms and
families. "Make Hezekiah your friend, for you will find it your interest
to do so upon the account both of the grace of God in him and the
presence of God with him. He shall sit upon the throne in truth, and
then he does indeed sit in honour and sit firmly. Then he shall sit
judging, and will then be a protector to those that have been a shelter
to the people of God." And see in him the character of a good
magistrate. \[1.\] He shall seek judgment; that is, he shall seek
occasions of doing right to those that are wronged, and shall punish the
injurious even before they are complained of: or he shall diligently
search into every cause brought before him, that he may find where the
right lies. \[2.\] He shall hasten righteousness, and not delay to do
justice, nor keep those long waiting that make application to him for
the redress of their grievances. Though he seeks judgment, and
deliberates upon it, yet he does not, under pretence of deliberation,
stay the progress of the streams of justice. Let the Moabites take
example by this, and then assure themselves that their state shall be
established.

[Isaiah 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 16:6</span></span>

Here we have, I. The sins with which Moab is charged, [Isa
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006). The prophet seems to check
himself for going about to give good counsel to the Moabites, concluding
they would not take the advice he gave them. He told them their duty
(whether they would hear or whether they would forbear), but despairs of
working any good upon them; he would have healed them, but they would
not be healed. Those that will not be counselled cannot be helped. Their
sins were, 1. Pride. This is most insisted upon; for perhaps there are
more precious souls ruined by pride than by any one lust whatsoever. The
Moabites were notorious for this: "We have heard in both ears of the
pride of Moab; it is what all their neighbours cry out shame upon them
for. He is very proud; the body of the nation is so, forgetting the
baseness of their origin and the brand of infamy fastened upon them by
that law of God which forbade a Moabite to enter into the congregation
of the Lord for ever, [Deu 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#003). We
have heard of his haughtiness and his pride. It is not the rash and
rigid censure of one of two concerning them, but it is the character
which all that know them will give of them. They are a proud people, and
therefore they will not take good counsel when it is given them. They
think themselves too wise to be advised; therefore they will not take
example by Hezekiah to do justly and love mercy. They scorn to make him
their pattern, for they think themselves able to teach him. They are
proud, and therefore will not be subject to God himself nor regard the
warnings he gives them. The wicked, in the pride of his countenance,
will not seek after God. They are proud, and therefore will not
entertain and protect God's outcasts; they scorn to have any thing to do
with them." But this is not all: - 2. "We have heard of his wrath too
(for those that are very proud are commonly very passionate),
particularly his wrath against the people of God, whom therefore he will
rather persecute than protect. 3. It is with his lies that he gains the
gratifications of his pride and his passion; but his lies shall not be
so; he shall not compass his proud and angry projects as he hoped he
should." Some read it, His haughtiness, his pride, and his wrath, are
greater than his strength. "We know that, if we lay at his mercy, we
should find no mercy with him, but he has not power equal to his malice.
His pride draws down ruin upon him; for it is the preface to
destruction, and he has not strength to ward it off."

II\. The sorrows with which Moab is threatened ([Isa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#007)): Therefore shall Moab howl for
Moab. All the inhabitants shall bitterly lament the ruin of their
country. They shall complain one to another: Every one shall howl in
despair, and not one shall either see any cause or have any heart to
encourage his friend. Observe,

1\. The causes of this sorrow. (1.) The destruction of their cities: For
the foundations of Kir-haraseth shall you mourn. That great and strong
city, which had held out against a mighty force ([Kg2
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#025)), should now be levelled with the
ground, either burnt or broken down, and its foundations stricken,
bruised and broken (so the word signifies); they shall howl when they
see their splendid cities turned into ruinous heaps. (2.) The desolation
of their country. Moab was famous for its fields and vineyards; but
those shall all be laid waste by the invading army, [Isa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008), [Isa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#010). See, \[1.\] What a fruitful
pleasant country they had, as the garden of the Lord, [Gen
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010). It was planted with choice and
noble vines, with principal plants, which reached even to Jazer, a city
in the tribe of Gad. The luxuriant branches of their vines wandered, and
wound themselves along the ranges on which they were spread, even
through the wilderness of Moab. There were vineyards there. Nay, they
were stretched out, and went even to the sea, the Dead Sea: the best
grapes grew in their hedge-rows. \[2.\] How merry and pleasant they had
been in it. Many a time they had shouted for their summer fruits, and
for their harvest, as the country people sometimes do with us when they
have cut down all their corn. They had had joy and gladness in their
fields and vineyards, singing and shouting at the treading of their
grapes. Nothing is said of their praising God for their abundance, and
giving him the glory of it. If they had made it the matter of their
thanksgiving, they might still have had it the food and fuel of their
lusts; see therefore, \[3.\] How they should be stripped of all. "The
fields shall languish, all the fruits of them being carried away or
trodden down; they cannot now enrich their owners as they have done, and
therefore they languish. The soldiers, called here the lords of the
heathen, shall break down all the plants, though they were principal
plants, the choicest that could be got. Now the shouting for the
enjoyment of the summer fruits has fallen, and is turned into howling
for the loss of them. The joy of harvest has ceased; there is no more
singing, no more shouting, for the treading out of wine. They have not
what they have had to rejoice in, nor have they a disposition to
rejoice; the ruin of their country has marred their mirth." Note, First,
God can easily change the note of those that are most addicted to mirth
and pleasure, can soon turn their laughter into mourning and their joy
into heaviness. Secondly, Joy in God is, upon this account, far better
than the joy of harvest, that it is what we cannot be robbed of, [Psa
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006), [Psa
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#007). Destroy the vines and the
fig-trees, and you make all the mirth of a carnal heart to cease, [Hos
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#011), [Hos
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#012). But a gracious soul can rejoice
in the Lord as the God of its salvation even when the fig-tree does not
blossom and there is no fruit in the vine, [Hab
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017), [Hab
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#018). In God therefore let us always
rejoice with a holy triumph, and in other things let us always rejoice
with a holy trembling, rejoice as though we rejoiced not.

2\. The concurrence of the prophet with them in this sorrow: "I will
with weeping bewail Jazer, and the vine of Sibmah, and look with a
compassionate concern upon the desolations of such a pleasant country. I
will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon! and mingle them with thy
tears;" nay ([Isa 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011)), it appears
to be an inward grief: My bowels shall sound like a harp for Moab; it
should make such an impression upon him that he should feel an inward
trembling, like that of the strings of a harp when it is played upon. It
well becomes God's prophets to acquaint themselves with grief; the great
prophet did so. The afflictions of the world, as well as those of the
church, should be afflictions to us. See [Isa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005).

III\. In the close of the chapter we have, 1. The insufficiency of the
gods of Moab, the false gods, to help them, [Isa
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#012). "Moab shall be soon weary of
the high place. He shall spend his spirits and strength in vain in
praying to his idols; they cannot help him, and he shall be convinced
that they cannot." It is seen that it is to no purpose to expect any
relief from the high places on earth; it must come from above the hills.
Men are generally so stupid that they will not believe, till they are
made to see, the vanity of idols and of all creature-confidences, nor
will come off from them till they are made weary of them. But, when he
is weary of his high places, he will not go, as he should, to God's
sanctuary, but to his sanctuary, to the temple of Chemosh, the principal
idol of Moab (so it is generally understood); and he shall pray there to
as little purpose, and as little to his own case and satisfaction, as he
did in his high places; for, whatever honours idolaters give to their
idols, they do not thereby make them at all the better able to help
them. Whether they are the dii majorum gentium - gods of the higher
order, or minorum - of the lower order, they are alike the creatures of
men's fancy and the work of men's hands. Perhaps it may be meant of
their coming to God's sanctuary. When they found they could have no
succours from their own high places some of them would come to the
temple of God at Jerusalem, to pray there, but in vain; he will justly
send them back to the gods whom they have served, [Jdg
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#014). 2. The sufficiency of the God
of Israel, the only true God, to make good what he had spoken against
them. (1.) The thing itself was long since determined ([Isa
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#013)): This is the word, this is the
thing, that the Lord has spoken concerning Moab, since the time that he
began to be so proud, and insolent, and abusive to God's people. The
country was long ago doomed to ruin; this was enough to give an
assurance of it that it is the word which the Lord has spoken; and, as
he will never unsay what he has spoken, so all the power of hell and
earth cannot gainsay it, or obstruct the execution of it. (2.) Now it
was made known when it should be done. The time was before fixed in the
counsel of God, but now it was revealed: The Lord has spoken that it
shall be within three years, [Isa
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#014). It is not for us to know, or
covet to know, the times and the seasons, any further than God has
thought fit to make them known, and so far we may and must take notice
of them. See how God makes known his mind by degrees; the light of
divine revelation shone more and more, and so does the light of divine
grace in the heart. Observe, \[1.\] The sentence passed upon Moab: The
glory of Moab shall be contemned, that is, it shall be contemptible,
when all those things they have gloried in shall come to nothing. Such
is the glory of this world, so fading and uncertain, admired awhile, but
soon slighted. Let that therefore which will soon be contemptible in the
eyes of others be always contemptible in our eyes in comparison with the
far more exceeding weight of glory. It was the glory of Moab that their
country was very populous and their forces were courageous; but where is
her glory when all that great multitude is in a manner swept away, some
by one judgment and some by another, and the little remnant that is left
shall be very small and feeble, not able to bear up under their own
griefs, much less to make head against their enemies' insults? Let not
therefore the strong glory in their strength nor the many in their
numbers. \[2.\] The time fixed for the execution of this sentence:
Within three years, as the years of a hireling, that is, at the three
years' end exactly, for a servant that is hired for a certain term keeps
account to a day. Let Moab know that her ruin is very near, and prepare
accordingly. Fair warning is given, and with it space to repent, which
if they had improved, as Nineveh did, we have reason to think the
judgments threatened would have been prevented.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 17](isa017)

</div>
