<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa039)  [Next](isa041) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 40:0</span></span>

At this chapter begins the latter part of the prophecy of this book,
which is not only divided from the former by the historical chapters
that come between, but seems to be distinguished from it in the scope
and style of it. In the former part the name of the prophet was
frequently prefixed to the particular sermons, besides the general title
(as [Isa 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001); [Isa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003); [Isa
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#001)); but this is all one continued
discourse, and the prophet not so much as once named. That consisted of
many burdens, many woes; this consists of many blessings. There the
distress which the people of God were in by the Assyrian, and their
deliverance out of that, were chiefly prophesied of; but that is here
spoken of as a thing past ([Isa 52:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#004));
and the captivity in Babylon, and their deliverance out of that, which
were much greater events, of more extensive and abiding concern, are
here largely foretold. Before God sent his people into captivity he
furnished them with precious promises for their support and comfort in
their trouble; and we may well imagine of what great use to them the
glorious, gracious, light of this prophecy was, in that cloudy and dark
day, and how much it helped to dry up their tears by the rivers of
Babylon. But it looks further yet, and to greater things; much of Christ
and gospel grace we meet with in the foregoing part of this book, but in
this latter part we shall find much more; and, as if it were designed
for a prophetic summary of the New Testament, it begins with that which
begins the gospels, "The voice of one crying in the wilderness" ([Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)), and concludes with that which
concludes the book of the Revelation, "The new heavens and the new
earth," ([Isa 66:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#022)). Even Mr. White
acknowledges that, as all the mercies of God to the Jewish nation bore
some resemblance to those glorious things performed by our Saviour for
man's redemption, so they are by the Spirit of God expressed in such
terms as show plainly that while the prophet is speaking of the
redemption of the Jews he had in his thoughts a more glorious
deliverance. And we need not look for any further accomplishment of
these prophecies yet to come; for if Jesus be he, and his kingdom be it,
that should come, we are to look for no other, but the carrying on and
completing of the same blessed work which was begun in the first
preaching and planting of Christianity in the world.

In this chapter we have, I. Orders given to preach and publish the glad
tidings of redemption ([Isa 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001), [Isa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)). II. These glad tidings
introduced by a voice in the wilderness, which gives assurance that all
obstructions shall be removed ([Isa
40:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)), and that, though all
creatures fail and fade, the word of God shall be established and
accomplished ([Isa 40:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)). III. A
joyful prospect given to the people of God of the happiness which this
redemption should bring along with it ([Isa
40:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009)). IV. The sovereignty and
power of that God magnified who undertakes to work out this redemption
([Isa 40:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012)). V. Idols therefore
triumphed over and idolaters upbraided with their folly ([Isa
40:18-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018)). VI. A reproof given to the
people of God for their fears and despondencies, and enough said, in a
few words, to silence those fears ([Isa
40:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#027)). And we, through patience
and comfort of this scripture, may have hope.

[Isaiah 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 40:1</span></span>

We have here the commission and instructions given, not to this prophet
only, but, with him, to all the Lord's prophets, nay, and to all
Christ's ministers, to proclaim comfort to God's people. 1. This did not
only warrant, but enjoin, this prophet himself to encourage the good
people who lived in his own time, who could not but have very melancholy
apprehensions of things when they saw Judah and Jerusalem by their
daring impieties ripening apace for ruin, and God in his providence
hastening ruin upon them. Let them be sure that, notwithstanding all
this, God had mercy in store for them. 2. It was especially a direction
to the prophets that should live in the time of captivity, when
Jerusalem was in ruins; they must encourage the captives to hope for
enlargement in due time. 3. Gospel ministers, being employed by the
blessed Spirit as comforters, and as helpers of the joy of Christians,
are here put in mind of their business. Here we have,

I. Comfortable words directed to God's people in general, [Isa
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001). The prophets have instructions
from their God (for he is the Lord God of the holy prophets, [Rev
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006)) to comfort the people of God;
and the charge is doubled, Comfort you, comfort you - not because the
prophets are unwilling to do it (no, it is the most pleasant part of
their work), but because sometimes the souls of God's people refuse to
be comforted, and their comforters must repeat things again and again,
ere they can fasten any thing upon them. Observe here, 1. There are a
people in the world that are God's people. 2. It is the will of God that
his people should be a comforted people, even in the worst of times. 3.
It is the work and business of ministers to do what they can for the
comfort of God's people. 4. Words of conviction, such as we had in the
former part of this book, must be followed with words of comfort, such
as we have here; for he that has torn will heal us.

II\. Comfortable words directed to Jerusalem in particular: "Speak to
the heart of Jerusalem ([Isa 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002));
speak that which will revive her heart, and be a cordial to her and to
all that belong to her and wish her well. Do not whisper it, but cry
unto her: cry aloud, to show saints their comforts as well as to show
sinners their transgressions; make her hear it:" 1. "That the days of
her trouble are numbered and finished: Her warfare is accomplished, the
set time of her servitude; the campaign is now at an end, and she shall
retire into quarters of refreshment." Human life is a warfare ([Job
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001)); the Christian life much more.
But the struggle will not last always; the warfare will be accomplished,
and then the good soldiers shall not only enter into rest, but be sure
of their pay. 2. "That the cause of her trouble is removed, and, when
that is taken away, the effect will cease. Tell her that her iniquity is
pardoned, God is reconciled to her, and she shall no longer be treated
as one guilty before him." Nothing can be spoken more comfortably than
this, Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee. Troubles are
then removed in love when sin is pardoned. 3. "That the end of her
trouble is answered: She has received of the Lord double for the cure of
all her sins, sufficient, and more than sufficient, to separate between
her and her idols," the worship of which was the great sin for which God
had a controversy with them, and from which he designed to reclaim them
by their captivity in Babylon: and it had that effect upon them; it
begat in them a rooted antipathy to idolatry, and was physic doubly
strong for the purging out of that iniquity. Or it may be taken as the
language of the divine compassion: His soul was grieved for the misery
of Israel ([Jdg 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#016)), and, like a
tender father, since he spoke against them he earnestly remembered them
([Jer 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020)), and was ready to say
that he had given them too much correction. They, being very penitent,
acknowledged that God has punished them less than their iniquities
deserved; but he, being very pitiful, owned, in a manner, that he had
punished them more than they deserved. True penitents have indeed, in
Christ and his sufferings, received of the Lord's hand double for all
their sins; for the satisfaction Christ made by his death was of such an
infinite value that it was more than double to the demerits of sin; for
God spared not his own Son.

[Isaiah 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 40:3</span></span>

The time to favour Zion, yea, the set time, having come, the people of
God must be prepared, by repentance and faith, for the favours designed
them; and, in order to call them to both these, we have here the voice
of one crying in the wilderness, which may be applied to those prophets
who were with the captives in their wilderness-state, and who, when they
saw the day of their deliverance dawn, called earnestly upon them to
prepare for it, and assured them that all the difficulties which stood
in the way of their deliverance should be got over. It is a good sign
that mercy is preparing for us if we find God's grace preparing us for
it, [Psa 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#017). But it must be applied
to John the Baptist; for, though God was the speaker, he was the voice
of one crying in the wilderness, and his business was to prepare the way
of the Lord, to dispose men's minds for the reception and entertainment
of the gospel of Christ. The way of the Lord is prepared,

I. By repentance for sin; that was it which John Baptist preached to all
Judah and Jerusalem ([Mat 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002), [Mat
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#005)), and thereby made ready a people
prepared for the Lord, [Luk 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017).

1\. The alarm is given; let all take notice of it at their peril; God is
coming in a way of mercy, and we must prepare for him, [Isa
40:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003). If we apply it to their
captivity, it may be taken as a promise that, whatever difficulties lie
in their way, when they return they shall be removed. This voice in the
wilderness (divine power going along with it) sets pioneers on work to
level the roads. But it may be taken as a call to duty, and it is the
same duty that we are called to, in preparation for Christ's entrance
into our souls. (1.) We must get into such a frame of spirit as will
dispose us to receive Christ and his gospel: "Prepare you the way of the
Lord; prepare yourselves for him, and let all that be suppressed which
would be an obstruction to his entrance. Make room for Christ: Make
straight a highway for him." If he prepare the end for us, we ought
surely to prepare the way for him. Prepare for the Saviour; lift up your
heads, O you gates! [Psa 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007), [Psa
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#009). Prepare for the salvation, the
great salvation, and other minor deliverances. Let us get to be fit for
them, and then God will work them out. Let us not stand in our own
light, nor put a bar in our own door, but find, or make, a highway for
him, even in that which was desert ground. This is that for which he
waits to be gracious. (2.) We must get our hearts levelled by divine
grace. Those that are hindered from comfort in Christ by their
dejections and despondencies are the valleys that must be exalted. Those
that are hindered from comfort in Christ by a proud conceit of their own
merit and worth are the mountains and hills that must be made low. Those
that have entertained prejudices against the word and ways of God, that
are untractable, and disposed to thwart and contradict even that which
is plain and easy because it agrees not with their corrupt inclinations
and secular interests, are the crooked that must be made straight and
the rough places that must be made plain. Let but the gospel of Christ
have a fair hearing, and it cannot fail of acceptance. This prepares the
way of the Lord; and thus God will by his grace prepare his own way in
all the vessels of mercy, whose hearts he opens as he did Lydia's.

2\. When this is done the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, [Isa
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#005). (1.) When the captives are
prepared for deliverance Cyrus shall proclaim it, and those shall have
the benefit of it, and those only, whose hearts the Lord shall stir up
with courage and resolution to break through the discouragements that
lay in their way, and to make nothing of the hills, and valleys, and all
the rough places. (2.) When John Baptist has for some time preached
repentance, mortification, and reformation, and so made ready a people
prepared for the Lord ([Luk 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017)),
then the Messiah himself shall be revealed in his glory, working
miracles, which John did not, and by his grace, which is his glory,
binding up and healing with consolations those whom John had wounded
with convictions. And this revelation of divine glory shall be a light
to lighten the Gentiles. All flesh shall see it together, and not the
Jews only; they shall see and admire it, see it and bid it welcome; as
the return out of captivity was taken notice of by the neighbouring
nations, [Psa 126:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#002). And it shall be
the accomplishment of the word of God, not one iota or tittle of which
shall fall to the ground: The mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and
therefore the hand of the Lord will effect it.

II\. By confidence in the word of the Lord, and not in any creature. The
mouth of the Lord having spoken it, the voice has this further to cry
(he that has ears to hear let him hear it), The word of our God shall
stand for ever, [Isa 40:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#008).

1\. By this accomplishment of the prophecies and promises of salvation,
and the performance of them to the utmost in due time, it appears that
the word of the Lord is sure and what may be safely relied on. Then we
are prepared for deliverance when we depend entirely upon the word of
God, build our hopes on that, with an assurance that it will not make us
ashamed: in a dependence upon this word we must be brought to own that
all flesh is grass, withering and fading. (1.) The power of man, when it
does appear against the deliverance, is not to be feared; for it shall
be as grass before the word of the Lord: it shall wither and be trodden
down. The insulting Babylonians, who promise themselves that the
desolations of Jerusalem shall be perpetual, are but as grass which the
spirit of the Lord blows upon, makes nothing of, but blasts all its
glory; for the word of the Lord, which promises their deliverance, shall
stand for ever, and it is not in the power of their enemies to hinder
the execution of it. (2.) The power of man, when it would appear for the
deliverance, is not to be trusted to; for it is but as grass in
comparison with the word of the Lord, which is the only firm foundation
for us to build our hope upon. When God is about to work salvation for
his people he will take them off from depending upon creatures, and
looking for it from hills and mountains. They shall fail them, and their
expectations from them shall be frustrated: The Spirit of the Lord shall
blow upon them; for God will have no creature to be a rival with him for
the hope and confidence of his people; and, as it is his word only that
shall stand for ever, so in that word only our faith must stand. When we
are brought to this, then, and not till then, we are fit for mercy.

2\. The word of our God, that glory of the Lord which is now to be
revealed, the gospel, and that grace which is brought with it to us and
wrought by it in us, shall stand for ever; and this is the satisfaction
of all believers, when they find all their creature-comforts withering
and fading like grass. Thus the apostle applies it to the word which by
the gospel is preached unto us, and which lives and abides for ever as
the incorruptible seed by which we are born again, [Pe1
1:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023). To prepare the way of the
Lord we must be convinced, (1.) Of the vanity of the creature, that all
flesh is grass, weak and withering. We ourselves are so, and therefore
cannot save ourselves; all our friends are so, and therefore are unable
to save us. All the beauty of the creature, which might render it
amiable, is but as the flower of grass, soon blasted, and therefore
cannot recommend us to God and to his acceptance. We are dying
creatures; all our comforts in this word are dying comforts, and
therefore cannot be the felicity of our immortal souls. We must look
further for a salvation, look further for a portion. (2.) Of the
validity of the promise of God. We must be convinced that the word of
the Lord can do that for us which all flesh cannot - that, forasmuch as
it stands for ever, it will furnish us with a happiness that will run
parallel with the duration of our souls, which must live for ever; for
the things that are not seen, but must be believed, are eternal.

[Isaiah 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 40:9</span></span>

It was promised ([Isa 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#005)) that the
glory of the Lord shall be revealed; that is it with the hopes of which
God's people must be comforted. Now here we are told,

I. How it shall be revealed, [Isa
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009). 1. It shall be revealed to Zion
and Jerusalem; notice shall be given of it to the remnant that are left
in Zion and Jerusalem, the poor of the land, who were vine-dressers and
husbandmen; it shall be told them that their brethren shall return to
them. This shall be told also to the captives who belonged to Zion and
Jerusalem, and retained their affection for them. Zion is said to dwell
with the daughter of Babylon ([Zac
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#007)); and there she receives notice of
Cyrus's gracious proclamation; and so the margin reads it, O thou that
tellest good tidings to Zion, etc., meaning the persons who were
employed in publishing that proclamation; let them do it with a good
will, let them make the country ring of it, and let them tell it to the
sons of Zion in their own language, saying to them, Behold your God. 2.
It shall be published by Zion and Jerusalem (so the text reads it);
those that remain there, or that have already returned, when they find
the deliverance proceeding towards perfection, let them proclaim it in
the most public places, whence they may be best heard by all the cities
of Judah; let them proclaim it as loudly as they can: let them lift up
their voice with strength, and not be afraid of overstraining
themselves; let them not be afraid lest the enemy should hear it and
quarrel with them, or lest it should not prove true, or not such good
tidings as at first it appeared; let them say to the cities of Judah,
and all the inhabitants of the country, Behold your God. When God is
going on with the salvation of his people, let them industriously spread
the news among their friends, let them tell them that it is God that has
done it; whoever were the instruments, God was the author; it is their
God, a God in covenant with them, and he does it as theirs, and they
will reap the benefit and comfort of it. "Behold him, take notice of his
hand in it, and look above second causes; behold, the God you have long
looked for has come at last ([Isa
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#009)): This is our God, we have waited
for him." This may refer to the invitation which was sent forth from
Jerusalem to the cities of Judah, as soon as they had set up an altar,
immediately upon their return out of captivity, to come and join with
them in their sacrifices, [Ezr 3:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#002).
"When the worship of God is set up again, send notice of it to all your
brethren, that they may share with you in the comfort of it." But this
was to have its full accomplishment in the apostles' public and
undaunted preaching of the gospel to all nations, beginning at
Jerusalem. The voice crying in the wilderness gave notice that he was
coming; but now notice is given that he has come. Behold the Lamb of
God; take a full view of your Redeemer. Behold your King, behold your
God.

II\. What that glory is which shall be revealed. "Your God will come,
will show himself,"

1\. "With the power and greatness of a prince ([Isa
40:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#010)): He will come with strong hand,
too strong to be obstructed, though it may be opposed. His strong hand
shall subdue his people to himself, and shall restrain and conquer his
and their enemies. He will come who is strong enough to break through
all the difficulties that lie in his way." Our Lord Jesus was full of
power, a mighty Saviour. Some read, it, He will come against the mighty
one, and overpower him, overcome him. Satan is the strong man armed; but
our Lord Jesus is stronger than he, and he shall make it to appear that
he is so, for, (1.) He shall reign in defiance of all opposition: His
arm shall rule, shall overrule for him, for the fulfilling of his
counsels, to his own glory; for he is his own end. (2.) He shall
recompense to all according to their works, as a righteous Judge: His
reward is with him; he brings along with him, as a returning prince,
punishments for the rebels and preferments for his loyal subjects. (3.)
He shall proceed and accomplish his purpose: His work is before him,
that is, he knows perfectly well what he has to do, which way to go
about it, and how to compass it. He himself knows what he will do.

2\. "With the pity and tenderness of a shepherd," [Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011). God is the Shepherd of Israel
([Psa 80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001)); Christ is the good
Shepherd, [Joh 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011). The same that
rules with the strong hand of a prince leads and feeds with the kind
hand of a shepherd. (1.) He takes care of all his flock, the little
flock: He shall feed his flock like a shepherd. His word is food for his
flock to feed on; his ordinances are fields for them to feed in; his
ministers are under-shepherds that are appointed to attend them. (2.) He
takes particular care of those that most need his care, the lambs that
are weak, and cannot help themselves, and are unaccustomed to hardship,
and those that are with young, that are therefore heavy, and, if any
harm be done them, are in danger of casting their young. He particularly
takes care for a succession, that it may not fail or be cut off. The
good Shepherd has tender care for children that are towardly and
hopeful, for young converts, that are setting out in the way to heaven,
for weak believers, and those that are of a sorrowful spirit. These are
the lambs of his flock, that shall be sure to want nothing that their
case requires. \[1.\] He will gather them in the arms of his power; his
strength shall be made perfect in their weakness, [Co2
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009). He will gather them in when they
wander, gather them up when they fall, gather them together when they
are dispersed, and gather them home to himself at last; and all this
with his own arm, out of which none shall be able to pluck them, [Joh
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028). \[2.\] He will carry them in
the bosom of his love and cherish them there. When they tire or are
weary, are sick and faint, when they meet with foul ways, he will carry
them on, and take care they are not left behind. \[3.\] He will gently
lead them. By his word he requires no more service, and by his
providence he inflicts no more trouble, than he will fit them for; for
he considers their frame.

[Isaiah 40:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 40:12</span></span>

The scope of these verses is to show what a great and glorious being the
Lord Jehovah is, who is Israel's God and Saviour. It comes in here, 1.
To encourage his people that were captives in Babylon to hope in him,
and to depend upon him for deliverance, though they were ever so weak
and their oppressors ever so strong. 2. To engage them to cleave to him,
and not to turn aside after other gods; for there are none to be
compared with him. 3. To possess all those who receive the glad tidings
of redemption by Christ with a holy awe and reverence of God. Though it
was said ([Isa 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009)), Behold your God,
and ([Isa 40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011)) He shall feed his
flock like a shepherd, yet these condescensions of his grace must not be
thought of with any diminution to the transcendencies of his glory. Let
us see how great our God is, and fear before him; for,

I. His power is unlimited, and what no creature can compare with, much
less contend with, [Isa 40:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012). 1. He
has a vast reach. View the celestial globe, and you are astonished at
the extent of it; but the great God metes the heavens with a span; to
him they are but a hand-breadth, so large-handed is he. View the
terraqueous globe, and he has the command of that too. All the waters in
the world he can measure in the hollow of his hand, where we can hold
but a little water; and the dry land he easily manages, for he
comprehends the dust of the earth in a measure, or with his three
fingers; it is no more to him than a pugil, or that which we take up
between our thumb and two fingers. 2. He has a vast strength, and can as
easily move mountains and hills as the tradesman heaves his goods into
the scales and out of them again; he poises them with his hand as
exactly as if he weighed them in a pair of balances. This may refer to
the work of creation, when the heavens were stretched out as exactly as
that which is spanned, and the earth and waters were put together in
just proportions, as if they had been measured, and the mountains made
of such a weight as to serve for ballast to the globe, and no more. Or
it may refer to the work of providence (which is a continued creation)
and the consistency of all the creatures with each other.

II\. His wisdom is unsearchable, and what no creature can give either
information or direction to, [Isa
40:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#013), [Isa
40:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#014). As none can do what God has
done and does, so none can assist him in the doing of it or suggest any
thing to him which he thought not of. When the Lord by his Spirit made
the world ([Job 26:13](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#013)) there was none
that directed his Spirit, or gave him any advice, either what to do or
how to do it. Nor does he need any counsellor to direct him in the
government of the world, nor is there any with whom he consults, as the
wisest kings do with those that know law and judgment, [Est
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#013). God needs not to be told what is
done, for he knows it perfectly; nor needs he be advised concerning what
is to be done, for he knows both the right end and the proper means.
This is much insisted upon here, because the poor captives had no
politicians among them to manage their concerns at court or to put them
in a way of gaining their liberty. "No matter," says the prophet, "you
have a God to act for you, who needs not the assistance of statesmen."
In the great work of our redemption by Christ matters were concerted
before the world was, when there was one to teach God in the path of
judgment, [Co1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007).

III\. The nations of the world are nothing in comparison of him, [Isa
40:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#015), [Isa
40:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#017). Take them all together, all the
great and mighty nations of the earth, kings the most pompous, kingdoms
the most populous, both the most wealthy; take the isles, the multitude
of them, the isles of the Gentiles: Before him, when they stand in
competition with him or in opposition to him, they are as a drop of the
bucket compared with the vast ocean, or the small dust of the balance
(which does not serve to turn it, and therefore is not regarded, it is
so small) in comparison with all the dust of the earth. He takes them
up, and throws them away from him, as a very little thing, not worth
speaking of. They are all in his eye as nothing, as if they had no being
at all; for they add nothing to his perfection and all-sufficiency. They
are counted by him, and are to be counted by us in comparison of him,
less than nothing, and vanity. When he pleases, he can as easily bring
them all into nothing as at first he brought them out of nothing. When
God has work to do he values not either the assistance or the resistance
of any creature. They are all vanity; the word that is used for the
chaos ([Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)), to which they will
at last be reduced. Let this beget in us high thoughts of God and low
thoughts of this world, and engage us to make God, and not man, both our
fear and our hope. This magnifies God's love to the world, that, though
it is of such small account and value with him, yet, for the redemption
of it, he gave his only-begotten Son, [Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016).

IV\. The services of the church can make no addition to him nor do they
bear any proportion to his infinite perfections ([Isa
40:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#016)): Lebanon is not sufficient to
burn; not the wood of it, to be for the fuel of the altar, though it be
so well stocked with cedars; not the beasts of it, to be for sacrifices,
though it be so well stocked with cattle, [Isa
40:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#016). Whatever we honour God with, it
falls infinitely short of the merit of his perfection; for he is exalted
far above all blessing and praise, all burnt-offerings and sacrifices.

[Isaiah 40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 40:18</span></span>

The prophet here reproves those, 1. Who represented God by creatures,
and so changed his truth into a lie and his glory into shame, who made
images and then said that they resembled God, and paid their homage to
them accordingly. 2. Who put creatures in the place of God, who feared
them more than God, as if they were a match for him, or loved them more
than God, as if they were fit to be rivals with him. Twice the challenge
is here made, To whom will you liken God? [Isa
40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018), and again [Isa
40:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#025). The Holy One himself says, To
whom will you liken me? This shows the folly and absurdity, (1.) Of
corporal idolatry, making visible images of him who is invisible,
imagining the image to be animated by the deity, and the deity to be
presentiated by the image, which, as it was an instance of the
corruption of the human nature, so it was an intolerable injury to the
honour of the divine nature. (2.) Of spiritual idolatry, making
creatures equal with God in our affections. Proud people make themselves
equal with God; covetous people make their money equal with God; and
whatever we esteem or love, fear or hope in, more than God, that
creature we equal with God, which is the highest affront imaginable to
him who is God over all. Now, to show the absurdity of this,

I. The prophet describes idols as despicable things and worthy of the
greatest contempt ([Isa 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#019), [Isa
40:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#020)): "Look upon the better sort of
them, which rich people set up, and worship; they are made of some base
metal, cast into what shape the founder pleases, and that is gilded, or
overlaid with plates of gold, that it may pass for a golden image. It is
a creature; for the workman made it; therefore it is not God, [Hos
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#006). It depended upon his will whether
it should be a god at all, and of what shape it should be. It is a
cheat; for it is gold on the outside, but within it is lead or copper,
in this indeed representing the deities, that they were not what they
seemed to be, and deceived their admirers. How despicable then are the
worst sort of them - the poor men's gods! He that is so impoverished
that he has scarcely a sacrifice to offer to his god when he has made
him will yet not be without an enshrined deity of his own; and, though
he cannot procure one of brass or stone, he will have a wooden one
rather than none, and for that purpose chooses a tree that will not soon
rot, and of that he will have his graven image made. Both agree to have
their image well fastened, that they may not be robbed of it. The better
sort have silver chains to fix theirs with; and, though it be but a
wooden image, care is taken that it shall not be moved." Let us pause a
little and see, 1. How these idolaters shame themselves, and what a
reproach they put upon their own reason, in dreaming that gods of their
own making (Nehushtans, pieces of brass or logs of wood) should be able
to do them any kindness. Thus vain were they in their imaginations; and
how was their foolish heart darkened! 2. See how these idolaters shame
us, who worship the only living and true God. They spared no cost upon
their idols; we grudge that as waste which is spent in the service of
our God. They took care that their idols should not be moved; we
wilfully provoke our God to depart from us.

II\. He describes God as infinitely great, and worthy of the highest
veneration; so that between him and idols, whatever competition there
may be, there is no comparison. To prove the greatness of God he
appeals,

1\. To what they had heard of him by the hearing of the ear, and the
consent of all ages and nations concerning him ([Isa
40:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#021)): "Have you not known by the
very light of nature? Has it not been told you by your fathers and
teachers, according to the constant tradition received from their
ancestors and predecessors, even from the beginning?" (Those notices of
God are as ancient as the world.) "Have you not understood it as always
acknowledged from the foundation of the earth, that God is a great God,
and a great King above all gods?" It has been a truth universally
admitted that there is an infinite Being who is the fountain of all
being. This is understood not only ever since the beginning of the
world, but from and by the origin of the universe. It is founded upon
the foundation of the earth. The invisible things of God are clearly
seen from the creation of the world, [Rom
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020). Thou mayest not only ask thy
father, and he shall tell thee this, and thy elders ([Deu
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007)); but ask those that go by the
way ([Job 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#029)), ask the first man
you meet, and he will say the same. Some read it, Will you not know?
Will you not hear it? For those that are ignorant of this are willingly
ignorant; the light shines in their faces, but they shut their eyes
against it. Now that which is here said of God is, (1.) That he has the
command of all the creatures. The heaven and the earth themselves are
under his management: He sits upon the circle, or globe, of the earth,
[Isa 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022). He that has the special
residence of his glory in the upper world maintains a dominion over this
lower world, gives law to it, and directs all the motions of it to his
own glory. He sits undisturbed upon the earth, and so establishes it. He
is still stretching out the heavens, his power and providence keep them
still stretched out, and will do so till the day comes that they shall
be rolled together like a scroll. He spreads them out as easily as we
draw a curtain to and fro, opening these curtains in the morning and
drawing them close again at night. And the heaven is to this earth as a
tent to dwell in; it is a canopy drawn over our heads, et quod tegit
omnia coelum - and it encircles all. - Ovid. See [Psa
104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002). (2.) That the children of men,
even the greatest and mightiest, are as nothing before him. The numerous
inhabitants of this earth are in his eye as grasshoppers in ours, so
little and inconsiderable, of such small value, of such little use, and
so easily crushed. Proud men's lifting up themselves is but like the
grasshopper's leap; in an instant they must stoop down to the earth
again. If the spies thought themselves grasshoppers before the sons of
Anak ([Num 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#033)), what are we before
the great God? Grasshoppers live but awhile, and live carelessly, not
like the ant; so do the most of men. (3.) That those who appear and act
against him, how formidable soever they may be to their
fellow-creatures, will certainly be humble and brought down by the
mighty hand of God, [Isa 40:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#023), [Isa
40:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#024). Princes and judges, who have
great authority, and abuse it to the support of oppression and
injustice, make nothing of those about them; as for all their enemies
they puff at them ([Psa 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005); [Psa
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)); but, when the great God takes
them to task, he brings them to nothing; he humbles them, and tames
them, and makes them as vanity, little regarded, neither feared nor
loved. He makes them utterly unable to stand before his judgments, which
shall either, \[1.\] Prevent their settlement in their authority: They
shall not be planted; they shall not be sown; and those are the two ways
of propagating plants, either by seed or slips. Nay, if they should gain
a little interest, and so be planted or sown, yet their stock shall not
take root in the earth, they shall not continue long in power. Eliphaz
saw the foolish taking root, but suddenly cursed their habitation. And
then how soon is the fig-tree withered away! Or, \[2.\] He will blast
them when they think they are settled. He does but blow upon them, and
then they shall wither, and come to nothing, and the whirlwind shall
take them away as stubble. For God's wrath, though it seem at first to
blow slightly upon them, will soon become a mighty whirlwind. When God
judges he will overcome. Those that will not bow before him cannot stand
before him.

2\. He appeals to what their eyes saw of him ([Isa
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026)): "Lift up your eyes on high; be
not always poring on this earth" (O curvae in terras animae et
coelestium inanes! - Degenerate minds, that can bend so towards the
earth, having nothing celestial in them!), "but sometimes look up" (Os
homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri jussit - Heaven gave to man an
erect countenance, and bade him gaze on the stars); "behold the glorious
lights of heaven, consider who has created them. They neither made nor
marshalled themselves; doubtless, therefore, there is a God that gave
them their being, power, and motion." What we see of the creature should
lead us to the Creator. The idolaters, when they lifted up their eyes
and beheld the hosts of heaven, being wholly immerged in sense, looked
no further, but worshipped them, [Deu
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019); [Job
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026). Therefore the prophet here
directs us to make use of our reason as well as our senses, and to
consider who created them, and to pay our homage to him. Give him the
glory of his sovereignty over them - He brings out their host by number,
as a general draws out the squadrons and battalions of his army; of the
knowledge he has of them - He calls them all by names, proper names,
according as their place and influence are ([Psa
147:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#004)); and of the use he makes of
them; when he calls them out to any service, so obsequious are they
that, by the greatness of his might, not one of them fails, but, as when
the stars in their courses fought against Sisera, every one does that to
which he is appointed. To make these creatures therefore rivals with
God, which are such ready servants to him, is an injury to them as well
as an affront to him.

[Isaiah 40:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 40:27</span></span>

Here, I. The prophet reproves the people of God, who are now supposed to
be captives in Babylon for their unbelief and distrust of God, and the
dejections and despondencies of their spirit under their affliction
([Isa 40:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#027)): "Why sayest thou, O
Jacob! to thyself and to those about thee, My way is hidden from the
Lord? Why dost thou make hard and melancholy conclusions concerning
thyself and thy present case as if the latter were desperate?" 1. The
titles he here gives them were enough to shame them out of their
distrusts: O Jacob! O Israel! Let them remember whence they took these
names - from one who had found God faithful to him and kind in all his
straits; and why they bore these names - as God's professing people, a
people in covenant with him. 2. The way of reproving them is by
reasoning with them: "Why? Consider whether thou hast any ground to say
so." Many of our foolish frets and foolish fears would vanish before a
strict enquiry into the causes of them. 3. That which they are reproved
for is an ill-natured, ill-favoured, word they spoke of God, as if he
had cast them off. There seems to be an emphasis laid upon their saying
it: Why sayest thou and speakest thou? It is bad to have evil thoughts
rise in our mind, but it is worse to put an imprimatur - a sanction to
them, and turn them into evil words. David reflects with regret upon
what he said in his haste, when he was in distress. 4. The ill word they
said was a word of despair concerning their present calamitous
condition. They were ready to conclude, (1.) That God would not heed
them: "My way is hidden from the Lord; he takes no notice of our
straits, nor concerns himself any more in our concernments. There are
such difficulties in our case that even divine wisdom and power will be
nonplussed." A man whose way is hidden is one whom God has hedged in,
[Job 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#023). (2.) That God could not
help them: "My judgment is passed over from my God; my case is past
relief, so far past it that God himself cannot redress the grievances of
it. Our bones are dried." [Eze 37:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#011).

II\. He reminds them of that which, if duly considered, was sufficient
to silence all those fears and distrust. For their conviction, as before
for the conviction of idolaters ([Isa
40:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#021)), he appeals to what they had
known and what they had heard. Jacob and Israel were a knowing people,
or might have been, and their knowledge came by hearing; for Wisdom
cried in their chief places of concourse. Now, among other things, they
had heard that God had spoken once, twice, yea, many a time they had
heard it, That power belongs unto God ([Psa
62:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#011)), That is,

1\. He is himself an almighty God. He must needs be so, for he is the
everlasting God, even Jehovah. He was from eternity; he will be to
eternity; and therefore with him there is no deficiency, no decay. He
has his being of himself, and therefore all his perfections must needs
be boundless. He is without beginning of days or end of life, and
therefore with him there is no change. He is also the Creator of the
ends of the earth, that is, of the whole earth and all that is in it
from end to end. He therefore is the rightful owner and ruler of all,
and must be concluded to have an absolute power over all and an
all-sufficiency to help his people in their greatest straits. Doubtless
he is still as able to save his church as he was at first to make the
world. (1.) He has wisdom to contrive the salvation, and that wisdom is
never at a loss: There is no searching of his understanding, so as to
countermine the counsels of it and defeat its intentions; no, nor so as
to determine what he will do, for he has ways by himself, ways in the
sea. None can say, "Thus far God's wisdom can go, and no further;" for,
when we know not what to do, he knows. (2.) He has power to bring about
the salvation, and that power is never exhausted: He faints not, nor is
weary; he upholds the whole creation, and governs all the creatures, and
is neither tired nor toiled; and therefore, no doubt, he has power to
relieve his church, when it is brought ever so low, without weakness or
weariness.

2\. He gives strength and power to his people, and helps them by
enabling them to help themselves. He that is the strong God is the
strength of Israel. (1.) He can help the weak, [Isa
40:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#029). Many a time he gives power to
the faint, to those that are ready to faint away; and to those that have
no might he not only gives, but increases strength, as there is more and
more occasion for it. Many out of bodily weakness are wonderfully
recovered, and made strong, by the providence of God: and many that are
feeble in spirit, timorous and faint-hearted, unfit for services and
sufferings, are yet strengthened by the grace of God with all might in
the inward man. To those who are sensible of their weakness, and ready
to acknowledge they have no might, God does in a special manner increase
strength; for, when we are weak in ourselves, then are we strong in the
Lord. (2.) He will help the willing, will help those who, in a humble
dependence upon him, help themselves, and will do well for those who do
their best, [Isa 40:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#030), [Isa
40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031). Those who trust to their own
sufficiency, and are so confident of it that they neither exert
themselves to the utmost nor seek unto God for his grace, are the youth
and the young men, who are strong, but are apt to think themselves
stronger than they are. And they shall faint and be weary, yea, they
shall utterly fail in their services, in their conflicts, and under
their burdens; they shall soon be made to see the folly of trusting to
themselves. But those that wait on the Lord, who make conscience of
their duty to him, and by faith rely upon him and commit themselves to
his guidance, shall find that God will not fail them. \[1.\] They shall
have grace sufficient for them: They shall renew their strength as their
work is renewed, as there is new occasion; they shall be anointed, and
their lamps supplied, with fresh oil. God will be their arm every
morning, [Isa 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#002). If at any time
they have been foiled and weakened they shall recover themselves, and so
renew their strength. Heb. They shall change their strength, as their
work is changed - doing work, suffering work; they shall have strength
to labour, strength to wrestle, strength to resist, strength to bear. As
the day so shall the strength be. \[2.\] They shall use this grace for
the best purposes. Being strengthened, First, They shall soar upward,
upward towards God: They shall mount up with wings like eagles, so
strongly, so swiftly, so high and heaven-ward. In the strength of divine
grace, their souls shall ascend above the world, and even enter into the
holiest. Pious and devout affections are the eagles' wings on which
gracious souls mount up, [Psa 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001).
Secondly, They shall press forward, forward towards heaven. They shall
walk, they shall run, the way of God's commandments, cheerfully and with
alacrity (they shall not be weary), constantly and with perseverance
(they shall not faint); and therefore in due season they shall reap. Let
Jacob and Israel therefore, in their greatest distresses, continue
waiting upon God, and not despair of timely and effectual relief and
succour from him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 41](isa041)

</div>
