<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa014)  [Next](isa016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 15:0</span></span>

This chapter, and that which follows it, are the burden of Moab - a
prophecy of some great desolation that was coming upon that country,
which bordered upon this land of Israel, and had often been injurious
and vexatious to it, though the Moabites were descended from Lot,
Abraham's kinsman and companion, and though the Israelites, by the
appointment of God, had spared them when they might both easily and
justly have cut them off with their neighbours. In this chapter we have,
I. Great lamentation made by the Moabites, and by the prophet himself
for them ([Isa 15:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001)). II. The great
calamities which should occasion that lamentation and justify it ([Isa
15:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#006)).

[Isaiah 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 15:1</span></span>

The country of Moab was of small extent, but very fruitful. It bordered
upon the lot of Reuben on the other side Jordan and upon the Dead Sea.
Naomi went to sojourn there when there was a famine in Canaan. This is
the country which (it is here foretold) should be wasted and grievously
harassed, not quite ruined, for we find another prophecy of its ruin
(Jer. 48), which was accomplished by Nebuchadnezzar. This prophecy here
was to be fulfilled within three years ([Isa
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#014)), and therefore was fulfilled in
the devastations made of that country by the army of the Assyrians,
which for many years ravaged those parts, enriching themselves with
spoil and plunder. It was done either by the army of Shalmaneser, about
the time of the taking of Samaria, in the fourth year of Hezekiah (as is
most probable), or by the army of Sennacherib, which, ten years after,
invaded Judah. We cannot suppose that the prophet went among the
Moabites to preach to them this sermon; but he delivered it to his own
people, 1. To show them that, though judgment begins at the house of
God, it shall not end there, - that there is a providence which governs
the world and all the nations of it, - and that to the God of Israel the
worshippers of false gods were accountable, and liable to his judgments.
2. To give them a proof of God's care of them and jealousy for them, and
to convince them that God was an enemy to their enemies, for such the
Moabites had often been. 3. That the accomplishment of this prophecy now
shortly (within three years) might be a confirmation of the prophet's
mission and of the truth of all his other prophecies, and might
encourage the faithful to depend upon them.

Now concerning Moab it is here foretold,

I. That their chief cities should be surprised and taken in a night by
the enemy, probably because the inhabitants, as the men of Laish,
indulged themselves in ease and luxury, and dwelt securely ([Isa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001)): Therefore there shall be great
grief, because in the night Air of Moab is laid waste and Kir of Moab,
the two principal cities of that kingdom. In the night that they were
taken, or sacked, Moab was cut off. The seizing of them laid the whole
country open, and made all the wealth of it an easy prey to the
victorious army. Note, 1. Great changes and very dismal ones may be made
in a very little time. Here are two cities lost in a night, though that
is the time of quietness. Let us therefore lie down as those that know
not what a night may bring forth. 2. As the country feeds the cities, so
the cities protect the country, and neither can say to the other, I have
no need of thee.

II\. That the Moabites, being hereby put into the utmost consternation
imaginable, should have recourse to their idols for relief, and pour out
their tears before them ([Isa 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002)):
He (that is, Moab, especially the king of Moab) has gone up to Bajith
(or rather to the house or temple of Chemosh), and Dibon, the
inhabitants of Dibon, have gone up to the high places, where they
worshipped their idols, there to make their complaints. Note, It becomes
a people in distress to seek to their God; and shall not we then thus
walk in the name of the Lord our God, and call upon him in the time of
trouble, before whom we shall not shed such useless profitless tears as
they did before their gods?

III\. That there should be the voice of universal grief all the country
over. It is described here elegantly and very affectingly. Moab shall be
a vale of tears - a little map of this world, [Isa
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002). The Moabites shall lament the
loss of Nebo and Medeba, two considerable cities, which, it is likely,
were plundered and burnt. They shall tear their hair for grief to such a
degree that on all their heads shall be baldness, and they shall cut off
their beards, according to the customary expressions of mourning in
those times and countries. When they go abroad they shall be so far from
coveting to appear handsome that in the streets they shall gird
themselves with sackcloth ([Isa 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#003)),
and perhaps being forced to use that poor clothing, the enemy having
stripped them, and rifled their houses, and left them no other clothing.
When they come home, instead of applying themselves to their business,
they shall go up to the tops of their houses which were flat-roofed, and
there they shall weep abundantly, nay, they shall howl, in crying to
their gods. Those that cry not to God with their hearts do but howl upon
their beds, [Hos 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#014); [Amo
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#003). They shall come down with weeping
(so the margin reads it); they shall come down from their high places
and the tops of their houses weeping as much as they did when they went
up. Prayer to the true God is heart's ease ([Sa1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#018)), but prayers to false gods are
not. Divers places are here named that should be full of lamentation
([Isa 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#004)), and it is but a poor
relief to have so many fellow-sufferers, fellow-mourners; to a public
spirit it is rather an aggravation socios habuisse doloris - to have
associates in woe.

IV\. That the courage of their militia should fail them. Though they
were bred soldiers, and were well armed, yet they shall cry out and
shriek for fear, and every one of them shall have his life become
grievous to him, though it is characteristic of a military life to
delight in danger, [Isa 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#004). See how
easily God can dispirit the stoutest of men, and deprive a nation of
benefit by those whom it most depended upon for strength and defence.
The Moabites shall generally be so overwhelmed with grief that life
itself shall be a burden to them. God can easily make weary of life
those that are fondest of it.

V. That the outcry for these calamities should propagate grief to all
the adjacent parts, [Isa 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005). 1. The
prophet himself has very sensible impressions made upon his spirit by
the prediction of it: "My heart shall cry out for Moab; though they are
enemies to Israel, they are our fellow-creatures, of the same rank with
us, and therefore it should grieve us to see them in such distress, the
rather because we know not how soon it may be our own turn to drink of
the same cup of trembling." Note, It becomes God's ministers to be of a
tender spirit, not to desire the woeful day, but to be like their
master, who wept over Jerusalem even when he gave her up to ruin, like
their God, who desires not the death of sinners. 2. All the neighbouring
cities shall echo to the lamentations of Moab. The fugitives, who are
making the best of their way to shift for their own safety, shall carry
the cry to Zoar, the city to which their ancestor Lot fled for shelter
from Sodom's flames and which was spared for his sake. They shall make
as great a noise with their cry as a heifer of three years old does when
she goes lowing for her calf, as [Sa1
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#012). They shall go up the hill of
Luhith (as David went up the ascent of Mount Olivet, many a weary step
and all in tears, [Sa2 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030)), and in
the way of Horonaim (a dual termination), the way that leads to the two
Beth-horons, the upper and the nether, which we read of, [Jos
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#003), [Jos
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#005). Thither the cry shall be
carried, there it shall be raised, even at that great distance: A cry of
destruction; that shall be the cry, like, "Fire, fire! we are all
undone." Grief is catching, so is fear, and justly, for trouble is
spreading and when it begins who knows where it will end?

[Isaiah 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 15:6</span></span>

Here the prophet further describes the woeful and piteous lamentations
that should be heard throughout all the country of Moab when it should
become a prey to the Assyrian army. "By this time the cry has gone round
about all the borders of Moab," [Isa
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#008). Every corner of the country has
received the alarm, and is in the utmost confusion upon it. It has
reached to Eglaim, a city at one end of the country, and to Beer-elim, a
city as far the other way. Where sin has been general, and all flesh
have corrupted their way, what can be expected but a general desolation?
Two things are here spoken of as causes of this lamentation: -

I. The waters of Nimrim are desolate ([Isa
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#006)), that is, the country is
plundered and impoverished, and all the wealth and substance of it swept
away by the victorious army. Famine is usually the sad effect of war.
Look into the fields that were well watered, the fruitful meadows that
yielded delightful prospects and more delightful products, and there all
is eaten up, or carried off by the enemy's foragers, and the remainder
trodden to dirt by their horses. If an army encamp upon green fields,
their greenness is soon gone. Look into the houses, and they are
stripped too ([Isa 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#007)): The
abundance of wealth that they had gotten with a great deal of art and
industry, and that which they had laid up with a great deal of care and
confidence, shall they carry away to the brook of the willows. Either
the owners shall carry it thither to hide it or the enemies shall carry
it thither to pack it up and send it home, by water perhaps, to their
own country. Note, 1. Those that are eager to get abundance of this
world, and solicitous to lay up what they have gotten, little consider
what may become of it and in how short a time it may be all taken from
them. Great abundance, by tempting the robbers, exposes the owners; and
those who depend upon it to protect them often find it does but betray
them. 2. In times of distress great riches are often great burdens, and
do but increase the owner's care or the enemies' strength. Cantabit
vacuus coram latrone viator - The penniless traveller will exult, when
accosted by a robber, in having nothing about him.

II\. The waters of Dimon are turned into blood ([Isa
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#009)), that is, the inhabitants of the
country are slain in great numbers, so that the waters adjoining to the
cities, whether rivers or pools, are discoloured with human gore,
inhumanly shed like water. Dimon signifies bloody; the place shall
answer to its name. Perhaps it was that place in the country of Moab
where the waters seemed to the Moabites as blood ([Kg2
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#022), [Kg2
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#023)), which occasioned their
overthrow. But now, says God, I will bring more upon Dimon, more blood
than was shed, or thought to be seen, at that time. I will bring
additions upon Dimon (so the word is), additional plagues; I have yet
more judgments in reserve for them. For all this, God's anger is not
turned away. When he judges he will overcome; and to the roll of curses
shall be added many like words, [Jer
36:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#032). See here what is the yet more
evil to be brought upon Dimon, upon Moab, which is now to be made a land
of blood. Some flee, and make their escape, others sit still, and are
overlooked, and are as a remnant of the land; but upon both God will
bring lions, beasts of prey (which are reckoned one of God's four
judgments, [Eze 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021)), and these
shall glean up those that have escaped the sword of the enemy. Those
that continue impenitent in sin, when they are preserved from one
judgment, are but reserved for another.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 16](isa016)

</div>
