<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa011)  [Next](isa013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 12:0</span></span>

The salvation promised in the foregoing chapter was compared to that of
Israel "in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt;" so that
chapter ends. Now as Moses and the children of Israel then sang a song
of praise to the glory of God ([Exo
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001).md) so shall the people of God do in
that day when the root of Jesse shall stand for an ensign of the people
and shall be the desire and joy of all nations. In that day, I. Every
particular believer shall sing a song of praise for his own interest in
that salvation ([Isa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001.md), [Isa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003).md). "Thou shalt say, Lord, I will
praise thee." Thanksgiving-work shall be closet-work. II. Many in
concert shall join in praising God for the common benefit arising from
this salvation ([Isa 12:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#004).md): "You
shall say, Praise you the Lord." Thanksgiving-work shall be
congregation-work; and the praises of God shall be publicly sung in the
congregations of the upright.

[Isaiah 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 12:1</span></span>

This is the former part of the hymn of praise which is prepared for the
use of the church, of the Jewish church when God would work great
deliverances for them, and of the Christian church when the kingdom of
the Messiah should be set up in the world in despite of the opposition
of the powers of darkness: In that day thou shalt say, O Lord! I will
praise thee. The scattered church, being united into one body, shall, as
one man, with one mind and one mouth, thus praise God, who is one and
his name one. In that day, when the Lord shall do these great things for
thee, thou shalt say, O Lord! I will praise thee. That is,

I. "Thou shalt have cause to say so." The promise is sure, and the
blessings contained in it are very rich, and, when they are bestowed,
will furnish the church with abundant matter for rejoicing and therefore
with abundant matter for thanksgiving. The Old Testament prophecies of
gospel times are often expressed by the joy and praise that shall then
be excited; for the inestimable benefits we enjoy by Jesus Christ
require the most elevated and enlarged thanksgivings.

II\. "Thou shalt have a heart to say so." All God's other gifts to his
people shall be crowned with this. He will give them grace to ascribe
all the glory of them to him, and to speak of them upon all occasions
with thankfulness to his praise. Thou shalt say, that is, thou oughtest
to say so. In that day, when many are brought home to Jesus Christ and
flock to him as doves to their windows, instead of envying the kind
reception they find with Christ, as the Jews grudged the favour shown to
the Gentiles, thou shalt say, O Lord! I will praise thee. Note, we ought
to rejoice in, and give thanks for, the grace of God to others as well
as to ourselves.

1\. Believers are here taught to give thanks to God for the turning away
of his displeasure from them and the return of his favour to them ([Isa
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001).md): O Lord! I will praise thee,
though thou wast angry with me. Note, Even God's frowns must not put us
out of tune for praising him; though he be angry with us, though he slay
us, yet we must put our trust in him and give him thanks. God has often
just cause to be angry with us, but we have never any reason to be angry
with him, nor to speak otherwise than well of him; even when he blames
us we must praise him. Thou was angry with us, but thy anger is turned
away. Note, (1.) God is sometimes angry with his own people and the
fruits of his anger do appear, and they ought to take notice of this,
that they may humble themselves under his mighty hand. (2.) Though God
may for a time be angry with his people, yet his anger shall at length
be turned away; it endures but for a moment, nor will he contend for
ever. By Jesus Christ, the root of Jesse, God's anger against mankind
was turned away; for he is our peace. (3.) Those whom God is reconciled
to he comforts; even the turning away of his anger is a comfort to them;
yet that is not all: those that are at peace with God may rejoice in
hope of the glory of God, [Rom 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001.md),
[Rom 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002.md). Nay, God sometimes brings
his people into a wilderness that there he may speak comfortably to
them, [Hos 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#014). (4..md) The turning away
of God's anger, and the return of his comforts to us, ought to be the
matter of our joyful thankful praises.

2\. They are taught to triumph in God and their interest in him ([Isa
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002).md): "Behold, and wonder; God is my
salvation; not only my Saviour, by whom I am saved, but my salvation, in
whom I am safe. I depend upon him as my salvation, for I have found him
to be so. He shall have the glory of all the salvations that have been
wrought for me, and from him only will I expect the salvations I further
need, and not from hills and mountains: and if God be my salvation, if
he undertake my eternal salvation, I will trust in him to prepare me for
it and preserve me to it. I will trust him with all my temporal
concerns, not doubting but he will make all to work for my good. I will
be confident, that is, I will be always easy in my own mind." Note,
Those that have God for their salvation may enjoy themselves with a holy
security and serenity of mind. Let faith in God as our salvation be
effectual, (1.) To silence our fears. We must trust, and not be afraid,
not be afraid that the God we trust in will fail us; no, there is no
danger of that; not be afraid of any creature, though ever so formidable
and threatening. Note, Faith in God is a sovereign remedy against
disquieting tormenting fears. (2.) To support our hopes. Is the Lord
Jehovah our salvation? Then he will be our strength and song. We have
work to do and temptations to resist, and we may depend upon him to
enable us for both, to strengthen us with all might by his Spirit in the
inner man, for he is our strength; his grace is so, and that grace shall
be sufficient for us. We have many troubles to undergo, and must expect
griefs in a vale of tears; and we may depend upon him to comfort us in
all our tribulations, for he is our song; he giveth songs in the night.
If we make God our strength, and put our confidence in him, he will be
our strength; if we make him our song, and place our comfort in him, he
will be our song. Many good Christians have God for their strength who
have him not for their song; they walk in darkness: but light is sown
for them. And those that have God for their strength ought to make him
their song, that is, to give him the glory of it (see [Psa
68:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#035).md) and to take to themselves the
comfort of it, for he will become their salvation. Observe the title
here given to God: Jah, Jehovah. Jah is the contraction of Jehovah, and
both signify his eternity and unchangeableness, which are a great
comfort to those that depend upon him as their strength and their song.
Some make Jah to signify the Son of God made man; he is Jehovah, and in
him we may glory as our strength, and song, and salvation.

3\. They are aught to derive comfort to themselves from the love of God
and all the tokens of that love ([Isa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003).md): "Therefore, because the Lord
Jehovah is your strength and song and will be your salvation, you shall
draw water with joy." Note, The assurances God has given us of his love,
and the experiences we have had of the benefit and comfort of his grace,
should greatly encourage our faith in him and our expectations from him:
"Out of the wells of salvation in God, who is the fountain of all good
to his people, you shall draw water with joy. God's favour shall flow
forth to you, and you shall have the comfort of it and make use of the
blessed fruits of it." Note, (1.) God's promises revealed, ratified, and
given out to us, in his ordinances, are wells of salvation; wells of the
Saviour (so some read it), for in them the Saviour and salvation are
made known to us and made over to us. (2.) It is our duty by faith to
draw water out of these wells, to take to ourselves the benefit and
comfort that are treasured up for us in them, as those that acknowledge
all our fresh springs to be there and all our fresh streams to be
thence, [Psa 87:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#007). (3..md) Water is to be
drawn out of the wells of salvation with a great deal of pleasure and
satisfaction. It is the will of God that we should rejoice before him
and rejoice in him ([Deu 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#011).md), be
joyful in his house of prayer ([Isa
56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007).md), and keep his feasts with
gladness, [Act 2:46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046.md).

[Isaiah 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 12:4</span></span>

This is the second part of this evangelical song, and to the same
purport with the former; there believers stir up themselves to praise
God, here they invite and encourage one another to do it, and are
contriving to spread his praise and draw in others to join with them in
it. Observe,

I. Who are here called upon to praise God - the inhabitants of Zion and
Jerusalem, whom God had in a particular manner protected from
Sennacherib's violence, [Isa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#006.md).
Those that have received distinguishing favours from God ought to be
most forward and zealous in praising him. The gospel church is Zion.
Christ is Zion's King. Those that have a place and a name in the church
should lay out themselves to diffuse the knowledge of Christ and to
bring many to him. Thou inhabitress of Zion; the word is feminine. Let
the weaker sex be strong in the Lord, and out of their mouth praise
shall be perfected.

II\. How they must praise the Lord. 1. By prayer: Call upon his name. As
giving thanks for former mercy is a decent way of begging further mercy,
so begging further mercy is graciously accepted as a thankful
acknowledgment of the mercies we have received. In calling upon God's
name we give unto him some of the glory that is due to his name as our
powerful and bountiful benefactor. 2. By preaching and writing. We must
not only speak to God, but speak to others concerning him, not only call
upon his name, but (as the margin reads it) proclaim his name; let
others know something more from us than they did before concerning God,
and those things whereby he has made himself known. Declare his doings,
his counsels (so some read it); the work of redemption is according to
the counsel of his will, and in that and other wonderful works that he
has done we must take notice of his thoughts which are to us-ward, [Psa
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005.md). Declare these among the people,
among the heathen, that they may be brought into communion with Israel
and the God of Israel. When the apostles preached the gospel to all
nations, beginning at Jerusalem, then this scripture was fulfilled, that
his doings should be declared among the people and that what he has done
should be known in all the earth. 3. By a holy exultation and transport
of joy: "Cry out and shout; welcome the gospel to yourselves and publish
it to others with huzzas and loud acclamations, as those that shout for
victory ([Exo 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#018).md) or for the
coronation of a king," [Num 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#021.md).

III\. For what they must praise the Lord. 1. Because he has glorified
himself. Remember it yourselves, and make mention of it to others, that
his name is exalted, has become more illustrious and more conspicuous;
in this every good man rejoices. 2. Because he has magnified his people:
He has done excellent things for them, which make them look great and
considerable. 3. Because he is, and will be, great among them: Great is
the Holy One, for he is glorious in holiness; therefore great, because
holy. True goodness is true greatness. He is great as the Holy One of
Israel, and in the midst of them, praised by them ([Psa
76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001).md), manifesting himself among them,
and appearing gloriously in their behalf. It is the honour and happiness
of Israel that the God who is in covenant with them, and in the midst of
them, is infinitely great.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 13](isa013.md)

</div>
