<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa059)  [Next](isa061) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 60](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 60:0</span></span>

This whole chapter is all to the same purport, all in the same strain;
it is a part of God's covenant with his church, which is spoken of in
the last verse of the foregoing chapter, and the blessings here promised
are the fruits of the word and Spirit there promised. The long
continuance of the church, even unto the utmost ages of time, was there
promised, and here the large extent of the church, even unto the utmost
regions of the earth; and both these tend to the honour of the Redeemer.
It is here promised, I. That the church shall be enlightened and shone
upon ([Isa 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001), [Isa
60:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#002)). II. That it shall be enlarged
and great additions made to it, to join in the service of God ([Isa
60:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003)). III. That the new converts
shall be greatly serviceable to the church and to the interests of it
([Isa 60:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#009)). IV. That the church
shall be in great honour and reputation among men ([Isa
60:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#014)). V. That it shall enjoy a
profound peace and tranquility ([Isa
60:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#017), [Isa
60:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#018)). VI. That, the members of it
being all righteous, the glory and joy of it shall be everlasting ([Isa
60:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019)). Now this has some reference
to the peaceable and prosperous condition which the Jews were sometimes
in after their return out of captivity into their own land; but it
certainly looks further, and was to have its full accomplishment in the
kingdom of the Messiah, the enlargement of that kingdom by the bringing
in of the Gentiles into it, and the spiritual blessings in heavenly
things by Christ Jesus with which it should be enriched, and all these
earnests of eternal joy and glory.

[Isaiah 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 60:1</span></span>

It is here promised that the gospel temple shall be very lightsome and
very large.

I. It shall be very lightsome: Thy light has come. When the Jews
returned out of captivity they had light and gladness, and joy and
honour; they then were made to know the Lord and to rejoice in his great
goodness; and upon both accounts their light came. When the Redeemer
came to Zion he brought light with him, he himself came to be a light.
Now observe, 1. What this light is, and whence it springs: The Lord
shall arise upon thee ([Isa 60:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#002)), the
glory of the Lord ([Isa 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)) shall be
seen upon thee. God is the father and fountain of lights, and it is in
his light that we shall see light. As far as we have the knowledge of
God in us, and the favour of God towards us, our light has come. When
God appears to us, and we have the comfort of his favour, then the glory
of the Lord rises upon us as the morning light; when he appears for us,
and we have the credit of his favour, when he shows us some token for
good and proclaims his favour to us, then his glory is seen upon us, as
it was upon Israel in the pillar of cloud and fire. When Christ arose as
the sun of righteousness, and in him the day-spring from on high visited
us, then the glory of the Lord was seen upon us, the glory as of the
first-begotten of the Father. 2. What a foil there shall be to this
light: Darkness shall cover the earth; but, though it be gross darkness,
darkness that might be felt, like that of Egypt, that shall overspread
the people, yet the church, like Goshen, shall have light at the same
time. When the case of the nations that have not the gospel shall be
very melancholy, those dark corners of the earth being full of the
habitations of cruelty to poor souls, the state of the church shall be
very pleasant. 3. What is the duty which the rising of this light calls
for: "Arise, shine; not only receive this light, and" (as the margin
reads it) "be enlightened by it, but reflect this light; arise and shine
with rays borrowed from it." The children of light ought to shine as
lights in the world. If God's glory be seen upon us to our honour, we
ought not only with our lips, but in our lives, to return the praise of
it to his honour, [Mat 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016); [Phi
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015).

II\. It shall be very large. When the Jews were settled again in their
own land, after their captivity, many of the people of the land joined
themselves to them; but it does not appear that there ever was any such
numerous accession to them as would answer the fulness of this prophecy;
and therefore we must conclude that this looks further, to the bringing
of the Gentiles into the gospel church, not their flocking to one
particular place, though under that type it is here described. There is
no place now that is the centre of the church's unity; but the promise
respects their flocking to Christ, and coming by faith, and hope, and
holy love, into that society which is incorporated by the charter of his
gospel, and of the unity of which he only is the centre - that family
which is named from him, [Eph 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015).
The gospel church is expressly called Zion and Jerusalem, and under that
notion all believers are said to come to it ([Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022). You have come unto Mount Zion,
to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem), which serves for
a key to this prophecy, [Eph 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019).
Observe,

1\. What shall invite such multitudes to the church: "They shall come to
thy light and to the brightness of thy rising, [Isa
60:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003). They shall be allured to join
themselves to thee," (1.) "By the light that shines upon thee," the
light of the glorious gospel, which the churches hold forth, in
consequence of which they are called golden candlesticks. This light
which discovers so much of God and his good will to man, by which life
and immortality are brought to light, this shall invite all the serious
well-affected part of mankind to come and join themselves to the church,
that they may have the benefit of this light to inform them concerning
truth and duty. (2.) "By the light with which thou shinest." The purity
and love of the primitive Christians, their heavenly-mindedness,
contempt of the world, and patient sufferings, were the brightness of
the church's rising, which drew many into it. The beauty of holiness was
the powerful attractive by which Christ had a willing people brought to
him in the day of his power, [Psa
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003).

2\. What multitudes shall come to the church. Great numbers shall come,
Gentiles (or nations) of those that are saved, as it is expressed with
allusion to this, [Rev 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024). Nations
shall be discipled ([Mat 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)), and
even kings, men of figure, power, and influence, shall be added to the
church. They come from all parts ([Isa
60:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#004)): Lift up thy eyes round about,
and see them coming, devout men out of every nation under heaven, [Act
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#005). See how white the fields are
already to the harvest, [Joh 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035). See
them coming in a body, as one man, and with one consent: They gather
themselves together, that they may strengthen one another's hands, and
encourage one another. Come, and let us go, [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003). "They come from the remotest
parts: They come to thee from far, having heard the report of thee, as
the queen of Sheba, or seen thy star in the east, as the wise men, and
they will not be discouraged by the length of the journey from coming to
thee. There shall come some of both sexes. Sons and daughters shall come
in the most dutiful manner, as thy sons and thy daughters, resolved to
be of thy family, to submit to the laws of thy family and put themselves
under the tuition of it. They shall come to be nursed at thy side, to
have their education with thee from their cradle." The church's children
must be nursed at her side, not sent out to be nursed among strangers;
there, where alone the unadulterated milk of the word is to be had, must
the church's new-born babes be nursed, that they may grow thereby, [Pe1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#001), [Pe1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002). Those that would enjoy the
dignities and privileges of Christ's family must submit to the
discipline of it.

3\. What they shall bring with them and what advantage shall accrue to
the church by their accession to it. Those that are brought into the
church by the grace of God will be sure to bring all they are worth in
with them, which with themselves they will devote to the honour and
service of God and do good with in their places. (1.) The merchants
shall write holiness to the Lord upon their merchandise and their hire,
as [Isa 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#018). "The abundance of the
sea, either the wealth that is fetched out of the sea (the fish, the
pearls) or that which is imported by sea, shall all be converted to thee
and to thy use." The wealth of the rich merchants shall be laid out in
works of piety and charity. (2.) The mighty men of the nations shall
employ their might in the service of the church: "The forces, or troops,
of the Gentiles shall come unto thee, to guard thy coasts, strengthen
thy interests, and, if occasion be, to fight thy battles." The forces of
the Gentiles had often been against the church, but now they shall be
for it; for as God, when he pleases, can, and, when we please him, will,
make even our enemies to be at peace with us ([Pro
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#007)), so, when Christ overcomes the
strong man armed, he divides his spoils, and makes that to serve his
interests which had been used against them, [Luk
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#022). (3.) The wealth imported by
land-carriage, as well as that by sea, shall be made use of in the
service of God and the church ([Isa
60:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#006)): The camels and dromedaries that
bring gold and incense (gold to make the golden altar of and incense and
sweet perfumes to burn upon it), those of Midian and Sheba, shall bring
the richest commodities of their country, not to trade with, but to
honour God with, and not in small quantities, but camel-loads of them.
This was in part fulfilled when the wise men of the east (perhaps some
of the countries here mentioned), drawn by the brightness of the star,
came to Christ, and presented to him treasures of gold, frankincense,
and myrrh, [Mat 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011). (4.) Great
numbers of sacrifices shall be brought to God's altar, acceptable
sacrifices, and, though brought by Gentiles, they shall find acceptance,
[Isa 60:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#007). Kedar was famous for
flocks, and probably the fattest rams were those of Nebaioth; these
shall come up with acceptance on God's altar. God must be served and
honoured with what we have, according as he has blessed us, and with the
best we have. This was fulfilled when by the decree of Darius the
governors beyond the rivers (perhaps of some of these countries) were
ordered to furnish the temple at Jerusalem with bullocks, rams, and
lambs, for the burnt-offering of the God of heaven, [Ezr
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#009). It had a further accomplishment,
and we trust will have, in the bringing in of the fulness of the
Gentiles to the church, which is called the sacrificing or offering up
of the Gentiles unto God, [Rom 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016).
The flocks and rams are precious souls; for they are said to minister to
the church, and to come up as living sacrifices, presenting themselves
to God by a reasonable service on his altar, [Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001).

4\. How God shall be honoured by the increase of the church and the
accession of such numbers to it. (1.) They shall intend the honour of
God's name in it. When they bring their gold and incense it shall not be
to show the riches of their country, nor to gain applause to themselves
for piety and devotion, but to show forth the praises of the Lord, [Isa
60:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#006). Our greatest services and gifts
to the church are not acceptable further than we have an eye to the
glory of God in them. And this must be our business in our attendance on
public ordinances, to give unto the Lord the glory due to his name; for
therefore, as these here, we are called out of darkness into light, that
we should show forth the praises of him that called us, [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009). (2.) God will advance the honour
of his own name by it; so he has said ([Isa
60:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#007)): I will glorify the house of my
glory. The church is the house of God's glory, where he manifests his
glory to his people and receives that homage by which they do honour to
him. And it is for the glory of this house, and of him that keeps house
there, both that the Gentiles shall bring their offerings to it and that
they shall be accepted therein.

5\. How the church shall herself be affected with this increase of her
numbers, [Isa 60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005). (1.) She shall be
in a transport of joy upon this account: "Thou shalt see and flow
together" (or flow to and fro), "as in a pleasing agitation about it,
surprised at it, but extremely glad of it." (2.) There shall be a
mixture of fear with this joy: "Thy heart shall fear, doubting whether
it be lawful to go in to the uncircumcised and eat with them." Peter was
so impressed with this fear that he needed a vision and voice from
heaven to help him over it, [Act
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#028). But, (3.) "When this fear is
conquered thy heart shall be enlarged in holy love, so enlarged that
thou shalt have room in it for all the Gentile converts; thou shalt not
have such a narrow soul as thou hast had nor affections so confined
within the Jewish pale." When God intends the beauty and prosperity of
his church he gives this largeness of heart and an extensive charity.
(4.) These converts flocking to the church shall be greatly admired
([Isa 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#008)): Who are these that fly as
a cloud? Observe, \[1.\] How the conversion of souls is here described.
It is flying to Christ and to his church, for thither we are directed;
it is flying like a cloud, though in great multitudes, so as to
overspread the heavens, yet with great unanimity, all as one cloud. They
shall come with speed, as a cloud flying on the wings of the wind, and
come openly, and in the view of all, their very enemies beholding them
([Rev 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#012)), and yet not able to
hinder them. They shall fly as doves to their windows, in great flights,
many together; they fly on the wings of the harmless dove, which flies
low, denoting their innocency and humility. They fly to Christ, to the
church, to the word and ordinances, as doves, by instinct, to their own
windows, to their own home; thither they fly for refuge and shelter when
they are pursued by the birds of prey, and thither they fly for rest
when they have been wandering and are weary, as Noah's dove to the ark.
\[2.\] How the conversion of souls is here admired. It is spoken of with
wonder and pleasure: Who are these? We have reason to wonder that so
many flock to Christ: when we see them all together we shall wonder
whence they all came. And we have reason to admire with pleasure and
affection those that do flock to him: Who are these? How excellent, how
amiable are they! What a pleasant sight is it to see poor souls
hastening to Christ, with a full resolution to abide with him!

[Isaiah 60:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 60:9</span></span>

The promises made to the church in the foregoing verses are here
repeated, ratified, and enlarged upon, designed still for the comfort
and encouragement of the Jews after their return out of captivity, but
certainly looking further, to the enlargement and advancement of the
gospel church and the abundance of spiritual blessings with which it
shall be enriched.

I. God will be very gracious and propitious to them. We must begin with
that promise, because thence all the rest take rise. The sanctuary that
was desolate begins to be repaired when God causes his face to shine
upon it, [Dan 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#017). All the favour
that the people of God find with men is owing to the light of God's
countenance and his favour to them ([Isa
60:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#010)): "All shall now make court to
thee, for in my wrath I smote thee, while thou wast in captivity" (and
the sufferings of the church, especially by its corruptions, decays, and
divisions, against which these promises will be its relief, are sad
tokens of God's displeasure), "But now in my favour have I had mercy on
thee, and therefore have all this mercy in store for thee."

II\. Many shall be brought into the church, even from far countries
([Isa 60:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#009)): Surely the isles shall
wait for me, shall welcome the gospel, and shall attend God with their
praises for it and their ready subjection to it. The ships of Tarshish,
transport-ships, shall lie ready to carry members from far distant
regions to the church, or (which is equivalent) to carry the ministers
of the church to remote parts, to preach the gospel and to bring in
souls to join themselves to the Lord. Observe, 1. Who are brought - thy
sons, that is, such as are designed to be so, those children of God that
are scattered abroad, [Joh 11:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#052). 2.
What they shall bring with them. They live at such a distance that they
cannot bring their flocks and their rams; but, like those who lived
remote from Jerusalem (who, when they came up to worship at the feast,
because they could not bring their tithes in kind, turned them into
money), they shall bring their silver and gold with them. Note, When we
give up ourselves to God we must with ourselves give up all we have to
him. If we honour him with our spirits, we shall honour him with our
substance. 3. To whom they shall devote and dedicate themselves and all
they are worth - to the name of the Lord thy God, to God as the Lord of
all and the church's God and King, even to the Holy One of Israel (whom
Israel worships as a Holy One, in the beauty of holiness), because he
has glorified thee. Note, The honour God puts upon his church and people
should not only engage us to honour them, but invite us to join
ourselves to them. We will go with you, for God is with you, [Zac
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023).

III\. Those that come into the church shall be welcome; for so spacious
is the holy city that though, Lord, it is done as thou hast commanded,
yet still there is room. "Therefore thy gates shall be open continually
([Isa 60:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#011)), not only because thou
hast no reason to fear thy enemies, but because thou hast reason to
expect thy friends." It is usual with us to leave our doors open, or
leave some one ready to open them, all night, if we look for a child or
a guest to come in late. Note, Christ is always ready to entertain those
that come to him, is never out of the way, nor can they ever come
unseasonably; the gate of mercy is always open, night and day, or shall
soon be opened to those that knock. Ministers, the door-keepers, must be
always ready to admit those that offer themselves to the Lord. God not
only keeps a good house in his church, but he keeps open house, that at
any time, by the preaching of the word, in season and out of season, the
forces of the Gentiles, and the kings or commanders of those forces, may
be brought into the church. Lift up your heads, O you gates! and let
such welcome guests as these come in.

IV\. All that are about the church shall be made in some way or other
serviceable to it. Though dominion is far from being founded in men's
grace, it is founded in God's; and he that made the inferior creatures
useful to man will make the nations of men useful to the church. The
earth helped the woman. All things are for your sakes. So here ([Isa
60:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#010)), "Even the sons of strangers,
that have neither knowledge of thee nor kindness for thee, that have
always been aliens to the commonwealth of Israel, even they shall build
up thy wall, and their kings shall in that and other things ministers
unto thee and not think it any disparagement to them to do so." This was
fulfilled when the king of Persia, and the governors of the provinces by
his order, were aiding and assisting Nehemiah in building the wall about
Jerusalem. Rather than Jerusalem's walls shall lie still in ruins, the
sons of the stranger shall be raised up to build them. Even those that
do not belong to the church may be a protection to it. And the greatest
of men should not think it below them to minister to the church, but
rejoice that they are in a capacity, and have a heart, to do it any
service. Nay, it is the duty of all to do what they can in their places
to advance the interests of God's kingdom among men; it is at their
peril if they do not; for ([Isa
60:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#012)), The nation and kingdom that
will not serve thee shall perish; not that they must perish by the sword
or by human anathemas, or as if this gave any countenance to the using
of external force for the propagating of the gospel, or as if men might
be compelled by penalties and punishments to come into the church; by no
means. But those who will not by faith submit to Jesus Christ, the King
of the church, and serve him, shall perish eternally, [Psa
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012). Those that will not be subject
to Christ's golden sceptre, to the government of his word and Spirit,
that will not be brought under, or kept in, by the discipline of his
family, shall be broken in pieces by his iron rod. Bring them forth and
slay them before me, [Luk 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#027).
Nations of such shall be utterly and eternally wasted, when Christ shall
come to take vengeance on those that obey not his gospel, [Th2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008).

V. There shall be abundance of beauty added to the ordinances of divine
worship ([Isa 60:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#013)): The glory of
Lebanon, the strong and stately cedars that grow there, shall come unto
thee, as of old to Solomon, when he built the temple ([Ch2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#016)), and with them shall be brought
other timber, proper for the carved work thereof, which the enemy had
broken down, [Psa 74:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#005), [Psa
74:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#006). The temple, the place of God's
sanctuary, shall be not only rebuilt, but beautified. It is the place of
his feet, where he rests and resides, [Eze
43:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#007). The ark is called his footstool,
because it was under the mercy-seat, [Psa
132:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#007). This he will make glorious in
the eyes of his people and of all their neighbours. The glory of the
latter house, to which this refers, though in many instances inferior,
was yet really greater than the glory of the former, because Christ came
to that temple, [Mal 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001). It was
likewise adorned with goodly stones and gifts ([Luk
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#005)), to which this promise may have
some reference; yet so slightly did Christ speak of them there that we
must suppose it to have its full accomplishment in the beauties of
holiness, and the graces and comforts of the Spirit, with which gospel
ordinances are adorned and enriched.

VI\. The church shall appear truly great and honourable, [Isa
60:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#014). The people of the Jews, after
their return out of captivity, by degrees became more considerable, and
made a better figure than one would have expected, after they had been
so much reduced, and than any of the other nations recovered that had
been in like manner humbled by the Chaldeans. It is probable that many
of those who had oppressed them in Babylon, when they were themselves
driven out by the Persians, made their court to the Jews for shelter and
supply and were willing to scrape acquaintance with them. This prophecy
is further fulfilled when those that have been enemies to the church are
wrought upon by the grace of God to see their error, and come, and join
themselves to it: "The sons of those that afflicted thee, if not they
themselves, yet their children, shall crouch to thee, shall beg pardon
for their folly and beg an interest in thy favour and admission into thy
family," [Sa1 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#036). A promise like
this is made to the church of Philadelphia, [Rev
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009). And it is intended to be, 1. A
mortification to the proud oppressors of the church, that have afflicted
her, and despised her, and taken a pleasure in doing so; they shall be
brought down; their spirits shall be broken, and their condition shall
be so mean and miserable that they shall be glad to be obliged to those
whom they have most studied to disoblige. Note, Sooner or later God will
pour contempt upon those that put contempt upon his people. 2. An
exaltation to the poor oppressed ones of the church; and this is the
honour that shall be done to them, they shall have an opportunity of
doing good to those who have done evil to them and saving those alive
who have afflicted and despised them. It is a pleasure to a good man,
and he accounts it an honour, to show mercy to those with whom he has
found no mercy. Yet this is not all. "They shall not only become
suppliants to thee for their own interest, but they shall give honour to
thee: They shall call thee, The city of the Lord; they shall at length
be convinced that thou art a favourite of heaven, and the particular
care of the divine providence." That city is truly great and honourable,
it is strong, it is rich, it is safe, it is beautiful, it is the most
desirable place that can be to live in, which is the city of the Lord,
which he owns, in which he dwells, in which religion is uppermost. Such
a one is Zion; it is the place which God has chosen to put his name
there; it is the Zion of the Holy One of Israel; therefore, we may be
sure, it is a holy city, else the Holy One of Israel would never be
called the patron of it.

[Isaiah 60:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 60:15</span></span>

The happy and glorious state of the church is here further foretold,
referring principally and ultimately to the Christian church and the
spiritual peace of that, but under the type of that little gleam of
outward peace which the Jews sometimes enjoyed after their return out of
captivity. This is here spoken of,

I. As compared with what it had been. This made her peace and honour the
more pleasant, that her condition had been much otherwise.

1\. She had been despised, but now she should be honoured, [Isa
60:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#015), [Isa
60:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#016). Jerusalem had been forsaken and
hated, abandoned by her friends, abhorred by her enemies; no man went
through that desolate city, but declined it as a rueful spectacle; it
was an astonishment and a hissing. But now it shall be made an eternal
excellency, being reformed from idolatry and having recovered the tokens
of God's favour, and it shall be the joy of good people for many
generations. Yet considering how short Jerusalem's excellency was, and
how short it came of the vast compass of this promise, we must look for
the full accomplishment of it in the perpetual excellencies of the
gospel church, far exceeding those of the Old Testament church, and the
glorious privileges and advantages of the Christian religion, which are
indeed the joy of many generations. Two things are here spoken of as her
excellency and joy, in opposition to her having been forsaken and hated:
- (1.) She shall find herself countenanced by her neighbours. The
nations, and their kings, that are brought to embrace Christianity,
shall lay themselves out for the good of the church, and maintain its
interests with the tenderness and affection that the nurse shows to the
child at her breasts ([Isa 60:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#016)):
"Thou shalt suck the milk of the Gentiles, not suck their blood (that is
not the spirit of the gospel); thou shalt suck the breast of kings, who
shall be to thee as nursing fathers." (2.) She shall find herself
countenanced by her God: "Thou shalt know that I the Lord am thy Saviour
and thy Redeemer, shalt know it by experience; for such a salvation,
such a redemption, shall be wrought out for thee as plainly discovers
itself to be the work of the Lord, the work of a mighty one, for it is a
great salvation, of the Mighty One of Jacob, for it secures the welfare
of all those that are Israelites indeed." They before knew the Lord to
be their God; now they know him to be their Saviour, their Redeemer.
Their Holy One now appears their Mighty One.

2\. She had been impoverished, but now she shall be enriched, and every
thing shall be changed for the better with her, [Isa
60:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#017). When those who were raised out
of the dust are set among princes, instead of brass money in their
purses they have bold, and instead of iron vessels in their houses they
have silver ones, and other improvements agreeable: so much shall the
spiritual glory of the New Testament church exceed the external pomp and
splendour of the Jewish economy, which had no glory in comparison with
that which quite excels it, [Co2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#010).
When we had baptism in the room of circumcision, the Lord's supper in
the room of the passover, and a gospel ministry in the room of a
Levitical priesthood, we had gold instead of brass. Sin turned gold into
brass when Rehoboam made brazen shields instead of the golden ones he
had pawned; but God's favour, when that returns, will turn brass again
into gold.

3\. She had been oppressed by her own princes, which was sadly
complained of, not only as her sin, but as her misery ([Isa
59:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#014)); but now all the grievances of
that kind shall be redressed ([Isa
60:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#017)): "I will make thy officers
peace; men of peace shall be made officers, and shall be indeed
justices, not patrons of injustice, and justices of peace, not
instruments of trouble and vexation. They shall be peace, that is, they
shall sincerely seek thy welfare and by their means thou shalt enjoy
good." They shall be peace, for they shall be righteousness; and then
the peace is as a river, when the righteousness is as the waves of the
sea. Even exactors, whose business it is to demand the public tribute,
though they be exact, must not be exacting, but must be just to the
subject as well as to the prince, and, according to the instructions
John Baptist gave to the publicans must exact no more than is appointed
them, [Luk 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#013).

4\. She had been insulted by her neighbours, invaded, spoiled, and
plundered; but now it shall be so no more ([Isa
60:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#018)): "Violence shall no more be
heard in thy land; neither the threats and triumphs of those that do
violence nor the outcries and complaints of those that suffer violence
shall again be heard, but every man shall peaceably enjoy his own. There
shall be no wasting nor destruction, either of persons of possessions,
any where within thy borders; but thy walls shall be called salvation
(they shall be safe, and means of safety to thee) and thy gates shall be
praise, praise to thee (every one shall commend thee for the good
condition they are kept in), and praise to thy God, who strengthens the
bars of thy gates," [Psa 147:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#013). When
God's salvation is upon the walls it is fit that his praises should be
in the gates, the places of concourse.

II\. As completed in what it shall be. It should seem that in the close
of this chapter we are directed to look further yet, as far forward as
to the glory and happiness of heaven, under the type and figure of the
flourishing state of the church on earth, which yet was never such as to
come any thing near to what is here foretold; and several of the images
and expressions here made use of we find in the description of the new
Jerusalem, [Rev 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023); [Rev
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005). As the prophets sometimes
insensibly pass from the blessings of the Jewish church to the spiritual
blessings of the Christian church, which are eternal, so sometimes they
rise from the church militant to the church triumphant, where, and where
only, all the promised peace, and joy, and honour will be in perfection.
1. God shall be all in all in the happiness here promised; so he is
always to true believers ([Isa 60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019)):
The sun and the moon shall be no more thy light. God's people, when they
enjoy his favour, and walk in the light of his countenance, make little
account of sun and moon, and the other lights of this world, but could
walk comfortably in the light of the Lord though they should withdraw
their shining. In heaven there shall be no occasion for sun or moon, for
it is the inheritance of the saints in light, such light as will swallow
up the light of the sun as easily as the sun does that of a candle.
"Idolaters worshipped the sun and moon (which some have thought the most
ancient and plausible idolatry); but these shall be no more thy light,
shall no more be idolized, but the Lord shall be to thee a constant
light, both day and night, in the night of adversity as well as in the
day of prosperity." Those that make God their only light shall have him
their all-sufficient light, their sun and shield. Thy God shall be thy
glory. Note, God is the glory of those whose God he is and will be so to
eternity. It is their glory that they have him for their God, and they
glory in it; it is to them instead of beauty. God's people are, upon
this account, an honourable people, that they have an interest in God as
their sin covenant. 2. The happiness here promised shall know no change,
period, or allay ([Isa 60:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#020)): "Thy
sun shall no more go down, but it shall be eternal day, eternal
sunshine, with thee; that shall not be thy sun which is sometimes
eclipsed, often clouded, and, though it shine ever so bright, ever so
warm, will certainly set and leave thee in the dark, in the cold, in a
few hours; but he shall be a sun, a fountain of light to thee, who is
himself the Father of all lights, with whom there is no variableness,
nor shadow of turning," [Jam 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017). We
read of the sun's standing still once, and not hasting to go down for
the space of a day, and it was a glorious day, never was the like; but
what was that to the day that shall never have a night? Or, if it had,
it should be a light night; for neither shall thy moon withdraw itself;
it shall never wane, shall never change, but be always at the full. The
comforts and joys that are in heaven, the glories provided for the soul,
as the light of the sun, and those prepared for the glorified body too,
as the light of the moon, shall never know the least cessation or
interruption; how should they when the Lord shall himself be thy
everlasting light - a light which never wastes nor can ever be
extinguished? And the days of thy mourning shall be ended, so as never
to return; for all tears shall be wiped away, and the fountains of them,
sin and affliction, dried up, so that sorrow and sighing shall flee away
for ever. 3. Those that are entitled to this happiness, being duly
prepared and qualified for it, shall never be put out of the possession
of it ([Isa 60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021)): Thy people, that
shall inhabit this New Jerusalem, shall all be righteous, all justified
by the righteousness of the Messiah, all sanctified by his Spirit; all
that people, that Jerusalem, must be righteous, must have that holiness
without which no man shall see the Lord. They are all righteous, for we
know that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God. There
are no people on earth that are all righteous; there is a mixture of
some bad in the best societies on this side heaven; but there are no
mixtures there. They shall be all righteous, that is, they shall be
entirely righteous; as there shall be none corrupt among them, so there
shall be no corruption in them; the spirits of just men shall there be
made perfect. And they shall be all the righteous together who shall
replenish the New Jerusalem; it is called the congregation of the
righteous, [Psa 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005). And, because they
are all righteous, therefore they shall inherit the land for ever, for
nothing but sin can turn them out of it. The perfection of the saints'
holiness secures the perpetuity of their happiness. 4. The glory of the
church shall redound to the honour of the church's God: "They shall
appear to be the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, and I will
own them as such." It was by the grace of God that they were designed to
this happiness; they are the branch of his planting, or of his
plantations; he broke them off from the wild olive and grafted them into
the good olive, transplanted them out of the field, when they were as
tender branches, into his nursery, that, being now planted in his garden
on earth, they might shortly be removed to his paradise in heaven. It
was by his grace likewise that they were prepared and fitted for this
happiness; they are the work of his hands ([Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)), are wrought to the self-same
thing, [Co2 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#005). It is a work of time,
and, when it shall be finished, will appear a work of wonder; and God
will be glorified, who began it, and carried it on; for the Lord Jesus
will then be admired in all those that believe. God will glorify himself
in glorifying his chosen. 5. They will appear the more glorious, and God
will be the more glorified in them, if we compare what they are with
what they were, the happiness they have arrived at with the smallness of
their beginnings ([Isa 60:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#022)): "A
little one shall become a thousand and a small one a strong nation." The
captives that returned out of Babylon strangely multiplied, and became a
strong nation. The Christian church was a little one, a very small one
at first - the number of their names was once but 120; yet it became a
thousand. The stone cut out of the mountain without hands swelled so as
to fill the earth. The triumphant church, and every glorified saint,
will be a thousand out of a little one, a strong nation out of a small
one. The grace and peace of the saints were at first like a grain of
mustard-seed, but they increase and multiply, and make a little one to
become a thousand, the weak to be as David. When they come to heaven,
and look back upon the smallness of their beginning, they will wonder
how they got thither. And so wonderful is all this promise that it
needed the ratification with which it is closed: I the Lord will hasten
it in his time - all that is here said relating to the Jewish and
Christian church, to the militant and triumphant church, and to every
particular believer. (1.) It may seem too difficult to be brought about,
and therefore may be despaired of; but the God of almighty power has
undertaken it: "I the Lord will do it, who can do it, and who have
determined to do it." It will be done by him whose power is irresistible
and his purposes unalterable. (2.) It may seem to be delayed and put off
so long that we are out of hopes of it; but, as the Lord will do it, so
he will hasten it, will do it with all convenient speed; though much
time may pass before it is done, no time shall be lost; he will hasten
it in its time, in the proper time, in the season wherein it will be
beautiful; he will do it in the time appointed by his wisdom, though not
in the time prescribed by our folly. And this is really hastening it;
for, though it seem to tarry, it does not tarry if it come in God's
time, for we are sure that that is the best time, which he that believes
will patiently wait for.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 61](isa061)

</div>
