<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa024)  [Next](isa026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 25:0</span></span>

After the threatenings of wrath in the foregoing chapter we have here,
I. Thankful praises for what God had done, which the prophet, in the
name of the church, offers up to God, and teaches us to offer the like
([Isa 25:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001)). II. Precious promises
of what God would yet further do for his church, especially in the grace
of the gospel ([Isa 25:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006)). III. The
church's triumph in God over her enemies thereupon ([Isa
25:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#009)). This chapter looks as
pleasantly upon the church as the former looked dreadfully upon the
world.

[Isaiah 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 25:1</span></span>

It is said in the close of the foregoing chapter that the Lord of hosts
shall reign gloriously; now, in compliance with this, the prophet here
speaks of the glorious majesty of his kingdom ([Psa
145:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#012)), and gives him the glory of
it; and, however this prophecy might have an accomplishment in the
destruction of Babylon and the deliverance of the Jews out of their
captivity there, it seems to look further, to the praises that should be
offered up to God by the gospel church for Christ's victories over our
spiritual enemies and the comforts he has provided for all believers.
Here,

I. The prophet determines to praise God himself; for those that would
stir up others should in the first place stir up themselves to praise
God ([Isa 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001)): "O Lord! thou art my
God, a God in covenant with me." When God is punishing the kings of the
earth upon the earth, and making them to tremble before him, a poor
prophet can go to him, and, with a humble boldness, say, O Lord! thou
art my God, and therefore I will exalt thee, I will praise thy name.
Those that have the Lord for their God are bound to praise him; for
therefore he took us to be his people that we might be unto him for a
name and for a praise, [Jer 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#011). In
praising God we exalt him; not that we can make him higher than he is,
but we must make him to appear to ourselves and others than he does. See
[Exo 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002).

II\. He pleases himself with the thought that others also shall be
brought to praise God, [Isa 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#003).
"Therefore, because of the desolations thou hast made in the earth by
thy providence ([Psa 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)) and the
just vengeance thou hast taken on thy and thy church's enemies,
therefore shall the strong people glorify thee in concert, and the city
(the metropolis) of the terrible nations fear thee." This may be
understood, 1. Of those people that have been strong and terrible
against God. Those that have been enemies to God's kingdom, and have
fought against the interests of it with a great deal of strength and
terror, shall either be converted, and glorify God by joining with his
people in his service, or at least convinced, so as to own themselves
conquered. Those that have been the terror of the mighty shall be forced
to tremble before the judgments of God and call in vain to rocks and
mountains to hide them. Or, 2. Of those that shall be now made strong
and terrible for God and by him, though before they were weak and
trampled upon. God shall so visibly appear for and with those that fear
him and glorify him that all shall acknowledge them a strong people and
shall stand in awe of them. There was a time when many of the people of
the land became Jews, for the fear of the Jews fell upon them ([Est
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#017)), and when those that knew their
God were strong and did exploits ([Dan
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#032)), for which they glorified God.

III\. He observes what is, and ought to be, the matter of this praise.
We and others must exalt God and praise him; for, 1. He has done
wonders, according to the counsel of his own will, [Isa
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001). We exalt God by admiring what he
has done as truly wonderful, wonderful proofs of his power beyond what
any creature could perform, and wonderful proofs of his goodness beyond
what such sinful creatures as we are could expect. These wonderful
things, which are new and surprising to us, and altogether unthought of,
are according to his counsels of old, devised by his wisdom and designed
for his own glory and the comfort of his people. All the operations of
providence are according to God's eternal counsels (and those
faithfulness and truth itself), all consonant to his attributes,
consistent with one another, and sure to be accomplished in their
season. 2. He has in particular humbled the pride, and broken the power,
of the mighty ones of the earth ([Isa
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#002)): "Thou hast made of a city, of
many a city, a heap of rubbish. Of many a defenced city, that thought
itself well guarded by nature and art, and the multitude and courage of
its militia, thou hast made a ruin." What created strength can hold out
against Omnipotence? "Many a city so richly built that it might be
called a palace, and so much frequented and visited by persons of the
best rank from all parts that it might be called a palace of strangers,
thou hast made to be no city; it is levelled with the ground, and not
one stone left upon another, and it shall never be built again." This
has been the case of many cities in divers parts of the world, and in
our own nation particularly; cities that flourished once have gone to
decay and are lost, and it is scarcely known (except by urns or coins
digged up out of the earth) where they stood. How many of the cities of
Israel have long since been heaps and ruins! God hereby teaches us that
here we have no continuing city and must therefore seek one to come
which will never be a ruin or go to decay. 3. He has seasonably relieved
and succoured his necessitous and distressed people ([Isa
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#004)): Thou has been a strength to the
poor, a strength to the needy. As God weakens the strong that are proud
and secure, so he strengthens the weak that are humble and serious, and
stay themselves upon him. Nay, he not only makes them strong, but he is
himself their strength; for in him they strengthen themselves, and it is
his favour that is the strength of their hearts. He is a strength to the
needy in his distress, when he needs strength, and when his distress
drives him to God. And, as he strengthens them against their inward
decays, so he shelters them from outward assaults. He is a refuge from
the storm of rain or hail, and a shadow from the scorching heat of the
sun in summer. God is a sufficient protection to his people in all
weathers, hot and cold, wet and dry. The armour of righteousness serves
both on the right hand and on the left, [Co2
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#007). Whatever dangers or troubles
God's people may be in, effectual care is taken that they shall sustain
no real hurt or damage. When perils are most threatening and alarming
God will then appear for the safety of his people: When the blast of the
terrible ones is as a storm against the wall, which makes a great noise,
but cannot overthrow the wall. The enemies of God's poor are terrible
ones; they do all they can to make themselves so to them. Their rage is
like a blast of wind, loud, and blustering, and furious; but, like the
wind, it is under a divine check; for God holds the winds in his fist,
and God will be such a shelter to his people that they shall be able to
stand the shock, keep their ground, and maintain their integrity and
peace. A storm beating on a ship tosses it, but that which beats on a
wall never stirs it, [Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010); [Psa
138:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#007). 4. That he does and will
shelter those that trust in him from the insolence of their proud
oppressors ([Isa 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#005)): Thou shalt, or
thou dost, bring down the noise of strangers; thou shalt abate and still
it, as the heat in a dry place is abated and moderated by the shadow of
a cloud interposing. The branch, or rather the son or triumph, of the
terrible ones shall be brought low, and they shall be made to change
their note and lower their voice. Observe here, (1.) The oppressors of
God's people are called strangers; for they forget that those they
oppress are made of the same mould, of the same blood, with them. They
are called terrible ones; for so they affect to be, rather than amiable
ones: they would rather be feared than loved. (2.) Their insolence
towards the people of God is noisy and hot, and that is all; it is but
the noise of strangers, who think to carry their point by hectoring and
bullying all that stand in their way, and talking big. Pharaoh king of
Egypt is but a noise, [Jer 46:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#017). It
is like the heat of the sun scorching in the middle of the day; but
where is it when the sun has set? (3.) Their noise, and heat, and all
their triumph, will be humbled and brought low, when their hopes are
baffled and all their honours laid in the dust. The branches, even the
top branches, of the terrible ones, will be broken off, and thrown to
the dunghill. (4.) If the labourers in God's vineyard be at any time
called to bear the burden and heat of the day, he will find some way or
other to refresh them, as with the shadow of a cloud, that they may not
be pressed above measure.

[Isaiah 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 25:6</span></span>

If we suppose (as many do) that this refers to the great joy which there
should be in Zion and Jerusalem when the army of the Assyrians was
routed by an angel, or when the Jews were released out of their
captivity in Babylon, or upon occasion of some other equally surprising
deliverance, yet we cannot avoid making it to look further, to the grace
of the gospel and the glory which is the crown and consummation of that
grace; for it is at our resurrection through Christ that the saying here
written shall be brought to pass; then, and not till then (if we may
believe St. Paul), it shall have its full accomplishment: Death is
swallowed up in victory, [Co1 15:54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#054).
This is a key to the rest of the promises here connected together. And
so we have here a prophecy of the salvation and the grace brought unto
us by Jesus Christ, into which the prophets enquired and searched
diligently, [Pe1 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010).

I. That the grace of the gospel should be a royal feast for all people;
not like that of Ahasuerus, which was intended only to show the grandeur
of the master of the feast ([Est 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#004));
for this is intended to gratify the guests, and therefore, whereas all
there was for show, all here is for substance. The preparations made in
the gospel for the kind reception of penitents and supplicants with God
are often in the New Testament set forth by the similitude of a feast,
as [Mat 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#001), etc., which seems to be
borrowed from this prophecy. 1. God himself is the Master of the feast,
and we may be sure he prepares like himself, as becomes him to give,
rather than as becomes us to receive. The Lord of hosts makes this
feast. 2. The guests invited are all people, Gentiles as well as Jews.
Go preach the gospel to every creature. There is enough for all, and
whoever will may come, and partake freely, even those that are gathered
out of the highways and the hedges. 3. The place is Mount Zion. Thence
the preaching of the gospel takes rise: the preachers must begin at
Jerusalem. The gospel church is the Jerusalem that is above; there this
feast is made, and to it all the invited guests must go. 4. The
provision is very rich, and every thing is of the best. It is a feast,
which supposes abundance and variety; it is a continual feast to
believers, it is their own fault if it be not. It is a feast of fat
things and full of marrow; so relishing, so nourishing, are the comforts
of the gospel to all those that feast upon them and digest them. The
returning prodigal was entertained with the fatted calf; and David has
that pleasure in communion with God with which his soul is satisfied as
with marrow and fatness. It is a feast of wines on the lees, the
strongest-bodied wines, that have been kept long upon the lees, and then
are well refined from them, so that they are clear and fine. There is
that in the gospel which, like wine soberly used, makes glad the heart
and raises the spirits, and is fit for those that are of a heavy heart,
being under convictions of sin and mourning for it, that they may drink
and forget their misery (for that is the proper use of wine - it is a
cordial for those that need it, [Pro
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#005), [Pro
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#006)), may be of good cheer, knowing
that their sins are forgiven, and may be vigorous in their spiritual
work and warfare, as a strong man refreshed with wine.

II\. That the world should be freed from that darkness of ignorance and
mistake in the mists of which it had been so long lost and buried ([Isa
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#007)): He will destroy in this
mountain the face of the covering (the covering of the face) with which
all people are covered (hood-winked or blind-folded) so that they cannot
see their way nor go about their work, and by reason of which they
wander endlessly. Their faces are covered as those of men condemned, or
dead men. There is a veil spread over all nations, for they all sit in
darkness; and no marvel, when the Jews themselves, among whom God was
known, had a veil upon their hearts, [Co2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015). But this veil the Lord will
destroy, by the light of his gospel shining in the world, and the power
of his Spirit opening men's eyes to receive it. He will raise those to
spiritual life that have long been dead in trespasses and sins.

III\. That death should be conquered, the power of it broken, and the
property of it altered: He will swallow up death in victory, [Isa
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008). 1. Christ will himself, in his
resurrection, triumph over death, will break its bands, its bars,
asunder, and cast away all its cords. The grave seemed to swallow him
up, but really he swallowed it up. 2. The happiness of the saints shall
be out of the reach of death, which puts a period to all the enjoyments
of this world, embitters them, and stains the beauty of them. 3.
Believers may triumph over death, and look upon it as a conquered enemy:
O death! where is thy sting? 4. When the dead bodies of the saints shall
be raised at the great day, and their mortality swallowed up of life,
then death will be for ever swallowed up of victory; and it is the last
enemy.

IV\. That grief shall be banished, and there shall be perfect and
endless joy: The Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces. Those
that mourn for sin shall be comforted and have their consciences
pacified. In the covenant of grace there shall be that provided which is
sufficient to counterbalance all the sorrows of this present time, to
wipe away our tears, and to refresh us. Those particularly that suffer
for Christ shall have consolations abounding as their afflictions do
abound. But in the joys of heaven, and nowhere short of them, will fully
be brought to pass this saying, as that before, for there it is that God
shall wipe away all tears, [Rev 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#017);
[Rev 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004). And there shall be no more
sorrow, because there shall be no more death. The hope of this should
now wipe away all excessive tears, all the weeping that hinders sowing.

V. That all the reproach cast upon religion and the serious professors
of it shall be for ever rolled away: The rebuke of his people, which
they have long lain under, the calumnies and misrepresentations by which
they have been blackened, the insolence and cruelty with which their
persecutors have trampled on them and trodden them down, shall be taken
away. Their righteousness shall be brought forth as the light, in the
view of all the world, who shall be convinced that they are not such as
they have been invidiously characterized; and so their salvation from
the injuries done them as such shall be wrought out. Sometimes in this
world God does that for his people which takes away their reproach from
among men. However, it will be done effectually at the great day; for
the Lord has spoken it, who can, and will, make it good. Let us
patiently bear sorrow and shame now, and improve both; for shortly both
will be done away.

[Isaiah 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 25:9</span></span>

Here is, I. The welcome which the church shall give to these blessings
promised in the foregoing verses ([Isa
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#009)): It shall be said in that day,
with a humble holy triumph and exultation, Lo, this is our God; we have
waited for him! Thus will the deliverance of the church out of long and
sore troubles be celebrated; thus will it be as life from the dead. With
such transports of joy and praise will those entertain the glad tidings
of the Redeemer who looked for him, and for redemption in Jerusalem by
him; and with such a triumphant song as this will glorified saints enter
into the joy of their Lord. 1. God himself must have the glory of all:
"Lo, this is our God, this is the Lord. This which is done is his doing,
and it is marvellous in our eyes. Herein he has done like himself, has
magnified his own wisdom, power, and goodness. Herein he has done for us
like our God, a God in covenant with us, and whom we serve." Note, Our
triumphs must not terminate in what God does for us and gives to us, but
must pass through them to himself, who is the author and giver of them:
This is our God. Have any of the nations of the earth such a God to
trust to? No, their rock is not as our rock. There is none like unto the
God of Jerusalem. 2. The longer it has been expected the more welcome it
is. "This is he whom we have waited for, in dependence upon his word of
promise, and a full assurance that he would come in the set time, in due
time, and therefore we were willing to tarry his time; and now we find
it is not in vain to wait for him, for the mercy comes at last, with an
abundant recompence for the delay." 3. It is matter of joy unspeakable:
"We will be glad and rejoice in his salvation. We that share in the
benefits of it will concur in the joyful thanksgivings for it." 4. It is
an encouragement to hope for the continuance and perfection of this
salvation: We have waited for him, and he will save us, will carry on
what he has begun; for as for God, our God, his work is perfect.

II\. A prospect of further blessings for the securing and perpetuating
of these. 1. The power of God shall be engaged for them and shall
continue to take their part: In this mountain shall the hand of the Lord
rest, [Isa 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#010). The church and
people of God shall have continued proofs of God's presence with them
and residence among them: his hand shall be continually over them, to
protect and guard them, and continually stretched out to them, for their
supply. Mount Zion is his rest for ever; here he will dwell. 2. The
power of their enemies, which is engaged against them, shall be broken.
Moab is here put for all the adversaries of God's people, that are
vexatious to them; they shall all be trodden down or threshed (for then
they beat out the corn by treading it) and shall be thrown out as straw
to the dunghill, being good for nothing else. God having caused his hand
to rest upon this mountain, it shall not be a hand that hangs down, or
is folded up, feeble and inactive; but he shall spread forth his hands,
in the midst of his people, like one that swims, which intimates that he
will employ and exert his power for them vigorously, - that he will be
doing for them on all sides, - that he will easily and effectually put
by the opposition that is given to his gracious intentions for them, and
thereby further and push forward his good work among them, - and that on
their behalf he will be continually active, for so the swimmer is. It is
foretold, particularly, what he shall do for them. (1.) He shall bring
down the pride of their enemies (and Moab was notoriously guilty of
pride, [Isa 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006)) by one humbling
judgment after another, stripping them of that which they are proud of.
(2.) He shall bring down the spoils of their hands, shall take from them
that which they have got by spoil and rapine. He shall bring down the
arms of their hands, which are lifted up against God's Israel; he shall
quite break their power, and disable them to do mischief. (3.) He shall
ruin all their fortifications, [Isa
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#012). Moab has his walls, and his
high forts, with which he hopes to secure himself, and from which he
designs to annoy the people of God; but God shall bring them all down,
lay them low, bring them to the ground, to the dust; and so those who
trusted to them will be left exposed. There is no fortress impregnable
to Omnipotence, no fort so high but the arm of the Lord can overtop it
and bring it down. This destruction of Moab is typical of Christ's
victory over death (spoken of [Isa
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008)), his spoiling principalities and
powers in his cross ([Col 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015)), his
pulling down Satan's strong-holds by the preaching of his gospel ([Co2
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004)), and his reigning till all his
enemies be made his footstool, [Psa
110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 26](isa026)

</div>
