<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa049)  [Next](isa051) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 50](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 50:0</span></span>

In this chapter, I. Those to whom God sends are justly charged with
bringing all the troubles they were in upon themselves, by their own
wilfulness and obstinacy, it being made to appear that God was able and
ready to help them if they had been fit for deliverance ([Isa
50:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001)). II. He by whom God sends
produces his commission ([Isa 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004)),
alleges his own readiness to submit to all the services and sufferings
he was called to in the execution of it ([Isa
50:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#005), [Isa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006)), and assures himself that God,
who sent him, would stand by him and bear him out against all opposition
([Isa 50:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007)). III. The message that
is sent is life and death, good and evil, the blessing and the curse,
comfort to desponding saints and terror to presuming sinners ([Isa
50:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#010), [Isa
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#011)). Now all this seems to have a
double reference, 1. To the unbelieving Jews in Babylon, who quarrelled
with God for his dealings with them, and to the prophet Isaiah, who,
though dead long before the captivity, yet, prophesying so plainly and
fully of it, saw fit to produce his credentials, to justify what he had
said. 2. To the unbelieving Jews in our Saviour's time, whose own fault
it was that they were rejected, Christ having preached much to them, and
suffered much from them, and being herein borne up by a divine power.
The "contents" of this chapter, in our Bibles, give this sense of it,
very concisely, thus: - "Christ shows that the dereliction of the Jews
is not to be imputed to him, by his ability to save, by his obedience in
that work, and by his confidence in divine assistance." The prophet
concludes with an exhortation to trust in God and not in ourselves.

[Isaiah 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 50:1</span></span>

Those who have professed to be the people of God, and yet seem to be
dealt severely with, are apt to complain of God, and to lay the fault
upon him, as if he had been hard with them. But, in answer to their
murmurings, we have here,

I. A challenge given them to prove, or produce any evidence, that the
quarrel began on God's side, [Isa
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001). They could not say that he had
done them any wrong or had acted arbitrarily. 1. He had been a husband
to them; and husbands were then allowed a power to put away their wives
upon any little disgust: if their wives found not favour in their eyes,
they made nothing of giving them a bill of divorce, [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001); [Mat
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#007). But they could not say that God
had dealt so with them. It is true they were now separated from him, and
had abode many days without ephod, altar, or sacrifice; but whose fault
was that? They could not say that God had given their mother a bill of
divorce; let them produce it if they can, for a bill of divorce was
given into the hand of her that was divorced. 2. He had been a father to
them; and fathers had then a power to sell their children for slaves to
their creditors, in satisfaction for the debts they were not otherwise
able to pay. Now it is true the Jews were sold to the Babylonians then,
and afterwards to the Romans; but did God sell them for payment of his
debts? No, he was not indebted to any of those to whom they were sold,
or, if he had sold them, he did not increase his wealth by their price,
[Psa 44:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#012). When God chastens his
children, it is neither for his pleasure ([Heb
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#010)) nor for his profit. All that
are saved are saved by a prerogative of grace, but those that perish are
cut off by an act of divine holiness and justice, not of absolute
sovereignty.

II\. A charge exhibited against them, showing them that they were
themselves the authors of their own ruin: "Behold, for your iniquities,
for the pleasure of them and the gratification of your own base lusts,
you have sold yourselves, for your iniquities you are sold; not as
children are sold by their parents, to pay their debts, but as
malefactors are sold by the judges, to punish them for their crimes. You
sold yourselves to work wickedness, and therefore God justly sold you
into the hands of your enemies, [Ch2
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#005), [Ch2
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#008). It is for your transgressions
that your mother is put away, for her whoredoms and adulteries," which
were always allowed to be a just cause of divorce. The Jews were sent
into Babylon for their idolatry, a sin which broke the marriage
covenant, and were at last rejected for crucifying the Lord of glory;
these were the iniquities for which they were sold and put away.

III\. The confirmation of this challenge and this charge. 1. It is plain
that it was owing to themselves that they were cast off; for God came
and offered them his favour, offered them his helping hand, either to
prevent their trouble or to deliver them out of it, but they slighted
him and all the tenders of his grace. "Do you lay it upon me?" (says
God); "tell me, then, wherefore, when I came, was there no man to meet
me, when I called, was there none to answer me?" [Isa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#002). God came to them by his servants
the prophets, demanding the fruits of his vineyard ([Mat
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#034)); he sent them his messengers,
rising up betimes and sending them ([Jer
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#015)); he called to them to leave
their sins, and so prevent their own ruin: but was there no man, or next
to none, that had any regard to the warnings which the prophets gave
them, none that answered the calls of God, or complied with the messages
he sent them; and this was it for which they were sold and put away.
Because they mocked the messengers of the Lord, therefore, God brought
upon them the king of the Chaldeans, [Ch2
36:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#016), [Ch2
36:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#017). Last of all he sent unto them
his Son. He came to his own, but his own received him not; he called
them to himself, but there were none that answered; he would have
gathered Jerusalem's children together, but they would not; they knew
not, because they would not know, the things that belonged to their
peace, nor the day of their visitation, and for that transgression it
was that they were put away and their house was left desolate, [Mat
21:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#041); [Mat
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037), [Mat
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038); [Luk
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041), [Luk
19:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#042). When God calls men to
happiness, and they will not answer, they are justly left to be
miserable. 2. It is plain that it was not owing to a want of power in
God, for he is almighty, and could have recovered them from so great a
death; nor was it owing to a want of power in Christ, for he is able to
save to the uttermost. The unbelieving Jews in Babylon thought they were
not delivered because their God was not able to deliver them; and those
in Christ's time were ready to ask, in scorn, Can this man save us? For
himself he cannot save. "But" (says God) "is my hand shortened at all,
or is it weakened?" Can any limits be set to Omnipotence? Cannot he
redeem who is the great Redeemer? Has he no power to deliver whose all
power is? To put to silence, and for ever to put to shame, their doubts
concerning his power, he here gives unquestionable proofs of it. (1.) He
can, when he pleases, dry up the seas, and make the rivers a wilderness.
He did so for Israel when he redeemed them out of Egypt, and he can do
so again for their redemption out of Babylon. It is done at his rebuke,
as easily as with a word's speaking. He can so dry up the rivers as to
leave the fish to die for want of water, and to putrefy. When God turned
the waters of Egypt into blood he slew the fish, [Psa
105:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#029). The expression our Saviour
sometimes used concerning the power of faith, that it will remove
mountains and plant sycamores in the sea, is not unlike this; if their
faith could do that, no doubt their faith would save them, and therefore
they were inexcusable if they perished in unbelief. (2.) He can, when he
pleases, eclipse the lights of heaven, clothe then with blackness, and
make sackcloth their covering ([Isa
50:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#003)) by thick and dark clouds
interposing, which he balances, [Job
36:32](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#032); [Job
37:16](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#016).

[Isaiah 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 50:4</span></span>

Our Lord Jesus, having proved himself able to save, here shows himself
as willing as he is able to save, here shows himself as willing as he is
able. We suppose the prophet Isaiah to say something of himself in these
verses, engaging and encouraging himself to go on in his work as a
prophet, notwithstanding the many hardships he met with, not doubting
but that God would stand by him and strengthen him; but, like David, he
speaks of himself as a type of Christ, who is here prophesied of and
promised to be the Saviour.

I. As an acceptable preacher. Isaiah, a a prophet, was qualified for the
work to which he was called, so were the rest of God's prophets, and
others whom he employed as his messengers; but Christ was anointed with
the Spirit above his fellows. To make the man of God perfect, he has, 1.
The tongue of the learned, to know how to give instruction, how to speak
a word in season to him that is weary, [Isa
50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004). God, who made man's mouth, gave
Moses the tongue of the learned, to speak for the terror and conviction
of Pharaoh, [Exo 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#011), [Exo
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#012). He gave to Christ the tongue of
the learned, to speak a word in season for the comfort of those that are
weary and heavily laden under the burden of sin, [Mat
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028). Grace was poured into his lips,
and they are said to drop sweet-smelling myrrh. See what is the best
learning of a minister, to know how to comfort troubled consciences, and
to speak pertinently, properly, and plainly, to the various cases of
poor souls. An ability to do this is God's gift, and it is one of the
best gifts, which we should covet earnestly. Let us repose ourselves in
the many comfortable words which Christ has spoken to the weary. 2. The
ear of the learned, to receive instruction. Prophets have as much need
of this as of the tongue of the learned; for they must deliver what they
are taught and no other, must hear the word from God's mouth diligently
and attentively, that they may speak it exactly, [Eze
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017). Christ himself received that he
might give. None must undertake to be teachers who have not first been
learners. Christ's apostles were first disciples, scribes instructed
unto the kingdom of heaven, [Mat
13:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052). Nor is it enough to hear, but
we must hear as the learned, hear and understand, hear and remember,
hear as those that would learn by what we hear. Those that would hear as
the learned must be awake, and wakeful; for we are naturally drowsy and
sleepy, and unapt to hear at all, or we hear by the halves, hear and do
not heed. Our ears need to be wakened; we need to have something said to
rouse us, to awaken us out of our spiritual slumbers, that we may hear
as for our lives. We need to be awakened morning by morning, as duly as
the day returns, to be awakened to do the work of the day in its day.
Our case calls for continual fresh supplies of divine grace, to free us
from the dulness we contract daily. The morning, when our spirits are
most lively, is a proper time for communion with God; then we are in the
best frame both to speak to him (my voice shalt thou hear in the
morning) and to hear from him. The people came early in the morning to
hear Christ in the temple ([Luk
21:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#038)), for, it seems, his were
morning lectures. And it is God that wakens us morning by morning. If we
do any thing to purpose in his service, it is he who, as our Master,
calls us up; and we should doze perpetually if he did not waken us
morning by morning.

II\. As a patient sufferer, [Isa 50:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#005),
[Isa 50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006). One would think that he who
was commissioned and qualified to speak comfort to the weary should meet
with no difficulty in his work, but universal acceptance. It is however
quite otherwise; he has both hard work to do and hard usage to undergo;
and here he tells us with what undaunted constancy he went through with
it. We have no reason to question but that the prophet Isaiah went on
resolutely in the work to which God had called him, though we read not
of his undergoing any such hardships as are here supposed; but we are
sure that the prediction was abundantly verified in Jesus Christ: and
here we have, 1. His patient obedience in his doing work. "The Lord God
has not only wakened my ear to hear what he says, but has opened my ear
to receive it, and comply with it" ([Psa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006), [Psa
40:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#007), My ear hast thou opened; then
said I, Lo, I come); for when he adds, I was not rebellious, neither
turned away back, more is implied than expressed - that he was willing,
that though he foresaw a great deal of difficulty and discouragement,
though he was to take pains and give constant attendance as a servant,
though he was to empty himself of that which was very great and humble
himself to that which was very mean, yet he did not fly off, did not
fail, nor was discouraged. He continued very free and forward to his
work even when he came to the hardest part of it. Note, As a good
understanding in the truths of God, so a good will to the work and
service of God, is from the grace of God. 2. His obedient patience in
his suffering work. I call it obedient patience because he was patient
with an eye to his Father's will, thus pleading with himself, This
commandment have I received of my Father, and thus submitting to God,
Not as I will, but as thou wilt. In this submission he resigned himself,
(1.) To be scourged: I gave my back to the smiters; and that not only by
submitting to the indignity when he was smitten, but by permitting it
(or admitting it rather) among the other instances of pain and shame
which he would voluntarily undergo for us. (2.) To be buffeted: I gave
my cheeks to those that not only smote them, but plucked off the hair of
the beard, which was a greater degree both of pain and of ignominy. (3.)
To be spit upon: I hid not my face from shame and spitting. He could
have hidden his face from it, could have avoided it, but he would not,
because he was made a reproach of men, and thus he would answer to the
type of Job, that man of sorrows, of whom it is said that they smote him
on the cheek reproachfully ([Job
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#010)), which was an expression not
only of contempt, but of abhorrence and indignation. All this Christ
underwent for us, and voluntarily, to convince us of his willingness to
save us.

III\. As a courageous champion, [Isa
50:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007). The Redeemer is as famous for
his boldness as for his humility and patience, and, though he yields,
yet he is more than a conqueror. Observe, 1. The dependence he has upon
God. What was the prophet Isaiah's support was the support of Christ
himself (v. 7): The Lord God will help me; and again, v. 9. Those whom
God employs he will assist, and will take care they want not any help
that they or their work call for. God, having laid help upon his Son for
us, gave help to him, and his hand was all along with the man of his
right hand. Nor will he only assist him in his work, but accept of him
(v. 8): He is near that justifieth. Isaiah, no doubt, was falsely
accused and loaded with reproach and calumny, as other prophets were;
but he despised the reproach, knowing that God would roll it away and
bring forth his righteousness as the light, perhaps in this world ([Psa
37:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#006)), at furthest in the great day,
when there will be a resurrection of names as well as bodies, and the
righteous shall shine forth as the morning sun. And so it was verified
in Christ; by his resurrection he was proved to be not the man that he
was represented, not a blasphemer, not a deceiver, not an enemy to
Caesar. The judge that condemned him owned he found no fault in him; the
centurion, or sheriff, that had charge of his execution, declared him a
righteous man: so near was he that justified him. But it was true of him
in a further and more peculiar sense: the Father justified him when he
accepted the satisfaction he made for the sin of man, and constituted
him the Lord our righteousness, who was made sin for us. He was
justified in the Spirit, [Ti1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016). He
was near who did it; for his resurrection, by which he was justified,
soon followed his condemnation and crucifixion. He was straightway
glorified, [Joh 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#032). 2. The
confidence he thereupon has of success in his undertaking: "If God will
help me, if he will justify me, will stand by me and bear me out, I
shall not be confounded, as those are that come short of the end they
aimed at and the satisfaction they promised themselves: I know that I
shall not be ashamed." Though his enemies did all they could to put him
to shame, yet he kept his ground, he kept his countenance, and was not
ashamed of the work he had undertaken. Note, Work for God is work that
we should not be ashamed of; and hope in God is hope that we shall not
be ashamed of. Those that trust in God for help shall not be
disappointed; they know whom they have trusted, and therefore know they
shall not be ashamed. 3. The defiance which in this confidence he bids
to all opposers and opposition: "God will help me, and therefore have I
set my face like a flint." The prophet did so; he was bold in reproving
sin, in warning sinners ([Eze 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#008),
[Eze 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009)), and in asserting the truth
of his predictions. Christ did so; he went on in his work, as Mediator,
with unshaken constancy and undaunted resolution; he did not fail nor
was discouraged; and here he challenges all his opposers, (1.) To enter
the lists with him: Who will contend with me, either in law or by the
sword? Let us stand together as combatants, or as the plaintiff and
defendant. Who is my adversary? Who is the master of my cause? so the
word is, "Who will pretend to enter an action against me? Let him
appear, and come near to me, for I will not abscond." Many offered to
dispute with Christ, but he put them to silence. The prophet speaks this
in the name of all faithful ministers; those who keep close to the pure
word of God, in delivering their message, need not fear contradiction;
the scriptures will bear them out, whoever contends with them. Great is
the truth and will prevail. Christ speaks this in the name of all
believers, speaks it as their champion. Who dares be an enemy to those
whom he is a friend to, or contend with those for whom he is an
advocate? Thus St. Paul applies it ([Rom
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033)): Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of God's elect? (2.) He challenges them to prove any crime upon
him ([Isa 50:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#009)): Who is he that shall
condemn me? The prophet perhaps was condemned to die; Christ we are sure
was; and yet both could say, Who is he that shall condemn? For there is
no condemnation to those whom God justifies. There were those that did
condemn them, but what became of them? They all shall wax old as a
garment. The righteous cause of Christ and his prophets shall outlive
all opposition. The moth shall eat them up silently and insensibly; a
little thing will serve to destroy them. But the roaring lion himself
shall not prevail against God's witnesses. All believers are enabled to
make this challenge, Who is he that shall condemn? It is Christ that
died.

[Isaiah 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 50:10</span></span>

The prophet, having the tongue of the learned given him, that he might
give to every one his portion, here makes use of it, rightly dividing
the word of truth. It is the summary of the gospel. He that believes
shall be saved (he that trusts in the name of the Lord shall be
comforted, though for a while he walk in darkness and have no light),
but he that believes not shall be damned; though for a while he walk in
the light of his own fire, yet he shall lie down in sorrow.

I. Comfort is here spoken to disconsolate saints, and they are
encouraged to trust in God's grace, [Isa
50:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#010). Here observe, 1. What is always
the character of a child of God. He is one that fears the Lord with a
filial fear, that stands in awe of his majesty and is afraid of
incurring his displeasure. This is a grace that usually appears most in
good people when they walk in darkness, when other graces appear not.
They then tremble at his word ([Isa
66:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002)) and are afraid of his judgments,
[Psa 119:120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120). He is one that obeys the
voice of God's servant, is willing to be ruled by the Lord Jesus, as
God's servant in the great work of man's redemption, one that yields a
sincere obedience to the law of Christ and cheerfully comes up to the
terms of his covenant. Those that truly fear God will obey the voice of
Christ. 2. What is sometimes the case of a child of God. It is supposed
that though he has in his heart the fear of God, and faith in Christ,
yet for a time he walks in darkness and has no light, is disquieted and
has little or no comfort. Who is there that does so? This intimates that
it is a case which sometimes happens among the professors of religion,
yet not very often; but, whenever it happens, God takes notice of it. It
is no new thing for the children and heirs of light sometimes to walk in
darkness, and for a time not to have any glimpse or gleam of light. This
is not meant so much of the comforts of this life (those that fear God,
when they have ever so great an abundance of them, do not walk in them
as their light) as of their spiritual comforts, which relate to their
souls. They walk in darkness when their evidences for heaven are
clouded, their joy in God is interrupted, the testimony of the Spirit is
suspended, and the light of God's countenance is eclipsed. Pensive
Christians are apt to be melancholy, and those who fear always are apt
to fear too much. 3. What is likely to be an effectual cure in this sad
case. He that is thus in the dark, (1.) Let him trust in the name of the
Lord, in the goodness of his nature, and that which he has made known of
himself, his wisdom, power, and goodness. The name of the Lord is a
strong tower, let his run into that. Let him depend upon it that if he
walk before God, which a man may do though he walk in the dark, he shall
find God all-sufficient to him. (2.) Let him stay himself upon his God,
his in covenant; let him keep hold of his covenant-relation to God, and
call God his God, as Christ on the cross, My God, My God. Let him stay
himself upon the promises of the covenant, and build his hopes on them.
When a child of God is ready to sink he will find enough in God to stay
himself upon. Let him trust in Christ, for God's name is in him ([Exo
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#021)), trust in that name of his, The
Lord our righteousness, and stay himself upon God as his God, in and
through a Mediator.

II\. Conviction is here spoken to presuming sinners, and they are warned
not to trust in themselves, [Isa
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#011). Observe, 1. The description
given of them. They kindle a fire, and walk in the light of that fire.
They depend upon their own righteousness, offer all their sacrifices,
and burn all their incense, with that fire (as Nadab and Abihu) and not
with the fire from heaven. In their hope of acceptance with God they
have no regard to the righteousness of Christ. They refresh and please
themselves with a conceit of their own merit and sufficiency, and warm
themselves with that. It is both light and heat to them. They compass
themselves about with sparks of their own kindling. As they trust in
their own righteousness, and not in the righteousness of Christ, so they
place their happiness in their worldly possessions and enjoyments, and
not in the favour of God. Creature-comforts are as sparks, short-lived
and soon gone; yet the children of this world, while they last, warm
themselves by them, and walk with pride and pleasure in the light of
them. 2. The doom passed upon them. They are ironically told to walk in
the light of their own fire. "Make your best of it, while it lasts. But
what will be in the end thereof, what will it come to at last? This
shall you have of my hand (says Christ, for to him the judgment is
committed), you shall lie down in sorrow, shall go to bed in the dark."
See [Job 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#005), [Job
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#006). His candle shall be put out with
him. Those that make the world their comfort, and their own
righteousness their confidence, will certainly meet with a fatal
disappointment, which will be bitterness in the end. A godly man's way
may be melancholy, but his end shall be peace and everlasting light. A
wicked man's way may be pleasant, but his end and endless abode will be
utter darkness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 51](isa051)

</div>
