<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa055)  [Next](isa057) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 56](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 56:0</span></span>

After the exceedingly great and precious promises of gospel grace,
typified by temporal deliverances, which we had in the foregoing
chapter, we have here, I. A solemn charge given to us all to make
conscience of our duty, as we hope to have the benefit of those promises
([Isa 56:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001), [Isa
56:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#002)). II. Great encouragement given
to strangers that were wiling to come under the bonds of the covenant,
assuring them of the blessings of the covenant ([Isa
56:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003)). III. A high charge drawn up
against the watchmen of Israel, that were careless and unfaithful in the
discharge of their duty ([Isa
56:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009)), which seems to be the
beginning of a new sermon, by way of reproof and threatening, which is
continued in the following chapters. And the word of God was intended
for conviction, as well as for comfort and instruction in righteousness.

[Isaiah 56:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 56:1</span></span>

The scope of these verses is to show that when God is coming towards us
in a way of mercy we must go forth to meet him in a way of duty.

I. God here tells us what are his intentions of mercy to us ([Isa
56:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001)): My salvation is near to come -
the great salvation wrought out by Jesus Christ (for that was the
salvation of which the prophets enquired and searched diligently, [Pe1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010)), typified by the salvation of
the Jews from Sennacherib or out of Babylon. Observe, 1. The gospel
salvation is the salvation of the Lord. It was contrived and brought
about by him; he glories in it as his. 2. In that salvation God's
righteousness is revealed, which is so much the beauty of the gospel
that St. Paul makes this the ground of his glorying in it. ([Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)), because therein is the
righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith. The law revealed that
righteousness of God by which all sinners stand condemned, but the
gospel reveals that by which all believers stand acquitted. 3. The Old
Testament saints saw this salvation coming, and drawing near to them,
long before it came; and they had notice by the prophets of its
approach. As Daniel understood by Jeremiah's books the approach of the
redemption out of Babylon, at the end of seventy years, so others
understood by Daniel's books the approach of our redemption by Christ at
the end of seventy weeks of years.

II\. He tells us what are his expectations of duty from us, in
consideration thereof. Say not, "We see the salvation near, and
therefore we may live as we list, for there is no danger now of missing
it or coming short of it;" that is turning the grace of God into
wantonness. But, on the contrary, when the salvation is near double your
guard against sin. Note, The fuller assurances God gives us of the
performance of his promises the stronger obligations he lays us under to
obedience. The salvation here spoken of has now come; yet, there being
still a further salvation in view, the apostle presses duty upon us
Christians with the same argument. [Rom
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#011), Now is our salvation nearer than
when we believed. That which is here required to qualify and prepare us
for the approaching salvation is,

1\. That we be honest and just in all our dealings: Keep you judgment
and do justice. Walk by rule, and make conscience of what you say and
do, that you do no wrong to any. Render to all their dues exactly, and,
in exacting what is due to you, keep up a court of equity in your own
bosom, to moderate the rigours of the law. Be ruled by that golden rule,
"Do as you would be done by." Magistrates must administer justice wisely
and faithfully. This is required to evidence the sincerity of our faith
and repentance, and to open the way of mercy. Repent for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand. God is true to us; let us be so to one another.

2\. That we religiously observe the sabbath day, [Isa
56:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#002). We are not just if we rob God of
his time. Sabbath-sanctification is here put for all the duties of the
first table, the fruits of our love to God, as justice and judgment are
put for all those of the second table, the fruits of our love to our
neighbour. Observe, (1.) The duty required, which is to keep the
sabbath, to keep it as a talent we are to trade with, as a treasure we
are entrusted with. "Keep it holy; keep it safe; keep it with care and
caution; keep it from polluting it. Allow neither yourselves nor others
either to violate the holy rest or omit the holy work of that day." If
this be intended primarily for the Jews in Babylon, it was fit that they
should be particularly put in mind of this, because when, by reason of
their distance from the temple, they could not observe the other
institutions of their law, yet they might distinguish themselves from
the heathen by putting a difference between God's day and other days.
But it being required more generally of man, and the son of man, it
intimates that sabbath-sanctification should be a duty in gospel times,
when the bounds of the church should be enlarged and other rites and
ceremonies abolished. Observe, Those that would keep the sabbath from
polluting it must put on resolution, must not only do this, but lay hold
on it, for sabbath time is precious, but is very apt to slip away if we
take not great care; and therefore we must lay hold on it and keep our
hold, must do it and persevere in it. (2.) The encouragement we have to
do this duty: Blessed is he that doeth it. The way to have the blessing
of God upon our employments all the week is to make conscience, and make
a business, of sabbath-sanctification; and in doing so we shall be the
better qualified to do judgment and justice. The more godliness the more
honesty, [Ti1 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#002).

3\. That we have nothing to do with sin: Blessed is the man that keeps
his hand from doing evil, any wrong to his neighbour, in body, goods, or
good name - or, more generally, any thing that is displeasing to God and
hurtful to his own soul. Note, The best evidence of our having kept the
sabbath well will be a care to keep a good conscience all the week. By
this it will appear that we have been in the mount with God if our faces
shine in a holy conversation before men.

[Isaiah 56:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 56:3</span></span>

The prophet is here, in God's name, encouraging those that were hearty
in joining themselves to God and yet laboured under great
discouragements. 1. Some were discouraged because they were not of the
seed of Abraham. They had joined themselves to the Lord, and bound their
souls with a bond to be his for ever (this is the root and life of
religion, to break off from the world and the flesh, and devote
ourselves entirely to the service and honour of God); but they
questioned whether God would accept them, because they were of the sons
of the stranger, [Isa 56:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003). They were
Gentiles, strangers to the commonwealth of Israel and aliens from the
covenants of promise, and therefore feared they had no part nor lot in
the matter. They said, "The Lord has utterly separated me from his
people, and will not own me as one of them, nor admit me to their
privileges." It was often said that there should be one law for the
stranger and for him that was born in the land ([Exo
12:49](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#049)), and yet they came to this
melancholy conclusion. Note, Unbelief often suggests things to the
discouragement of good people which are directly contrary to what God
himself has said, things which he has expressly guarded against. Let not
the sons of the stranger therefore say thus, for they have no reason to
say it. Note, Ministers must have answers ready for the disquieting
fears and jealousies of weak Christians, which, how unreasonable soever,
they must take notice of. 2. Others were discouraged because they were
not fathers in Israel. The eunuch said, Behold, I am a dry tree. So he
looked upon himself, and it was his grief; so others looked upon him,
and it was his reproach. He was thought to be of no use because he had
no children, nor was ever likely to have any. This was then the more
grievous because eunuchs were not admitted to be priests ([Lev
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#020)), nor to enter into the
congregation ([Deu 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#001)), and because
the promise of a numerous posterity was the particular blessing of
Israel and the more valuable because from among them the Messiah was to
come. Yet God would not have the eunuchs to make the worst of their
case, nor to think that they should be excluded from the gospel church,
and from being spiritual priests, because they were shut out from the
congregation of Israel and the Levitical priesthood; no, as the taking
down of the partition wall, contained in ordinances, admitted the
Gentiles, so it let in likewise those that had been kept out by
ceremonial pollutions. Yet, by the reply here given to this suggestion,
it should seem the chief thing which the eunuch laments in his case is
his being written childless.

Now suitable encouragements are given to each of these.

I. To those who have no children of their own, who, though they had the
honour to be the children of the church and the covenant themselves, yet
had none to whom they might transmit that honour, none to receive the
sign of circumcision and the privileges secured by that sign. Now
observe,

1\. What a good character they have, though they lie under this ignominy
and affliction; and those only are entitled to the following comforts
who in some measure answer to these characters. (1.) They keep God's
sabbaths as he has appointed them to be kept. In the primitive times, if
a Christian were asked, "Hast thou kept holy the Lord's day?" He would
readily answer, "I am a Christian, and dare not do otherwise." (2.) In
their whole conversation they choose those things that please God. They
do that which is good; they do it with a sincere design to please God in
it; they do it of choice, and with delight. If sometimes, through
infirmity, they come short in doing that which pleases God, yet they
choose it, they endeavour after it, and aim at it. Note, Whatever is
God's pleasure should without dispute be our choice. (3.) They take hold
of his covenant, and that is a thing that pleases God as much as any
thing. The covenant of grace is proposed and proffered to us in the
gospel; to take hold of it is to consent to it, to accept the offer and
come up to the terms, deliberately and sincerely to take God to be to us
a God and to give up ourselves to him to be to him a people. Taking hold
of the covenant denotes an entire and resolute consent to it, taking
hold as those that are afraid of coming short, catching at it as a good
bargain, and as those that are resolved never to let it go, for it is
our life: and we take hold of it as a criminal took hold of the horns of
the altar to which he fled for refuge.

2\. What a great deal of comfort they may have if they answer to this
character, though they are not built up into families ([Isa
56:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#005)): Unto them will I give a better
place and name. It is supposed that there is a place and a name, which
we have from sons and daughters, that is valuable and desirable. It is a
pleasing notion we have that we live in our children when we are dead.
But there is a better place, and a better name, which those have that
are in covenant with God, and it is sufficient to counterbalance the
want of the former. A place and a name denote rest and reputation; a
place to live comfortably in themselves, and a name to live creditably
with among their neighbours; they shall be happy, and may be easy both
at home and abroad. Though they have not children to be the music of
their house, or arrows in their quiver, to keep them in countenance when
they speak with their enemies in the gate, yet they shall have a place
and a name more than equivalent. For, (1.) God will give it to them,
will give it to them by promise; he will himself be both their
habitation and their glory, their place and their name. (2.) He will
give it to them in his house, and within his walls; there they shall
have a place, shall be planted so as to take root ([Psa
92:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#013)), shall dwell all the days of
their life, [Psa 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004). They shall be
at home in communion with God, as Anna, that departed not from the
temple night nor day. There they shall have a name. A name for the good
things with God and good people is a name better than that of sons and
daughters. Our relation to God, our interest in Christ, our title to the
blessings of the covenant, and our hopes of eternal life, are things
that give us in God's house a blessed place and a blessed name. (3.) It
shall be an everlasting name, that shall never be extinct, shall never
be cut off; like the place and name of angels, who therefore marry not,
because they die not. Spiritual blessings are unspeakably better than
those of sons and daughters; for children are a certain care and may
prove the greatest grief and shame of a man's life, but the blessings we
partake of in God's house are a sure and constant joy and honour,
comforts which cannot be embittered.

II\. To those that are themselves the children of strangers.

1\. It is here promised that they shall now be welcome to the church,
[Isa 56:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#006), [Isa
56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007). When God's Israel come out of
Babylon, let them bring as many of their neighbours along with them as
they can persuade to come, and God will find room enough for them all in
his house. And here, (as before) we may observe,

(1.) Upon what terms they shall be welcome. Let them know that God's
Israel, when they come out of Babylon, will not be plagued, as they were
when they came out of Egypt, with a mixed multitude, that went with
them, but were not cordially for them; no, the sons of the strangers
shall have a place and a name in God's house provided, \[1.\] That they
forsake other gods, all rivals and pretenders whatsoever, and join
themselves to the Lord, so as to become one spirit, [Co1
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#017). \[2.\] That they join themselves
to him as subjects to their prince and soldiers to their general, by an
oath of fidelity and obedience, to serve him, not occasionally, as one
would serve a turn, but to be constantly his servants, entirely subject
to his command, and devoted to his interest. \[3.\] That they join
themselves to him as friends to his honour and the interests of his
kingdom in the world, to love the name of the Lord, to be well pleased
with all the discoveries he has made of himself and all the memorials
they make of him. Observe, Serving him and loving him go together; for
those that love him truly will serve him faithfully, and that obedience
is most acceptable to him, as well as most pleasant to us, which flows
from a principle of love, for then his commandments are not grievous,
[Jo1 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#003). \[4.\] That they keep the
sabbath from polluting it; for the stranger that is within thy gates is
particularly required to do that. \[5.\] That they take hold of the
covenant, that is, that they come under the bonds of it, and put in for
the benefits of it.

(2.) To what privileges they shall be welcome, [Isa
56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007). Three things are here promised
them, in their coming to God: - \[1.\] Assistance: "I will bring them to
my holy mountain, not only bid them welcome when they come, but incline
them to come, will show them the way, and lead them in it." David
himself prays that God by his light and truth would bring them to his
holy hill, [Psa 43:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#003). And the sons of
the stranger shall be under the same guidance. The church is God's holy
hill, on which he hath set his King, and, in bringing them to Zion Hill,
he brings them to be subjects to Zion's King, as well as worshippers in
Zion's holy temple. \[2.\] Acceptance: "Their burnt-offerings and their
sacrifices shall be accepted on my altar, and be never the less
acceptable for being theirs, though they are sons of the stranger." The
prayers and praises (those spiritual sacrifices) of devout Gentiles
shall be as pleasing to God as those of the pious Jews, and no
difference shall be made between them; for, though they are Gentiles by
birth, yet through grace they shall be looked upon as the believing seed
of faithful Abraham and the praying seed of wrestling Jacob, for in
Christ Jesus there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor
uncircumcision. \[3.\] Comfort. They shall not only be accepted, but
they themselves shall have the pleasure of it: I will make them joyful
in my house of prayer. They shall have grace, not only to serve God, but
to serve him cheerfully and with gladness, and that shall make the
service the more acceptable to him; for, when we sing in the ways of the
Lord, then great is the glory of our God. They shall go away and eat
their bread with joy, because God now accepts their works, [Ecc
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#007). Nay, though they came mourning to
the house of prayer, they shall go away rejoicing, for they shall there
find such ease, by casting their cares and burdens upon God, and
referring themselves to him, that, like Hannah, they shall go away and
their countenance shall be no more sad. Many a sorrowful spirit has been
made joyful in the house of prayer.

2\. It is here promised that multitudes of the Gentiles shall come to
the church, not only that the few who come dropping in shall be made
welcome, but that great numbers shall come in, and the door be thrown
open to them: My house shall be called a house of prayer for all people.
The temple was then God's house, and to that Christ applies these words
([Mat 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013)), but with an eye to it as
a type of the gospel church, [Heb 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#008),
[Heb 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009). For Christ calls it his
house, [Heb 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006). Now concerning this
house it is promised, (1.) That it shall not be a house of sacrifice,
but a house of prayer. The religious meetings of God's people shall be
meetings for prayer, in which they shall join together, as a token of
their united faith and mutual love. (2.) That it shall be a house of
prayer, not for the people of the Jews only, but for all people. This
was fulfilled when Peter was made, not only to perceive it himself, but
to tell it to the world, that in every nation he that fears God and
works righteousness is accepted of him, [Act
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035). It had been declared again and
again that the stranger that comes nigh shall be put to death, but
Gentiles shall now be looked upon no longer as strangers and foreigners,
[Eph 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019). And it appears by Solomon's
prayer, at the dedication of the temple, both that it was primarily
intended for a house of prayer and that strangers should be welcome to
it, [Kg1 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#030), [Kg1
8:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#041), [Kg1
8:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#043). And it is intimated here ([Isa
56:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#008)) that when the Gentiles are
called in they shall be incorporated into one body with the Jews, that
(as Christ says, [Joh 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)) there may
be one fold and one Shepherd; for, \[1.\] God will gather the outcasts
of Israel. Many of the Jews that had by their unbelief cast themselves
out shall by faith be brought in again, a remnant according to the
election of grace, [Rom 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005). Christ
came to the lost sheep of the house of Israel ([Mat
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024)), to gather their outcasts ([Psa
147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002)), to restore their preserved
([Isa 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006)), and to be their glory,
[Luk 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#032). \[2.\] He will gather
others also to him, besides his own outcasts that are gathered to him.
Or, though some of the Gentiles have come over now and then into the
church, that shall not serve (as some may think) to answer the extent of
these promises; no, there are still more and more to be brought in: "I
will gather others to him besides these; these are but the first-fruits
in comparison with the harvest that shall be gathered for Christ in the
nations of the earth, when the fulness of the Gentiles shall come in."
Note, The church is a growing body: when some are gathered to it we may
still hope there shall be more, till the mystical body be completed.
Other sheep I have.

[Isaiah 56:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 56:9</span></span>

From words of comfort the prophet here, by a very sudden change of his
style, passes to words of reproof and conviction, and goes on in that
strain, for the most part, in the three following chapters; and
therefore some here begin a new sermon. He had assured the people that
in due time God would deliver them out of captivity, which was designed
for the comfort of those that should live when God would do this. Now
here he shows what their sins and provocations were, for which God would
send them into captivity, and this was designed for the conviction of
those that lived in his own time, nearly a hundred years before the
captivity, who were now filling up the measure of the nation's sin, and
to justify God in what he brought upon them. God will lay them waste by
the fierceness of their enemies, for the falseness of their friends.

I. Desolating judgments are here summoned, [Isa
56:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009). The sheep of God's pasture are
now to be made the sheep of his slaughter, to fall as victims to his
justice, and therefore the beasts of the field and the forest are called
to come and devour. They are beasts of prey, and do it from their own
ravenous disposition; but God permits them to do it, nay, he employs
them as his servants in doing it, the ministers of his justice, though
they mean not so, neither does their heart think so. If this refers
primarily to the descent made upon them by the Babylonians, and their
devouring them, yet it may look further, to the destruction of Jerusalem
and the Jewish nation by the Romans, after these outcasts of them
(mentioned [Isa 56:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#008)) were gathered in
to the Christian church. The Roman armies came upon them as beasts of
the forest to devour them, and they quite took away their place and
nation. Note, When God has bloody work to do he has beasts of prey
within call, to be employed in doing it.

II\. The reason of these judgments is here given. The shepherds, who
should have been the watchmen of the flock, to discover the approaches
of the beasts of prey, to keep them off, and protect the sheep, were
treacherous and careless, minded not their business, nor made any
conscience of the trust reposed in them, and so the sheep became an easy
prey to the wild beasts. Now this may refer to the false prophets that
lived in Isaiah's, Jeremiah's, and Ezekiel's time (who flattered the
people in their wicked ways, and told them they should have peace though
they went on) and to the priests that bore rule by their means. Or it
may refer to the wicked princes, the sons of Josiah, that did evil in
the sight of the Lord, and other wicked magistrates under them, who
betrayed their trust, were vicious and profane, and, instead of making
up the breach at which the judgments of God were breaking in upon them,
made it wider, and augmented the fierce anger of the Lord instead of
doing any thing to turn it away. They should have kept judgment and
justice (v. 1), but they abandoned both, [Jer
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#001). Or it may refer to those who were
the nation's watchmen in our Saviour's time, the chief priests and the
scribes, who should have discerned the signs of the times and have given
notice to the people of the approach of the Messiah, but who, instead of
that, opposed him, and did all they could to keep people from coming to
the knowledge of him and to prejudice them against him. It is a very sad
character that is here given of these watchmen. Woe unto thee, O land!
when thy guides are such. 1. They had no sense or knowledge of their
business. They were wretchedly ignorant of their work, and very unfit to
teach, being so ill-taught themselves: His watchmen are blind, and
therefore utterly unfit to be watchmen. If the seers see not, who shall
see for us? If the light that is in us be darkness, how great is that
darkness! Christ describes the Pharisees to be blind leaders of the
blind, [Mat 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014). The beasts of the
field come to devour, and the watchmen are blind, and are not aware of
them. They are all ignorant ([Isa
56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010)), shepherds that cannot
understand ([Isa 56:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#011)), that know not
what is to be done about the sheep, nor can feed them with
understanding, [Jer 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#015). 2. What
little knowledge they had they made no use of it; no one was the better
for it. As they were blind watchmen, that could not discern the danger,
so they were dumb dogs, that would not give warning of it. And why are
the dogs set to guard the sheep if they cannot bark to waken the
shepherd and frighten the wolf? Such were these; those that had the
charge of souls never reproved men for their faults, nor told them what
would be in the end thereof, never gave them notice of the judgments of
God that were breaking in upon them. They barked at God's prophets, and
bit them too, and worried the sheep, but made no opposition to the wolf
or thief. 3. They were very lazy, and would take no pains. They loved
their ease, and hated business, were always sleeping, lying down and
loving to slumber. They were not overcome and overpowered by sleep, as
the disciples, through grief and fatigue, but they lay down on purpose
to invite sleep, and said, Soul, take thy ease. Yet a little sleep. It
is bad with a people when their shepherds slumber ([Nah
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#018)), and it is well for God's people
that their shepherd, the keeper of Israel, neither slumbers nor sleeps.
4. They were very covetous and eager after the world - greedy dogs that
can never have enough. If they had ever so much, they would think it too
little. They so love silver as never to be satisfied with silver, [Ecc
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#010). All their enquiry is what they
shall get, not what they shall do. Let them have the wages, and they
care not whether the work be done or no; they feed not the flock, but
fleece it. They are every one looking to his own way, minding his own
private interests, and have no regard at all to the public welfare. It
was St. Paul's complaint of the watchmen in his time ([Phi
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)), All seek their own, not the
things that are Jesus Christ's. Every one is for propagating his own
opinion, advancing his own party, raising his own family, and having
every thing to his own mind, while the common concerns of the public are
wretchedly neglected and postponed. They look every one to his gain from
his quarter, from his end or part of the work. They are for fain from
every quarter (Rem rem quocunque modo rem - Money, money, by fair means
or by foul we must have money), but especially from their own quarter,
where they will be sure to take care that they lose nothing, nor miss
any thing that is to be got. If any one put not into their mouths they
not only will do him no service, but they prepare war against him, [Mic
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#005). 5. They were perfect epicures,
given to their pleasures, never so much in their element as in their
drunken revels ([Isa 56:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#012)): Come (say
they), I will fetch wine (they have that at command; their cellars are
better furnished than their closets) and we will fill ourselves, or be
drunk, with strong drink. They were often drunk, not overseen (as we
say) or overtaken in drink, but designedly. The watchmen did thus invite
and encourage one another to drink to excess, or they courted the people
to sit and drink with them, and so confirmed those in their wicked ways,
and hardened their hearts, whom they should have reproved. How could
they think it any harm to be drunk when the watchmen themselves joined
with them and led them to it! 6. They were very secure and confident of
the continuance of their prosperity and ease; they said, "Tomorrow shall
be as this day and much more abundant; we shall have as much to spend
upon our lusts tomorrow as we have today." They had no thought at all of
their own frailty and mortality, though they were shortening their days
and hastening their deaths by their excesses. They had no dread of the
judgments of God, though they were daily provoking him and making
themselves liable to his wrath and curse. They never considered the
uncertainty of all the delights and enjoyments of sense, how they perish
in the using and pass away with the lusts of them. They resolved to
continue in this wicked course, whatever their consciences said to the
contrary, to be as merry tomorrow as they are today. But boast not
thyself of tomorrow when perhaps this night thy soul shall be required
of thee.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 57](isa057)

</div>
