<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa046)  [Next](isa048) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 47](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 47:0</span></span>

Infinite Wisdom could have ordered things so that Israel might have been
released and yet Babylon unhurt; but if they will harden their hearts,
and will not let the people go, they must thank themselves that their
ruin is made to pave the way to Israel's release. That ruin is here, in
this chapter, largely foretold, not to gratify a spirit of revenge in
the people of God, who had been used barbarously by them, but to
encourage their faith and hope concerning their own deliverance, and to
be a type of the downfall of that great enemy of the New Testament
church which, in the Revelation, goes under the name of "Babylon." In
this chapter we have, I. The greatness of the ruin threatened, that
Babylon should be brought down to the dust, and made completely
miserable, should fall from the height of prosperity into the depth of
adversity ([Isa 47:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001)). II. The sins
that provoked God to bring this ruin upon them. 1. Their cruelty to the
people of God ([Isa 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#006)). 2. Their
pride and carnal security ([Isa
47:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#007)). 3. Their confidence in
themselves and contempt of God ([Isa
47:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#010)). 4. Their use of magic arts and
their dependence upon enchantments and sorceries, which should be so far
from standing them in any stead that they should but hasten their ruin
([Isa 47:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#011)).

[Isaiah 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 47:1</span></span>

In these verses God by the prophet sends a messenger even to Babylon,
like that of Jonah to Nineveh: "The time is at hand when Babylon shall
be destroyed." Fair warning is thus given her, that she may by
repentance prevent the ruin and there may be a lengthening of her
tranquility. We may observe here,

I. God's controversy with Babylon. We will begin with that, for there
all the calamity begins; she has made God her enemy, and then who can
befriend her: Let her know that the righteous Judge, to whom vengeance
belongs, has said ([Isa 47:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#003)), I will
take vengeance. She has provoked God, and shall be reckoned with for it
when the measure of her iniquities is full. Woe to those on whom God
comes to take vengeance; for who knows the power of his anger and what a
fearful thing it is to fall into his hands? Were it a man like ourselves
who would be revenged on us, we might hope to be a match for him, either
to make our escape from him or to make our part good with him. But he
says, "I will not meet thee as a man, not with the compassions of a man,
but I will be to the as a lion, and a young lion" ([Hos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#014)); or, rather, not with the
strength of a man, which is easily resisted, but with the power of a
God, which cannot be resisted. Not with the justice of a man, which may
be bribed, or biassed, or mollified by a foolish pity, but with the
justice of a God, which is strict and severe, and can never be evaded.
As in pardoning the penitent, so in punishing the impenitent, he is God
and not man, [Hos 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#009).

II\. The particular ground of this controversy. We are sure that there
is cause for it, and it is a just cause; it is the vengeance of his
temple ([Jer 50:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#028)); it is for
violence done to Zion, [Jer 51:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#035). God
will plead his people's cause against them. It is acknowledged ([Isa
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#006)) that God had, in wrath,
delivered his people into the hands of the Babylonians, had made use of
them for the correction of his children, and had by their means polluted
his inheritance, had left his peculiar people exposed to suffer in
common with the rest of the nations, had suffered the heathen, who
should have been kept at a distance, to come into his sanctuary and
defile his temple, [Psa 79:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#001). Herein
God was righteous; but the Babylonians carried the matter too far, and,
when they had them in their hands (triumphing to see a people that had
been so much in reputation for wisdom, holiness, and honour, brought
thus low), with a base and servile spirit they trampled upon them, and
showed them no mercy, no, not the common instances of humanity which the
miserable are entitled to purely by their misery. They used them
barbarously, and with an air of contempt, nay, and of complacency in
their calamities. They were brought under the yoke; but, as if that were
not enough, they laid the yoke on very heavily, adding affliction to the
afflicted. Nay, they laid it on the ancient - the elders in years, who
were past their labour, and must sink under a yoke which those in their
youthful strength would easily bear - the elders in office, those that
had been judges and magistrates, and persons of the first rank. They
took a pride in putting these to the meanest hardest drudgery. Jeremiah
laments this, that the faces of elders were not honoured, [Lam
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#012). Nothing brings a surer or a
sorer ruin upon any people than cruelty, especially to God's Israel.

III\. The terror of this controversy. She has reason to tremble when she
is told who it is that has this quarrel with her ([Isa
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#004)): "As for our Redeemer, our Goel,
that undertakes to plead our cause as the avenger of our blood, he has
two names which speak not only comfort to us, but terror to our
adversaries." 1. "He is the Lord of hosts, that has all the creatures at
his command, and therefore has all power both in heaven and in earth."
Woe to those against whom the Lord fights, for the whole creation is at
war with them. 2. "He is the Holy One of Israel, a God in covenant with
us, who has his residence among us, and will faithfully perform all the
promises he has made to us." God's power and holiness are engaged
against Babylon and for Zion. This may fitly be applied to Christ, our
great Redeemer. He is both Lord of hosts and the Holy One of Israel.

IV\. The consequences of it to Babylon. She is called a virgin, because
so she thought herself, though she was the mother of harlots. She was
beautiful as a virgin, and courted by all about her; she had been called
tender and delicate ([Isa 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001)), and
the lady of kingdoms ([Isa 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#005)); but
now the case is altered. 1. Her honour is gone, and she must bid
farewell to all her dignity. She that had sat at the upper end of the
world, sat in state and sat at ease, must now come down and sit in the
dust, as very mean and a deep mourner, must sit on the ground, for she
shall be so emptied and impoverished that she shall not have a seat left
her to sit upon. 2. Her power is gone, and she must bid farewell to all
her dominion. She shall rule no more as she has done, nor give law as
she has done to her neighbours: There is no throne, none for thee, O
daughter of the Chaldeans! Note, Those that abuse their honour or power
provoke God to deprive them of it, and to make them come down and sit in
the dust. 3. Her ease and pleasure are gone: "She shall no more be
called tender and delicate as she has been, for she shall not only be
deprived of all those things with which she pampered herself, but shall
be put to hard service and made to feel both want and pain, which will
be more than doubly grievous to her who formerly would not venture to
setcreation is at war with them. 2. "He is the Holy One of Israel, a God
in covenant with us, who has his residence among us, and will faithfully
perform all the promises he has made to us." God's power and holiness
are engaged against Babylon and for Zion. This may fitly be applied to
Christ, our great Redeemer. He is both Lord of hosts and the Holy One of
Israel.

IV\. The consequences of it to Babylon. She is called a virgin, because
so she thought herself, though she was the mother of harlots. She was
beautiful as a virgin, and courted by all about her; she had been called
tender and delicate ([Isa 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001)), and
the lady of kingdoms ([Isa 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#005)); but
now the case is altered. 1. Her honour is gone, and she must bid
farewell to all her dignity. She that had sat at the upper end of the
world, sat in state and sat at ease, must now come down and sit in the
dust, as very mean and a deep mourner, must sit on the ground, for she
shall be so emptied and impoverished that she shall not have a seat left
her to sit upon. 2. Her power is gone, and she must bid farewell to all
her dominion. She shall rule no more as she has done, nor give law as
she has done to her neighbours: There is no throne, none for thee, O
daughter of the Chaldeans! Note, Those that abuse their honour or power
provoke God to deprive them of it, and to make them come down and sit in
the dust. 3. Her ease and pleasure are gone: "She shall no more be
called tender and delicate as she has been, for she shall not only be
deprived of all those things with which she pampered herself, but shall
be put to hard service and made to feel both want and pain, which will
be more than doubly grievous to her who formerly would not venture to
set so much as the sole of her foot to the ground for tenderness and for
delicacy," [Deu 28:56](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#056). It is our
wisdom not to use ourselves to be tender and delicate, because we know
not how hardly others may use us before we die not what straits we may
be reduced to. 4. Her liberty is gone, and she is brought into a state
of servitude and as sore a bondage as she in her prosperity had brought
others to. Even the great men of Babylon must now receive the same law
from the conquerors that they used to give to the conquered: "Take the
mill-stones and grind meal ([Isa
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#002)), set to work, to hard labour"
(like beating hemp in Bridewell), "which will make thee sweat so that
thou must throw off all thy head-dresses, and uncover thy locks." When
they were driven from one place to another, at the capricious humours of
their masters, they must be forced to wade up to the middle through the
waters, to make bare the leg and uncover the thigh, that they might pass
over the rivers, which would be a great mortification to those that used
to ride in state. But let them not complain, for just thus they had
formerly used their captives; and with what measure they then meted it
is now measured to them again. Let those that have power use it with
temper and moderation, considering that the spoke which is uppermost
will be under. 5. All her glory, and all her glorying, are gone. Instead
of glory, she has ignominy ([Isa
47:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#003)): Thy nakedness shall be
uncovered and thy shame shall be seen, according to the base and
barbarous usage they commonly gave their captives, to whom, for
covetousness of their clothes, they did not leave rags sufficient to
cover their nakedness, so void were they of the modesty as well as of
the pity due to the human nature. Instead of glorying she sits silently,
and gets into darkness ([Isa 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#005)),
ashamed to show her face, for she has quite lost her credit and shall no
more be called the lady of kingdoms. Note, God can make those sit
silently that used to make the greatest noise in the world, and send
those into darkness that used to make the greatest figure. Let him that
glories, therefore, glory in a God that changes not, and not in any
worldly wealth, pleasure, or honour, which are subject to change.

[Isaiah 47:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 47:7</span></span>

Babylon, now doomed to ruin, is here justly upbraided with her pride,
luxury, and security, in the day of her prosperity, and the confidence
she had in her own wisdom and forecast, and particularly in the
prognostications and counsels of the astrologers. These things are
mentioned both to justify God in bringing these judgments upon her and
to mortify her, and put her to so much the greater shame, under these
judgments; for, when God comes forth to take vengeance, glory belongs to
him, but confusion to the sinner.

I. The Babylonians are here upbraided with their pride and haughtiness,
and the great conceit they had of themselves, because of their wealth
and power, and the vast extent of their dominion; it was the language
both of the government and of the body of the people: Thou sayest in thy
heart (and God, who searches all hearts, can tell men what they say
there, though they never speak it out) I am, and none else besides me,
[Isa 47:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#008), [Isa
47:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#010). The repetition of this part of
the charge intimates that they said it often, and that it was very
offensive to God. It is the very word that God has often said concerning
himself, I am, and none else besides me, denoting his self-existence,
his infinite and incomparable perfections, and his sole supremacy. All
this Babylon pretends to; and no wonder if she that assumed a power to
make what gods and goddesses she pleased for the people to worship made
herself one among the rest. It is presumption to say of any creature,
"It is, and there is not its like, there is none besides it" (for
creatures stand very nearly upon a level with one another); but it is
insufferable arrogance for any to say so of themselves, and an evidence
of their self-ignorance.

II\. They are upbraided with their luxury and love of ease ([Isa
47:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#008)): "Thou that art given to
pleasures, art a slave to them, art in them as in thy element, and, that
thou mayest enjoy them without disturbance or interruption, dwellest
carelessly and layest nothing to heart." Great wealth and plenty are
great temptations to sensuality, and, where there is fulness of bread,
there is commonly abundance of idleness. But if those that are given to
pleasures, and dwell carelessly, would but hear this, that for all these
things God will bring them into judgment, it would be a damp to their
mirth, an allay to their pleasure, and would find them something to be
in care about.

III\. They are upbraided with their carnal security and their vain
confidence of the perpetuity of their pomps and pleasures. This is much
insisted on here. Observe,

1\. The cause of their security. They thought themselves safe and out of
danger, not because they were ignorant of the uncertainty of all earthly
enjoyments and the inevitable fate that attends states and kingdoms as
well as particular persons, but because they did not lay this to heart,
did not apply it to themselves, nor give it a due consideration. They
lulled themselves asleep in ease and pleasure, and dreamt of nothing
else but that tomorrow should be as this day, and much more abundant.
They did not remember the latter end of it - the latter end of their
prosperity, that it is a fading flower, and will wither - the latter end
of their iniquity, that it will be bitterness, that they day will come
when their injustice and oppression must be reckoned for and punished.
She did not remember her latter end (so some read it); she forgot that
her day would come to fall and what would be in the end hereof. It was
the ruin of Jerusalem ([Lam 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#009)) that
she remembered not her last end, therefore she came down wonderfully;
and it was Babylon's ruin too. The children of men are easy, and think
themselves safe, in their sinful ways, only because they never think of
death, and judgment, and their future state.

2\. The ground of their security. They trusted in their wickedness and
in their wisdom, [Isa 47:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#010). (1.)
Their power and wealth, which they had gotten by fraud and oppression,
were their confidence: Thou hast trusted in thy wickedness, As Doeg.
[Psa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007). Many have so debauched
their own consciences, and have got to such a pitch of daring
wickedness, that they stick at nothing; and this they trust to carry
them through those difficulties which embarrass men who make conscience
of what they say and do. They doubt not but they shall be too hard for
all their enemies, because they dare lie, and kill, and forswear
themselves, and do any thing for their interest. Thus they trust in
their wickedness to secure them, which is the only thing that will ruin
them. (2.) Their policy and craft, which they called their wisdom, were
their confidence. They thought they could outwit all mankind, and
therefore might set all their enemies at defiance. But their wisdom and
knowledge perverted them, and turned them out of the way, made them
forget themselves, and the preparation necessary to be made for
hereafter.

3\. The expressions of their security. Three things this proud and
haughty monarchy said, in her security: - (1.) "I shall be a lady for
ever," [Isa 47:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#007). She looked upon the
patent of her honour to be not merely during the pleasure of the
sovereign Lord, the fountain of honour, or during her own good
behaviour, but to be perpetual to the present generation and their heirs
and successors for ever. She was not only proud that she was a lady, but
confident that she should be a lady for ever. Thus the New Testament
Babylon says, I sit as a queen, and shall see no sorrow, [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007). Those ladies mistake themselves,
and consider not their latter end, who think they shall be ladies for
ever; for death will shortly lay their honour with them in the dust.
Saints will be saints for ever, but lords and ladies will not be so for
ever. (2.) "I shall not sit as a widow, in solitude and sorrow, shall
never lose the power and wealth I am thus wedded to; the monarchy shall
never want a monarch to espouse and protect it, and be a husband to the
state; nor shall I know the loss of children," [Isa
47:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#008). She was as confident of the
continuance of the numbers of her people as of the dignity of her
prince, and had no fear of being either deposed or depopulated. Those
that are in the height of prosperity are apt to fancy themselves out of
the reach of adverse fate. (3.) "No one sees me when I do amiss, and
therefore there will be none to call me to an account," [Isa
47:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#010). It is common for sinners to
promise themselves impunity, because they promise themselves secrecy, in
their wicked ways. They trust to their wicked arts and designs to stand
them in stead, because they think they have carried them on so plausibly
that none can discern the wickedness and deceit of them.

4\. The punishment of their security. It shall be their ruin; and it
will be, (1.) A complete ruin; and it will be, (1.) A complete ruin, the
ruin of all their comforts and confidences: "These two things shall come
upon thee (the very two things that thou didst set at defiance), loss of
children and widowhood, [Isa 47:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#009).
Both thy princes and thy people shall be cut off, so that thou shalt be
no more a government, no more a nation." Note, God often brings upon
secure sinners those very mischiefs which they least feared and thought
themselves in least danger of. "They shall come upon thee in their
perfection, with all their aggravating circumstances and without any
thing to allay or mitigate them." Afflictions to God's children are not
afflictions in perfection. Widowhood is not to them a calamity in
perfection, for they have this to comfort themselves with, that their
Maker is their husband; loss of children is not, for he is better to
them than ten sons. But on his enemies they come in perfection.
Widowhood and loss of children are either of them great griefs, but both
together great indeed. Naomi thinks she may well be called Marah when
she is left both of her sons and of her husband ([Rut
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#005)); and yet on her these evils did
not come in perfection, for she had two daughters-in-law left, that were
comforts to her. But on Babylon they come in perfection; she has no
comfort remaining. (2.) It will be a sudden and surprising ruin. The
evil shall come in one day, nay, in a moment, which will make it much
the more terrible, especially to those that were so very secure. "Evil
shall come upon thee ([Isa 47:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#011)) and
thou shalt have neither time nor way to provide against it, or to
prepare for it; for thou shalt not know whence it rises, and therefore
shalt not know where to stand upon thy guard." Thou shalt not know the
morning thereof; so the Hebrew phrase is. We know just when and where
the day will break and the sun rise, but we know not what the day, when
it comes, will bring forth, nor when or where trouble will arise;
perhaps the storm may come from that point of the compass which we
little thought of. Babylon pretended to great wisdom and knowledge ([Isa
47:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#010)), but with all her knowledge she
cannot foresee, nor with all her wisdom prevent, the ruin threatened:
"Desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, as a thief in the night,
which thou shalt not know, that is, which thou little thoughtest of."
Fair warning was indeed given them, by Isaiah and other prophets of the
Lord, of this desolation; but they slighted that notice, and would give
no credit to it, and therefore justly is it so ordered that they should
have no other notice of it, but that partly through their own security,
and partly through the swiftness and subtlety of the enemy, when it came
it should be a perfect surprise to them. Those that slight the warnings
of the written word, let them not expect any other premonitions. (3.) It
will be an irresistible ruin, and such as they will have no fence
against: "Mischief shall come upon thee so suddenly that thou shalt have
no time to turn thee in, so strongly that thou shalt not be able to make
head against it and to put it off and save thyself." There is no
opposing the judgments of God when they come with commission. Babylon
herself, with all her wealth, and power, and multitude, is not able to
put off the mischief that comes.

IV\. They are upbraided with their divinations, their magical and
astrological arts and sciences, which the Chaldeans, above any other
nation, were notorious for, and from them other nations borrowed all
their learning of that kind.

1\. This is here spoken of as one of their provoking sins, which would
bring the judgments of God upon them, [Isa
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#009). "These evils shall come upon
thee to punish thee for the multitude of thy sorceries, and the great
abundance of thy enchantments." Witchcraft is a sin in its own nature
exceedingly heinous; it is giving that honour to the devil which is due
to God only, making God's enemy our guide and the father of lies our
oracle. In Babylon it was a national sin, and had the protection and
countenance of the government; conjurors, for aught that appears, were
their privy counsellors and prime ministers of state. And shall not God
visit for these things? Observe what a multitude, what a great
abundance, of sorceries and enchantments there were among them. Such a
bewitching sin this was that when it was once admitted it spread like
wildfire, and they never knew any end of it; the deceived and the
deceivers both increased strangely.

2\. It is here spoken of as one of their vain confidences, which they
relied much upon, but should be deceived in, for it would not serve so
much as to give them notice of the judgments coming, much less to guard
against them. (1.) They are here upbraided with the mighty pains they
had taken about their sorceries and enchantments: Thou hast laboured in
them from thy youth, [Isa 47:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#012). They
trained up their young men in these studies, and those that applied
themselves to them were indefatigable in their labours about them -
reading books, making observations, trying experiments. Well, let them
stand up now with their enchantments, and try their skill in the
critical moment. Let them make a stand, if they can, in opposition to
the invading enemy; let them stand to offer their service to their
country; but to what purpose? "Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy
counsels of this kind ([Isa 47:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#013));
thou hast advised with them all, but hast received no satisfaction from
them; the different schemes they have erected, and the different
judgments they have given, have but increased thy perplexity and tired
thee out." In the multitude of such counsellors there is no safety. (2.)
They are upbraided with the variety they had of such kinds of people
among them, [Isa 47:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#013). They had their
astrologers, or viewers of the heavens, that did not consider them, as
David, to behold the wisdom and power of God in them; but, under
pretence of foretelling future events by them, they viewed the heavens
and forgot him that made them and set their dominion on the earth ([Job
38:33](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#033)), and has himself dominion over
them, for he rides on the heavens. They had their star-gazers, who by
the motions of the stars, their conjunctions and oppositions, read the
doom of states and kingdoms. They had their monthly prognosticators,
their almanac-makers, that told what weather it should be or what news
they should have each month. The great stock they had of these was what
they valued themselves much upon; but they were all cheats, and their
art was a sham. I confess I see not how the judicial astrology which
some now pretend to, by the rules of which they undertake to prophecy
concerning things to come, can be distinguished from that of the
Chaldeans, nor therefore how it can escape the censure and contempt
which this text lays that under; yet I fear there are some who study
their almanacs, and regard them and their prognostications, more than
their Bibles and the prophecies there. (3.) They are upbraided with the
utter inability and insufficiency of all these pretenders to do them any
kindness in the day of their distress. Let them see whether with the
help of their enchantments they can prevail against their enemies, or
profit themselves, inspirit their own forces or dispirit those that come
against them, [Isa 47:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#012). Let them see
what service those can do them who make a trade of divination: "Let them
stand up, and either by their power save thee from these evils that are
coming upon thee or by their foresight make such a discovery of them
beforehand that thou mayest by needful precautions save thyself;" as
Elisha, by notifying to the king of Israel the motions of the Syrian
army, enabled him to save himself, not once nor twice, [Kg2
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#010). This baffling of the diviners
was literally fulfilled when, the night that Babylon was taken and
Belshazzar slain, all his astrologers, soothsayers, and wise men, were
quite nonplussed with the handwriting on the wall that pronounced the
fatal sentence, [Dan 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#008). (4.) They
are upbraided with the fall of the wise men themselves in the common
ruin, [Isa 47:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#014). Those are unlikely
to stand their friends in any stead who cannot secure themselves; they
are as stubble at the best, worthless and useless, and they shall be as
stubble before a consuming fire. The Persians, to make room for their
own wise men, will cut off those of Babylon; that fire shall burn them,
and they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame. Those
can expect no other than to be devoured by their sins make themselves
fuel to a devouring fire. When God kindles a fire among them it shall
not be a coal to warm at, and a fire to sit before, but a coal to burn
them. Or, rather, it denotes that they shall be utterly consumed by the
judgments of God, burnt quite to ashes, and there shall not remain one
live coal to do any body any service; for when God judges he will
overcome. (5.) They are upbraided with their merchants, and those they
dealt with ([Isa 47:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#015)), such as they
dealt with from their youth, either, \[1.\] In a way of consultation.
These astrologers, that dealt in the black art, they always loved to be
dealing with, and they were in effect their merchants; fortune-telling
was one of the best trades in Babylon, and those that followed that
trade probably lived as splendidly and got as much money as the richest
merchants; yet, when some of them were devoured, others fled their
country, every one to his quarter, and there was none to save Babylon.
Miserable comforters are they all. Or, \[2.\] In a way of commerce. As
their astrologers, with whom they had laboured, failed them, so did
their merchants; they took care to secure their own effects, and then
valued not what became of Babylon. They wandered every one to his own
quarter; each man shifted for his own safety, but none would offer to
lend a helping hand, no, not to a city by which they had got so much
money. Every one was for himself, but few for his friends. The New
Testament Babylon is lamented by the merchants that were made rich by
her, but they very prudently stand afar off to lament her ([Rev
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#015)), not willing to attempt any
thing for her succour. Happy are those who by faith and prayer deal with
one that will be a very present help in time of trouble!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 48](isa048)

</div>
