<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[James Index](jam.md)  
  [Previous](jam001)  [Next](jam003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001.md)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 2:0</span></span>

In this chapter the apostle condemns a sinful regarding of the rich, and
despising the poor, which he imputes to partiality and injustice, and
shows it to be an acting contrary to God, who has chosen the poor, and
whose interest is often persecuted, and his name blasphemed, by the rich
([Jam 2:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001).md). He shows that the whole
law is to be fulfilled, and that mercy should be followed, as well as
justice ([Jam 2:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#008).md). He exposes the
error and folly of those who boast of faith without works, telling us
that this is but a dead faith, and such a faith as devils have, not the
faith of Abraham, or of Rahab ([Jam
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011) to the end.md).

[James 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 2:1</span></span>

The apostle is here reproving a very corrupt practice. He shows how much
mischief there is in the sin of prosōpolēpsia - respect of persons,
which seemed to be a very growing evil in the churches of Christ even in
those early ages, and which, in these after-times, has sadly corrupted
and divided Christian nations and societies. Here we have,

I. A caution against this sin laid down in general: My brethren, have
not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect
of persons, [Jam 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001.md). Observe here, 1.
The character of Christians fully implied: they are such as have the
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ; they embrace it; they receive it; they
govern themselves by it; they entertain the doctrine, and submit to the
law and government, of Christ; they have it as a trust; they have it as
a treasure. 2. How honorably James speaks of Jesus Christ; he calls him
the Lord of glory; for he is the brightness of his Father's glory, and
the express image of his person. 3. Christ's being the Lord of glory
should teach us not to respect Christians for any thing so much as their
relation and conformity to Christ. You who profess to believe the glory
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which the poorest Christian shall partake of
equally with the rich, and to which all worldly glory is but vanity, you
should not make men's outward and worldly advantages the measure of your
respect. In professing the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, we should not
show respect to men, so as to cloud or lessen the glory of our glorious
Lord: how ever any may think of it, this is certainly a very heinous
sin.

II\. We have this sin described and cautioned against, by an instance or
example of it ([Jam 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#002.md), [Jam
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#003).md): For if there come into your
assembly a man with a gold ring, etc. Assembly here is meant of those
meetings which were appointed for deciding matters of difference among
the members of the church, or for determining when censures should be
passed upon any, and what those censures should be; therefore the Greek
word here used, sunagōgē, signifies such an assembly as that in the
Jewish synagogues, when they met to do justice. Maimonides says (as I
find the passage quoted by Dr. Manton) "That is was expressly provided
by the Jews' constitutions that, when a poor man and a rich plead
together, the rich shall not be bidden to sit down and the poor stand,
or sit in a worse place, but both sit or both stand alike." To this the
phrases used by the apostle have a most plain reference, and therefore
the assembly here spoken of must be some such as the
synagogue-assemblies of the Jews were, when they met to hear causes and
to execute justice: to these the arbitrations and censures of their
Christian assemblies are compared. But we must be careful not to apply
what is here said to the common assemblies for worship; for in these
certainly there may be appointed different places of persons according
to their rank and circumstances, without sin. Those do not understand
the apostle who fix his severity here upon this practice; they do not
consider the word judges (used in [Jam
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#004).md), nor what is said of their being
convected as transgressors of the law, if they had such a respect of
persons as is here spoken of, according to [Jam
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#009.md). Thus, now put the case: "There
comes into your assembly (when of the same nature with some of those at
the synagogue) a man that is distinguished by his dress, and who makes a
figure, and there comes in also a poor man in vile raiment, and you act
partially, and determine wrong, merely because the one makes a better
appearance, or is in better circumstances, than the other." Observe
hence, 1. God has his remnant among all sorts of people, among those
that wear soft and gay clothing, and among those that wear poor and vile
raiment. 2. In matters of religion, rich and poor stand upon a level; no
man's riches set him in the least nearer to God, nor does any man's
poverty set him at a distance from God. With the Most High there is no
respect of persons, and therefore in matters of conscience there should
be none with us. 3. All undue honouring of worldly greatness and riches
should especially be watched against in Christian societies. James does
not here encourage rudeness or disorder. Civil respect must be paid, and
some difference may be allowed in our carriage towards persons of
different ranks; but this respect must never be such as to influence the
proceedings of Christian societies in disposing of the offices of the
church, or in passing the censures of the church, or in any thing that
is purely a matter of religion; here we are to know no man after the
flesh. It is the character of a citizen of Zion that in his eyes a vile
person is contemned, but he honoureth those that fear the Lord. If a
poor man be a good man, we must not value him a whit the less for his
poverty; and, if a rich man be a bad man (though he may have both gay
clothing and a gay profession), we must not value him any whit the more
for his riches. 4. Of what importance it is to take care what rule we go
by in judging of men; if we allow ourselves commonly to judge by outward
appearance, this will too much influence our spirits and our conduct in
religious assemblies. There is many a man, whose wickedness renders him
vile and despicable, who yet makes a figure in the world; and, on the
other hand, there is many a humble, heavenly, good Christian, who is
clothed meanly; but neither should he nor his Christianity be thought
the worse of on this account.

III\. We have the greatness of this sin set forth, [Jam
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#004.md), [Jam
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005.md). It is great partiality, it is
injustice, and it is to set ourselves against God, who has chosen the
poor, and will honour and advance them (if good), let who will despise
them. 1. In this sin there is shameful partiality: Are you not then
partial in yourselves? The question is here put, as what could not fail
of being answered by every man's conscience that would put it seriously
to himself. According to the strict rendering of the original, the
question is, "Have you not made a difference? And, in that difference,
do you not judge by a false rule, and go upon false measures? And does
not the charge of a partiality condemned by the law lie fully against
you? Does not your own conscience tell you that you are guilty?" Appeals
to conscience are of great advantage, when we have to do with such as
make a profession, even though they may have fallen into a very corrupt
state. 2. This respect of persons is owing to the evil and injustice of
the thoughts. As the temper, conduct, and proceedings, are partial, so
the heart and thoughts, from which all flows, are evil: "You have become
judges of evil thoughts; that is, you are judges according to those
unjust estimations and corrupt opinions which you have formed to
yourselves. Trace your partiality till you come to those hidden thoughts
which accompany and support it, and you will find those to be
exceedingly evil. You secretly prefer outward pomp before inward grace,
and the things that are seen before those which are not seen." The
deformity of sin is never truly and fully discerned till the evil of our
thoughts be disclosed: and it is this which highly aggravates the faults
of our tempers and lives - that the imagination of the thoughts of the
heart is evil, [Gen 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005.md). 3. This
respect of persons is a heinous sin, because it is to show ourselves
most directly contrary to God ([Jam
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005).md): "Hath not God chosen the poor of
this world, rich in faith? etc. But you have despised them, [Jam
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#006.md). God has made those heirs of a
kingdom whom you make of no reputation, and has given very great and
glorious promises to those to whom you can hardly give a good word or a
respectful look. And is not this a monstrous iniquity in you who pretend
to be the children of God and conformed to him? Hearken, my beloved
brethren; by all the love I have for you, and all the regards you have
to me, I beg you would consider these things. Take notice that many of
the poor of this world are the chosen of God. Their being God's chosen
does not prevent their being poor; their being poor does not at all
prejudice the evidences of their being chosen. [Mat
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005.md), The poor are evangelized." God
designed to recommend his holy religion to men's esteem and affection,
not by the external advantages of gaiety and pomp, but by its intrinsic
worth and excellency; and therefore chose the poor of this world. Again,
take notice that many poor of the world are rich in faith; thus the
poorest may become rich; and this is what they ought to be especially
ambitious of. It is expected from those who have wealth and estates that
they be rich in good works, because the more they have the more they
have to do good with; but it is expected from the poor in the world that
they be rich in faith, for the less they have here the more they may,
and should, live in the believing expectation of better things in a
better world. Take notice further, Believing Christians are rich in
title, and in being heirs of a kingdom, though they may be very poor as
to present possessions. What is laid out upon them is but little; what
is laid up for them is unspeakably rich and great. Note again, Where any
are rich in faith, there will be also divine love; faith working by love
will be in all the heirs of glory. Note once more, under this head,
Heaven is a kingdom, and a kingdom promised to those that love God. We
read of the crown promised to those that love God, in the former chapter
([Jam 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#012).md); we here find there is a
kingdom too. And, as the crown is a crown of life, so the kingdom will
be an everlasting kingdom. All these things, laid together, show how
highly the poor in this world, if rich in faith, are now honoured, and
shall hereafter be advanced by God; and consequently how very sinful a
thing it was for them to despise the poor. After such considerations as
these, the charge is cutting indeed: But you have despised the poor,
[Jam 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#006.md). 4. Respecting persons, in
the sense of this place, on account of their riches or outward figure,
is shown to be a very great sin, because of the mischiefs which are
owing to worldly wealth and greatness, and the folly which there is in
Christians' paying undue regards to those who had so little regard
either to their God or them: "Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you
before the judgment-seat? Do not they blaspheme that worthy name by
which you are called? [Jam 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#007.md).
Consider how commonly riches are the incentives of vice and mischief, of
blasphemy and persecution: consider how many calamities you yourselves
sustain, and how great reproaches are thrown upon your religion and your
God by men of wealth, and power, and worldly greatness; and this will
make your sin appear exceedingly sinful and foolish, in setting up that
which tends to pull you down, and to destroy all that you are building
up, and to dishonour that worthy name by which you are called." The name
of Christ is a worthy name; it reflects honour, and gives worth to those
who wear it.

[James 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jam 2:8</span></span>

The apostle, having condemned the sin of those who had an undue respect
of persons, and having urged what was sufficient to convict them of the
greatness of this evil, now proceeds to show how the matter may be
mended; it is the work of a gospel ministry, not only to reprove and
warn, but to teach and direct. [Col
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#028.md), Warning every man, and teaching
every man. And here,

I. We have the law that is to guide us in all our regards to men set
down in general. If you fulfil the royal law, according to the
scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, you do well, [Jam
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#008.md). Lest any should think James had
been pleading for the poor so as to throw contempt on the rich, he now
lets them know that he did not design to encourage improper conduct
towards any; they must not hate nor be rude to the rich, any more than
despise the poor; but as the scripture teaches us to love all our
neighbours, be they rich or poor, as ourselves, so, in our having a
steady regard to this rule, we shall do well. Observe hence, 1. The rule
for Christians to walk by is settled in the scriptures: If according to
the scriptures, etc. It is not great men, nor worldly wealth, nor
corrupt practices among professors themselves, that must guide us, but
the scriptures of truth. 2. The scripture gives us this as a law, to
love our neighbour as ourselves; it is what still remains in full force,
and is rather carried higher and further by Christ than made less
important to us. 3. This law is a royal law, it comes from the King of
kings. Its own worth and dignity deserve it should be thus honoured; and
the state in which all Christians now are, as it is a state of liberty,
and not of bondage or oppression, makes this law, by which they are to
regulate all their actions to one another, a royal law. 4. A pretence of
observing this royal law, when it is interpreted with partiality, will
not excuse men in any unjust proceedings. In is implied here that some
were ready to flatter rich men, and be partial to them, because, if they
were in the like circumstances, they should expect such regards to
themselves; or they might plead that to show a distinguished respect to
those whom God in his providence had distinguished by their rank and
degree in the world was but doing right; therefore the apostle allows
that, so far as they were concerned to observe the duties of the second
table, they did well in giving honour to whom honour was due; but this
fair pretence would not cover their sin in that undue respect of persons
which they stood chargeable with; for,

II\. This general law is to be considered together with a particular
law: "If you have respect to persons, you commit sin, and are convinced
of the law as transgressors, [Jam 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#009.md).
Notwithstanding the law of laws, to love your neighbour as yourselves,
and to show that respect to them which you would be apt to look for
yourselves if in their circumstances, yet this will not excuse your
distributing either the favours or the censures of the church according
to men's outward condition; but here you must look to a particular law,
which God, who gave the other, has given you together with it, and by
this you will stand fully convicted of the sin I have charged you with."
This law is in [Lev 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015.md), Thou shalt
do no unrighteousness in judgment; thou shalt not respect the person of
the poor nor the person of the mighty; but in righteousness shalt though
judge thy neighbour. Yea, the very royal law itself, rightly explained,
would serve to convict them, because it teaches them to put themselves
as much in the places of the poor as in those of the rich, and so to act
equitably towards one as well as the other. Hence he proceeds,

III\. To show the extent of the law, and how far obedience must be paid
to it. They must fulfil the royal law, have a regard to one part as well
as another, otherwise it would not stand them in stead, when they
pretended to urge it as a reason for any particular actions: For
whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, is
guilty of all, [Jam 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010.md). This may be
considered, 1. With reference to the case James has been upon: Do you
plead for your respect to the rich, because you are to love your
neighbour as yourselves? Why then show also an equitable and due regard
to the poor, because you are to love your neighbour as yourself: or else
your offending in one point will spoil your pretence of observing that
law at all. Whosoever shall keep the whole law, if he offend in one
point, wilfully, avowedly, and with continuance, and so as to think he
shall be excused in some matters because of his obedience in others, he
is guilty of all; that is, he incurs the same penalty, and is liable to
the same punishment, by the sentence of the law, as if he had broken it
in other points as well as that he stands chargeable with. Not that all
sins are equal, but that all carry the same contempt of the authority of
the Lawgiver, and so bind over to such punishment as is threatened on
the breach of that law. This shows us what a vanity it is to think that
our good deeds will atone for our bad deeds, and plainly puts us upon
looking for some other atonement. 2. This is further illustrated by
putting a case different from that before mentioned ([Jam
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011).md): For he that said, Do not commit
adultery, said also, Do not kill. Now, if thou commit no adultery, yet,
if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of the law. One, perhaps,
is very severe in the case of adultery, or what tends to such pollutions
of the flesh; but less ready to condemn murder, or what tends to ruin
the health, break the hearts, and destroy the lives, of others: another
has a prodigious dread of murder, but has more easy thoughts of
adultery; whereas one who looks at the authority of the Lawgiver more
than the matter of the command will see the same reason for condemning
the one as the other. Obedience is then acceptable when all is done with
an eye to the will of God; and disobedience is to be condemned, in
whatever instance it be, as it is a contempt of the authority of God;
and, for that reason, if we offend in one point, we contemn the
authority of him who gave the whole law, and so far are guilty of all.
Thus, if you look to the law of the old, you stand condemned; for cursed
is every that continueth not in all things that are written in the book
of the law to do them, [Gal 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010.md).

IV\. James directs Christians to govern and conduct themselves more
especially by the law of Christ. So speak and so do as those that shall
be judged by the law of liberty, [Jam
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#012.md). This will teach us, not only to
be just and impartial, but very compassionate and merciful to the poor;
and it will set us perfectly free from all sordid and undue regards to
the rich. Observe here, 1. The gospel is called a law. It has all the
requisites of a law: precepts with rewards and punishments annexed; it
prescribes duty, as well as administers comfort; and Christ is a king to
rule us as well as a prophet to teach us, and a priest to sacrifice and
intercede for us. We are under the law to Christ. 2. It is a law of
liberty, and one that we have no reason to complain of as a yoke or
burden; for the service of God, according to the gospel, is perfect
freedom; it sets us at liberty from all slavish regards, either to the
persons or the things of this world. 3. We must all be judged by this
law of liberty. Men's eternal condition will be determined according to
the gospel; this is the book that will be opened, when we shall stand
before the judgment-seat; there will be no relief to those whom the
gospel condemns, nor will any accusation lie against those whom the
gospel justifies. 4. It concerns us therefore so to speak and act now as
become those who must shortly be judged by this law of liberty; that is,
that we come up to gospel terms, that we make conscience of gospel
duties, that e be of a gospel temper, and that our conversation be a
gospel conversation, because by this rule we must be judged. 5. The
consideration of our being judged by the gospel should engage us more
especially to be merciful in our regards to the poor ([Jam
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013).md): For he shall have judgment
without mercy that hath shown no mercy; and mercy rejoiceth against
judgment. Take notice here, (1.) The doom which will be passed upon
impenitent sinners at last will be judgment without mercy; there will be
no mixtures or allays in the cup of wrath and of trembling, the dregs of
which they must drink. (2.) Such as show no mercy now shall find no
mercy in the great day. But we may note, on the other hand, (3.) That
there will be such as shall become instances of the triumph of mercy, in
whom mercy rejoices against judgment: all the children of men, in the
last day, will be either vessels of wrath or vessels of mercy. It
concerns all to consider among which they shall be found; and let us
remember that blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

[James 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 2:14</span></span>

In this latter part of the chapter, the apostle shows the error of those
who rested in a bare profession of the Christian faith, as if that would
save them, while the temper of their minds and the tenour of their lives
were altogether disagreeable to that holy religion which they professed.
To let them see, therefore, what a wretched foundation they built their
hopes upon, it is here proved at large that a man is justified, not by
faith only, but by works. Now,

I. Upon this arises a very great question, namely, how to reconcile Paul
and James. Paul, in his epistles to the Romans and Galatians, seems to
assert the directly contrary thing to what James here lays down, saying
if often, and with a great deal of emphasis, that we are justified by
faith only and not by the works of the law. Amicae scripturarum lites,
utinam et nostrae - There is a very happy agreement between one part of
scripture and another, notwithstanding seeming differences: it were well
if the differences among Christians were as easily reconciled.
"Nothing," says Mr. Baxter, "but men's misunderstanding the plain drift
and sense of Paul's epistles, could make so many take it for a matter of
great difficulty to reconcile Paul and James." A general view of those
things which are insisted on by the Antinomians may be seen in Mr.
Baxter's Paraphrase: and many ways might be mentioned which have been
invented among learned men to make the apostles agree; but it may be
sufficient only to observe these few things following: - 1. When Paul
says that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the law
([Rom 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028).md), he plainly speaks of
another sort of work than James does, but not of another sort of faith.
Paul speaks of works wrought in obedience to the law of Moses, and
before men's embracing the faith of the gospel; and he had to deal with
those who valued themselves so highly upon those works that they
rejected the gospel (as Rom. 10, at the beginning most expressly
declares); but James speaks of works done in obedience to the gospel,
and as the proper and necessary effects and fruits of sound believing in
Christ Jesus. Both are concerned to magnify the faith of the gospel, as
that which alone could save us and justify us; but Paul magnifies it by
showing the insufficiency of any works of the law before faith, or in
opposition to the doctrine of justification by Jesus Christ; James
magnifies the same faith, by showing what are the genuine and necessary
products and operations of it. 2. Paul not only speaks of different
works from those insisted on by James, but he speaks of a quite
different use that was made of good works from what is here urged and
intended. Paul had to do with those who depended on the merit of their
works in the sight of God, and thus he might well make them of no manner
of account. James had to do with those who cried up faith, but would not
allow works to be used even as evidence; they depended upon a bare
profession, as sufficient to justify them; and with these he might well
urge the necessity and vast importance of good works. As we must not
break one table of the law, by dashing it against the other, so neither
must we break in pieces the law and the gospel, by making them clash
with one another: those who cry up the gospel so as to set aside the
law, and those who cry up the law so as to set aside the gospel, are
both in the wrong; for we must take our work before us; there must be
both faith in Jesus Christ and good works the fruit of faith. 3. The
justification of which Paul speaks is different from that spoken of by
James; the one speaks of our persons being justified before God, the
other speaks of our faith being justified before men: "Show me thy faith
by thy works," says James, "let thy faith be justified in the eyes of
those that behold thee by thy works;" but Paul speaks of justification
in the sight of God, who justifies those only that believe in Jesus, and
purely on account of the redemption that is in him. Thus we see that our
persons are justified before God by faith, but our faith is justified
before men by works. This is so plainly the scope and design of the
apostle James that he is but confirming what Paul, in other places, says
of his faith, that it is a laborious faith, and a faith working by love,
[Gal 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006.md); [Th1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#003.md); [Tit
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008.md); and many other places. 4. Paul
may be understood as speaking of that justification which is inchoate,
James of that which is complete; it is by faith only that we are put
into a justified state, but then good works come in for the completing
of our justification at the last great day; then, Come you children of
my Father - for I was hungry, and you gave me meat, etc.

II\. Having thus cleared this part of scripture from every thing of a
contradiction to other parts of it, let us see what is more particularly
to be learnt from this excellent passage of James; we are taught,

1\. That faith without works will not profit, and cannot save us. What
doth it profit, my brethren, if a man say he hath faith, and have not
works? Can faith save him? Observe here, (1.) That faith which does not
save will not really profit us; a bare profession may sometimes seem to
be profitable, to gain the good opinion of those who are truly good, and
it may procure in some cases worldly good things; but what profit will
this be, for any to gain the world and to lose their souls? What doth it
profit? - Can faith save him? All things should be accounted profitable
or unprofitable to us as they tend to forward or hinder the salvation of
our souls. And, above all other things, we should take care thus to make
account of faith, as that which does not profit, if it do not save, but
will aggravate our condemnation and destruction at last. (2.) For a man
to have faith, and to say he has faith, are two different things; the
apostle does not say, If a man have faith without works, for that is not
a supposable case; the drift of this place of scripture is plainly to
show that an opinion, or speculation, or assent, without works, is not
faith; but the case is put thus, If a man say he hath faith, etc. Men
may boast of that to others, and be conceited of that in themselves, of
which they are really destitute.

2\. We are taught that, as love or charity is an operative principle, so
is faith, and that neither of them would otherwise be good for any
thing; and, by trying how it looks for a person to pretend he is very
charitable who yet never does any works of charity, you may judge what
sense there is in pretending to have faith without the proper and
necessary fruits of it: "If a brother or a sister be naked, and
destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace,
be you warmed and filled, notwithstanding you give them not those things
which are needful to the body, what doth it profit? [Jam
2:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#015.md). What will such a charity as
this, that consists in bare words, avail either you or the poor? Will
you come before God with such empty shows of charity as these? You might
as well pretend that your love and charity will stand the test without
acts of mercy as think that a profession of faith will bear you out
before God without works of piety and obedience. Even so faith, if it
hath not works, is dead, being along," [Jam
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#017.md). We are too apt to rest in a bare
profession of faith, and to think that this will save us; it is a cheap
and easy religion to say, "We believe the articles of the Christian
faith;" but it is a great delusion to imagine that this is enough to
bring us to heaven. Those who argue thus wrong God, and put a cheat upon
their own souls; a mock-faith is as hateful as mock-charity, and both
show a heart dead to all real godliness. You may as soon take pleasure
in a dead body, void of soul, or sense, or action, as God take pleasure
in a dead faith, where there are no works.

3\. We are taught to compare a faith boasting of itself without works
and a faith evidenced by works, by looking on both together, to try how
this comparison will work upon our minds. Yea, a man may say, Thou hast
faith, and I have works. Show me thy faith without thy works, and I will
show thee my faith by my works, [Jam
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#018.md). Suppose a true believer thus
pleading with a boasting hypocrite, "Thou makest a profession, and
sayest thou hast faith; I make no such boasts, but leave my works to
speak for me. Now give any evidence of having the faith thou professest
without works if thou canst, and I will soon let thee see how my works
flow from faith and are the undoubted evidences of its existence." This
is the evidence by which the scriptures all along teach men to judge
both of themselves and others. And this is the evidence according to
which Christ will proceed at the day of judgment. The dead were judged
according to their works, [Rev 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012.md).
How will those be exposed then who boast of that which they cannot
evidence, or who go about to evidence their faith by any thing but works
of piety and mercy!

4\. We are taught to look upon a faith of bare speculation and knowledge
as the faith of devils: Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest
well; the devils also believe, and tremble, [Jam
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019.md). That instance of faith which the
apostle here chooses to mention is the first principle of all religion.
"Thou believest that there is a God, against the atheists; and that
there is but one God, against the idolaters; thou doest well: so far all
is right. But to rest here, and take up a good opinion of thyself, or of
thy state towards God, merely on account of thy believing in him, this
will render thee miserable: The devils also believe, and tremble. If
thou contentest thyself with a bare assent to articles of faith, and
some speculations upon them, thus far the devils go. And as their faith
and knowledge only serve to excite horror, so in a little time will
thine." The word tremble is commonly looked upon as denoting a good
effect of faith; but here it may rather be taken as a bad effect, when
applied to the faith of devils. They tremble, not out of reverence, but
hatred and opposition to that one God on whom they believe. To rehearse
that article of our creed, therefore, I believe in God the Father
Almighty, will not distinguish us from devils at last, unless we now
give up ourselves to God as the gospel directs, and love him, and
delight ourselves in him, and serve him, which the devils do not, cannot
do.

5\. We are taught that he who boasts of faith without works is to be
looked upon at present as a foolish condemned person. But wilt thou
know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead? [Jam
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#020.md). The words translated vain man -
anthrōpe kene, are observed to have the same signification with the word
Raca, which must never be used to private persons, or as an effect of
anger ([Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022).md), but may be used as
here, to denote a just detestation of such a sort of men as are empty of
good works, and yet boasters of their faith. And it plainly declares
them fools and abjects in the sight of God. Faith without works is said
to be dead, not only as void of all those operations which are the
proofs of spiritual life, but as unavailable to eternal life: such
believers as rest in a bare profession of faith are dead while they
live.

6\. We are taught that a justifying faith cannot be without works, from
two examples, Abraham and Rahab.

(1.) The first instance is that of Abraham, the father of the faithful,
and the prime example of justification, to whom the Jews had a special
regard ([Jam 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#021).md): Was not Abraham
our father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon
the altar? Paul, on the other hand, says (in ch. 4 of the epistle to the
Romans) that Abraham believed, and it was counted to him for
righteousness. But these are well reconciled, by observing what is said
in Heb. 11, which shows that the faith both of Abraham and Rahab was
such as to produce those good works of which James speaks, and which are
not to be separated from faith as justifying and saving. By what Abraham
did, it appeared that he truly believed. Upon this footing, the words of
God himself plainly put this matter. [Gen
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016.md), [Gen
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017.md), Because thou hast done this
thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son; therefore in
blessing I will bless thee. Thus the faith of Abraham was a working
faith ([Jam 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#022).md), it wrought with his
works, and by works was made perfect. And by this means you come to the
true sense of that scripture which saith, Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed unto him for righteousness, [Jam
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#023.md). And thus he became the friend of
God. Faith, producing such works, endeared him to the divine Being, and
advanced him to very peculiar favours and intimacies with God. It is a
great honour done to Abraham that he is called and counted the friend of
God. You see then ([Jam 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#024).md) how that
by works a man is justified (comes into such a state of favour and
friendship with God), and not by faith only; not by a bare opinion, or
profession, or believing without obeying, but by having such a faith as
is productive of good works. Now besides the explication of this passage
and example, as thus illustrating and supporting the argument James is
upon, many other useful lessons may be learned by us from what is here
said concerning Abraham. \[1.\] Those who would have Abraham's blessings
must be careful to copy after his faith: to boast of being Abraham's
seed will not avail any, if they do not believe as he did. \[2.\] Those
works which evidence true faith must to works of self-denial, and such
as God himself commands (as Abraham's offering up his son, his only son,
was), and not such works as are pleasing to flesh and blood and may
serve our interest, or are the mere fruits of our own imagination and
devising. \[3.\] What we piously purpose and sincerely resolve to do for
God is accepted as if actually performed. Thus Abraham is regarded as
offering up his son, though he did not actually proceed to make a
sacrifice of him. It was a done thing in the mind, and spirit, and
resolution of Abraham, and God accepts it as if fully performed and
accomplished. \[4.\] The actings of faith make it grow perfect, as the
truth of faith makes it act. \[5.\] Such an acting faith will make
others, as well as Abraham, friends of God. Thus Christ says to his
disciples, I have called you friends, [Joh
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015.md). All transactions between God
and the truly believing soul are easy, pleasant, and delightful. There
is one will and one heart, and there is a mutual complacency. God
rejoiceth over those who truly believe, to do them good; and they
delight themselves in him.

(2.) The second example of faith's justifying itself and us with and by
works is Rahab: Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by
works, when she had received the messengers, and had sent them out
another way? [Jam 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025.md). The former
instance was of one renowned for his faith all his life long, This is of
one noted for sin, whose faith was meaner and of a much lower degree; so
that the strongest faith will not do, nor the meanest be allowed to go
without works. Some say that the word here rendered harlot was the
proper name of Rahab. Others tell us that it signifies no more than a
hostess, or one who keeps a public house, with whom therefore the spies
lodged. But it is very probable that her character was infamous; and
such an instance is mentioned to show that faith will save the worst,
when evidenced by proper works; and it will not save the best without
such works as God requires. This Rahab believed the report she had heard
of God's powerful presence with Israel; but that which proved her faith
sincere was, that, to the hazard of her life, she received the
messengers, and sent them out another way. Observe here, \[1.\] The
wonderful power of faith in transforming and changing sinners. \[2.\]
The regard which an operative faith meets with from God, to obtain his
mercy and favour. \[3.\] Where great sins are pardoned, there must
prefer the honour of God and the good of his people before the
preservation of her own country. Her former acquaintance must be
discarded, her former course of life entirely abandoned, and she must
give signal proof and evidence of this before she can be in a justified
state; and even after she is justified, yet her former character must be
remembered; not so much to her dishonour as to glorify the rich grace
and mercy of God. Though justified, she is called Rahab the harlot.

7\. And now, upon the whole matter, the apostle draws this conclusion,
As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead
also, [Jam 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#026.md). These words are read
differently; some reading them, As the body without the breath is dead,
so is faith without works: and then they show that works are the
companions of faith, as breathing is of life. Others read them, As the
body without the soul is dead, so faith without works is dead also: and
then they show that as the body has no action, nor beauty, but becomes a
loathsome carcass, when the soul is gone, so a bare profession without
works is useless, yea, loathsome and offensive. Let us then take head of
running into extremes in this case. For, (1.) The best works, without
faith, are dead; they want their root and principle. It is by faith that
any thing we do is really good, as done with an eye to God, in obedience
to him, and so as to aim principally at his acceptance. (2.) The most
plausible profession of faith, without works, is dead: as the root is
dead when it produces nothing green, nothing of fruit. Faith is the
root, good works are the fruits, and we must see to it that we have
both. We must not think that either, without the other, will justify and
save us. This is the grace of God wherein we stand, and we should stand
to it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 3](jam003.md)

</div>
