<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jude Index](jde)  
  [Previous](jo3001)  [Next](jde001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jude Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001)

[Jude](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jde 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The General Epistle of
Jude

This epistle is styled (as are some few others) general or Catholic,
because it is not immediately directed to any particular person, family,
or church, but to the whole society of Christians of that time, lately
converted to the faith of Christ, whether from Judaism or paganism: and
it is, and will be, of standing, lasting, and special use in and to the
church as long as Christianity, that is, as time, shall last. The
general scope of it is much the same with that of the second chapter of
the second epistle of Peter, which having been already explained, the
less will need to be said on this. It is designed to warn us against
seducers and their seduction, to inspire us with a warm love to, and a
hearty concern for, truth (evident and important truth), and that in the
closest conjunction with holiness, of which charity, or sincere unbiased
brotherly-love, is a most essential character and inseparable branch.
The truth we are to hold fast, and endeavour that others may be
acquainted with and not depart fRom. has two special characters: - It is
the truth as it is in Jesus ([Eph
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#021); and it is truth after (or which
is according to) godliness, [Tit 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001).
The gospel is the gospel of Christ. He has revealed it to us, and he is
the main subject of it; and therefore we are indispensably bound to
learn thence all we can of his person, natures, and offices:
indifference as to this is inexcusable in any who call themselves
Christians; and we know from what fountain we are wholly and solely to
draw all necessary saving knowledge. Further, it is also a doctrine of
godliness. Whatever doctrines favour the corrupt lusts of men cannot be
of God, let the pleas and pretensions for them be what they will. Errors
dangerous to the souls of men soon sprang up in the church. The servants
slept and tares were sown. But such were the wisdom and kindness of
Providence that they began sensibly to appear and show themselves, while
some, at least, of the apostles were yet alive to confute them, and warn
others against them. We are apt to think, If we had lived in their
times, we should have been abundantly fenced against the attempts and
artifices of seducers; but we have their testimony and their cautions,
which is sufficient; and, if we will not believe their writings, neither
should we have believed or regarded their sayings, if we had lived among
them and conversed personally with them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jude Chapter 1](jde001)

</div>
