<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg018)  [Next](jdg020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 19:0</span></span>

The three remaining chapters of this book contain a most tragical story
of the wickedness of the men of Gibeah, patronised by the tribe of
Benjamin, for which that tribe was severely chastised and almost
entirely cut off by the rest of the tribes. This seems to have been done
not long after the death of Joshua, for it was when there was no king,
no judge, in Israel ([Jdg 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001), and
[Jdg 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#025)), and Phinehas was then
high priest, [Jdg 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#028). These
particular iniquities, the Danites' idolatry, and the Benjamites'
immorality, let in that general apostasy, [Jdg
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#007). The abuse of the Levite's
concubine is here very particularly related. I. Her adulterous elopement
from him ([Jdg 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001), [Jdg
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#002)). II. His reconciliation to her,
and the journey he took to fetch her home ([Jdg
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#003)). III. Her father's kind
entertainment of him ([Jdg 3:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#004)). IV.
The abuse he met with at Gibeah, where, being benighted, he was forced
to stop. 1. He was neglected by the men of Gibeah ([Jdg
3:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#010)) and entertained by an
Ephraimite that sojourned among them ([Jdg
3:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#016)). 2. They set upon him in his
quarters, as the Sodomites did on Lot's quests ([Jdg
3:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#022)). 3. They villainously forced
his concubine to death ([Jdg 3:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#025)).
V. The course he took to send notice of this to all the tribes of Israel
([Jdg 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#029), [Jdg
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#030)).

[Judges 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 19:1</span></span>

The domestic affairs of this Levite would not have been related thus
largely but to make way for the following story of the injuries done
him, in which the whole nation interested themselves. Bishop Hall's
first remark upon this story is, That there is no complain of a public
ordered state but there is a Levite at one end of it, either as an agent
or as a patient. In Micah's idolatry a Levite was active; in the
wickedness of Gibeah a Levite was passive; no tribe shall sooner feel
the want of government than that of Levi; and, in all the book of
Judges, no mention is made of any of that tribe, but of these two. This
Levite was of Mount Ephraim, [Jdg
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001). He married a wife of
Bethlehem-Judah. She is called his concubine, because she was not
endowed, for perhaps he had nothing to endow her with, being himself a
sojourner and not settled; but it does not appear that he had any other
wife, and the margin calls her a wife, a concubine, [Jdg
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001). She came from the same city that
Micah's Levite came from, as if Bethlehem-Judah owed a double ill turn
to Mount Ephraim, for she was as bad for a Levite's wife as the other
for a Levite.

I. This Levite's concubine played the whore and eloped from her husband,
[Jdg 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#002). The Chaldee reads it only
that she carried herself insolently to him, or despised him, and, he
being displeased at it, she went away from him, and (which was not fair)
was received and entertained at her father's house. Had her husband
turned her out of doors unjustly, her father ought to have pitied her
affliction; but, when she treacherously departed from her husband to
embrace the bosom of a stranger, her father ought not to have
countenanced her sin. Perhaps she would not have violated her duty to
her husband if she had not known too well where she should be kindly
received. Children's ruin is often owing very much to parents'
indulgence.

II\. The Levite went himself to court her return. It was a sign there
was no king, no judge, in Israel, else she would have been prosecuted
and put to death as an adulteress; but, instead of that, she is
addressed in the kindest manner by her injured husband, who takes a long
journey on purpose to beseech her to be reconciled, [Jdg
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#003). If he had put her away, it would
have been a crime in him to return to her again, [Jer
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001). But, she having gone away, it was
a virtue in him to forgive the offence, and, though the party wronged,
to make the first motion to her to be friends again. It is part of the
character of the wisdom from above that it is gentle and easy to be
entreated. He spoke friendly to her, or comfortably (for so the Hebrew
phrase of speaking to the heart commonly signifies), which intimates
that she was in sorrow, penitent fore what she had done amiss, which
probably he heard of when he came to fetch her back. Thus God promises
concerning adulterous Israel ([Hos
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#014)), I will bring her into the
wilderness, and speak comfortably to her.

III\. Her father made him very welcome, and, by his extraordinary
kindness to him, endeavoured to atone for the countenance he had given
his daughter in withdrawing from him, and to confirm him in his
disposition to be reconciled to her. 1. He entertains him kindly,
rejoices to see him ([Jer 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003)), treats
him generously for three days, [Jdg
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#004). And the Levite, to show that he
was perfectly reconciled, accepted his kindness, and we do not find that
he upbraided him or his daughter with what had been amiss, but was as
easy and as pleasant as at his first wedding-feast. It becomes all, but
especially Levites, to forgive as God does. Every thing among them gave
a hopeful prospect of their living comfortably together for the future;
but, could they have foreseen what befel them within one day or two, how
would all their mirth have been embittered and turned into mourning!
When the affairs of our families are in the best posture we ought to
rejoice with trembling, because we know not what troubles one day may
bring forth. We cannot foresee what evil is near us, but we ought to
consider what may be, that we may not be secure, as if tomorrow must
needs be as this day and much more abundant, [Isa
56:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#012). 2. He is very earnest for his
stay, as a further demonstration of his hearty welcome. The affection he
had for him, and the pleasure he took in his company, proceeded, (1.)
From a civil regard to him as his son-in-law and an ingrafted branch of
his own house. Note, Love and duty are due to those to whom we are
related by marriage as well as to those who are bone of our bone: and
those that show kindness as this Levite did may expect to receive
kindness as he did. And, (2.) From a pious respect to him as a Levite, a
servant of God's house; if he was such a Levite as he should be (and
nothing appears to the contrary) he is to be commended for courting his
stay, finding his conversation profitable, and having opportunity to
learn from him the good knowledge of the Lord, hoping also that the Lord
will do him good because he has a Levite to be his son-in-law, and will
bless him for his sake. \[1.\] He forces him to stay the fourth day, and
this was kind; not knowing when they might be together again, he engages
him to stay as long as he possibly could. The Levite, though nobly
treated, was very urgent to be gone. A good man's heart is where his
business is; for as a bird that wanders from her nest so is the man that
wanders form his place. It is a sign a man has either little to do at
home, or little heart to do what he has to do, when he can take pleasure
in being long abroad where he has nothing to do. It is especially good
to see a Levite willing to go home to his few sheep in the wilderness.
Yet this Levite was overcome by importunity and kind persuasion to stay
longer than he intended, [Jdg 19:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#005).
We ought to avoid the extreme of an over-easy yielding, to the neglect
of our duty on the one hand, and that of moroseness and wilfulness, to
the neglect of our friends and their kindness on the other hand. Our
Saviour, after his resurrection, was prevailed upon to stay with his
friends longer than he at first intimated to be his purpose, [Luk
24:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#028), [Luk
24:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#029). \[2.\] He forces him to stay
till the afternoon of the fifth day, and this, as it proved, was unkind,
[Jdg 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#008), [Jdg
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#009). He would by no means let him go
before dinner, promises him he shall have dinner early, designing
thereby, as he had done the day before, to detain him another night; but
the Levite was intent on the house of the Lord at Shiloh ([Jdg
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#018)), and, being impatient to get
thither, would stay no longer. Had they set out early, they might have
reached some better lodging-place than that which they were now
constrained to take up with, nay, they might have got to Shiloh. Note,
Our friends' designed kindnesses often prove, in the event, real
injuries; what is meant for our welfare becomes a trap. Who knows what
is good for a man in this life? The Levite was unwise in setting out so
late; he might have got home better if he had staid a night longer and
taken the day before him.

IV\. In his return home he was forced to lodge at Gibeah, a city in the
tribe of Benjamin, afterwards called Gibeah of Saul, which lay on his
road towards Shiloh and Mount Ephraim. When it drew towards night, and
the shadows of the evening were stretched out, they began to think (as
it behoves us to do when we observe the day of our life hastening
towards a period) where they must lodge. When night came they could not
pursue their journey. He that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he
goes. They could not but desire rest, for which the night was intended,
as the day for labour. 1. The servant proposed that they should lodge in
Jebus, afterwards Jerusalem, but as yet in the possession of Jebusites.
"Come," said the servant, "let us lodge in this city of the Jebusites,"
[Jdg 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#011). And, if they had done so,
it is probable they would have had much better usage than they met with
in Gibeah of Benjamin. Debauched and profligate Israelites are worse and
much more dangerous than Canaanites themselves. But the master, as
became one of God's tribe, would by no means quarter, no, not one night,
in a city of strangers ([Jdg 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#012)),
not because he questioned his safety among them, but he was not willing,
if he could possibly avoid it, to have so much intimacy and familiarity
with them as a night's lodging came to, nor to be so much beholden to
them. By shunning this place he would witness against the wickedness of
those that contracted friendship and familiarity with these devoted
nations. Let Israelites, Levites especially, associate with Israelites,
and not with the sons of the stranger. 2. Having passed by Jebus, which
was about five or six miles from Bethlehem (the place whence they came),
and not having daylight to bring them to Ramah, they stopped at Gibeah
([Jdg 19:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#013)); there they sat down
in the street, nobody offering them a lodging. In these countries, at
that time, there were no inns, or public-houses, in which, as with us,
travellers might have entertainment for their money, but they carried
entertainment along with them, as this Levite did ([Jdg
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#019)), and depended upon the courtesy
and hospitality of the inhabitants for a lodging. Let us take occasion
hence, when we are in journeys, to thank God for this, among other
conveniences of travelling, that there are inns to entertain strangers,
and in which they may be welcome and well accommodated for their money.
Surely there is no country in the world wherein one may stay at home
with more satisfaction, or go abroad with more comfort, than in our own
nation. This traveller, though a Levite (and to those of that tribe God
had particularly commanded his people to be kind upon all occasions),
met with very cold entertainment at Gibeah: No man took them into his
house. If they had any reason to think he was a Levite perhaps that made
those ill-disposed people the more shy of him. There are those who will
have this laid to their charge at the great day, I was a stranger and
you took me not in.

[Judges 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 19:16</span></span>

Though there as not one of Gibeah, yet it proved there was one in
Gibeah, that showed some civility to this distressed Levite, who was
glad that any one took notice of him. It was strange that some of those
wicked people, who, when it was dark, designed so ill to him and his
concubine, did not, under pretence of kindness, invite them in, that
they might have a fairer opportunity of perpetrating their villany; but
either they had not wit enough to be so designing, or not wickedness
enough to be so deceiving. Or, perhaps, none of them separately thought
of such a wickedness, till in the black and dark night they got together
to contrive what mischief they should do. Bad people in confederacy make
one another much worse than any of them would be by themselves. When the
Levite, and his wife, and servant, were beginning to fear that they must
lie in the street all night (and as good have laid in a den of lions)
they were at length invited into a house, and we are here told,

I. Who that kind man was that invited them. 1. He was a man of Mount
Ephraim, and only sojourned in Gibeah, [Jdg
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#016). Of all the tribes of Israel,
the Benjamites had most reason to be kind to poor travellers, for their
ancestor, Benjamin, was born upon the road, his mother being then upon a
journey, and very near to this place, [Gen
35:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#016), [Gen
35:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#017). Yet they were hard-hearted to a
traveller in distress, while an honest Ephraimite had compassion on him,
and, no doubt, was the more kind to him, when, upon enquiry, he found
that he was his countryman, of Mount Ephraim likewise. He that was
himself but a sojourner in Gibeah was the more compassionate to a
wayfaring man, for he knew the heart of a stranger, [Exo
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#009); [Deu
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#019). Good people, that look upon
themselves but as strangers and sojourners in this world, should for
this reason be tender to one another, because they all belong to the
same better country and are not at home here. 2. He was an old man, one
that retained some of the expiring virtue of an Israelite. The rising
generation was entirely corrupted; if there was any good remaining among
them, it was only with those that were old and going off. 3. He was
coming home from his work out of the field at eventide. The evening
calls home labourers, [Psa 104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023).
But, it should seem, this was the only labourer that this evening
brought home to Gibeah. The rest had given themselves up to sloth and
luxury, and no marvel there was among them, as in Sodom, abundance of
uncleanness, when there was among them, as in Sodom, abundance of
idleness, [Eze 16:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#049). But he that was
honestly diligent in his business all day was disposed to be generously
hospitable to these poor strangers at night. Let men labour, that they
may have to give, [Eph 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028). It
appears from [Jdg 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#021) that he was a
man of some substance, and yet had been himself at work in the field. No
man's estate will privilege him in idleness.

II\. How free and generous he was in his invitation. He did not stay
till they applied to him to beg for a night's lodging; but when he saw
them ([Jdg 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#017)) enquired into their
circumstances, and anticipated them with his kindness. Thus our good God
answers before we call. Note, A charitable disposition expects only
opportunity, not importunity, to do good, and will succour upon sight,
unsought unto. Hence we read of a bountiful eye, [Pro
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#009). If Gibeah was like Sodom, this
old man was like Lot in Sodom, who sat in the gate to invite strangers,
[Gen 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#001). Thus Job opened his doors
to the traveller, and would not suffer him to lodge in the street, [Job
31:32](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#032). Observe, 1. How ready he was to
give credit to the Levite's account of himself when he saw no reason at
all to question the truth of it. Charity is not apt to distrust, but
hopeth all things ([Co1 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#007)) and will
not make use of Nabal's excuse for his churlishness to David, Many
servants now-a-days break away from their masters, [Sa1
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#010). The Levite, in his account of
himself, professed that he was now going to the house of the Lord ([Jdg
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#018)), for there he designed to
attend, either with a trespass-offering for the sins of his family, or
with a peace-offering for the mercies of his family, or both, before he
went to his own house. And, if the men of Gibeah had any intimation of
his being bound that way, probably they would therefore be disinclined
to entertain him. The Samaritans would not receive Christ because his
face was towards Jerusalem, [Luk 9:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#053).
But for this reason, because he was a Levite and was now going to the
house of the Lord, this good old man was the more kind to him. Thus he
received a disciples in the name of a disciple, a servant of God for his
Master's sake. 2. How free he was to give him entertainment. The Levite
was himself provided with all necessaries ([Jdg
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#019)), wanted nothing but a lodging,
but his generous host would be himself at the charge of his
entertainment ([Jdg 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#020)): Let all
thy wants be upon me; so he brought him into his house, [Jdg
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#021). Thus God will, some way or
other, raise up friends for his people and ministers, even when they
seem forlorn.

[Judges 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 19:22</span></span>

Here is, I. The great wickedness of the men of Gibeah. One could not
imagine that ever it should enter into the heart of men that had the use
of human reason, of Israelites that had the benefit of divine
revelation, to be so very wicked. "Lord, what is man!" said David, "what
a mean creature is he!" "Lord, what is man," may we say upon the reading
of this story, "what a vile creature is he, when he is given up to his
own heart's lusts!" The sinners are here called sons of Belial, that is,
ungovernable men, men that would endure no yoke, children of the devil
(for he is Belial), resembling him, and joining with him in rebellion
against God and his government. Sons of Benjamin, of whom Moses had
said, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him ([Deu
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012)), have become such sons of
Belial that an honest man cannot lodge in safety among them. The
sufferers were a Levite and his wife, and that kind man that gave them
entertainment. We are strangers upon earth, and must expect strange
usage. It is said they were making their hearts merry when this trouble
came upon them, [Jdg 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#022). If the
mirth was innocent, it teaches us of what uncertain continuance all our
creature comforts and enjoyments are; when we are ever so well pleased
with our friends, we know not how near our enemies are; nor, if it be
well with us this hour, can we be sure it will be so the next. If the
mirth was sinful and excessive, let it be a warning to us to keep a
strict guard upon ourselves, that we grow not intemperate in the use of
lawful things, nor be transported into indecencies by our cheerfulness;
for the end of that mirth is heaviness. God can soon change the note of
those that are making their hearts merry, and turn their laughter into
mourning and their joy into heaviness. Let us see what the wickedness of
these Benjamites was.

1\. They made a rude and insolent assault, in the night, upon the
habitation of an honest man, that not only lived peaceably among them,
but kept a good house and was a blessing and ornament to their city.
They beset the house round, and, to the great terror of those within,
beat as hard as they could at the door, [Jdg
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#022). A man's house is his castle, in
which he ought to be both safe and quiet, and, where there is law, it is
taken under the special protection of it; but there was no king in
Israel to keep the peace and secure honest men from the sons of
violence.

2\. They had a particular spite at the strangers that were within their
gates, that only desired a night's lodging among them, contrary to the
laws of hospitality, which all civilized nations have accounted sacred,
and which the master of the house pleaded with them ([Jdg
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#023)): Seeing that this man has come
into my house. Those are base and abject spirits indeed that will
trample upon the helpless, and use a man the worse for his being a
stranger, whom they know no ill of.

3\. They designed in the most filthy and abominable manner (not to be
thought of without horror and detestation) to abuse the Levite, whom
perhaps they had observed to be young and comely: Bring him forth that
we may know him. We should certainly have concluded they meant only to
enquire whence he came, and to know his character, but that the good man
of the house, who understood their meaning too well, by his answer lets
us know that they designed the gratification of that most unnatural and
worse than brutish lust which was expressly forbidden by the law of
Moses, and called an abomination, [Lev
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#022). Those that are guilty of it are
ranked in the New Testament among the worst and vilest of sinners ([Ti1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#010)), and such as shall not inherit
the kingdom of God, [Co1 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009). Now,
(1.) This was the sin of Sodom, and is thence called Sodomy. The Dead
Sea, which was the standing monument of God's vengeance upon Sodom, for
its filthiness, was one of the boundaries of Canaan, and lay not many
miles off from Gibeah. We may suppose the men of Gibeah had seen it many
a time, and yet would not take warning by it, but did worse than Sodom
([Eze 16:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#048)), and sinned just after
the similitude of their transgression. Who would have expected (says
bishop Hall) such extreme abomination to come out of the loins of Jacob?
Even the worst pagans were saints to them. What did it avail them that
they had the ark of God in Shiloh when they had Sodom in their streets -
God's law in their fringes, but the devil in their hearts? Nothing but
hell itself can yield a worse creature than a depraved Israelite. (2.)
This was the punishment of their idolatry, that sin to which they were,
above all others, most addicted. Because they liked not to retain God in
their knowledge, therefore he gave them up to these vile affections, by
which they dishonoured themselves as they had by their idolatry
dishonoured him and turned his glory into shame, [Rom
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024), [Rom
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028). See and admire, in this
instance, the patience of God. Why were not these sons of Belial struck
blind, as the Sodomites were? Why were not fire and brimstone rained
from heaven upon their city? It was because God would leave it to Israel
to punish them by the sword, and would reserve his own punishment of
them for the future state, in which those that go after strange flesh
shall suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, [Jde
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007).

4\. They were deaf to the reproofs and reasoning of the good man of the
house, who, being well acquainted (we may suppose) with the story of Lot
and the Sodomites, set himself to imitate Lot, [Jdg
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#023), [Jdg
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#024). Compare [Gen
19:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#006). He went out to them as Lot
did, spoke civilly to them, called them brethren, begged of them to
desist, pleaded the protection of his house which his guests were under,
and represented to them the great wickedness of their attempt: "Do not
so wickedly, so very wickedly." He calls it folly and a vile thing. But
in one thing he conformed too far to Lot's example (as we are apt in
imitating good men to follow them even in their false steps), in
offering them his daughter to do what they would with. He had not power
thus to prostitute his daughter, nor ought he to have done this evil
that good might come. But this wicked proposal of his may be in part
excused from the great surprise and terror he was in, his concern for
his guests, and his having too close a regard to what Lot did in the
like case, especially not finding that the angels who were by reproved
him for it. And perhaps he hoped that his mentioning this as a more
natural gratification of their lust would have sent them back to their
common harlots. But they would not hearken to him, [Jdg
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#025). Headstrong lusts are like the
deaf adder that stoppeth her ear; they sear the conscience and make it
insensible.

5\. They got the Levite's wife among them, and abused her to death, [Jdg
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#025). They slighted the old man's
offer of his daughter to their lust, either because she was not handsome
or because they knew her to be one of great gravity and modesty: but,
when the Levite brought them his concubine, they took her with them by
force to the place appointed for their filthiness. Josephus, in his
narrative of this story, makes her to be the person they had a design
upon when they beset the house, and says nothing of their villainous
design upon the Levite himself. They saw her (he says) in the street,
when they came into the town, and were smitten with her beauty; and
perhaps, though she was reconciled to her husband, her looks did not
bespeak her to be one of the most modest. Many bring mischief of this
kind upon themselves by their loose carriage and behaviour; a little
spark may kindle a great fire. One would think the Levite should have
followed them, to see what became of his wife, but it is probable he
durst not, lest they should do him a mischief. In the miserable end of
this woman, we may see the righteous hand of God punishing her for her
former uncleanness, when she played the whore against her husband, [Jdg
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#002). Though her father had
countenanced her, her husband had forgiven her, and the fault was
forgotten now that the quarrel was made up, yet God remembered it
against her when he suffered these wicked men thus wretchedly to abuse
her; how unrighteous soever they were in their treatment of her, in
permitting it the Lord was righteous. Her punishment answered her sin,
Culpa libido fuit, poena libido fuit - Lust was her sin, and lust was
her punishment. By the law of Moses she was to have been put to death
for her adultery. She escaped that punishment from men, yet vengeance
pursued her; for, if there was no king in Israel, yet there was a God in
Israel, a God that judgeth in the earth. We must not think it enough to
make our peace with men, whom by our sins we have wronged, but are
concerned, by repentance and faith, to make our peace with God, who sees
not as men see, nor makes so light of sin as men often do. The justice
of God in this matter does not at all extenuate the horrid wickedness of
these men of Gibeah, than which nothing could be more barbarous and
inhuman.

II\. The notice that was sent of this wickedness to all the tribes of
Israel. The poor abused woman made towards her husband's lodgings as
soon as ever the approach of the day-light obliged these sons of Belial
to let her go (for these works of darkness hate and dread the light),
[Jdg 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#025). Down she fell at the door,
with her hands on the threshold, begging pardon (as it were) for her
former transgression, and in that posture of a penitent, with her mouth
in the dust, she expired. There he found her ([Jdg
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#026), [Jdg
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#027)), supposed her asleep, or
overcome with shame and confusion for what had happened, but soon
perceived she was dead ([Jdg 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#028)),
took up her dead body, which, we may suppose, had all over it marks of
the hands, the blows, and other abuses, she had received. On this sad
occasion he waived his purpose of going to Shiloh, and went directly
home. He that went out in hopes to return rejoicing came in again
melancholy and disconsolate, sat down and considered, "Is this an injury
fit to be passed by?" He cannot call for fire from heaven to consume the
men of Gibeah, as those angels did who were, after the same manner,
insulted by the Sodomites. There was no king in Israel, nor (for aught
that appears) any sanhedrim, or great council, to appeal to, and demand
justice from. Phinehas is high priest, but he attends closely to the
business of the sanctuary, and will be no judge or divider. He has
therefore no other way left him than to appeal to the people: let the
community be judge. Though they had no general stated assembly of all
the tribes, yet it is probable that each tribe had a meeting of their
chiefs within itself. To each of the tribes, in their respective
meetings, he sent by special messengers a remonstrance of the wrong that
was done him, in all its aggravating circumstances, and with it a piece
of his wife's dead body ([Jdg 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#029)),
both to confirm the truth of the story and to affect them the more with
it. He divided it into twelve pieces, according to the bones, so some
read it, that is, by the joints, sending one to each tribe, even to
Benjamin among the rest, with the hope that some among them would be
moved to join in punishing so great a villany, and the more warmly
because committed by some of their own tribe. It did indeed look very
barbarous thus to mangle a dead body, which, having been so wretchedly
dishonoured, ought to have been decently interred; but the Levite
designed hereby, not only to represent their barbarous usage of his
wife, whom they had better have cut in pieces thus than have used as
they did, but also to express his own passionate concern and thereby to
excite the like in them. And it had the desired effect. All that saw the
pieces of the dead body, and were told how the matter was, expressed the
same sentiments upon it. 1. That the men of Gibeah had been guilty of a
very heinous piece of wickedness, the like to which had never been known
before in Israel, [Jdg 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#030). It was a
complicated crime, loaded and blackened with all possible aggravations.
They were not such fools as to make a mock at this sin, or turn the
story off with a jest. 2. That a general assembly of all Israel should
be called, to debate what was fit to be done for the punishment of this
wickedness, that a stop might be put to this threatening inundation of
debauchery, and the wrath of God might not be poured upon the whole
nation for it. It is not a common case, and therefore they stir up one
another to come together upon the occasion with this: Consider of it,
take advice, and speak your minds. We have here the three great rules by
which those that sit in council ought to go in every arduous affair.
(1.) Let every man retire into himself, and weigh the matter impartially
and fully in his own thoughts, and seriously and calmly consider it,
without prejudice on either side, before he speaks upon it. (2.) Let
them freely talk it over, and every man take advice of his friend, know
his opinion and his reasons, and weigh them. (3.) Then let every man
speak his mind, and give his vote according to his conscience. In the
multitude of such counsellors there is safety.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 20](jdg020)

</div>
