<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer031)  [Next](jer033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 32:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. Jeremiah imprisoned for foretelling the
destruction of Jerusalem and the captivity of king Zedekiah ([Jer
32:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001)). II. We have him buying land,
by divine appointment, as an assurance that in due time a happy end
should be put to the present troubles ([Jer
32:6-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#006)). III. We have his prayer,
which he offered up to God upon that occasion ([Jer
32:16-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#016)). IV. We have a message which
God thereupon entrusted him to deliver to the people. 1. He must
foretell the utter destruction of Judah and Jerusalem for their sins
([Jer 32:26-35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#026)). But, 2. At the same
time he must assure them that, though the destruction was total, it
should not be final, but that at length their posterity should recover
the peaceable possession of their own land ([Jer
32:36-44](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#036)). The predictions of this
chapter, both threatenings and promises, are much the same with what we
have already met with again and again, but here are some circumstances
that are very particular and remarkable.

[Jeremiah 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 32:1</span></span>

It appears by the date of this chapter that we are now coming very nigh
to that fatal year which completed the desolations of Judah and
Jerusalem by the Chaldeans. God's judgments came gradually upon them,
but, they not meeting him by repentance in the way of his judgments, he
proceeded in his controversy till all was laid waste, which was in the
eleventh year of Zedekiah; now what is here recorded happened in the
tenth. The king of Babylon's army had now invested Jerusalem and was
carrying on the siege with vigour, not doubting but in a little time to
make themselves masters of it, while the besieged had taken up a
desperate resolution not to surrender, but to hold out to the last
extremity. Now,

I. Jeremiah prophesies that both the city and the court shall fall into
the hands of the king of Babylon. He tells them expressly that the
besiegers shall take the city as a prize, for God, whose city it was in
a peculiar manner, will give it into their hands and put it out of his
protection ([Jer 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#003)), - that, though
Zedekiah attempt to make his escape, he shall be overtaken, and shall be
delivered a prisoner into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, shall be brought
into his presence, to his great confusion and terror, he having made
himself so obnoxious by breaking his faith with him, he shall hear the
king of Babylon pronounce his doom, and see with what fury and
indignation he will look upon him (His eyes shall behold his eyes, [Jer
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#004)), - that Zedekiah shall be
carried to Babylon, and continue a miserable captive there, until God
visit him, that is, till God put an end to his life by a natural death,
as Nebuchadnezzar had long before put an end to his days by putting out
his eyes. Note, Those that live in misery may be truly said to be
visited in mercy when God by death takes them home to himself. And,
lastly, he foretels that all their attempts to force the besiegers from
their trenches shall be ineffectual: Though you fight with the
Chaldeans, you shall not prosper; how should they, when God did not
fight for them? [Jer 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#005). See [Jer
34:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#002), [Jer
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#003).

II\. For prophesying thus he is imprisoned, not in the common goal, but
in the more creditable prison that was within the verge of the palace,
in the king of Judah's house, and there not closely confined, but in
custodia libera - in the court of the prison, where he might have good
company, good air, and good intelligence brought him, and would be
sheltered from the abuses of the mob; but, however, it was a prison, and
Zedekiah shut him up in it for prophesying as he did, [Jer
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#002), [Jer
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#003). So far was he from humbling
himself before Jeremiah, as he ought to have done ([Ch2
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#012)), that he hardened himself
against him. Though he had formerly so far owned him to be a prophet as
to desire him to enquire of the Lord for them ([Jer
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#002)), yet now he chides him for
prophesying ([Jer 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#003)), and shuts him
up in prison, perhaps not with design to punish him any further, but
only to restrain him from prophesying any further, which was crime
enough. Silencing God's prophets, though it is not so bad as mocking and
killing them, is yet a great affront to the God of heaven. See how
wretchedly the hearts of sinners are hardened by the deceitfulness of
sin. Persecution was one of the sins for which God was now contending
with them, and yet Zedekiah persists in it even now that he was in the
depth of distress. No providences, no afflictions, will of themselves
part between men and their sins, unless the grace of God work with them.
Nay, some are made worse by those very judgments that should make them
better.

III\. Being in prison, he purchases from a near relation of his a piece
of ground that lay in Anathoth, [Jer
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#006), [Jer
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#007), etc.

1\. One would not have expected, (1.) That a prophet should concern
himself so far in the business of this world; but why not? Though
ministers must not entangle themselves, yet they may concern themselves
in the affairs of this life. (2.) That one who had neither wife nor
children should buy land. We find ([Jer
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#002)) that he had no family of his
own; yet he may purchase for his own use while he lives, and leave it to
the children of his relations when he dies. (3.) One would little have
thought that a prisoner should be a purchaser; how should he get money
beforehand to buy land with? It is probably that he lived frugally, and
saved something out of what belonged to him as a priest, which is no
blemish at all to his character; but we have no reason to think that the
people were kind, or that his being beforehand was owing to their
generosity. Nay, (4.) It was most strange of all that he should buy a
piece of land when he himself knew that the whole land was now to be
laid waste and fall into the hands of the Chaldeans, and then what good
would this do him? But it was the will of God that he should buy it, and
he submitted, though the money seemed to be thrown away. His kinsman
came to offer it to him; it was not of his own seeking; he coveted not
to lay house to house and field to field, but Providence brought it to
him, and it was probably a good bargain; besides, the right of
redemption belonged to him ([Jer
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#008)), and if he refused he would not
do the kinsman's part. It is true he might lawfully refuse, but, being a
prophet, in a thing of this nature he must do that which would be for
the honour of his profession. It became him to fulfil all righteousness.
It was land that lay within the suburbs of a priests' city, and, if he
should refuse it, there was danger lest, in these times of disorder, it
might be sold to one of another tribe, which was contrary to the law, to
prevent which it was convenient for him to buy it. It would likewise be
a kindness to his kinsman, who probably was at this time in great want
of money. Jeremiah had but a little, but what he had he was willing to
lay out in such a manner as might tend most to the honour of God and the
good of his friends and country, which he preferred before his own
private interests.

2\. Two things may be observed concerning this purchase: -

(1.) How fairly the bargain was made. When Jeremiah knew by Hanameel's
coming to him, as God had foretold he would, that it was the word of the
Lord, that it was his mind that he should make this purchase, he made no
more difficulty of it, but bought the field. And, \[1.\] He was very
honest and exact in paying the money. He weighted him the money, did not
press him to take it upon his report, though he was his near kinsman,
but weighed it to him, current money. It was seventeen shekels of
silver, amounting to about forty shillings of our money. The land was
probably but a little field and of small yearly value, when the purchase
was so low; besides, the right of inheritance was in Jeremiah, so that
he had only to buy out his kinsman's life, the reversion being his
already. Some think this was only the earnest of a greater sum; but we
shall not wonder at the smallness of the price if we consider what
scarcity there was of money at this time and how little lands were
counted upon. \[2.\] He was very prudent and discreet in preserving the
writings. They were subscribed before witnesses. One copy was sealed up,
the other was open. One was the original, the other the counterpart; or
perhaps that which was sealed up was for his own private use, the other
that was open was to be laid up in the public register of conveyances,
for any person concerned to consult. Due care and caution in things of
this nature might prevent a great deal of injustice and contention. The
deeds of purchase were lodged in the hands of Baruch, before witnesses,
and he was ordered to lay them up in an earthen vessel (an emblem of the
nature of all the securities this world can pretend to give us, brittle
things and soon broken), that they might continue many days, for the use
of Jeremiah's heirs, after the return out of captivity; for they might
then have the benefit of this purchase. Purchasing reversions may be a
kindness to those that come after us, and a good man thus lays up an
inheritance for his children's children.

(2.) What was the design of having this bargain made. It was to signify
that though Jerusalem was now besieged, and the whole country was likely
to be laid waste, yet the time should come when houses, and fields, and
vineyards should be again possessed in this land, [Jer
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#015). As God appointed Jeremiah to
confirm his predictions of the approaching destruction of Jerusalem by
his own practice in living unmarried, so he now appointed him to confirm
his predictions of the future restoration of Jerusalem by his own
practice in purchasing this field. Note, It concerns ministers to make
it to appear in their whole conversation that they do themselves believe
that which they preach to others; and that they may do so, and impress
it the more deeply upon their hearers, they must many a time deny
themselves, as Jeremiah did in both these instances. God having promised
that this land should again come into the possession of his people,
Jeremiah will, on behalf of his heirs, put in for a share. Note, It is
good to manage even our worldly affairs in faith, and to do common
business with an eye to the providence and promise of God. Lucius Florus
relates it as a great instance of the bravery of the Roman citizens that
in the time of the second Punic war, when Hannibal besieged Rome and was
very near making himself master of it, a field on which part of his army
lay, being offered to sale at that time, was immediately purchased, in a
firm belief that the Roman valour would raise the siege, lib. ii. cap.
6. And have not we much more reason to venture our all upon the word of
God, and to embark in Zion's interests, which will undoubtedly be the
prevailing interests at last? Non si male nunc et olim sic erit - Though
now we suffer, we shall not suffer always.

[Jeremiah 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 32:16</span></span>

We have here Jeremiah's prayer to God upon occasion of the discoveries
God had made to him of his purposes concerning this nation, to pull it
down, and in process of time to build it up again, which puzzled the
prophet himself, who, though he delivered his messages faithfully, yet,
in reflecting upon them, was greatly at a loss within himself how to
reconcile them; in that perplexity he poured out his soul before God in
prayer, and so gave himself ease. That which disturbed him was not the
bad bargain he seemed to have made for himself in purchasing a field
that he was likely to have no good of, but the case of his people, for
whom he was still a kind and faithful intercessor, and he was willing to
hope that, if God had so much mercy in store for them hereafter as he
had promised, he would not proceed with so much severity against them
now as he had threatened. Before Jeremiah went to prayer he delivered
the deeds that concerned his new purchase to Baruch, which may intimate
to us that when we are going to worship God we should get our minds as
clear as may be from the cares and incumbrances of this world. Jeremiah
was in prison, in distress, in the dark about the meaning of God's
providences, and then he prays. Note, Prayer is a salve for every sore.
Whatever is a burden to us, we may by prayer cast it upon the Lord and
then be easy.

In this prayer, or meditation,

I. Jeremiah adores God and his infinite perfections, and gives him the
glory due to his name as the Creator, upholder, and benefactor, of the
whole creation, thereby owning his irresistible power, that he can do
what he will, and his incontestable sovereignty, that he may do what he
will, [Jer 32:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#017). Note, When at any
time we are perplexed about the particular methods and dispensations of
Providence it is good for us to have recourse to our first principles,
and to satisfy ourselves with the general doctrines of God's wisdom,
power, and goodness. Let us consider, as Jeremiah does here, 1. That God
is the fountain of all being, power, life, motion, and perfection: He
made the heaven and the earth with his outstretched arm; and therefore
who can control him? Who dares contend with him? 2. That with him
nothing is impossible, no difficulty insuperable: Nothing is too hard
for thee. When human skill and power are quite nonplussed, with God are
strength and wisdom sufficient to master all the opposition. 3. That he
is a God of boundless bottomless mercy; mercy is his darling attribute;
it is his goodness that is his glory: "Thou not only art kind, but thou
showest lovingkindness, not to a few, to here and there one, but to
thousands, thousands of persons, thousands of generations." 4. That he
is a God of impartial and inflexible justice. His reprieves are not
pardons, but if in mercy he spares the parents, that they may be led to
repentance, yet such a hatred has he to sin, and such a displeasure
against sinners, that he recompenses their iniquity into the bosom of
their children, and yet does them no wrong; so hateful is the
unrighteousness of man, and so jealous of its own honour is the
righteousness of God. 5. That he is a God of universal dominion and
command: He is the great God, for he is the mighty God, and might among
men makes them great. He is the Lord of hosts, of all hosts, that is his
name, and he answers to his name, for all the hosts of heaven and earth,
of men and angels, are at his beck. 6. That he contrives every thing for
the best, and effects every thing as he contrived it: He is great in
counsel, so vast are the reaches and so deep are the designs of his
wisdom; and he is mighty in doing, according to the counsel of his will.
Now such a God as this is not to be quarrelled with. His service is to
be constantly adhered to and all his disposals cheerfully acquiesced in.

II\. He acknowledges the universal cognizance God takes of all the
actions of the children of men and the unerring judgment he passes upon
them ([Jer 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#019)): Thy eyes are open
upon all the sons of men, wherever they are, beholding the evil and the
good, and upon all their ways, both the course they take and every step
they take, not as an unconcerned spectator, but as an observing judge,
to give every one according to his ways and according to his deserts,
which are the fruit of his doings; for men shall find God as they are
found of him.

III\. He recounts the great things God had done for his people Israel
formerly. 1. He brought them out of Egypt, that house of bondage, with
signs and wonders, which remain, if not in the marks of them, yet in the
memorials of them, even unto this day; for it would never be forgotten,
not only in Israel, who were reminded of it every year by the ordinance
of the passover, but among other men: all the neighbouring nations spoke
of it, as that which redounded exceedingly to the glory of the God of
Israel, and made him a name as at this day. This is repeated ([Jer
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#021)), that God brought them forth,
not only with comforts and joys to them, but with glory to himself, with
signs and wonders (witness the ten plagues), with a strong hand, too
strong for the Egyptians themselves, and with a stretched-out arm, that
reached Pharaoh, proud as he was, and with great terror to them and all
about them. This seems to refer to [Deu
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034). 2. He brought them into Canaan,
that good land, that land flowing with milk and honey. He swore to their
fathers to give it them, and, because he would perform his oath, he did
give it to the children ([Jer 32:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#022))
and they came in and possessed it. Jeremiah mentions this both as an
aggravation of their sin and disobedience and also as a plea with God to
work deliverance for them. Note, It is good for us often to reflect upon
the great things that God did for his church formerly, especially in the
first erecting of it, that work of wonder.

IV\. He bewails the rebellions they had been guilty of against God, and
the judgments God had brought upon them for these rebellions. It is a
sad account he here gives of the ungrateful conduct of that people
towards God. He had done every thing that he had promised to do (they
had acknowledged it, [Kg1 8:56](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#056)), but
they had done nothing of all that he commanded them to do ([Jer
32:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#023)); they made no conscience of any
of his laws; they walked not in them, paid no respect to any of his
calls by his prophets, for they obeyed not his voice. And therefore he
owns that God was righteous in causing all this evil to come upon them.
The city is besieged, is attacked by the sword without, is weakened and
wasted by the famine and pestilence within, so that it is ready to fall
into the hands of the Chaldeans that fight against it ([Jer
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#024)); it is given into their hands,
[Jer 32:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#025). Now, 1. He compares the
present state of Jerusalem with the divine predictions, and finds that
what God has spoken has come to pass. God had given them fair warning of
it before; and, if they had regarded this, the ruin would have been
prevented; but, if they will not do what God has commanded, they can
expect no other than that he should do what he had threatened. 2. He
commits the present state of Jerusalem to the divine consideration and
compassion ([Jer 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#024)): Behold the
mounts, or ramparts, or the engines which they make use of to batter the
city and beat down the wall of it. And again, "Behold thou seest it, and
takest cognizance of it. Is this the city that thou has chosen to put
thy name there? And shall it be thus abandoned?" He neither complains of
God for what he had done nor prescribes to God what he should do, but
desires he would behold their case, and is pleased to think that he does
behold it. Whatever trouble we are in, upon a personal or public
account, we may comfort ourselves with this, that God sees it and sees
how to remedy it.

V. He seems desirous to be let further into the meaning of the order God
had now given him to purchase his kinsman's field ([Jer
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#025)): "Though the city is given into
the hand of the Chaldeans, and no man is likely to enjoy what he has,
yet thou hast said unto me, Buy thou the field." As soon as he
understood that it was the mind of God he did it, and made no
objections, was not disobedient to the heavenly vision; but, when he had
done it, he desired better to understand why God had ordered him to do
it, because the thing looked strange and unaccountable. Note, Though we
are bound to follow God with an implicit obedience, yet we should
endeavour that it may be more and more an intelligent obedience. We must
never dispute God's statutes and judgments, but we may and must enquire,
What mean these statutes and judgments? [Deu
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#020).

[Jeremiah 32:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 32:26</span></span>

We have here God's answer to Jeremiah's prayer, designed to quiet his
mind and make him easy; and it is a full discovery of the purposes of
God's wrath against the present generation and the purposes of his grace
concerning the future generations. Jeremiah knew not how to sing both of
mercy and judgment, but God here teaches to sing unto him of both. When
we know not how to reconcile one word of God with another we may yet be
sure that both are true, both are pure, both shall be made good, and not
one iota or tittle of either shall fall to the ground. When Jeremiah was
ordered to buy the field in Anathoth he was willing to hope that God was
about to revoke the sentence of his wrath and to order the Chaldeans to
raise the siege. "No," says God, "the execution of the sentence shall go
on; Jerusalem shall be laid in ruins." Note, Assurances of future mercy
must not be interpreted as securities from present troubles. But, lest
Jeremiah should think that his being ordered to buy this field intimated
that all the mercy God had in store for his people, after their return,
was only that they should have the possession of their own land again,
he further informs him that that was but a type and figure of those
spiritual blessings which should then be abundantly bestowed upon them,
unspeakably more valuable than fields and vineyards; so that in this
word of the Lord, which came to Jeremiah, we have first as dreadful
threatenings and then as precious promises as perhaps any we have in the
Old Testament; life and death, good and evil, are here set before us;
let us consider and choose wisely.

I. The ruin of Judah and Jerusalem is here pronounced. The decree has
gone forth, and shall not be recalled. 1. God here asserts his own
sovereignty and power ([Jer 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#027)):
Behold, I am Jehovah, a self-existent self-sufficient being; I am that I
am; I am the God of all flesh, that is, of all mankind, here called
flesh because weak and unable to contend with God ([Psa
56:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#004)), and because wicked and corrupt
and unapt to comply with God. God is the Creator of all, and makes what
use he pleases of all. He that is the God of Israel is the God of all
flesh and of the spirits of all flesh, and, if Israel were cast off,
could raise up a people to his name out of some other nation. If he be
the God of all flesh, he may well ask, Is any thing too hard for me?
What cannot he do from whom all the powers of men are derived, on whom
they depend, and by whom all their actions are directed and governed?
Whatever he designs to do, whether in wrath or in mercy, nothing can
hinder him nor defeat his designs. 2. He abides by that he had often
said of the destruction of Jerusalem by the king of Babylon ([Jer
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#028)): I will give this city into his
hand, now that he is grasping at it, and he shall take it and make a
prey of it, [Jer 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#029). The Chaldeans
shall come and set fire to it, shall burn it and all the houses in it,
God's house not excepted, nor the king's neither. 3. He assigns the
reason for these severe proceedings against the city that had been so
much in his favour. It is sin, it is that and nothing else, that ruins
it. (1.) They were impudent and daring in sin. They offered incense to
Baal, not in corners, as men ashamed or afraid of being discovered, but
upon the tops of their houses ([Jer
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#029)), in defiance of God's justice.
(2.) They designed an affront to God herein. They did it to provoke me
to anger, [Jer 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#029). They have only
provoked me to anger with the works of their hands, [Jer
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#030). They could not promise
themselves any pleasure, profit, or honour out of it, but did it on
purpose to offend God. And again ([Jer
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#032)), All the evil which they have
done was to provoke me to anger. They knew he was a jealous God in the
matters of his worship, and there they resolved to try his jealousy and
dare him to his face. "Jerusalem has been to me a provocation of my
anger and fury," [Jer 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#031). Their
conduct in every thing was provoking. (3.) They began betimes, and had
continued all along provoking to God: "They have done evil before me
from their youth, ever since they were first formed into a people ([Jer
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#030)), witness their murmurings and
rebellions in the wilderness." And as for Jerusalem, though it was the
holy city, it has been a provocation to the holy God from the day that
they built it, even to this day, [Jer
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#031). O what reason have we to lament
the little honour God has from this world, and the great dishonour that
is done him, when even in Judah, where he is known and his name is
great, and in Salem where his tabernacle is, there was always that found
that was a provocation to him! (4.) All orders and degrees of men
contributed to the common guilt, and therefore were justly involved in
the common ruin. Not only the children of Israel, that had revolted from
the temple, but the children of Judah too, that still adhered to it -
not only the common people, the men of Judah and inhabitants of
Jerusalem, but those that should have reproved and restrained sin in
others were themselves ringleaders in it, their kings and princes, their
priests and prophets. (5.) God had again and again called them to
repentance, but they turned a deaf ear to his calls, and rudely turned
their back on him that called them, though he was their master, to whom
they were bound in duty, and their benefactor, to whom they were bound
in gratitude and interest, [Jer 32:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#033).
"I taught them better manners, with as much care as ever any tender
parent taught a child, rising up early, in teaching them, studying to
adapt the teaching to their capacities, taking them betimes, when they
might have been most pliable, but all in vain; they turned not the face
to me, would not so much as look upon me, nay, they turned the back upon
me," an expression of the highest contempt. As he called them, like
froward children, so they went from him, [Hos
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#002). They have not hearkened to
receive instruction; they regarded not a word that was said to them,
though it was designed for their own good. (6.) There was in their
idolatries an impious contempt of God; for ([Jer
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#034)) they set their abominations
(their idols, which they knew to be in the highest degree abominable to
God) in the house which is called by my name, to defile it. They had
their idols not only in their high places and groves, but even in God's
temple. (7.) They were guilty of the most unnatural cruelty to their own
children; for they sacrificed them to Moloch, [Jer
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#035). Thus because they liked not to
retain God in their knowledge, but changed his glory into shame, they
were justly given up to vile affections and stripped of natural ones,
and their glory was turned into shame. And, (8.) What was the
consequence of all this? \[1.\] They caused Judah to sin, [Jer
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#035). The whole country was infected
with the contagious idolatries and iniquities of Jerusalem. \[2.\] They
brought ruin upon themselves. It was as if they had done it on purpose
that God should remove them from before his face ([Jer
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#031)); they would throw themselves
out of his favour.

II\. The restoration of Judah and Jerusalem is here promised, [Jer
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#036), etc. God will in judgment
remember mercy, and there will a time come, a set time, to favour Zion.
Observe, 1. The despair to which this people were now at length brought.
When the judgment was threatened at a distance they had no fear; when it
attacked them they had no hope. They said concerning the city ([Jer
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#036)), It shall be delivered into the
hand of the king of Babylon, not by any cowardice or ill conduct of
ours, but by the sword, famine, and pestilence. Concerning the country
they said, with vexation ([Jer 32:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#043)),
It is desolate, without man or beast; there is no relief, there is no
remedy. It is given into the hand of the Chaldeans. Note, Deep security
commonly ends in deep despair; whereas those that keep up a holy fear at
all times have a good hope to support them in the worst of times. 2. The
hope that God gives them of mercy which he had in store for them
hereafter. Though their carcases must fall in captivity, yet their
children after them shall again see this good land and the goodness of
God in it. (1.) They shall be brought up from their captivity and shall
come and settle again in this land, [Jer
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#037). They had been under God's anger
and fury, and great wrath; but now they shall partake of his grace, and
love, and great favour. He had dispersed them, and driven them into all
countries. Those that fled dispersed themselves; those that fell into
the enemies; hands were dispersed by them, in policy, to prevent
combinations among them. God's hand was in both. But now God will find
them out, and gather them out of all the countries whither they were
driven, as he promised in the law ([Deu
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#003), [Deu
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#004)) and the saints had prayed, [Psa
106:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#047); [Neh
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#009). He had banished them, but he will
bring them again to this place, which they could not but have an
affection for. For many years past, while they were in their own land,
they were continually exposed, and terrified with the alarms of war; but
now I will cause them to dwell safely. Being reformed, and having
returned to God, neither their own consciences within nor their enemies
without shall be a terror to them. He promises ([Jer
32:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#041)): I will plant them in this land
assuredly; not only I will certainly do it, but they shall here enjoy a
holy a security and repose, and they shall take root here, shall be
planted in stability, and not again be unfixed and shaken. (2.) God will
renew his covenant with them, a covenant of grace, the blessings of
which are spiritual, and such as will work good things in them, to
qualify them for the great things God intended to do for them. It is
called an everlasting covenant ([Jer
32:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#040)), not only because God will be
for ever faithful to it, but because the consequences of it will be
everlasting. For, doubtless, here the promises look further than to
Israel according to the flesh, and are sure to all believers, to every
Israelite indeed. Good Christians may apply them to themselves and plead
them with God, may claim the benefit of them and take the comfort of
them. \[1.\] God will own them for his, and make over himself to them to
be theirs ([Jer 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#038)): They shall be
my people. He will make them his by working in them all the characters
and dispositions of his people, and then he will protect, and guide, and
govern them as his people. "And, to make them truly, completely, and
eternally happy, I will be their God." They shall serve and worship God
as theirs and cleave to him only, and he will approve himself theirs.
All he is, all he has, shall be engaged and employed for their good.
\[2.\] God will give them a heart to fear him, [Jer
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#039). That which he requires of those
whom he takes into covenant with him as his people is that they fear
him, that they reverence his majesty, dread his wrath, stand in awe of
his authority, pay homage to him, and give him the glory due unto his
name. Now what God requires of them he here promises to work in them,
pursuant to his choice of them as his people. Note, As it is God's
prerogative to fashion men's hearts, so it is his promise to his people
to fashion theirs aright; and a heart to fear God is indeed a good
heart, and well fashioned. It is repeated ([Jer
32:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#040)): I will put my fear in their
hearts, that is, work in them gracious principles and dispositions, that
shall influence and govern their whole conversation. Teachers may put
good things into our heads, but it is God only that can put them into
our hearts, that can work in us both to will and to do. \[3.\] He will
give them one heart and one way. In order to their walking in one way,
he will give them one heart: as the heart is, so will the way be, and
both shall be one; that is First, They shall be each of them one with
themselves. One heart is the same with a new heart, [Eze
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019). The heart is then one when it
is fully determined for God and entirely devoted to God. When the eye is
single and God's glory alone aimed at, when our hearts are fixed,
trusting in God, and we are uniform and universal in our obedience to
him, then the heart is one and way one; and, unless the heart be thus
steady, the goings will not be stedfast. From this promise we may take
direction and encouragement to pray, with David ([Psa
86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)), Unite my heart to fear thy
name; for God says, I will give them one heart, that they may fear me.
Secondly, They shall be all of them one with each other. All good
Christians shall be incorporated into one body; Jews and Gentiles shall
become one sheep-fold; and they shall all, as far as they are
sanctified, have a disposition to love one another, the gospel they
profess having in it the strongest inducements to mutual love, and the
Spirit that dwells in them being the Spirit of love. Though they may
have different apprehensions about minor things, they shall be all one
in the great things of God, being renewed after the same image. Though
they may have many paths, they have but one way, that of serious
godliness. \[4.\] He will effectually provide for their perseverance in
grace and the perpetuating of the covenant between himself and them.
They would have been happy when there were first planted in Canaan, like
Adam in paradise, if they had not departed from God. And therefore, now
that they are restored to their happiness, they shall be confirmed in it
by the preventing of their departures from God, and this will complete
their bliss. First, God will never leave nor forsake them: I will not
turn away from them to do them good. Earthly princes are fickle, and
their greatest favourites have fallen under their frowns; but God's
mercy endures for ever. Whom he loves he loves to the end. God may seem
to turn from this people ([Isa 54:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008)),
but even then he does not turn from doing and designing them good.
Secondly, They shall never leave nor forsake him; that is the thing we
are in danger of. We have no reason to distrust God's fidelity and
constancy, but our own; and therefore it is here promised that God will
give them a heart to fear him for ever, all days, to be in his fear
every day and all the day long ([Pro
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#017)), and to continue so to the end
of their days. He will put such a principle into their hearts that they
shall not depart from him. Even those who have given up their names to
God, if they be left to themselves, will depart from him; but the fear
of God ruling in the heart, will prevent their departure. That, and
nothing else, will do it. If we continue close and faithful to God, it
is owing purely to his almighty grace and not to any strength or
resolution of our own. \[5.\] He will entail a blessing upon their seed,
will give them grace to fear him, for the good of them and of their
children after them. As their departures from God had been to the
prejudice of their children, so their adherence to God should be to the
advantage of their children. We cannot better consult the good of
posterity than by setting up, and keeping up, the fear and worship of
God in our families. \[6.\] He will take a pleasure in their prosperity
and will do every thing to advance it ([Jer
32:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#041)): I will rejoice over them to do
them good. God will certainly do them good because he rejoices over
them. They are dear to him; he makes his boast of them, and therefore
will not only do them good, but will delight in doing them good. When he
punishes them it is with reluctance. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim?
But, when he restores them, it is with satisfaction; he rejoices in
doing them good. We ought therefore to serve him with pleasure and to
rejoice in all opportunities of serving him. He is himself a cheerful
giver, and therefore loves a cheerful servant. I will plant them (says
God) with my whole heart and with my whole soul. He will be intent upon
it, and take delight in it; he will make it the business of his
providence to settle them again in Canaan, and the various dispensations
of providence shall concur to it. All things shall appear at last so to
have been working for the good of the church that it will be said, The
governor of the world is entirely taken up with the care of his church.
\[7.\] These promises shall as surely be performed as the foregoing
threatenings were; and the accomplishment of those, notwithstanding the
security of the people, might confirm their expectation of the
performance of these, notwithstanding their present despair ([Jer
32:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#042)): As I have brought all this
great evil upon them, pursuant to the threatenings, and for the glory of
divine justice, so I will bring upon them all this good, pursuant to the
promise, and for the glory of divine mercy. He that is faithful to his
threatenings will much more be so to his promises; and he will comfort
his people according to the time that he has afflicted them. The
churches shall have rest after the days of adversity. \[8.\] As an
earnest of all this, houses and lands shall again fetch a good price in
Judah and Jerusalem, and, though now they are a drug, there shall again
be a sufficient number of purchasers ([Jer
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#043), [Jer
32:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#044)): Fields shall be bought in this
land, and people will covet to have lands here rather than any where
else. Lands, wherever they lie, will go off, not only in the places
about Jerusalem, but in the cities of Judah and of Israel, too, whether
they lie on mountains, or in valleys, or in the south, in all parts of
the country, men shall buy fields, and subscribe evidences. Trade shall
revive, for they shall have money enough to buy land with. Husbandry
shall revive, for those that have money shall covet to lay it out upon
lands. Laws shall again have their due course, for they shall subscribe
evidences and seal them. This is mentioned to reconcile Jeremiah to his
new purchase. Though he had bought a piece of ground and could not go to
see it, yet he must believe that this was the pledge of many a purchase,
and those but faint resemblances of the purchased possessions in the
heavenly Canaan, reserved for all those who have God's fear in their
hearts and do not depart from him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 33](jer033)

</div>
