<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer006)  [Next](jer008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 7:0</span></span>

The prophet having in God's name reproved the people for their sins, and
given them warning of the judgments of God that were coming upon them,
in this chapter prosecutes the same intention for their humiliation and
awakening. I. He shows them the invalidity of the plea they so much
relied on, that they had the temple of God among them and constantly
attended the service of it, and endeavours to take them off from their
confidence in their external privileges and performances ([Jer
7:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#001)). II. He reminds them of the
desolations of Shiloh, and foretels that such should be the desolations
of Jerusalem ([Jer 7:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012)). III. He
represents to the prophet their abominable idolatries, for which he was
thus incensed against them ([Jer
7:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#017)). IV. He sets before the
people that fundamental maxim of religion that "to obey is better than
sacrifice" ([Sa1 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)), and that God
would not accept the sacrifices of those that obstinately persisted in
disobedience ([Jer 7:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021)). V. He
threatens to lay the land utterly waste for their idolatry and impiety,
and to multiply their slain as they had multiplied their sin ([Jer
7:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029)).

[Jeremiah 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 7:1</span></span>

These verses begin another sermon, which is continued in this and the
two following chapters, much to the same effect with those before, to
reason them to repentance. Observe,

I. The orders given to the prophet to preach this sermon; for he had not
only a general commission, but particular directions and instructions
for every message he delivered. This was a word that came to him from
the Lord, [Jer 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#001). We are not told
when this sermon was to be preached; but are told, 1. Where it must be
preached - in the gate of the Lord's house, through which they entered
into the outer court, or the court of the people. It would affront the
priests, and expose the prophet to their rage, to have such a message as
this delivered within their precincts; but the prophet must not fear the
face of man, he cannot be faithful to his God if he do. 2. To whom it
must be preached - to the men of Judah, that enter in at these gates to
worship the Lord; probably it was at one of three feasts, when all the
males from all parts of the country were to appear before the Lord in
the courts of his house, and not to appear empty: then he had many
together to preach to, and that was the most seasonable time to admonish
them not to trust to their privileges. Note, (1.) Even those that
profess religion have need to be preached to as well as those that are
without. (2.) It is desirable to have opportunity of preaching to many
together. Wisdom chooses to cry in the chief place of concourse, and, as
Jeremiah here, in the opening of the gates, the temple-gates. (3.) When
we are going to worship God we have need to be admonished to worship him
in the spirit, and to have no confidence in the flesh, [Phi
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003).

II\. The contents and scope of the sermon itself. It is delivered in the
name of the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, who commands the world,
but covenants with his people. As creatures we are bound to regard the
Lord of hosts, as Christians the God of Israel; what he said to them he
says to us, and it is much the same with that which John Baptist said to
those whom he baptized ([Mat 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#008), [Mat
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009)), Bring forth fruits meet for
repentance; and think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to
our father. The prophet here tells them,

1\. What were the true words of God, which they might trust to. In
short, they might depend upon it that if they would repent and reform
their lives, and return to God in a way of duty, he would restore and
confirm their peace, would redress their grievances, and return to them
in a way of mercy ([Jer 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#003)): Amend
your ways and your doings. This implies that there had been much amiss
in their ways and doings, many faults and errors. But it is a great
instance of the favour of God to them that he gives them liberty to
amend, shows them where and how they must amend, and promises to accept
them upon their amendment: "I will cause you to dwell quietly and
peaceably in this place, and a stop shall be put to that which threatens
your expulsion." Reformation is the only way, and a sure way to ruin. He
explains himself ([Jer 7:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#005)), and
tells them particularly,

(1.) What the amendment was which he expected from them. They must
thoroughly amend; in making good, they must make good their ways and
doings; they must reform with resolution, and it must be a universal,
constant, preserving reformation - not partial, but entire - not
hypocritical, but sincere - not wavering, but constant. They must make
the tree good, and so make the fruit good, must amend their hearts and
thoughts, and so amend their ways and doings. In particular, \[1.\] They
must be honest and just in all their dealings. Those that had power in
their hands must thoroughly execute judgment between a man and his
neighbour, without partiality, and according as the merits of the cause
appeared. They must not either in judgment or in contract oppress the
stranger, the fatherless, or the widow, nor countenance or protect those
that did oppress, nor refuse to do them justice when they sought for it.
They must not shed innocent blood, and with it defile this place and the
land wherein they dwelt. \[2.\] They must keep closely to the worship of
the true God only: "Neither walk after other gods; do not hanker after
them, nor hearken to those that would draw you into communion with
idolaters; for it is, and will be, to your own hurt. Be not only so just
to your God, but so wise for yourselves, as not to throw away your
adorations upon those who are not able to help you, and thereby provoke
him who is able to destroy you." Well, this is all that God insists
upon.

(2.) He tells them what the establishment is which, upon this amendment,
they may expect from him ([Jer 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#007)):
"Set about such a work of reformation as this with all speed, go through
with it, and abide by it; and I will cause you to dwell in this place,
this temple; it shall continue your place of resort and refuge, the
place of your comfortable meeting with God and one another; and you
shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers for ever and ever,
and it shall never be turned out either from God's house or from your
own." It is promised that they shall still enjoy their civil and sacred
privileges, that they shall have a comfortable enjoyment of them: I will
cause you to dwell here; and those dwell at ease to whom God gives a
settlement. They shall enjoy it by covenant, by virtue of the grant made
of it to their fathers, not by providence, but by promise. They shall
continue in the enjoyment of it without eviction or molestation; they
shall not be disturbed, much less dispossessed, for ever and ever;
nothing but sin could throw them out. An everlasting inheritance in the
heavenly Canaan is hereby secured to all that live in godliness and
honesty. And the vulgar Latin reads a further privilege here, [Jer
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#003), [Jer
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#007). Habitabo vobiscum - I will dwell
with you in this place; and we should find Canaan itself but an
uncomfortable place to dwell in if God did not dwell with us there.

2\. What were the lying words of their own hearts, which they must not
trust to. He cautions them against this self-deceit ([Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)): "Trust no in lying words. You
are told in what way, and upon what terms, you may be easy safe, and
happy; now do not flatter yourselves with an opinion that you may be so
on any other terms, or in any other way." Yet he charges them with this
self-deceit arising from vanity ([Jer
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#008)): "Behold, it is plain that you do
trust in lying words, notwithstanding what is said to you; you trust in
words that cannot profit; you rely upon a plea that will stand you in no
stead." Those that slight the words of truth, which would profit them,
take shelter in words of falsehood, which cannot profit them. Now these
lying words were, "The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the
temple of the Lord are these. These buildings, the courts, the holy
place, and the holy of holies, are the temple of the Lord, built by his
appointment, to his glory; here he resides, here he is worshipped, here
we meet three times a year to pay our homage to him as our King in his
palace." This they thought was security enough to them to keep God and
his favours from leaving them, God and his judgments from breaking in
upon them. When the prophets told them how sinful they were, and how
miserable they were likely to be, still they appealed to the temple:
"How can we be either so or so, as long as we have that holy happy place
among us?" The prophet repeats it because they repeated it upon all
occasions. It was the cant of the times; it was in their mouths upon all
occasions. If they heard an awakening sermon, if any startling piece of
news was brought to them, they lulled themselves asleep again with this,
"We cannot but do well, for we have the temple of the Lord among us."
Note, The privileges of a form of godliness are often the pride and
confidence of those that are strangers and enemies to the power of it.
It is common for those that are furthest from God to boast themselves
most of their being near to the church. They are haughty because of the
holy mountain ([Zep 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#011)), as if God's
mercy were so tied to them that they might defy his justice. Now to
convince them what a frivolous plea this was, and what little stead it
would stand them in,

(1.) He shows them the gross absurdity of it in itself. If they knew any
thing either of the temple of the Lord or of the Lord of the temple,
they must think that to plead that, either in excuse of their sin
against God or in arrest of God's judgment against them, was the most
ridiculous unreasonable thing that could be. \[1.\] God is a holy God;
but this plea made him the patron of sin, of the worst of sins, which
even the light of nature condemns, [Jer
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#009), [Jer
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#010). "What," says he, "will you
steal, murder, and commit adultery, be guilty of the vilest
immoralities, and which the common interest, as well as the common
sense, of mankind witness against? Will you swear falsely, a crime which
all nations (who with the belief of a God have had a veneration for an
oath) have always had a horror of? Will you burn incense to Baal, a
dunghill-deity, that sets up as a rival with the great Jehovah, and, not
content with that, will you walk after other gods too, whom you know
not, and by all these crimes put a daring affront upon God, both as the
Lord of hosts and as the God of Israel? Will you exchange a God of whose
power and goodness you have had such a long experience for gods of whose
ability and willingness to help you you know nothing? And, when you have
thus done the worst you can against God, will you brazen your faces so
far as to come and stand before him in this house which is called by his
name and in which his name is called upon - stand before him as servants
waiting his commands, as supplicants expecting his favour? Will you act
in open rebellion against him, and yet herd among his subjects, among
the best of them? By this, it should seem, you think that either he does
not discover or does not dislike your wicked practices, to imagine
either of which is to put the highest indignity possible upon him. It is
as if you should say, We are delivered to do all these abominations." If
they had not the front to say this, totidem verbis - in so many words,
yet their actions spoke it aloud. They could not but own that God, even
their own God, had many a time delivered them, and been a present help
to them, when otherwise they must have perished. He, in delivering them,
designed to reduce them to himself, and by his goodness to lead them to
repentance; but they resolved to persist in their abominations
notwithstanding. As soon as they were delivered (as of old in the days
of the Judges) they did evil again in the sight of the Lord, which was
in effect to say, in direct contradiction to the true intent and meaning
of the providences which had affected them, that God had delivered them
in order to put them again into a capacity of rebelling against him, by
sacrificing the more profusely to their idols. Note, Those who continue
in sin because grace has abounded, or that grace may abound, do in
effect their idols. Note, Those who continue in sin because grace has
abounded, or that grace may abound, do in effect make Christ the
minister of sin. Some take it thus: "You present yourselves before God
with your sacrifices and sin-offerings, and then say, We are delivered,
we are discharged from our guilt, now it shall do us no hurt; when all
this is but to blind the world, and stop the mouth of conscience, that
you may, the more easily to yourselves and the more plausibly before
others, do all these abominations." \[2.\] His temple was a holy place;
but this plea made it a protection to the most unholy persons: "Has this
house, which is called by my name and is a standing sign of God's
kingdom of sin and Satan - has this become a den of robbers in your
eyes? Do you think it was built to be not only a rendezvous of, but a
refuge and shelter to, the vilest of malefactors?" No; though the horns
of the altar were a sanctuary to him that slew a man unawares, yet they
were not so to a wilful murderer, nor to one that did aught
presumptuously, [Exo 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#014); [Kg1
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#029). Those that think to excuse
themselves in unchristian practices with the Christian name, and sin the
more boldly and securely because there is a sin-offering provided, do,
in effect, make God's house of prayer a den of thieves, as the priests
in Christ's time, [Mat 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013). But
could they thus impose upon God? No: Behold, I have seen it, saith the
Lord, have seen the real iniquity through the counterfeit and dissembled
piety. Note, Though men may deceive one another with the appearances of
devotion, yet they cannot deceive God.

(2.) He shows them the insufficiency of this plea adjudged long since in
the case of Shiloh. \[1.\] It is certain that Shiloh was ruined, though
it had God's sanctuary in it, when by its wickedness it profaned that
sanctuary ([Jer 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012)): Go you now to
my place which was in Shiloh. It is probable that the ruins of that once
flourishing city were yet remaining; they might, at least, read the
history of it, which ought to affect them as if they saw the place.
There God set his name at the first, there the tabernacle was set up
when Israel first took possession of Canaan ([Joh
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001)), and thither the tribes went up;
but those that attended the service of the tabernacle there corrupted
both themselves and others, and from them arose the wickedness of his
people Israel; that fountain was poisoned, and sent forth malignant
streams; and what came of it? No; God forsook it ([Psa
78:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#060)), sent his ark into captivity,
cut off the house of Eli that presided there; and it is very probable
that the city was quite destroyed, for we never read any more of it but
as a monument of divine vengeance upon holy places when they harbour
wicked people. Note, God's judgments upon others, who have really
revolted from God while they have kept up a profession of nearness to
him, should be a warning to us not to trust in lying words. It is good
to consult precedents, and make use of them. Remember Lot's wife;
remember Shiloh and the seven churches of Asia; and know that the ark
and candlestick are moveable things, [Rev
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#005); [Mat
21:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#043). \[2.\] It is as certain that
Shiloh's fate will be Jerusalem's doom if a speedy and sincere
repentance prevent it not. First, Jerusalem was now as sinful as ever
Shiloh was; that is proved by the unerring testimony of God himself
against them ([Jer 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#013)): "You have
done all these works, you cannot deny it:" and they continued obstinate
in their sin; that is proved by the testimony of God's return and
repent, rising up early and speaking, as one in care, as one in earnest,
as one who would lose no time in dealing with them, nay, who would take
the fittest opportunity for speaking to them early in the morning, when,
if ever, they were sober, and had their thoughts free and clear; but it
was all in vain. God spoke, but they heard not, they heeded not, they
never minded; he called them, but they answered not; they would not come
at his call. Note, What God has spoken to us greatly aggravates what we
have done against him. Secondly, Jerusalem shall shortly be as miserable
as ever Shiloh was: Therefore I will do unto this house as I did to
Shiloh, ruin it, and lay it waste, [Jer
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#014). Those that tread in the steps of
the wickedness of those that went before them must expect to fall by the
like judgments, for all these things happened to them for ensamples. The
temple at Jerusalem, though ever so strongly built, if wickedness was
found in it, would be as unable to keep its ground and as easily
conquered as even the tabernacle in Shiloh was, when God's day of
vengeance had come. "This house" (says God) "is called by my name, and
therefore you may think that I should protect it; it is the house in
which you trust, and you think that it will protect you; this land is
the place, this city the place, which I gave to you and your fathers,
and therefore you are secure of the continuance of it, and think that
nothing can turn you out of it; but the men of Shiloh thus flattered
themselves and did but deceive themselves." He quotes another precedent
([Jer 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#015)), the ruin of the kingdom
of the ten tribes, who were the seed of Abraham, and had the covenant of
circumcision, and possessed the land which God gave to them and their
fathers, and yet the idolatries threw them out and extirpated them: "And
can you think but that the same evil courses will be as fatal to you?"
Doubtless they will be so; for God is uniform and of a piece with
himself in his judicial proceedings. It is a rule of justice, ut parium
par sit ratio - that in similar cases the same judgment should proceed.
"You have corrupted yourselves as your brethren the seed of Ephraim did,
and have become their brethren in iniquity, and therefore I will cast
you out of my sight, as I have cast them." The interpretation here given
of the judgment makes it a terrible one indeed; the casting of them out
of their land signified God's casting them out of his sight, as if he
would never look upon them, never look after them, more. Whenever we are
cast, it is well enough, if we be kept in the love of God; but, if we
are thrown out of his favour, our case is miserable though we dwell in
our own land. This threatening, that God would make this house like
Shiloh, we shall meet with again, and find Jeremiah indicted for it,
[Jer 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#006).

[Jeremiah 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 7:16</span></span>

God had shown them, in the foregoing verses, that the temple and the
service of it, of which they boasted and in which they trusted, should
not avail to prevent the judgment threatened. But there was another
thing which might stand them in some stead, and which yet they had no
value for, and that was the prophet's intercession for them; his prayers
would do them more good than their own pleas: now here that support is
taken from them; and their case is said indeed who have lost their
interest in the prayers of God's ministers and people.

I. God here forbids the prophet to pray for them ([Jer
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016)): "The decree has gone forth,
their ruin is resolved on, therefore pray not thou for this people, that
is, pray not for the preventing of this judgment threatened; they have
sinned unto death, and therefore pray not for their life, but for the
life of their souls," [Jo1 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016). See
here, 1. That God's prophets are praying men; Jeremiah foretold the
destruction of Judah and Jerusalem, and yet prayed for their
preservation, not knowing that the decree was absolute; and it is the
will of God that we pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Even when we
threaten sinners with damnation we must pray for their salvation, that
they may turn and live. Jeremiah was hated, and persecuted, and
reproached, by the children of his people, and yet he prayed for them;
for it becomes us to render good for evil. 2. That God's praying
prophets have a great interest in heaven, how little soever they have on
earth. When God has determined to destroy this people, he bespeaks the
prophet not to pray for them, because he would not have his prayers to
lie (as prophets' prayers seldom did) unanswered. God said to Moses, Let
me alone, [Exo 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#010). 3. It is an ill
omen to a people when God restrains the spirits of his ministers and
people from praying for them, and gives them to see their case so
desperate that they have no heart to speak a good word for them. 4.
Those that will not regard good ministers' preaching cannot expect any
benefit by their praying. If you will not hear us when we speak from God
to you, God will not hear us when we speak to him for you.

II\. He gives him a reason for this prohibition. Praying breath is too
precious a thing to be lost and thrown away upon a people hardened in
sin and marked for ruin.

1\. They are resolved to persist in their rebellion against God, and
will not be turned back by the prophet's preaching. For this he appeals
to the prophet himself, and his own inspection and observation ([Jer
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#017)): Seest thou not what they do
openly and publicly, without either shame or fear, in the cities of
Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem? This intimates both that the sin
was evident and could not be denied and that the sinners were impudent
and would not be reclaimed; they committed their wickedness even in the
prophet's presence and under his eye; he saw what they did, and yet they
did it, which was an affront to his office, and to him whose officer he
was, and bade defiance to both. Now observe,

(1.) What the sin is with which they are here charged - it is idolatry,
[Jer 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018). Their idolatrous respects
are paid to the queen of heaven, the moon, either in an image or in the
original, or both. They worshipped it probably under the name of
Ashtaroth, or some other of their goddesses, being in love with the
brightness in which they saw the moon walk, and thinking themselves
indebted to her for her benign influences or fearing her malignant ones,
[Job 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026). The worshipping of the
moon was much in use among the heathen nations, [Jer
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017), [Jer
44:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#019). Some read it the frame or
workmanship of heaven. The whole celestial globe with all its ornaments
and powers was the object of their adoration. They worshipped the host
of heaven, [Act 7:42](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#042). The homage they
should have paid to their Prince they paid to the statues that
beautified the frontispiece of his palace; they worshipped the creatures
instead of him that made them, the servants instead of him that commands
them, and the gifts instead of him that gave them. With the queen of
heaven they worshipped other gods, images of things not only in heaven
above, but in earth beneath, and in the waters under the earth; for
those that forsake the true God wander endlessly after false ones. To
these deities of their own making they offer cakes for meat-offerings,
and pour out drink-offerings, as if they had their meat and drink from
them and were obliged to make to them their acknowledgments: and see how
busy they are, and how every hand is employed in the service of these
idols, according as they used to be employed in their domestic services.
The children were sent to gather wood; the fathers kindled the fire to
heat the oven, being of the poorer sort that could not afford to keep
servants to do it, yet they would rather do it themselves than it should
be undone; the women kneaded the dough with their own hands, for
perhaps, though they had servants to do it, they took a pride in showing
their zeal for their idols by doing it themselves. Let us be instructed,
even by this bad example, in the service of our God. \[1.\] Let us
honour him with our substance, as those that have our subsistence from
him, and eat and drink to the glory of him from whom we have our meat
and drink. \[2.\] Let us not decline the hardest services, nor disdain
to stoop to the meanest, by which God may be honoured; for none shall
kindle a fire on God's altar for nought. Let us think it an honour to be
employed in any work for God. \[3.\] Let us bring up our children in the
acts of devotion; let them, as they are capable, be employed in doing
something towards the keeping up of religious exercises.

(2.) What is the direct tendency of this sin: "It is that they may
provoke me to anger; they cannot design any thing else in it. But ([Jer
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#019)) do they provoke me to anger? Is
it because I am hard to be pleased, or easily provoked? Or am I to bear
the blame of the resentment? No; it is their own doing; they may thank
themselves, and they alone shall bear it." Is it against God that they
provoke him to wrath? Is he the worse for it? Does it do him any real
damage? No; is it not against themselves, to the confusion of their own
faces? It is malice against God, but it is impotent malice; it cannot
hurt him: nay, it is foolish malice; it will hurt themselves. They show
their spite against God, but they do the spite to themselves. Canst thou
think any other than that a people, thus desperately set upon their own
ruin, should be abandoned?

2\. God is resolved to proceed in his judgments against them, and will
not be turned back by the prophet's prayers ([Jer
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#020)): Thus saith the Lord God, and
what he saith he will not unsay, nor can all the world gainsay it; hear
it therefore, and tremble. "Behold, my anger and my fury shall be poured
out upon this place, as the flood of waters was upon the old world or
the shower of fire and brimstone upon Sodom; since they will anger me,
let them see what will come of it." They shall soon find, (1.) That
there is no escaping this deluge of fire, either by flying from it or
fencing against it; it shall be poured out on this place, though it be a
holy place, the Lord's house. It shall reach both man and beast, like
the plagues of Egypt, and, like some of them, shall destroy the trees of
the field and the fruit of the ground, which they had designed and
prepared for Baal, and of which they had made cakes to the queen of
heaven. (2.) There is no extinguishing it: It shall burn and shall not
be quenched; prayers and tears shall then avail nothing. When his wrath
is kindled but a little, much more when it is kindled to such a degree,
there shall be no quenching it. God's wrath is that fire unquenchable
which eternity itself will not see the period of. Depart, you cursed,
into everlasting fire.

[Jeremiah 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 7:21</span></span>

God, having shown the people that the temple would not protect them
while they polluted it with their wickedness, here shows them that their
sacrifices would not atone for them, nor be accepted, while they went on
in disobedience. See with what contempt he here speaks of their
ceremonial service ([Jer 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021)). "Put
your burnt-offerings to your sacrifices; go on in them as long as you
please; add one sort of sacrifice to another; turn your burnt-offerings
(which were to be wholly burnt to the honour of God) into
peace-offerings" (which the offerer himself had a considerable share
of), "that you may eat flesh, for that is all the good you are likely to
have from your sacrifices, a good meal's meat or two; but expect not any
other benefit by them while you live at this loose rate. Keep your
sacrifices to yourselves" (so some understand it); "let them be served
up at your own table, for they are no way acceptable at God's altars."
For the opening of this,

I. He shows them that obedience was the only thing he required of them,
[Jer 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022), [Jer
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#023). He appeals to the original
contract, by which they were first formed into a people, when they were
brought out of Egypt. God made them a kingdom of priests to himself, not
that he might be regaled with their sacrifices, as the devils, whom the
heathen worshipped, which are represented as eating with pleasure the
fat of their sacrifices and drinking the wine of their drink-offerings,
[Deu 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#038). No: Will God eat the flesh
of bulls? [Psa 50:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#013). I spoke not to
your fathers concerning burnt-offerings or sacrifices, not of them at
first. The precepts of the moral law were given before the ceremonial
institutions; and those came afterwards, as trials of their obedience
and assistances to their repentance and faith. The Levitical law begins
thus: If any man of you will bring an offering, he must do so and so
([Lev 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002), [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)), as if it were intended rather to
regulate sacrifice than to require it. But that which God commanded,
which he bound them to by his supreme authority and which he insisted
upon as the condition of the covenant, was, Obey my voice; see [Exo
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#026), where this was the statute and
the ordinance by which God proved them: Hearken diligently to the voice
of the Lord thy God. The condition of their being God's peculiar people
was this ([Exo 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005)), If you will obey
my voice indeed. "Make conscience of the duties of natural religion,
observe positive institutions from a principle of obedience, and then I
will be your God and you shall be my people," which is the greatest
honour, happiness, and satisfaction, that any of the children of men are
capable of. "Let your conversation be regular, and in every thing study
to comply with the will and word of God; walk within the bounds that I
have set you, and in all the ways that I have commanded you, and then
you may assure yourselves that it shall be well with you." The demand
here is very reasonable, that we should be directed by Infinite Wisdom
to that which is fit, that he that made us should command us, and that
he should give us law who gives us our being and all the supports of it;
and the promise is very encouraging: Let God's will be your rule and his
favour shall be your felicity.

II\. He shows them that disobedience was the only thing for which he had
a quarrel with them. He would not reprove them for their sacrifices, for
the omission of them; they had been continually before him ([Psa
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#008)); with them they hoped to bribe
God, and purchase a license to go on in sin. That therefore which God
had all along laid to their charge was breaking his commandments in the
course of their conversation, while they observed them, in some
instances, in the course of their devotion, [Jer
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#024), [Jer
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#025), etc. 1. They set up their own
will in competition with the will of God: They hearkened not to God and
to his law; they never heeded that; it was to them as if it had never
been given or were of no force; they inclined not their ear to attend to
it, much less their hearts to comply with it. But they would have their
own way, would do as they chose, and not as they were bidden. Their own
counsels were their guide, and not the dictates of divine wisdom; that
shall be lawful and good with them which they think so, though the word
of God says quite contrary. The imagination of their evil heart, the
appetites and passions of it, shall be a law to them, and they will walk
in the way of it, and in the sight of their eyes. 2. If they began well,
yet they did not proceed, but soon flew off. They went backward, when
they talked of making a captain, and returning to Egypt again, and would
not go forward under God's conduct. They promised fair: All that the
Lord shall say unto us we well do; and, if they would but have kept in
that good mind, all would have been well; but, instead of going on in
the way of duty, they drew back into the way of sin, and were worse than
ever. 3. When God sent to them by word of mouth to put them in mind of
the written word, which was the business of the prophets, it was all
one; still they were disobedient. God had servants of his among them in
every age, since they came out of Egypt unto this day, some or other to
tell them of their faults and put them in mind of their duty, whom he
rose up early to send (as before, [Jer
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#013)), as men rise up early to call
servants to their work; but they were as deaf to the prophets as they
were to the law ([Jer 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#026)): Yet they
hearkened not, nor inclined their ear. This had been their way and
manner all along; they were of the same stubborn refractory disposition
with those that went before them; it had all along been the genius of
the nation, and an evil genius it was, that continually haunted them
till it ruined them at last. 4. Their practice and character were still
the same. They are worse, and not better, than their fathers. (1.)
Jeremiah can himself witness against them that they were disobedient, or
he shall soon find it so ([Jer 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#027)):
"Thou shalt speak all these words to them, shalt particularly charge
them with disobedience and obstinacy. But even that will not work upon
them: They will not hearken to thee, nor heed thee. Thou shalt go, and
call to them with all the plainness and earnestness imaginable, but they
will not answer thee; they will either give thee no answer at all or not
an obedient answer; they will not come at thy call." (2.) He must
therefore own that they deserved the character of a disobedient people,
that were ripe for destruction, and must go to them and tell them so to
their faces ([Jer 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#028)): "Say unto
them, This is a nation that obeys not the voice of the Lord their God.
They are notorious for their obstinacy; they sacrifice to the Lord as
their God, but they will not be ruled by him as their God; they will not
receive either the instruction of his word or the correction of his rod;
they will not be reclaimed or reformed by either. Truth has perished
among them; they cannot receive it; they will not submit to it nor be
governed by it. They will not speak truth; there is no believing a word
they say, for it is cut off from their mouth, and lying comes in the
room of it. They are false both to God and man."

[Jeremiah 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 7:29</span></span>

Here is, I. A loud call to weeping and mourning. Jerusalem, that had
been a joyous city, the joy of the whole earth, must now take up a
lamentation on high places ([Jer
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029)), the high places where they had
served their idols; there must they now bemoan their misery. In token
both of sorrow and slavery, Jerusalem must now cut off her hair and cast
it away; the word is peculiar to the hair of the Nazarites, which was
the badge and token of their dedication to God, and it is called their
crown. Jerusalem had been a city which was a Nazarite to God, but now
must cut off her hair, must be profaned, degraded, and separated from
God, as she had been separated to him. It is time for those that have
lost their holiness to lay aside their joy.

II\. Just cause given for this great lamentation.

1\. The sin of Jerusalem appears here very heinous, nowhere worse, or
more exceedingly sinful ([Jer 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#030)):
"The children of Judah" (God's profession people, that came forth out of
the waters of Judah, [Isa 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#001)) "have
done evil in my sight, under my eye, in my presence; they have affronted
me to my face, which very much aggravates the affront:" or, "They have
done that which they know to be evil in my sight, and in the highest
degree offensive to me." Idolatry was the sin which was above all other
sins evil in God's sight. Now here are two things charged upon them in
their idolatry, which were very provoking: (1.) That they were very
impudent in it towards God and set him at defiance: They have set their
abominations (their abominable idols and the altars erected to them) in
the house that is called by my name, in the very courts of the temple,
to pollute it (Manasseh did so, [Kg2
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#007), [Kg2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012)), as if they thought God would
connive at it, or cared not though he was ever so much displeased with
it, or as if they would reconcile heaven and hell, God and Baal. The
heart is the place which God has chosen to put his name there; if sin
have the innermost and uppermost place there, we pollute the temple of
the Lord, and therefore he resents nothing more than setting up idols in
the heart, [Eze 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#004). (2.) That they
were very barbarous in it towards their own children, [Jer
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031). They have particularly built the
high places of Tophet, where the image of Moloch was set up, in the
valley of the son of Hinnom, adjoining to Jerusalem; and there they
burnt their sons and their daughters in the fire, burnt them alive,
killed them, and killed them in the most cruel manner imaginable, to
honour or appease those idols that were devils and not gods. This was
surely the greatest instance that ever was of the power of Satan in the
children of disobedience, and of the degeneracy and corruption of the
human nature. One would willingly hope that there were not many
instances of such a barbarous idolatry; but it is amazing that there
should be any, that men could be so perfectly void of natural affection
as to do a thing so inhuman as to burn little innocent children, and
their own too, that they should be so perfectly void of natural religion
as to think it lawful to do this, nay, to think it acceptable. Surely it
was in a way of righteous judgment, because they had changed the glory
of God into the similitude of a beast, that God gave them up to such
vile affections that changed them into worse than beasts. God says of
this that it was what he commanded them not, neither cam it into his
heart, which is not meant of his not commanding them thus to worship
Moloch (this he had expressly forbidden them), but he had never
commanded that his worshippers should be at such an expense, nor put
such a force upon their natural affection, in honouring him; it never
came into his heart to have children offered to him, yet they had
forsaken his service for the service of such gods as, by commanding
this, showed themselves to be indeed enemies to mankind.

2\. The destruction of Jerusalem appears here very terrible. That speaks
misery enough in general ([Jer 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029)),
The Lord hath rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath. Sin
makes those the generation of God's wrath that had ben the generation of
his love. And God will reject and quite forsake those who have thus made
themselves vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. He will disown them
for his. "Verily, I say unto you, I know you not." And he will give them
up to the terrors of their own guilt, and leave them in those hands.
(1.) Death shall triumph over them, [Jer
7:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#032). 33. Sin reigns unto death; for
that is the wages of it, the end of those things. Tophet, the valley
adjoining to Jerusalem, shall be called the valley of slaughter, for
there multitudes shall be slain, when, in their sallies out of the city
and their attempts to escape, they fall into the hands of the besiegers.
Or it shall be called the valley of slaughtered ones, because thither
the corpses of those that are slain shall be brought to be buried, all
other burying places being full; and there they shall bury until there
be no more place to make a grave. This intimates the multitude of those
that shall die by the sword, pestilence, and famine. Death shall ride on
prosperously, with dreadful pomp and power, conquering and to conquer.
The slain of the Lord shall be many. This valley of Tophet was a place
where the citizens of Jerusalem walked to take the air; but it shall now
be spoiled for that use, for it shall be so full of graves that there
shall be no walking there, because of the danger of contracting a
ceremonial pollution by the touch of a grave. There it was that they
sacrificed some of their children, and dedicated others to Moloch, and
there they should fall as victims to divine justice. Tophet had formerly
been the burying place, or burning place, of the dead bodies of the
besiegers, when the Assyrian army was routed by an angel; and for this
it was ordained of old, [Isa 30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033).
But they having forgotten this mercy, and made it the place of their
sin, God will now turn it into a burying place for the besieged. In
allusion to this valley, hell is in the New Testament called Gehenna -
the valley of Hinnom, for there were buried both the invading Assyrians
and the revolting Jews; so hell is a receptacle after death both for
infidels and hypocrites, the open enemies of God's church and its
treacherous friends; it is the congregation of the dead; it is prepared
for the generation of God's wrath. But so great shall that slaughter be
that even the spacious valley of Tophet shall not be able to contain the
slain; and at length there shall not be enough left alive to bury the
dead, so that the carcases of the people shall be meat for the birds and
beasts of prey, that shall feed upon them like carrion, and none shall
have the concern or courage to frighten them away, as Rizpah did from
the dead bodies of Saul's sons, 2 Sa. 28:26, Thy carcase shall be meat
to the fowls and beasts, and no man shall drive them away. Thus do the
law and the prophets agree, and the execution with both. The decent
burying of the dead is a piece of humanity, in remembrance of what the
dead body has been - the tabernacle of a reasonable soul. Nay, it is a
piece of divinity, in expectation of what the dead body shall be at the
resurrection. The want of it has sometimes been an instance of the rage
of men against God's witnesses, [Rev
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#009). Here it is threatened as an
instance of the wrath of God against his enemies, and is an intimation
that evil pursues sinners even after death. (2.) Joy shall depart from
them ([Jer 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#034)): Then will I cause to
cease the voice of mirth. God had called by his prophets, and by less
judgments, to weeping and mourning; but they walked contrary to him, and
would hear of nothing but joy and gladness, [Isa
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#012), [Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013). And what came of it? Now God
called to lamentation ([Jer 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029)), and
he made his call effectual, leaving them neither cause nor heart for joy
and gladness. Those that will not weep shall weep; those that will not
by the grace of God be cured of their vain mirth shall by the justice of
God be deprived of all mirth; for when God judges he will overcome. It
is threatened here that there shall be nothing to rejoice in. There
shall be none of the joy of weddings; no mirth, for there shall be no
marriages. The comforts of life shall be abandoned, and all care to keep
up mankind upon earth cast off; there shall be none of the voice of the
bridegroom and the bride, no music, no nuptial songs. Nor shall there be
any more of the joy of the harvest, for the land shall be desolate,
uncultivated and unimproved. Both the cities of Judah and the streets of
Jerusalem shall look thus melancholy; and when they thus look about
them, and see no cause to rejoice, no marvel if they retire into
themselves and find no heart to rejoice. Note, God can soon mar the
mirth of the most jovial, and make it to cease, which is a reason why we
should always rejoice with trembling, be merry and wise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 8](jer008)

</div>
