<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer043)  [Next](jer045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 44:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. An awakening sermon which Jeremiah preaches
to the Jews in Egypt, to reprove them for their idolatry,
notwithstanding the warnings given them both by the word and the rod of
God and to threaten the judgments of God against them for it ([Jer
44:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001)). II. The impudent and impious
contempt which the people put upon this admonition, and their declared
resolution to persist in their idolatries notwithstanding, in despite of
God and Jeremiah ([Jer 44:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#015)). III.
The sentence passed upon them for their obstinacy, that they should all
be cut off and perish in Egypt except a very small number; and, as a
sign or earnest of it, the king of Egypt should shortly fall into the
hands of the king of Babylon and be unable any longer to protect them
([Jer 44:20-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#020)).

[Jeremiah 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 44:1</span></span>

The Jews in Egypt were now dispersed into various parts of the country,
into Migdol, and Noph, and other places, and Jeremiah was sent on an
errand from God to them, which he delivered either when he had the most
of them together in Pathros ([Jer
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#015)) or going about from place to
place preaching to this purport. He delivered this message in the name
of the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, and in it,

I. God puts them in mind of the desolations of Judah and Jerusalem,
which, though the captives by the rivers of Babylon were daily mindful
of ([Psa 137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001)), the fugitives in the
cities of Egypt seem to have forgotten and needed to be put in mind of,
though, one would have thought, they had not been so long out of sight
as to become out of mind ([Jer 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#002)):
You have seen what a deplorable condition Judah and Jerusalem are
brought into; now will you consider whence those desolations came? From
the wrath of God; it was his fury and his anger that kindled the fire
which made Jerusalem and the cities of Judah waste and desolate ([Jer
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#006)); whoever were the instruments of
the destruction, they were but instruments: it was a destruction from
the Almighty.

II\. He puts them in mind of the sins that brought those desolations
upon Judah and Jerusalem. It was for their wickedness. It was this that
provoked God to anger, and especially their idolatry, their serving
other gods ([Jer 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#003)) and giving that
honour to counterfeit deities, the creatures of their own fancy and the
work of their own hands, which should have been given to the true God
only. They forsook the God who was known among them, and whose name was
great, for gods that they knew not, upstart deities, whose original was
obscure and not worth taking notice of: "Neither they nor you, nor your
fathers, could give any rational account why the God of Israel was
exchanged for such impostors." They knew not that they were gods; nay,
they could not but know that they were no gods.

III\. He puts them in mind of the frequent and fair warnings he had
given them by his word not to serve other gods, the contempt of which
warnings was a great aggravation of their idolatry, [Jer
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#004). The prophets were sent with a
great deal of care to call to them, saying, Oh! do not this abominable
thing that I hate. It becomes us to speak of sin with the utmost dread
and detestation as an abominable thing; it is certainly so, for it is
that which God hates, and we are sure that hid judgment is according to
truth. Call it grievous, call it odious, that we may by all means
possible put ourselves and others out of love with it. It becomes us to
give warning of the danger of sin, and the fatal consequences of it,
with all seriousness and earnestness: "Oh! do not do it. If you love
God, do not, for it is provoking to him; if you love your own souls do
not, for it is destructive to them." Let conscience do this for us in an
hour of temptation, when we are ready to yield. O take heed! do not this
abominable thing which the Lord hates; for, if God hates it, though
shouldst hate it. But did they regard what God said to them? No: "They
hearkened not, nor inclined their ear ([Jer
44:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#005)); they still persisted in their
idolatries; and you see what came of it, therefore God's anger was
poured out upon them, as at this day. Now this was intended for warning
to you, who have not only heard the judgments of God's mouth, as they
did, but have likewise seen the judgments of his hand, by which you
should be startled and awakened, for they were inflicted in terrorem,
that others might hear and fear and do no more as they did, lest they
should fare as they fared."

IV\. He reproves them for, and upbraids them with, their continued
idolatries, now that they had come into Egypt ([Jer
44:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#008)): You burn incense to other gods
in the land of Egypt. Therefore God forbade them to go into Egypt,
because he knew it would be a snare to them. Those whom God sent into
the land of the Chaldeans, though that was an idolatrous country, were
there, by the power of God's grace, weaned from idolatry; but those who
went against God's mind into the land of the Egyptians were there, by
the power of their own corruptions, more wedded than ever to their
idolatries; for, when we thrust ourselves without cause or call into
places of temptation, it is just with God to leave us to ourselves. In
doing this, 1. They did a great deal of injury to themselves and their
families: "You commit this great evil against your souls ([Jer
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#007)), you wrong them, you deceive
them with that which is false, you destroy them, for it will be fatal to
them." Note, In sinning against God we sin against our own souls. "It is
the ready way to cut yourselves off from all comfort and hope ([Jer
44:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#008)), to cut off your name and
honour; so that you will, both by your sin and by your misery, become a
curse and a reproach among all nations. It will become a proverb, As
wretched as a Jew. It is the ready way to cut off from you all your
relations, all that you shave have joy of and have your families built
up in, man and woman, child and suckling, so that Judah shall be a land
lost for want of heirs." 2. They filled up the measure of the iniquity
of their fathers, and, as if that had been too little for them, added to
it ([Jer 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#009)): "Have you forgotten
the wickedness of those who are gone before you, that you are not
humbled for it as you ought to be, and afraid of the consequences of
it?" Have you forgotten the punishments of your fathers? so some read
it. "Do you not know how dear their idolatry cost them? And yet dare you
continue in that vain conversation received by tradition from you
fathers, though you received the curse with it?" He reminds them of the
sins and punishments of the kings of Judah, who, great as they were,
escaped not the judgments of God for their idolatry; yea, and they
should have taken warning by the wickedness of their wives, who had
seduced them to idolatry. In the original it is, And of his wives,
which, Dr. Lightfoot thinks, tacitly reflects upon Solomon's wives,
particularly his Egyptian wives, to whom the idolatry of the kings of
Judah owed its original. "Have you forgotten this, and what came of it,
that you dare venture upon the same wicked courses?" See [Neh
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#018), [Neh
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#026). "Nay, to come to your own
times, Have you forgotten your own wickedness and the wickedness of your
wives, when you lived in prosperity in Jerusalem, and what ruin it
brought upon you? But, alas! to what purpose do I speak to them?" (says
God to the prophet, [Jer 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#010)) "they
are not humbled unto this day, by all the humbling providences that they
have been under. They have not feared, nor walked in my law." Note,
Those that walk not in the law of God do thereby show that they are
destitute of the fear of God.

V. He threatens their utter ruin for their persisting in their idolatry
now that they were in Egypt. Judgment is given against them, as before
([Jer 42:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#022)), that they shall perish
in Egypt; the decree has gone forth, and shall not be called back. They
set their faces to go into the land of Egypt ([Jer
44:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#012)), were resolute in their purpose
against God, and now God is resolute in his purpose against them: I will
set my face to cut off all Judah, [Jer
44:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#011). Those that think not only to
affront, but to confront, God Almighty, will find themselves outfaced;
for the face of the Lord is against those that do evil, [Psa
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016). It is here threatened
concerning these idolatrous Jews in Egypt, 1. That they shall all be
consumed, without exception; no degree nor order among them shall
escape: They shall fall, from the least to the greatest ([Jer
44:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#012)), high and low, rich and poor.
2. That they shall be consumed by the very same judgments which God made
use of for the punishment of Jerusalem, the sword, famine, and
pestilence, [Jer 44:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#012), [Jer
44:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#013). They shall not be wasted by
natural deaths, as Israel in the wilderness, but by these sore
judgments, which, by flying into Egypt, they thought to get out of the
reach of. 3. That none (except a very few that will narrowly escape)
shall ever return to the land of Judah again, [Jer
44:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#014). They thought, being nearer,
that they stood fairer for a return to their own land than those that
were carried to Babylon; yet those shall return, and these shall not;
for the way in which God has promised us any comfort is much surer than
that in which we have projected it for ourselves. Observe, Those that
are fretful and discontented will be uneasy and fond of change wherever
they are. The Israelites, when they were in the land of Judah, desired
to go into Egypt ([Jer 42:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#022)), but
when they were in Egypt they desired to return to the land of Judah
again; they lifted up their soul to it (so it is in the margin), which
denotes an earnest desire. But, because they would not dwell there when
God commanded it, they shall not dwell they were they desire it. If we
walk contrary to God, he will walk contrary to us. How can those expect
to be well off who would not know when they were so, though God himself
told them?

[Jeremiah 44:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 44:15</span></span>

We have here the people's obstinate refusal to submit to the power of
the word of God in the mouth of Jeremiah. We have scarcely such an
instance of downright daring contradiction to God himself as this, or
such an avowed rebellion of the carnal mind. Observe,

I. The persons who thus set God and his judgments at defiance; it was
not some one that was thus obstinate, but the generality of the Jews;
and they were such as knew either themselves or their wives to be guilty
of the idolatry Jeremiah had reproved, [Jer
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#015). We find, 1. That the women had
been more guilty of idolatry and superstition than the men, not because
the men stuck closer to the true God and the true religion than the
women, but, I fear, because they were generally atheists, and were for
no God and no religion at all, and therefore could easily allow their
wives to be of a false religion, and to worship false gods. 2. That it
was consciousness of guilt that made them impatient of reproof: They
knew that their wives had burnt incense to other gods, and that they had
countenanced them in it, and the women that stood by knew that they had
joined with them in their idolatrous usages; so that what Jeremiah said
touched them in a sore place, which made them kick against the pricks,
as children of Belial, that will not bear the yoke.

II\. The reply which these persons made to Jeremiah, and in him to God
himself; it is in effect the same with theirs who had the impudence to
say to the Almighty, Depart from us; we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways.

1\. They declare their resolution not to do as God commanded them, but
what they themselves had a mind to do; that is, they would go on to
worship the moon, here called the queen of heaven; yet some understand
it of the sun, which was much worshipped in Egypt ([Jer
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#013)) and had been so at Jerusalem
([Kg2 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#011)), and they say that the
Hebrew word for the sun being feminine it may not unfitly be called the
queen of heaven. And others understand it of all the host of heaven, or
the frame of heaven, the whole machine, [Jer
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018). These daring sinners do not now
go about to make excuses for their refusal to obey, nor suggest that
Jeremiah spoke from himself and not from God (as before, [Jer
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#002)), but they own that he spoke to
them in the name of the Lord, and yet tell him flatly, in so many words,
"We will not hearken unto thee; we will do that which is forbidden and
run the hazard of that which is threatened." Note, Those that live in
disobedience to God commonly grow worse and worse, and the heart is more
and more hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. Here is the genuine
language of the rebellious heart: We will certainly do whatsoever thing
goes forth out of our own mouth, let God and his prophets say what they
please to the contrary. What they said many think who yet have not
arrived at such a degree of impudence as to speak it out. It is that
which the young man would be at in the days of his youth; he would walk
in the way of his heart and the sight of his eyes, and would have and do
every thing he has a mind to, [Ecc
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#009).

2\. They give some sort of reasons for their resolution; for the most
absurd and unreasonably wicked men will have something to say for
themselves, till the day comes when every mouth shall be stopped.

(1.) They plead many of those things which the advocates for Rome make
the marks of a true church, and not only justify but magnify themselves
with; and these Jews have as much right to them as the Romanists have.
\[1.\] They plead antiquity: We are resolved to burn incense to the
queen of heaven, for our fathers did so; it is a practice that pleads
prescription; and why should we pretend to be wiser than our fathers?
\[2.\] They plead authority. Those that had power practised it
themselves and prescribed it to others: Our kings and our princes did
it, whom God set over us, and who were of the seed of David. \[3.\] They
plead unity. It was not here and there one that did it, but we, we all
with one consent, we that are a great multitude ([Jer
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#015)), we did it. \[4.\] They plead
universality. It was not done here and there, but in the cities of
Judah. \[5.\] They plead visibility. It was not done in a corner, in
dark and shady groves only, but in the streets, openly and publicly.
\[6.\] They plead that it was the practice of the mother-church, the
holy see; it was not now learned first in Egypt, but it had been done in
Jerusalem. \[7.\] They plead prosperity: They had we plenty of bread,
and of all good things; we were well and saw no evil. All the former
pleas, I fear, were too true in fact; God's witnesses against their
idolatry were few and hid; Elijah though that he was left alone: and
this last might perhaps be true as to some particular persons, but, as
to their nation, they were still under rebukes for their rebellions, and
there was no peace to those that went out or came in, [Ch2
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#005). But, supposing all to be true,
yet this does not at all excuse them from idolatry; it is the law of God
that we must be ruled and judged by, hot the practice of men.

(2.) They suggest that the judgments they had of late been under were
brought upon them for leaving off to burn incense to the queen of
heaven, [Jer 44:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#018). So perversely did
they misconstrue providence, though God, by his prophets, had so often
explained it to them, and the thing itself spoke the direct contrary.
Since we forsook our idolatries we have wanted all things, and have been
consumed by the sword, the true reason of which was because they still
retained their idols in their heart and an affection to their old sins;
but they would have it thought that it was because they had forsaken the
acts of sin. Thus the afflictions which should have been for their
welfare, to separate between them and their sins, being misinterpreted
did but confirm them in their sins. Thus, in the first ages of
Christianity, when God chastised the nations by any public calamities
for opposing the Christians and persecuting them, they put a contrary
sense upon the calamities, as if they were sent to punish them for
conniving at the Christians and tolerating them, and cried, Christianos
ad leones - Throw the Christians to the lions. Yet, if it had been true,
as they said here, that since they returned to the service of the true
God, the God of Israel, they had been in want and trouble, was that a
reason why they should revolt from him again? That was as much as to say
that they served not him, but their own bellies. Those who know God, and
put their trust in him, will serve him, though he starve them, though he
slay them, though they never see a good day with him in this world,
being well assured that they shall not lose by him in the end.

(3.) They plead that, though the women were most forward and active in
their idolatries, yet they did it with the consent and approbation of
their husbands; the women were busy to make cakes for meat-offerings to
the queen of heaven and to prepare and pour out the drink-offerings,
[Jer 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#019). We found, before, that
this was their work, [Jer 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018). "But
did we do it without our husbands, privately and unknown to them, so as
to give them occasion to be jealous of us? No; the fathers kindled the
fire while the women kneaded the dough; the men that were our heads,
whom we were bound to learn of and to be obedient to, taught us to do it
by their example." Note, It is sad when those who are in the nearest
relation to each other, who should quicken each other to that which is
good and so help one another to heaven, harden each other in sin and so
ripen one another for hell. Some understand this as spoken by the
husbands ([Jer 44:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#015)), who plead that
they did not do it without their men, that is, without their elders and
rulers, their great men, and men in authority; but, because the making
of the cakes and the pouring out of the drink-offerings are expressly
spoken of as the women's work ([Jer
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018)), it seems rather to be
understood as their plea: but it was a frivolous plea. What would it
avail them to be able to say that it was according to their husbands'
mind, when they knew that it was contrary to their God's mind?

[Jeremiah 44:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 44:20</span></span>

Daring sinners may speak many a bold word and many a big word, but,
after all, God will have the last word; for he will be justified when he
speaks, and all flesh, even the proudest, shall be silent before him.
Prophets may be run down, but God cannot; nay, here the prophet would
not.

I. Jeremiah has something to say to them from himself, which he could
say without a spirit of prophecy, and that was to rectify their mistake
(a wilful mistake it was) concerning the calamities they had been under
and the true intent and meaning of them. They said that these miseries
came upon them because they had now left off burning incense to the
queen of heaven. "No," says he, "it was because you had formerly done
it, not because you had now left it off." When they gave him that
answer, he immediately replied ([Jer
44:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#020)) that the incense which they and
their fathers had burnt to other gods did indeed go unpunished a great
while, for God was long-suffering towards them, and during the day of
his patience it was perhaps, as they said, well with them, and they saw
no evil; but at length they grew so provoking that the Lord could no
longer bear ([Jer 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#022)), but began a
controversy with them, whereupon some of them did a little reform; their
sins left them, for so it might be said, rather than that they left
their sins. But their old guilt being still upon the score, and their
corrupt inclinations still the same, God remembered against them the
idolatries of their fathers, their kings, and their princes, in the
streets of Jerusalem, which they, instead of being ashamed of, gloried
in as a justification of them in their idolatries; they all came into
his mind ([Jer 44:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#021)), all the
abominations which they had committed ([Jer
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#022)) and all their disobedience to
the voice of the Lord ([Jer 44:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#023)),
all were brought to account; and therefore, to punish them for these, is
their land a desolation and a curse, as at this day ([Jer
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#022)); therefore, not for their late
reformation, but for their old transgressions, has all this evil
happened to them, as at this day, [Jer
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#023). Note, The right understanding
of the cause of our troubles, one would think, should go far towards the
cure of our sins. Whatever evil comes upon us, it is because we have
sinned against the Lord, and should therefore stand in awe and sin not.

II\. Jeremiah has something to say to them, to the women particularly,
from the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, They have given their answer;
now let them hear God's reply, [Jer
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#024). Judah, that dwells in the land
of Egypt, has God speaking to them, even there; that is their privilege.
Let them observe what he says; that is their duty, [Jer
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#026). Now God, in his reply, tells
them plainly,

1\. That, since they were fully determined to persist in their idolatry,
he was fully determined to proceed in his controversy with them; if they
would go on to provoke him, he would go on to punish them, and see which
would get the better at last. God repeats what they had said ([Jer
44:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#025)): "You and your wives are agreed
in this obstinacy; you have spoken with your mouths and fulfilled with
your hands; you have said it, and you stand to it, have said it and go
on to do accordingly, We will surely perform our vows that we have
vowed, to burn incense to the queen of heaven," as if, though it were a
sin, yet their having vowed to do it were sufficient to justify them in
the doing of it; whereas no man can by his vow make that lawful to
himself, much less duty, which God has already made sin. "Well" (says
God), "you will accomplish, you will perform, your wicked vows: now hear
what is my vow, what I have sworn by my great name;" and, if the Lord
hath sworn, he will not repent, since they have sworn and will not
repent. With the froward he will show himself froward, [Psa
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026). (1.) He had sworn that what
little remains of religion there were among them should be lost, [Jer
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#026). Though they joined with the
Egyptians in their idolatries, yet they continued upon many occasions to
make mention of the name of Jehovah, particularly in their solemn oaths;
they said, Jehovah liveth, he is the living God, so they owned him to
be, though they worshipped dead idols; they swear, The Lord liveth ([Jer
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#002)), but I fear they retained this
form of swearing more in honour of their nation than of their God. But
God declares that his name shall no more be thus named by any man of
Judah in all the land of Egypt; that is, there shall be no Jews
remaining to use this dialect of their country, or, if there be, they
shall have forgotten it and shall learn to swear, as the Egyptians do,
by the life of Pharaoh, not of Jehovah. Note, Those are very miserable
whom God has so far left to themselves that they have quite forgotten
their religion and lost all the remains of their good education. Or this
may intimate that God would take it as an affront to him and would
resent it accordingly, if they did make mention of his name and profess
any relation to him. (2.) He hath sworn that what little remnant of
people there was there should all be consumed ([Jer
44:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#027)): I will watch over them for
evil; no opportunity shall be let slip to bring some judgment upon them,
until there be an end of them and they be rooted out. Note, To those
whom God finds impenitent sinners he will be found an implacable Judge.
And, when it comes to this, they shall know ([Jer
44:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#028)) whose word shall stand, mind or
theirs. They said that they should recover themselves when they returned
to worship the queen of heaven; God said they should ruin themselves;
and now the event will show which was in the right. The contest between
God and sinners is whose word shall stand, whose will shall be done, and
who shall get the better. Sinners say that they shall have peace though
they go on; God says they shall have no peace. But when God judges he
will overcome; God's word shall stand, and not the sinner's.

2\. He tells them that a very few of them should escape the sword, and
in process of time return into the land of Judah, a small number ([Jer
44:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#028)), next to none, in comparison
with the great numbers that should return out of the land of the
Chaldeans. This seems designed to upbraid those who boasted of their
numbers that concurred in sin; there were none to speak of that did not
join in idolatry: "Well," says God, "and there shall be as few that
shall escape the sword and famine."

3\. He gives them a sign that all these threatenings shall be
accomplished in their season, that they shall be consumed here in Egypt
and shall quite perish: Pharaoh-hophra, the present king of Egypt, shall
be delivered into the hand of his enemies that seek his life - of his
own rebellious subjects (so some) under Amasis, who usurped his throne -
of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon (so others), who invaded his kingdom;
the former is related by Herodotus, the latter by Josephus. It is likely
that this Pharaoh had tempted the Jews to idolatry by promises of his
favour; however, they depended upon him for his protection, and it would
be more than a presage of their ruin, it would be a step towards it, if
he were gone. They expected more from him than from Zedekiah king of
Judah; he was a more potent and politic prince. "But," says God, "I will
give him into the hand of his enemies, as I gave Zedekiah." Note, Those
creature-comforts and confidences that we promise ourselves most from
may fail us as soon as those that we promise ourselves least from, for
they are all what God makes them, not what we fancy them.

The sacred history records not the accomplishment of this prophecy, but
its silence is sufficient; we hear no more of these Jews in Egypt, and
therefore conclude them, according to this prediction, lost there; for
no word of God shall fall to the ground.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 45](jer045)

</div>
