<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer011)  [Next](jer013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 12:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. The prophet's humble complaint to God of the
success that wicked people had in their wicked practices ([Jer
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001), [Jer
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#002)) and his appeal to God concerning
his own integrity ([Jer 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#003)), with a
prayer that God would, for the sake of the public, bring the wickedness
of the wicked to an end ([Jer 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#003),
[Jer 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#004)). II. God's rebuke to the
prophet for his uneasiness at his present troubles, bidding him prepare
for greater ([Jer 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005), [Jer
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#006)). III. A sad lamentation of the
present deplorable state of the Israel of God ([Jer
12:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)). IV. An intimation of mercy
to God's people, in a denunciation of wrath against their neighbours
that helped forward their affliction, that they should be plucked out;
but with a promise that if they would at last join themselves with the
people of God they should come in sharers with them in their privileges
([Jer 12:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014)).

[Jeremiah 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 12:1</span></span>

The prophet doubts not but it would be of use to others to know what had
passed between God and his soul, what temptations he had been assaulted
with and how he had got over them; and therefore he here tells us,

I. What liberty he humbly took, and was graciously allowed him, to
reason with God concerning his judgments, [Jer
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001). He is about to plead with God,
not to quarrel with him, or find fault with his proceedings, but to
enquire into the meaning of them, that he might more and more see reason
to be satisfied in them, and might have wherewith to answer both his own
and others' objections against them. The works of the Lord, and the
reasons of them, are sought out even of those that have pleasure
therein. [Psa 111:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#002). We may not strive
with our Maker, but we may reason with him. The prophet lays down a
truth of unquestionable certainty, which he resolves to abide by in
managing this argument: Righteous art thou, O Lord! when I plead with
thee. Thus he arms himself against the temptation wherewith he was
assaulted, to envy the prosperity of the wicked, before he entered into
a parley with it. Note, When we are most in the dark concerning the
meaning of God's dispensations we must still resolve to keep up right
thoughts of God, and must be confident of this, that he never did, nor
ever will do, the least wrong to any of his creatures; even when his
judgments are unsearchable as a great deep, and altogether
unaccountable, yet his righteousness is as conspicuous and immovable as
the great mountains, [Psa 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006). Though
sometimes clouds and darkness are round about him, yet justice and
judgment are always the habitation of his throne, [Psa
97:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002). When we find it hard to
understand particular providences we must have recourse to general
truths as our first principles, and abide by them; however dark the
providence may be, the Lord is righteous; see [Psa
73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001). And we must acknowledge it to
him, as the prophet here, even when we plead with him, as those that
have no thoughts of contending but of learning, being fully assured that
he will be justified when he speaks. Note, However we may see cause for
our own information to plead with God, yet it becomes us to own that,
whatever he says or does, he is in the right.

II\. What it was in the dispensations of divine Providence that he
stumbled at and that he thought would bear a debate. It was that which
has been a temptation to many wise and good men, and such a one as they
have with difficulty got over. They see the designs and projects of
wicked people successful: The way of the wicked prospers; they compass
their malicious designs and gain their point. They see their affairs and
concerns in a good posture: They are happy, happy as the world can make
them, though they deal treacherously, very treacherously, both with God
and man. Hypocrites are chiefly meant (as appears, [Jer
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#002)), who dissemble in their good
professions, and depart from their good beginnings and good promises,
and in both they deal treacherously, very treacherously. It has been
said that men cannot expect to prosper who are unjust and dishonest in
their dealings; but these deal treacherously, and yet they are happy.
The prophet shows ([Jer 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#002)) both
their prosperity and their abuse of their prosperity. 1. God had been
very indulgent to them and they were got beforehand in the world: "They
are planted in a good land, a land flowing with milk and honey, and thou
hast planted them! nay, thou didst cast out the heathen to plant them,"
[Psa 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#002), [Psa
80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008). Many a tree is planted that yet
never grows nor comes to any thing; but they have taken root; their
prosperity seems to be confirmed and settled. They take root in the
earth, for there they fix themselves, and thence they draw the sap of
all their satisfaction. Many trees however take root which yet never
come on; but these grow, yea they bring forth fruit; their families are
built up, they live high, and spend at a great rate; and all this was
owing to the benignity of the divine Providence, which smiled upon them,
[Psa 73:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#007). 2. Thus God had favoured
them, though they had dealt treacherously with him: Thou art near in
their mouth and far from their reins. This was no uncharitable censure,
for he spoke by the Spirit of prophecy, without which it is not safe to
charge men with hypocrisy whose appearances are plausible. Observe, (1.)
Thought they cared not for thinking of God, nor had any sincere
affection to him, yet they could easily persuade themselves to speak of
him frequently and with an air of seriousness. Piety from the teeth
outward is no difficult thing. Many speak the language of Israel that
are not Israelites indeed. (2.) Though they had on all occasions the
name of God ready in their mouth, and accustomed themselves to those
forms of speech that savoured of piety, yet they could not persuade
themselves to keep up the fear of God in their hearts. The form of
godliness should engage us to keep up the power of it; but with them it
did not do so.

III\. What comfort he had in appealing to God concerning his own
integrity ([Jer 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#003)): But thou, O
Lord! knowest me. Probably the wicked men he complains of were forward
to reproach and censure him ([Jer
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#018)), in reference to which this was
his comfort, that God was a witness of his integrity. God knew he was
not such a one as they were (who had God near in their mouths, but far
from their reins), nor such a one as they took him to be, and
represented him, a deceiver and a false prophet; those that thus abused
him did not know him, [Co1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008). "But
thou, O Lord! knowest me, though they think me not worth their notice."
1. Observe what the matter is concerning which he appeals to God: Thou
knowest my heart towards thee. Note, We are as our hearts are, and our
hearts are good or bad according as they are, or are not, towards God;
and this is that therefore concerning which we should examine ourselves,
that we may approve ourselves to God. 2. The cognizance to which he
appeals: "Thou knowest me better than I know myself, not by hearsay or
report, for thou hast seen me, not with a transient glance, but thou
hast tried my heart." God's knowledge of us is as clear and exact and
certain as if he had made the most strict scrutiny. Note, The God with
whom we have to do perfectly knows how our hearts are towards him. He
knows both the guile of the hypocrite and the sincerity of the upright.

IV\. He prays that God would turn his hand against these wicked people,
and not suffer them to prosper always, though they had prospered long:
"Let some judgment come to pull them out of this fat pasture as sheep
for the slaughter, that it may appear their long prosperity was but like
the feeding of lambs in a large place, to prepare them for the day of
slaughter," [Hos 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#016). God suffered
them to prosper that by their pride and luxury they might fill up the
measure of their iniquity and so be ripened for destruction; and
therefore he thinks it a piece of necessary justice that they should
fall into mischief themselves, because they had done so much mischief to
others, that they should be pulled out of their land, because they had
brought ruin upon the land, and the longer they continued in it the more
hurt they did, as the plagues of their generation ([Jer
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#004)): "How long shall the land mourn.
(as it does under the judgments of God inflicted upon it) for the
wickedness of those that dwell therein? Lord, shall those prosper
themselves that ruin all about them?" 1. See here what the judgment was
which the land was now groaning under: The herbs of every field wither
(the grass is burnt up and all the products of the earth fail), and then
it follows of course, the beasts are consumed, and the birds, [Kg1
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#005). This was the effect of a long
drought, or want of rain, which happened, as it should seem, at the
latter end of Josiah's reign and the beginning of Jehoiakim's; it is
mentioned [Jer 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003), [Jer
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#013), [Jer
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#010), [Jer
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#012), and more fully afterwards, ch.
14. If they would have been brought to repentance by this less judgment,
the greater would have been prevented. Now why was it that this fruitful
land was turned into barrenness, but for the wickedness of those that
dwelt therein? [Psa 107:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#034). Therefore
the prophet prays that these wicked people might die for their own sin,
and that the whole nation might not suffer for it. 2. See here what was
the language of their wickedness: They said, He shall not see our last
end, either, (1.) God himself shall not. Atheism is the root of
hypocrisy. God is far from their reins, though near in their mouth,
because they say, How doth God know? [Psa
73:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#011); [Job
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#013). He knows not what way we take
nor what it will end in. Or, (2.) Jeremiah shall not see our last end;
whatever he pretends, when he asks us what shall be in the end hereof he
cannot himself foresee it. They look upon him as a false prophet. Or,
"whatever it is, he shall not live to see it, for we will be the death
of him," [Jer 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#021). Note, \[1.\]
Men's setting their latter end at a great distance, or looking upon it
as uncertain, is at the bottom of all their wickedness, [Lam
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#009). \[2.\] The whole creation groans
under the burden of the sin of man, [Rom
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022). It is for this that the earth
mourns (so it may be read); cursed is the ground for thy sake.

V. He acquaints us with the answer God gave to those complaints of his,
[Jer 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005), [Jer
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#006). We often find the prophets
admonished, whose business it was to admonish others, as [Isa
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#011). Ministers have lessons to learn
as well as lessons to teach, and must themselves hear God's voice and
preach to themselves. Jeremiah complained much of the wickedness of the
men of Anathoth, and that, notwithstanding that, they prospered. Now,
this seems to be an answer to that complaint. 1. It is allowed that he
had cause to complain ([Jer 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#006)):
"Thy brethren, the priests of Anathoth, who are of the house of thy
father, who ought to have protected thee and pretended to do so, even
they have dealt treacherously with thee, have been false to thee, and,
under colour of friendship, have designedly done thee all the mischief
they could; they have called a multitude after thee, raised the mob upon
thee, to whom they have endeavoured, by all arts possible, to render
thee despicable or odious, while at the same time they pretended that
they had no design to persecute thee nor to deprive thee of thy liberty.
They are indeed such as thou canst not believe, though they speak fair
words to thee. They seem to be thy friends, but are really thy enemies."
Note, God's faithful servants must not think it at all strange if their
foes be those of their own house ([Mat
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#036)), and if those they expect
kindness from prove such as they can put no confidence in, [Mic
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#005). 2. Yet he is told that he carried
the matter too far. (1.) He laid the unkindness of his countrymen too
much to heart. They wearied him, because it was in a land of peace
wherein he trusted, [Jer 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005). It was
very grievous to him to be thus hated and abused by his own kindred. He
was disturbed in his mind by it; his spirit was sunk and overwhelmed
with it, so that he was in great agitation and distress about it. Nay,
he was discouraged in his work by it, began to be weary of prophesying,
and to think of giving it up. (2.) He did not consider that this was but
the beginning of his sorrow, and that he had sorer trials yet before
him; and, whereas he should endeavour by a patient bearing of this
trouble to prepare himself for greater, by his uneasiness under this he
did but unfit himself for what further lay before him: If thou hast run
with the footmen and they have wearied thee, and run thee quite out of
breath, then how wilt thou contend with horses? If the injuries done him
by the men of Anathoth made such an impression upon him, what would he
do when the princes and chief priests at Jerusalem should set upon him
with their power, as they did afterwards? [Jer
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#002); [Jer
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#002). If he was so soon tired in a
land of peace, where there was little noise or peril, what would he do
in the swellings of Jordan, when that overflows all its banks and
frightens even lions out of their thickets? [Jer
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019). Note, \[1.\] While we are in
this world we must expect troubles, and difficulties. Our life is a
race, a warfare; we are in danger of being run down. \[2.\] God's usual
method being to begin with smaller trials, it is our wisdom to expect
greater than any we have yet met with. We may be called out to contend
with horsemen, and the sons of Anak may perhaps be reserved for the last
encounter. \[3.\] It highly concerns us to prepare for such trials and
to consider what we should do in them. How shall we preserve our
integrity and peace when we come to the swellings of Jordan? \[4.\] In
order to our preparation for further and greater trials, we are
concerned to approve ourselves well in present smaller trials, to keep
up our spirits, keep hold of the promise, keep in our way, with our eye
upon the prize, so run that we may obtain it. Some good interpreters
understand this as spoken to the people, who were very secure and
fearless of the threatened judgments. If they have been so humbled and
impoverished by smaller calamities, so wasted by the Assyrians, - if the
Ammonites and Moabites, who were their brethren, and with whom they were
in league, proved false to them (as undoubtedly they would), - then how
would they be able to deal with such a powerful adversary as the
Chaldeans would be? How would they bear up their head against that
invasion which should come like the swelling of Jordan?

[Jeremiah 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 12:7</span></span>

The people of the Jews are here marked for ruin.

I. God is here brought in falling out with them and leaving them
desolate; and they could never have been undone if they had not provoked
God to desert them. It is a terrible word that God here says ([Jer
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)): I have forsaken my house - the
temple, which had been his palace; they had polluted it, and so forced
him out of it: I have left my heritage, and will look after it no more.
His people that he has taken such delight in, and care of, are now
thrown out of his protection. They had been the dearly beloved of his
soul, precious in his sight and honorable above any people, which is
mentioned to aggravate their sin in returning him hatred for his love
and their misery in throwing themselves out of the favour of one that
had such a kindness for them, and to justify God in his dealings with
them. He sought not occasion against them, but, if they would have
conducted themselves with any tolerable propriety, he would have made
the best of them, for they were the beloved of his soul; but they had
conducted themselves so that they had provoked him to give them into the
hand of their enemies, to leave them unguarded, an easy prey to those
that bore them ill-will. But what was the quarrel God had with a people
that had been so long dear to him? Why, truly, they had degenerated. 1.
They had become like beasts of prey, which nobody loves, but every body
avoids and gets as far off from as he can ([Jer
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#008)): My heritage is unto me as a
lion in the forest. Their sins cry to heaven for vengeance as loud as a
lion roars. Nay, they cry out against God in the threatenings and
slaughter which they breathe against his prophets that speak to them in
his name; and what is said and done against them God takes as said and
done against himself. They blaspheme his name, oppose his authority, and
bid defiance to his justice, and so cry out against him as a lion in the
forest. Those that were the sheep of God's pasture had become barbarous
and ravenous, and as ungovernable as lions in the forest; therefore he
hated them; for what delight could the God of love take in a people that
had now become as roaring lions and raging beasts, fit to be taken and
shot at, as a vexation and torment to all about them? 2. They had become
like birds of prey, and therefore also unworthy a place in God's house,
where neither beasts nor birds of prey were admitted to be offered in
sacrifice ([Jer 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#009)): My heritage is
unto me as a bird with talons (so some read it, and so the margin); they
are continually pulling and pecking at one another; they have by their
unnatural contentions made their country a cock-pit. Or as a speckled
bird, dyed, or sprinkled, or bedewed with the blood of her prey. The
shedding of innocent blood was Jerusalem's measure-filling sin, and
hastened their ruin, not only as it provoked their neighbours likewise;
for those that have their hand against every man shall have every man's
hand against them ([Gen 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012)), and so
it follows here: The birds round about are against her. Some make her a
speckled, pied, or motley bird, upon the account of their mixing the
superstitious customs and usages of the heathen with divine institutions
in the worship of God; they were fond of a party-coloured religion, and
thought it made them fine, when really it made them odious. God's
turtle-dove is no speckled bird.

II\. The enemies are here brought in falling upon them and laying them
desolate. And some think it is upon this account that they are compared
to a speckled bird, because fowls usually make a noise about a bird of
an odd unusual colour. God's people are, among the children of this
world, as men wondered at, as a speckled bird; but this people had by
their own folly made themselves so; and the beasts and birds are called
and commissioned to prey upon them. Let all the birds round be against
her, for God has forsaken her, and with them let all the beasts of the
field come to devour. Those that have made a prey of others shall
themselves be preyed upon. It did not lessen the sin of the nations, but
very much increased the misery of Judah and Jerusalem, that the
desolation brought upon them was by order from heaven. The birds and
beasts are perhaps called to feast upon the bodies of the slain, as in
St. John's vision, [Rev 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017), [Rev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#018). The utter desolation of the
land by the Chaldean army is here spoken of as a thing done, so sure, so
near, was it. God speaks of it as a thing which he had appointed to be
done, and yet which he had no pleasure in, any more than in the death of
other sinners.

1\. See with what a tender affection he speaks of this land,
notwithstanding the sinfulness of it, in remembrance of his covenant,
and the tribute of honour and glory he had formerly had from it: It is
my vineyard, my portion, my pleasant portion, [Jer
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#010). Note, God has a kindness and
concern for his church, though there be much amiss in it; and his
correcting it will every way consist with his complacency in it.

2\. See with what a tender compassion he speaks of the desolations of
this land: Many pastors (the Chaldean generals that made themselves
masters of the country and ate it up with their armies as easily as the
Arabian shepherds with their flocks eat up the fruits of a piece of
ground that lies common) have destroyed my vineyard, without any
consideration had either of the value of it or of my interest in it;
they have with the greatest insolence and indignation trodden it under
foot, and that which was a pleasant land they have made a desolate
wilderness. The destruction was universal: The whole land is made
desolate, [Jer 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#011). It is made so by
the sword of war: The spoilers, the Chaldean soldiers, have come through
the plain upon all high places; they have made themselves masters of all
the natural fastnesses and artificial fortresses, [Jer
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#012). The sword devours from one end
of the land to the other; all places lie exposed, and the numerous army
of the invaders disperse themselves into every corner of that fruitful
country, so that no flesh shall have peace, none shall be exempt from
the calamity nor be able to enjoy any tranquillity. When all flesh have
corrupted their way, no flesh shall have peace; those only have peace
that walk after the Spirit.

3\. See whence all this misery comes. (1.) It comes from the displeasure
of God. It is the sword of the Lord that devours, [Jer
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#012). While God's people keep close
to him the sword of their protectors and deliverers is the sword of the
Lord, witness that of Gideon; but when they have forsaken him, so that
he has become their enemy and fights against them, then the sword of
their invaders and destroyers becomes the sword of the Lord; witness
this of the Chaldeans. It is because of the fierce anger of the Lord
([Jer 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#013)); it was this that kindled
this fire among them and made their enemies so furious. And who may
stand before him when he is angry? (2.) It is their sin that has made
God their enemy, particularly their incorrigibleness under former
rebukes ([Jer 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#011)): The land mourns
unto me; the country that lies desolate does, as it were, pour out its
complaint before God and humble itself under his hand; but the
inhabitants are so senseless and stupid that none of them lays it to
heart; they do not mourn to God, but are unaffected with his
displeasure, while the very ground they go upon shames them. Note, When
God's hand is lifted up, and men will not see, it shall be laid on, and
they shall be made to feel, [Isa
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#011).

4\. See how unable they should be to guard against it ([Jer
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#013)): "They have sown wheat, that
is, they have taken a great deal of pains for their own security and
promised themselves great matters from their endeavors, but it is all in
vain; they shall reap thorns, that is, that which shall prove very
grievous and vexatious to them. Instead of helping themselves, they
shall but make themselves more uneasy. They have put themselves to pain,
both with their labour and with their expectations, but it shall not
profit; they shall not prevail to extricate themselves out of the
difficulties into which they have plunged themselves. They shall be
ashamed of your revenues, ashamed that they have depended so much upon
their preparations for war and particularly upon their ability to bear
the charges of it." Money constitutes the sinews of war; they thought
they had enough of that, but shall be ashamed of it; for their silver
and gold shall not profit them in the day of the Lord's anger.

[Jeremiah 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 12:14</span></span>

The prophets sometimes, in God's name, delivered messages both of
judgment and mercy to the nations that bordered on the land of Israel:
but here is a message to all those in general who had in their turns
been one way or other injurious to God's people, had either oppressed
them or triumphed in their being oppressed. Observe,

I. What the quarrel was that God had with them. They were his evil
neighbours ([Jer 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014)), evil
neighbours to his church, and what they did against it he took as done
against himself, and therefore called them his evil neighbours, that
should have been neighbourly to Israel, but were quite otherwise. Note,
It is often the lot of good people to live among bad neighbours, that
are unkind and provoking to them; and it is bad indeed when they are all
so. These evil neighbours were the Moabites, Ammonites Syrians,
Edomites, Egyptians, that had been evil neighbours to Israel in helping
to debauch them and draw them from God (therefore God calls them his
evil neighbours), and now they helped to make them desolate, and joined
with the Chaldeans against them. It is just with God to make those the
instruments of trouble to us whom we have made instruments of sin. That
which God lays to their charge is: They have meddled with the
inheritance which I have caused my people Israel to inherit; they
unjustly seized that which was none of their own: nay, they
sacrilegiously turned that to their own use which was given to God's
peculiar people. He that said, Touch not my anointed, said also, "Touch
not their inheritance; it is at your peril if you do." Not only the
persons but the estates of God's people are under his protection.

II\. What course he would take with them. 1. He would break the power
they had got over his people, and force them to make restitution: I will
pluck out the house of Judah from among them. This would be a great
favour to God's people, who had either been taken captive by them, or,
when they fled to them for shelter, had been detained and made
prisoners; but it would be a great mortification to their enemies, who
would be like a lion disappointed of his prey. The house of Judah either
cannot or will not make any bold struggles towards their own liberty;
but God will with a gracious violence pluck them out, will by his Spirit
compel them to come out and by his power compel their task-masters to
let them go, as he plucked Israel out of Egypt. 2. He would bring upon
them the same calamities that they had been instrumental to bring upon
his people: I will pluck them out of their land. Judgment began at the
house of God, but it did not end there. Nebuchadnezzar, when he had
wasted the land of Israel, turned his hand against their evil neighbours
and was a scourge to them.

III\. What mercy God had in store for such of them as would join
themselves to him and become his people, [Jer
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#015), [Jer
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#016). They had drawn in God's
backsliding people to join with them in the service of idols. If now
they would be drawn by a returning people to join with them in the
service of the true and living God, they should not only have their
enmity to the people of God forgiven them, but the distance which they
had been kept at before should be removed, and they should be received
to stand upon the same level with the Israel of God. This had its
accomplishment in part when, after the return out of captivity, many of
the people of the lands that had been evil neighbours to Israel became
Jews; and it was to have its accomplishment in the conversion of the
Gentiles to the faith of Christ. Let not Israel, though injured by them,
be implacable towards them, for God is not: After that I have plucked
them out, in justice for their sins and in jealousy for the honour of
Israel, I will return, will change my way, and have compassion on them.
Though, being heathen, they can lay no claim to the mercies of the
covenant, yet they shall have benefit by the compassions of the Creator,
who will notwithstanding look upon them as the work of his hands. Note,
God's controversies with his creatures, though they cannot be disputed,
may be accommodated. Those who (as these) have been not only strangers,
but enemies in their minds by wicked works, may be reconciled, [Col
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#021). Observe here,

1\. What were the terms on which God would show favour to them. It is
always provided that they will diligently learn the ways of my people,
that is, in general, the ways that they walk in when they conduct
themselves as my people (not the crooked ways into which they have
turned aside), the ways which my people are directed to take. Note, (1.)
There are good ways that are peculiarly the ways of God's people, which
however they may differ in the choice of their paths, they are all
agreed to walk in. The ways of holiness and heavenly-mindedness, of love
and peaceableness, the ways of prayer and sabbath-sanctification, and
diligent attendance on instituted ordinances - these, and the like, are
the ways of God's people. (2.) Those that would have their lot with
God's people, and their last end like theirs, must learn their ways and
walk in them, must observe the rule they walk by and conform to that
rule they walk by and conform to that rule and go forth by those
footsteps. By an intimate conversation with God's people they must learn
to do as they do. (3.) It is impossible to learn the ways of God's
people as they should be learnt, without a great deal of care and pains.
We must diligently observe these ways and diligently obliges ourselves
to walk in them, must look diligently ([Heb
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#015)), and work diligently, [Luk
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#024). In particular, they must learn
to give honour to God's name by making all their solemn appeals to him.
They must learn to say, The Lord liveth (to own him, to adore him, and
to abide by his judgment), as they taught my people to swear by Baal. It
was bad enough that they did themselves swear by Baal, worse that they
taught God's own people, who had been better taught; and yet, if they
will at length reform, they shall be accepted. observe, \[1.\] We must
not despair of the conversion of the worst; no, not of those who have
been instrumental to pervert and debauch others; even they may be
brought to repentance, and, if they be, shall find mercy. \[2.\] Those
whom we have been industrious to draw to that which is evil, when God
opens their eyes and ours, we should be as industrious to follow in that
which is good. It will be a holy revenge upon ourselves to become pupils
to those in the way of duty to whom we have been tutors in the was of
sin. \[3.\] The conversion of the deceived may prove a happy occasion of
the conversion even of the deceivers. Thus those who fall together into
the ditch are sometimes plucked together out of it.

2\. What should be the tokens and fruits of this favour when they return
to God and God to them. (1.) They shall be restored to and
re-established in their own land ([Jer
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#015)): I will bring them again every
man to his heritage. The same hand that plucked them up shall plant them
again. (2.) They shall become entitled to the spiritual privileges of
God's Israel: "If they will be towardly, and learn the ways of my
people, will conform to the rules and confine themselves to the
restraints of my family, then shall they be built in the midst of my
people. They shall not only be brought among them, to have a name and a
place in the house of the Lord, where there was a court for the
Gentiles, but they shall be built among them; they shall unite with
them; the former enmities shall be slain; they shall be both edified and
settled among them." See [Isa 56:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#005).
Note, Those that diligently learn the ways of God's people shall enjoy
the privileges and comforts of his people.

IV\. What should become of those that were still wedded to their own
evil ways, yea, though many of those about them turned to the Lord ([Jer
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#017)): If there will not obey, if any
of them continue to stand it out, I will utterly pluck up and destroy
that nation, that family, that particular person, saith the Lord. Those
that will not be ruled by the grace of God shall be ruined by the
justice of God. And, if disobedient nations shall be destroyed, much
more disobedient churches from whom better things are expected.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 13](jer013)

</div>
