<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](isa066)  [Next](jer001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Book of the Prophet
Jeremiah

The Prophecies of the Old Testament, as the Epistles of the New, are
placed rather according to their bulk than their seniority - the longest
first, not the oldest. There were several prophets, and writing ones,
that were contemporaries with Isaiah, as Micah, or a little before him,
as Hosea, and Joel, and Amos, or soon after him, as Habakkuk and Nahum
are supposed to have been; and yet the prophecy of Jeremiah, who began
many years after Isaiah finished, is placed next to his, because there
is so much in it. Where we meet with most of God's word, there let the
preference be given; and yet those of less gifts are not to be despised
nor excluded. Nothing now occurs to be observed further concerning
prophecy in general; but concerning this prophet Jeremiah we may
observe, I. That he was betimes a prophet; he began young, and therefore
could say, from his own experience, that it is good for a man to bear
the yoke in his youth, the yoke both of service and of affliction, [Lam
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#027). Jerome observes that Isaiah, who
had more years over his head, had his tongue touched with a coal of
fire, to purge away his iniquity ([Isa
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007)), but that when God touched
Jeremiah's mouth, who was yet but young, nothing was said of the purging
of his iniquity ([Jer 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#009)), because,
by reason of his tender years, he had not so much sin to answer for. II.
That he continued long a prophet, some reckon fifty years, others above
forty. He began in the thirteenth year of Josiah, when things went well
under that good king, but he continued through all the wicked reigns
that followed; for when we set out for the service of God, though the
wind may then be fair and favourable, we know not how soon it may turn
and be tempestuous. III. That he was a reproving prophet, was sent in
God's name to tell Jacob of their sins and to warn them of the judgments
of God that were coming upon them; and the critics observe that
therefore his style or manner of speaking is more plain and rough, and
less polite, than that of Isaiah and some others of the prophets. Those
that are sent to discover sin ought to lay aside the enticing words of
man's wisdom. Plain-dealing is best when we are dealing with sinners to
bring them to repentance. IV. That he was a weeping prophet; so he is
commonly called, not only because he penned the Lamentations, but
because he was all along a mournful spectator of the sins of his people
and of the desolating judgments that were coming upon them. And for this
reason, perhaps, those who imagined our Saviour to be one of the
prophets thought him of any of them to be most like to Jeremiah ([Mat
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#014)), because he was a man of
sorrows and acquainted with grief. V. That he was a suffering prophet.
He was persecuted by his own people more than any of them, as we shall
find in the story of this book; for he lived and preached just before
the Jews' destruction by the Chaldeans, when their character seems to
have been the same as it was just before their destruction by the
Romans, when they killed the Lord Jesus, and persecuted his disciples,
pleased not God, and were contrary to all men, for wrath had come upon
them to the uttermost, [Th1 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#015), [Th1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#016). The last account we have of him
in his history is that the remaining Jews forced him to go down with
them into Egypt; whereas the current tradition is, among Jews and
Christians, that he suffered martyrdom. Hottinger, out of Elmakin, an
Arabic historian, relates that, continuing to prophesy in Egypt against
the Egyptians and other nations, he was stoned to death; and that long
after, when Alexander entered Egypt, he took up the bones of Jeremiah
where they were buried in obscurity, and carried them to Alexandria, and
buried them there. The prophecies of this book which we have in the
first nineteen chapters seem to be the heads of the sermons he preached
in a way of general reproof for sin and denunciation of judgment;
afterwards they are more particular and occasional, and mixed with the
history of his day, but not placed in due order of time. With the
threatenings are intermixed many gracious promises of mercy to the
penitent, of the deliverance of the Jews out of their captivity, and
some that have a plain reference to the kingdom of the Messiah. Among
the Apocryphal writings an epistle is extant said to be written by
Jeremiah to the captives in Babylon, warning them against the worship of
idols, by exposing the vanity of idols and the folly of idolaters. It is
in Baruch, ch. 6. But it is supposed not to be authentic; nor has it, I
think, any thing like the life and spirit of Jeremiah's writings. It is
also related concerning Jeremiah (2 Macc. 2:4) that, when Jerusalem was
destroyed by the Chaldeans, he, by direction from God, took the ark and
the altar of incense, and, carrying them to Mount Nebo lodged them in a
hollow cave there and stopped the door; but some that followed him, and
thought that they had marked the place, could not find it. He blamed
them for seeking it, telling them that the place should be unknown till
the time that God should gather his people together again. But I know
not what credit is to be given to that story, though it is there said to
be found in the records. We cannot but be concerned, in the reading of
Jeremiah's prophecies, to find that they were so little regarded by the
men of that generation; but let us make use of that as a reason why we
should regard them the more; for they are written for our learning too,
and for warning to us and to our land.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 1](jer001)

</div>
