<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer003)  [Next](jer005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 4:0</span></span>

It should seem that the first two verses of this chapter might better
have been joined to the close of the foregoing chapter, for they are
directed to Israel, the ten tribes, by way of reply to their compliance
with God's call, directing and encouraging them to hold their resolution
([Jer 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#001), [Jer
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#002)). The rest of the chapter concerns
Judah and Jerusalem. I. They are called to repent and reform ([Jer
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003), [Jer
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#004)). II. They are warned of the
advance of Nebuchadnezzar and his forces against them, and are told that
it is for their sins, from which they are again exhorted to wash
themselves ([Jer 4:5-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#005)). III. To
affect them the more with the greatness of the desolation that was
coming, the prophet does himself bitterly lament it, and sympathize with
his people in the calamities it brought upon them, and the plunge it
brought them to, representing it as a reduction of the world to its
first chaos ([Jer 4:19-31](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#019)).

[Jeremiah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 4:1</span></span>

When God called to backsliding Israel to return ([Jer
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#022)) they immediately answered, Lord,
we return; now God here takes notice of their answer, and, by way of
reply to it,

I. He directs them how to pursue their good resolutions: "Dost thou say,
I will return?" 1. "Then thou must return unto me; make a thorough work
of it. Do not only turn from thy idolatries, but return to the
instituted worship of the God of Israel." Or, "Thou must return speedily
and not delay (as [Isa 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#012), If you
will enquire, enquire you); if you will return unto me, return you: do
not talk of it, but do it." 2. "Thou must utterly abandon all sin, and
not retain any of the relics of idolatry: Put away thy abominations out
of my sight," that is, out of all places (for every place is under the
eye of God), especially out of the temple, the house which he had in a
particular manner his eye upon, to see that it was kept clean. It
intimates that their idolatries were not only obvious, but offensive, to
the eye of God. They were abominations which he could not endure the
sight of; therefore they must be put away out of his sight, because they
were a provocation to the pure eyes of God's glory. Sin must be put away
out of the heart, else it is not put away out of God's sight, for the
heart and all that is in it lie open before his eye. 3. They must not
return to sin again; so some understand that, Thou shalt not remove,
reading it, Thou shalt not, or must not, wander. "If thou wilt put away
thy abominations, and wilt not wander after them again, as thou hast
done, all shall be well." 4. They must give unto God the glory due unto
his name ([Jer 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#002)): "Thou shalt sear,
The Lord liveth. His existence shall be with thee the most sacred fact,
than which nothing can be more sure, and his judgment the supreme court
to which thou shalt appeal, than which nothing can be more awful."
Swearing is an act of religious worship, in which we are to give honour
to God three ways: - (1.) We must swear by the true God only, and not by
creatures, or any false gods, - by the God that liveth, not by the gods
that are deaf and dumb and dead, - by him only, and not by the Lord and
by Malcham, as [Zac 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#005). (2.) We must
swear that only which is true, in truth and in righteousness, not daring
to assert that which is false, or which we do not know to be true, nor
to assert that as certain which is doubtful, nor to promise that which
we mean not to perform, nor to violate the promise we have made. To say
that which is untrue, or to do that which is unrighteous, is bad, but to
back either with an oath is much worse. (3.) We must do it solemnly,
swear in judgment, that is, when judicially called to it, and not in
common conversation. Rash swearing is as great a profanation of God's
name as solemn swearing is an honour to it. See [Deu
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#020); [Mat
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034), [Mat
5:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#037).

II\. He encourages them to keep in this good mind and adhere to their
resolutions. If the scattered Israelites will thus return to God, 1.
They shall be blessed themselves; for to that sense the first words may
be read: "If thou wilt return to me, then thou shalt return, that is,
thou shalt be brought back out of thy captivity into thy own land again,
as was of old promised," [Deu 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#029);
[Deu 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#002). Or, "Then thou shalt rest
in me, shalt return to me as they rest, even while thou art in the land
of thy captivity." 2. They shall be blessings to others; for their
returning to God again will be a means of others turning to him who
never new him. If thou wilt own the living Lord, thou wilt thereby
influence the nations among whom thou art to bless themselves in him, to
place their happiness in his favour and to think themselves happy in
being brought to the fear of him. See [Isa
65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016). They shall bless themselves in
the God of truth, and not in false gods, shall do themselves the honour,
and give themselves the satisfaction, to join themselves to him; and
then in him shall they glory; they shall make him their glory, and shall
please, nay, shall pride, themselves in the blessed change they have
made. Those that part with their sins to return to God, however they
scrupled at the bargain at first, when they go away, then they boast.

[Jeremiah 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 4:3</span></span>

The prophet here turns his speech, in God's name, to the men of the
place where he lived. We have heard what words he proclaimed towards the
north ([Jer 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012)), for the comfort of
those that were now in captivity and were humbled under the hand of God;
let us now see what he says to the men of Judah and Jerusalem, who were
now in prosperity, for their conviction and awakening. In these two
verses he exhorts them to repentance and reformation, as the only way
left them to prevent the desolating judgments that were ready to break
in upon them. Observe,

I. The duties required of them, which they are concerned to do.

1\. They must do by their hearts as they do by their ground that they
expect any good of; they must plough it up ([Jer
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003)): "Break up your fallow-ground.
Plough to yourselves a ploughing (or plough up your plough land), that
you sow not among thorns, that you may not labour in vain, for your own
safety and welfare, as those do that sow good seed among thorns and as
you have been doing a great while. Put yourselves into a frame fit to
receive mercy from God, and put away all that which keeps it from you,
and then you may expect to receive mercy and to prosper in your
endeavours to help yourselves." Note, (1.) An unconvinced unhumbled
heart is like fallow-ground, ground untilled, unoccupied. It is ground
capable of improvement; it is our ground, let out to us, and we must be
accountable for it; but it is fallow; it is unfenced and lies common; it
is unfruitful and of no advantage to the owner, and (which is
principally intended) it is overgrown with thorns and weeds, which are
the natural product of the corrupt heart; and, if it be not renewed with
grace, rain and sunshine are lost upon it, [Heb
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#007), [Heb
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#008). (2.) We are concerned to get this
fallow-ground ploughed up. We must search into our own hearts, let the
word of God divide (as the plough does) between the joints and the
marrow, [Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012). We must rend our
hearts, [Joe 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013). We must pluck up by
the roots those corruptions which, as thorns, choke both our endeavours
and our expectations, [Hos 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#012).

2\. They must do that to their souls which was done to their bodies when
they were taken into covenant with God ([Jer
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#004)): "Circumcise yourselves to the
Lord, and take away the foreskin of your heart. Mortify the flesh and
the lusts of it. Pare off that superfluity of naughtiness which hinders
your receiving with meekness the engrafted word, [Jam
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#021). Boast not of, and rest not in,
the circumcision of the body, for that is but a sign, and will not serve
without the thing signified. It is a dedicating sign. Do that in
sincerity which was done in profession by your circumcision; devote and
consecrate yourselves unto the Lord, to be to him a peculiar people.
Circumcision is an obligation to keep the law; lay yourselves afresh
under that obligation. It is a seal of the righteousness of faith; lay
hold then of that righteousness, and so circumcise yourselves to the
Lord."

II\. The danger they are threatened with, which they are concerned to
avoid. Repent and reform, lest my fury come forth like fire, which it is
now ready to do, as that fire which came forth from the Lord and
consumed the sacrifices, and which was always kept burning upon the
altar and none might quench it; such is God's wrath against impenitent
sinners, because of the evil of their doings. Note, 1. That which is to
be dreaded by us more than any thing else is the wrath of God; for that
is the spring and bitterness of all present miseries and will be the
quintessence and perfection of everlasting misery. 2. It is the evil of
our doings that kindles the fire of God's wrath against us. 3. The
consideration of the imminent danger we are in of falling and perishing
under this wrath should awaken us with all possible care to sanctify
ourselves to God's glory and to see to it that we be sanctified by his
grace.

[Jeremiah 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 4:5</span></span>

God's usual method is to warn before he wounds. In these verses,
accordingly, God gives notice to the Jews of the general desolation that
would shortly be brought upon them by a foreign invasion. This must be
declared and published in all the cities of Judah and streets of
Jerusalem, that all might hear and fear, and by this loud alarm be
either brought to repentance or left inexcusable. The prediction of this
calamity is here given very largely, and in lively expressions, which
one would think should have awakened and affected the most stupid.
Observe,

I. The war proclaimed, and general notice given of the advance of the
enemy. It is published now, some years before, by the prophet; but,
since this will be slighted, it shall be published after another manner
when the judgment is actually breaking in, [Jer
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#005), [Jer
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#006). The trumpet must be blown, the
standard must be set up, a summons must be issued out to the people to
gather together and to draw towards Zion, either to guard it or
expecting to be guarded by it. There must be a general rendezvous. The
militia must be raised and all the forces mustered. Those that are able
men, and fit for service, must go into the defenced cities, to garrison
them; those that are weak, and would lessen their provisions, but not
increase their strength, must retire, and not stay.

II\. An express arrived with intelligence of the approach of the king of
Babylon and his army. It is an evil that God will bring from the north
(as he had said, [Jer 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#015)), even a
great destruction, beyond all that had yet come upon the nation of the
Jews. The enemy is here compared, 1. To a lion that comes up from his
thicket, when he is hungry, to seek his prey, [Jer
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007). The helpless beasts are so
terrified with his roaring (as some report) that they cannot flee from
him, and so become an easy prey to him. Nebuchadnezzar is this roaring
tearing lion, the destroyer of the nations, that has laid many countries
waste, and now is on his way in full speed towards the land of Judah.
The destroyer of the Gentiles shall be the destroyer of the Jews too,
when they have by their idolatry made themselves like the Gentiles. "He
has gone forth from his place, from Babylon, or the place of the
rendezvous of his army, on purpose against this land; that is the prey
he has now his eye upon, not to plunder it only, but to make it
desolate, and herein he shall succeed to such a degree that the cities
shall be laid waste, without inhabitants, shall be overgrown with grass
as a field;" so some read it. 2. To a drying blasting wind ([Jer
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#011)), a parching scorching wind,
which spoils the fruits of the earth and withers them, not a wind which
brings rain, but such as comes out of the north, which drives away rain
([Pro 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#023)), but brings something
worse instead of it; such shall this evil out of the north be to this
people, a black freezing wind, which they can neither fence against nor
flee from, but, wherever they go, it shall surround and pursue them; and
they cannot see it before it comes, but, when it comes, they shall feel
it. It is a wind of the high places in the wilderness, or plain, that
beats upon the tops of the hills or that carries all before it in the
plain, where there is no shelter, but the ground is all champaign. It
shall come in its full force towards the daughters of my people, that
have been brought up so tenderly and delicately that they could not
endure to have the wind blow upon them. Now this fierce wind shall come
against them, not to fan, nor cleanse them, not such a gentle wind as is
used in winnowing corn, but a full wind ([Jer
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#012)), a strong and violent wind,
blowing full upon them. This shall come to me, or rather for me; it
shall come with commission from God and shall accomplish that for which
he sends it; for this, as other stormy winds, fulfills his word. 3. To
clouds and whirlwinds for swiftness, [Jer
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013). The Chaldean army shall come up
as clouds driven with the wind, so thick shall they stand, so fast shall
they march, and it shall be to no purpose to offer to stop them or make
head against them, any more than to arrest a cloud or give check to a
whirlwind. The horses are swifter than eagles when they fly upon their
prey; it is in vain to think either of opposing them or of outrunning
them. 4. To watchers and the keepers of a field, [Jer
4:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#015). The voice declares from Dan,
a city which lay furthest north of all the cities of Canaan, and
therefore received the first tidings of this evil from the north and
hastened it to Mount Ephrain, that part of the land of Israel which lay
next to Judea; they received the news of the affliction and transmitted
it to Jerusalem. Ill news flies apace; and an impenitent people, that
hates to be reformed, can expect no other that ill news. Now, what is
the news? "Tell the nations, those mixed nations that now inhabit the
cities of the ten tribes, mention it to them, that they may provide for
their own safety; but publish it against Jerusalem, that is the place
aimed at, the game shot at, let them know that watchers have come from a
far country, that is, soldiers, that will watch all opportunities to do
mischief." Private soldiers we call private sentinels, or watchmen.
"They are coming in full career, and give out their voice against the
cities of Judah; they design to invest them, to make themselves masters
of them, and to attack them with loud shouts, as sure of victory. As
keepers of a field surround it, to keep all out from it, so shall they
surround the cities of Judah, to keep all in them, till they be
constrained to surrender at discretion; they are against her round
about, compassing her in on every side." See [Luk
19:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#043). As formerly the good angels,
those watchers, and holy ones, were like keepers of a field to
Jerusalem, watching about it, that nothing might go in to its prejudice,
so now their enemies were as watchers and keepers of a field,
surrounding it that nothing might go in to its relief and succour.

III\. The lamentable cause of this judgment. How is it that Judah and
Jerusalem come to be thus abandoned to ruin? See how it came to this. 1.
They sinned against God; it was all owing to themselves: She has been
rebellious against me, saith the Lord, [Jer
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#017). Their enemies surrounded them as
keepers of a field, because they had taken up arms against their
rightful Lord and sovereign, and were to be seized as rebels. The
Chaldeans were breaking in upon them, and it was sin that opened the gap
at which they entered: Thy way and thy doings have procured these things
unto thee ([Jer 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#018)), thy evil way
and thy doings that have not been good. It was not a false step or two
that did them this mischief, but their way and course of living were
bad. Note, Sin is the procuring cause of all our troubles. Those that go
on in sin while they are endeavouring to ward off mischiefs with one
hand are at the same time pulling them upon their own heads with the
other. 2. God was angry with them for their sin. It is the fierce anger
of the Lord that makes the army of the Chaldeans thus fierce, thus
furious; that is kindled against us, and is not turned back from us,
[Jer 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#008). Note, In men's anger against
us, and the violence of that, we must see and own God's anger and the
power of that. If that were turned back from us, our enemies could not
come forward against us. 3. In his just and holy anger he condemned them
to this dreadful punishment: Now also will I give sentence against them,
[Jer 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#012). The execution was done, not
in a heat, but in pursuance of a sentence solemnly passed, according to
equity, and upon mature deliberation. Some read it, Now will I do
execution upon them, according to the doom formerly passed; and we are
sure that the judgment of God is according to the truth, and the
execution of that judgment.

IV\. The lamentable effects of this judgment, upon the first alarm given
of it. 1. The people that should fight shall quite despair and shall not
have a heart to make the least stand against the enemy ([Jer
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#008)): "For this gird yourself with
sackcloth, lament and howl," that is, "you will do so. When the cry is
made through the kingdom, Arm, arm! all will be seized with a
consternation, and all put into confusion. Instead of girding on the
sword, they will gird on the sackcloth; instead of animating one another
to a vigorous resistance, they will lament and howl, and so dishearten
one another. While the enemy is yet at a distance they will give up all
for gone, and cry, Woe unto us! for we are spoiled, [Jer
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013). We are all undone, the spoilers
will certainly carry the day, and it is in vain to make head against
them." Judah and Jerusalem had been famed for valiant men; but see what
is the effect of sin: by depriving men of their confidence towards God,
it deprives them of their courage towards men. 2. Their great men, who
should contrive for the public safety, shall be at their wits' end ([Jer
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#009)): At that day the heart of the
king shall perish, both his wisdom and his courage. Despairing of
success, he shall have no spirit to do any thing, and, if he had, he
will not know what to do. His princes and privy-counselors, who should
animate and advise him, shall be as much at a loss and as much in
despair as he. See how easily, how effectually, God can bring ruin upon
a people that are doomed to it, merely by dispiriting them, taking away
the heart of the chief of them ([Job
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#020), [Job
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#024)), cutting off the spirit of
princes, [Psa 76:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#012). The business of
the priests was to encourage the people in the time of war; they were to
say to the people, Fear not, and let not your hearts faint, [Deu
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#002), [Deu
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#003). They were to blow the trumpets,
for an assurance to them that in the day of battle they should be
remembered before the Lord their God, [Num
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#009). But now the priests themselves
shall be astonished, and shall have no heart themselves to do their
office, and therefore shall not be likely to put spirit into the people.
The prophets too, the false prophets, who had cried peace to them, shall
be put into the greatest amazement imaginable, seeing their own guilty
blood ready to be shed by that sword which they had often told the
people there was no danger of. Note, God's judgments come with the
greatest terror upon those that have been most secure. Our Saviour
foretels that at the last destruction of Jerusalem men's hearts should
fail them for fear, [Luk 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#026). And it
is common for those who have cheated and flattered people into a carnal
security not only to fail them, but to discourage them, when the trouble
comes.

V. The prophet's complaint of the people's being deceived, [Jer
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#010). It is expressed strangely, as we
read it: Ah! Lord God, surely thou hast greatly deceived this people,
saying, You shall have peace. We are sure that God deceives none. Let no
man say, when he is tempted or deluded, that God has tempted or deluded
him. But, 1. The people deceived themselves with the promises that God
had made in general of his favour to that nation, and the many peculiar
privileges with which they were dignified, building upon them, though
they took no care to perform the conditions on which the accomplishment
of those promises and the continuance of those privileges did depend;
and they had no regard to the threatenings which in the law were set
over-against those promises. Thus they cheated themselves and then
wickedly complained that God had cheated them. 2. The false prophets
deceived them with promises of peace, which they made them in God's
name. [Jer 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#017); [Jer
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#009). If God had sent them, he had
indeed greatly deceived the people, but he had not. It was the people's
fault that they gave them credit; and here also they deceived
themselves. 3. God had permitted the false prophets to deceive, and the
people to be deceived by them, giving both up to strong delusions, to
punish them for not receiving the truth in the love of it. Herein the
Lord was righteous; but the prophet complains of it as the sorest
judgment of all, for by this means they had been hardened in their sins.
4. It may be read with an interrogation, "Hast thou indeed thus deceived
this people? It is plain that they are greatly deceived, for they expect
peace, whereas the sword reaches unto the soul; that is, it is a killing
sword, abundance of lives are lost, and more likely to be." Now, was it
God that deceived them? No, he had often given them warning of judgments
in general and of this in particular; but their own prophets deceive
them, and cry peace to those to whom the God of heaven does not speak
peace. It is a pitiable thing, and that which every good man greatly
laments, to see people flattered into their own ruin, and promising
themselves peace when war is at the door; and this we should complain of
to God, who alone can prevent such a fatal delusion.

VI\. The prophet's endeavour to undeceive them. When the prophets they
loved and caressed dealt falsely with them, he whom they hated and
persecuted dealt faithfully. 1. He shows them their wound. They were
loth to see it, very loth to have it searched into; but, if they will
allow themselves the liberty of a free thought, they might discover
their punishment in their sin ([Jer
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#018)): "This is thy wickedness because
it is bitter. Now thou seest that it is a bitter thing to depart from
God, and will certainly be bitterness in the latter end, [Jer
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#019). It produces bitter effects, and
grief that reaches unto the heart, touches to the quick, and in the most
tender part; the sword reaches to the soul," [Jer
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#010). God can make trouble reach the
heart even of those that would lay nothing to heart. "And by this thou
mayest see what is thy wickedness, that it is a bitter thing, a root of
bitterness, that bears gall and wormwood, and that it has reached to the
heart; it is the corruption of the soul, of the imagination of the
thought of the heart." If the heart were not polluted with sin, it would
not be disturbed and disquieted as it is with trouble. 2. He shows them
the cure, [Jer 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#014). "Since thy
wickedness reaches to the heart, there the application must be made. O
Jerusalem! wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou mayest be saved."
By Jerusalem he means each one of the inhabitants of Jerusalem; for
every man has a heart of his own to take care of, and it is personal
reformation that must help the public. Every one must return from his
own evil way, and, in order to that, cleanse his own evil heart. "And
let the heart of the city too be purified, not the suburbs only, the
outskirts of it." The vitals of a state must be amended by the
reformation of those that have the commanding influence upon it. Note,
(1.) Reformation is absolutely necessary to salvation. There is no other
way of preventing judgments, or turning them away when we are threatened
with them, but taking away the sin by which we have procured them to
ourselves. (2.) No reformation is saving but that which reaches the
heart. There is heart-wickedness that is defiling to the soul, from
which we must wash ourselves. By repentance and faith we must wash our
hearts from the guilt we have contracted by spiritual wickedness, by
those sins which begin and end in the heart and go no further; and by
mortification and watchfulness we must suppress and prevent this
heart-wickedness for the future. The tree must be made good, else the
fruit will not. Jerusalem was all overspread with the leprosy of sin.
Now as the physicians agree with respect to the body when afflicted with
leprosy that external applications will do no good, unless physic be
taken inwardly to carry off the humours that lurk there and to change
the mass of the blood, so it is with the soul, so it is with the state:
there will be no effectual reformation of the manners without a
reformation of the mind; the mistakes there must be rectified, the
corruptions there must be mortified, and the evil dispositions there
changed. "Though thou art Jerusalem, called a holy city, that will not
save thee, unless thou wash thy heart from wickedness." In the latter
part of the verse he reasons with them: How long shall thy vain thoughts
lodge within thee? He complains here \[1.\] Of the delays of their
reformation: "How long shall that filthy heart of thine continue
unwashed? When shall it once be?" Note, The God of heaven thinks the
time long that his room is usurped, and his interest opposed, in our
souls, [Jer 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#027). \[2.\] Of the root
of their corruption, the vain thoughts that lodged within them and
defiled their hearts, from which they must wash their hearts. Thoughts
of iniquity or mischief, these are the evil thoughts that are the spawn
of the evil heart, from which all other wickedness is produced, [Mat
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#019). These are our own, the
conceptions of our own lusts ([Jam
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#015)), and they are the most dangerous
when they lodge within us, when they are admitted and entertained as
guests, and are suffered to continue. Some read it thoughts of
affliction, such thoughts as will bring nothing but affliction and
misery. Some by the vain thoughts here understand all those frivolous
pleas and excuses with which they turned off the reproofs and calls of
the word and rendered them ineffectual, and bolstered themselves up in
their wickedness. Wash thy heart from wickedness, and think not to say,
We are not polluted ([Mat 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023)), or,
"We are Jerusalem; we have Abraham to our father," [Mat
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#008), [Mat
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009).

[Jeremiah 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 4:19</span></span>

The prophet is here in an agony, and cries out like one upon the rack of
pain with some acute distemper, or as a woman in travail. The
expressions are very pathetic and moving, enough to melt a heart of
stone into compassion: My bowels! my bowels! I am pained at my very
heart; and yet well, and in health himself, and nothing ails him. Note,
A good man, in such a bad world as this is, cannot but be a man of
sorrows. My heart makes a noise in me, through the tumult of my spirits,
and I cannot hold my peace. Note, The grievance and the grief sometimes
may be such that the most prudent patient man cannot forbear
complaining.

Now, what is the matter? What is it that puts the good man into such
agitation? It is not for himself, or any affliction in his family that
he grieves thus; but it is purely upon the public account, it is his
people's case that he lays to heart thus.

I. They are very sinful and will not be reformed, [Jer
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#022). These are the words of God
himself, for so the prophet chose to give this character of the people,
rather than in his own words, or as from himself: My people are foolish.
God calls them his people, though they are foolish. They have cast him
off, but he has not cast them off, [Rom
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001). "They are my people, whom I have
been in covenant with, and still have mercy in store for. They are
foolish, for they have not known me." Note, Those are foolish indeed
that have not known God, especially that call themselves his people, and
have the advantages of coming into acquaintance with him, and yet have
not known him. They are sottish children, stupid and senseless, and have
no understanding. They cannot distinguish between truth and falsehood,
good and evil; they cannot discern the mind of God either in his word or
in his providence; they do not understand what their true interest is,
nor on which side it lies. They are wise to do evil, to plot mischief
against the quiet in the land, wise to contrive the gratification of
their lusts, and then to conceal and palliate them. But to do good they
have no knowledge, no contrivance, no application of mind; they know not
how to make a good use either of the ordinances or of the providences of
God, nor how to bring about any design for the good of their country.
Contrary to this should be our character. [Rom
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#019), I would have you wise unto that
which is good, and simple concerning evil.

II\. They are miserable, and cannot be relieved.

1\. He cries out, Because thou hast heard, O my soul! the sound of the
trumpet, and seen the standard, both giving the alarm of war, [Jer
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#019), [Jer
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#021). He does not say, Thou hast
heard, O my ear! but, O my soul! because the event was yet future, and
it is by the spirit of prophecy that he see it and receives the
impression of it. His soul heard it from the words of God, and therefore
he was as well assured of it, and as much affected with it, as if he had
heard it with his bodily ears. He expresses this deep concern, (1.) To
show that, though he foretold this calamity, yet he was far from
desiring the woeful day; for a woeful day it would be to him. It becomes
us to tremble at the thought of the misery that sinners are running
themselves into, though we have good hopes, through grace, that we
ourselves are delivered from the wrath to come. (2.) To awaken them to a
holy fear, and so to a care to prevent so great a judgment by a true and
timely repentance. Note, Those that would affect other with the word of
God should evidence that they are themselves affected with it. Now,

2\. Let us see what there is in the destruction here foreseen and
foretold that is so very affecting.

(1.) It is a swift and sudden destruction; it comes upon Judah and
Jerusalem ere they are aware, and pours in so fast upon them that they
have not the east breathing time. They have no time to recollect their
thoughts, much less to recruit or recover their strength: Destruction
upon destruction is cried ([Jer 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#020)),
breach upon breach, one sad calamity, like Job's messengers, treading
upon the heels of another. The death of Josiah breaks the ice, and
plucks up the flood-gates; within three months after that his son and
successor Jehoahaz is deposed by the king of Egypt; within two or three
years after Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem and took it, and
thenceforward he was continually making descents upon the land of Judah
with his armies during the reigns of Jehoiakim, Jeconiah, and Zedekiah,
till about nineteen years after he completed their ruin in the
destruction of Jerusalem: but suddenly were their tents spoiled and
their curtains in a moment. Though the cities held out for some time,
the country was laid waste at the very first. The shepherds and all that
lived in tents were plundered immediately; they and their effects fell
into the enemies' hands; therefore we find the Rechabites, who dwelt in
tents, upon the first coming of the army of the Chaldees into the land
retiring to Jerusalem, [Jer 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#011). The
inhabitants of the villages soon ceased: Suddenly were the tents
spoiled. The plain men that dwelt in tents were first made a prey of.

(2.) This dreadful war continued a great while, not in the borders, but
in the bowels of the country; for the people were very obstinate, and
would not submit to the king of Babylon, but took all opportunities to
rebel against him, which did but lengthen out the calamity; they might
as well have yielded at first as at last. This is complained of ([Jer
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#021)): How long shall I see the
standard? Shall the sword devour for ever? Good men are none of those
that delight in war, for they know not how to fish in troubled waters;
they are for peace ([Psa 120:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#007)), and
will heartily say Amen to that prayer, "Give peace in out time, O Lord!"
O thou sword of the Lord! when wilt thou be quiet?

(3.) The desolations made by it in the land were general and universal:
The whole land is spoiled, or plundered ([Jer
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#020)); so it was at first, and at
length it became a perfect chaos. It was such a desolation as amounted
in a manner to a dissolution; not only the superstructure, but even the
foundations, were all out of course. The prophet in vision saw the
extent and extremity of this destruction, and he here gives a most
lively description of it, which one would think might have made those
uneasy in their sins who dwelt in a land doomed to such a ruin, which
might yet have been prevented by their repentance. \[1.\] The earth is
without form, and void ([Jer 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#023)), as
it was [Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002). It is Tohu and Bohu,
the words there used, as far as the land of Judea goes. It is confusion
and emptiness, stripped of all its beauty, void of all its wealth, and,
compared with what it was, every thing out of place and out of shape. To
a worse chaos than this will the earth be reduced at the end of time,
when it, and all the works that are therein, shall be burnt up. \[2.\]
The heavens too are without light, as the earth is without fruits. This
alludes to the darkness that was upon the face of the deep ([Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)), and represents God's displeasure
against them, as the eclipse of the sun did at our Saviour's death. It
was not only the earth that failed them, but heaven also frowned upon
them; and with their trouble they had darkness, for they could not see
through their troubles. The smoke of their houses and cities which the
enemy burnt, and the dust which their army raised in its march, even
darkened the sun, so that the heavens had no light. Or it may be taken
figuratively: The earth (that is, the common people) was impoverished
and in confusion; and the heavens (that is, the princes and rulers) had
no light, no wisdom in themselves, nor were any comfort to the people,
nor a guide to them. Comp. [Mat 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029).
\[3.\] The mountains trembled, and the hills moved lightly, [Jer
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#024). So formidable were the
appearances of God against his people, as in the days of old they had
been for them, that the mountains skipped like rams and the little hills
like lambs, [Psa 114:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#004). The
everlasting mountains seemed to be scattered, [Hab
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006). The mountains on which they had
worshipped their idols, the mountains over which they had looked for
succours, all trembled, as if they had been conscious of the people's
guilt. The mountains, those among them that seemed to the highest and
strongest, and of the firmest resolution, trembled at the approach of
the Chaldean army. The hills moved lightly, as being eased of the burden
of a sinful nation, [Isa 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024). \[4.\]
Not the earth only, but the air, was dispeopled, and left uninhabited
([Jer 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#025)): I beheld the cities, the
countries that used to be populous, and, lo, there was no man to be
seen; all the inhabitants were either killed, or fled, or taken
captives, such a ruining depopulating thing is sin: nay, even the birds
of the heavens, that used to fly about and sing among the branches, had
now fled away, and were no more to be seen or heard. The land of Judah
had now become like the lake of Sodom, over which (they say) no bird
flies; see [Deu 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023). The enemies
shall make such havoc of the country that they shall not so much as
leave a bird alive in it. \[5.\] Both the ground and the houses shall be
laid waste ([Jer 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#026)): Lo, the
fruitful place was a wilderness, being deserted by the inhabitants that
should cultivate it, and then soon overgrown with thorns and briers, or
being trodden down by the destroying army of the enemy. The cities also
and their gates and walls are broken down and levelled with the ground.
Those that look no further than second causes impute it to the policy
and fury of the invaders; but the prophet, who looks to the first cause,
says that it is at the presence of the Lord, at his face (that is, the
anger of his countenance), even by his fierce anger, that this was done.
Even angry men cannot do us any real hurt, unless God be angry with us.
If our ways please him, all is well. \[6.\] The meaning of all this is
that the nation shall be entirely ruined, and every part of it shall
share in the destruction; neither town nor country shall escape. First,
Not the country, for the whole land shall be desolate, corn land and
pasture land, both common and enclosed, it shall be laid waste ([Jer
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#027)); the conquerors will have
occasion for it all. Secondly, Not the men, for ([Jer
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#029)) the whole city shall flee, all
the inhabitants of the town shall quit their habitations by consent, for
fear of the horsemen and bowmen. Rather than lie exposed to their fury,
they shall go into the thickets, where they are in danger of being torn
by briers, nay, to be torn in pieces by wild beasts; and they shall
climb up upon the rocks, where their lodging will be hard and cold, and
the precipice dangerous. Let us not be over-fond of our houses and
cities; for the time may come when rocks and thickets may be preferable,
and chosen rather. This shall be the common case, for every city shall
be forsaken, and not a man shall be left that dares dwell therein. Both
government and trade shall be at an end, and all civil societies and
incorporations dissolved. It is a very dismal idea which this gives of
the approaching desolation; but in the midst of all these threatenings
comes in one comfortable word ([Jer
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#027)): Yet will not I make a full end
- not a total consumption, for God will reserve a remnant to himself,
that shall be hidden in the day of the Lord's anger - not a final
consumption, for Jerusalem shall again be built and the land inhabited.
This comes in here, in the midst of the threatenings, for the comfort of
those that trembled at God's word; and it intimates to us the
changeableness of God's providence; as it breaks down, so it raises up
again; every end of our comforts is not a full end, however we may be
ready to think it so. It also intimates the unchangeableness of God's
covenant, which stands so firmly, that, though he may correct his people
severely, yet he will not cast them off, [Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011).

(4.) Their case was helpless and without remedy. \[1.\] God would not
help them; so he tells them plainly, [Jer
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#028). And, if the Lord do not help
them, who can? This is that which makes their case deplorable. "For this
the earth mourns and the heavens above are black (there are no prospects
but what are very dismal), because I have spoken it; I have given the
word which shall not be called back; I have purposed it (it is a
consumption decreed, determined) and I will not repent, not change this
way, but proceed in it, and will not turn back from it." They would not
repent and turn back from the way of their sins ([Jer
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#025)), and therefore God will not
repent and turn back from the way of his judgments. \[2.\] They could
not help themselves, [Jer 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#030), [Jer
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#031). When the thing appeared at a
distance they flattered themselves with hopes that, though God should
not appear for them as he had done for Hezekiah against the Assyrian
army, yet they should find some means or other to secure themselves and
give check to the forces of the enemy. But the prophet tells them that,
when it comes to the setting to, they will be quite at a loss: "When
thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do? What course wilt thou take? Sit
down now, and consider this in time." He assures them that, whatever
were now their contrivances and confidences, First, They will then be
despised by their allies whom they depended upon for assistance. He had
often compared the sin of Jerusalem to whoredom, not only her idolatry,
but her trust in creatures, in the neighbouring powers. Now here he
compares her to a harlot abandoned by all the lewd ones that used to
make court to her. She is supposed to do all she can to keep up her
interest in their affections. She does what she can to make herself
appear considerable among the nations, and a valuable ally. She
compliments them by her ambassadors to the highest degree, to engage
them to stand by her now in her distress. She clothes herself with
crimson, as if she were rich, and decks herself with ornaments of gold,
as if her treasuries were still as full as ever they had been. She rents
her face with painting, puts the best colours she can upon her present
distresses and does her utmost to palliate and extenuate her losses,
sets a good face upon them. But this painting, though it beautifies the
face for the present, really rends it; the frequent use of paint spoils
the skin, cracks it, and makes it rough; so the case which by false
colours has been made to appear better than really it was, when truth
comes to light, will look so much the worse. "And, after all, in vain
shalt thou make thyself fair; all thy neighbours are sensible how low
thou art brought; the Chaldeans will strip thee of thy crimson and
ornaments, and then thy confederates will not only slight thee and
refuse to give thee any succour, but they will join with those that seek
thy life, that they may come in for a share in the prey of so rich a
country." Here seems to be an allusion to the story of Jezebel, who
thought, by making herself look fair and fine, to outface her doom, but
in vain, [Kg2 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#030), [Kg2
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#033). See what creatures prove when we
confide in them, how treacherous they are; instead of saving the life,
they seek the life; they often change, so that they will sooner do us an
ill turn than any service. And see to how little purpose it is for those
that have by sin deformed themselves in God's eyes to think by any arts
they can use to beautify themselves in the eye of the world. Secondly,
They will then be themselves in despair; they will find their troubles
to be like the pains of a woman in travail, which she cannot escape: I
have heard the voice of the daughter of Zion, her groans echoing to the
triumphal shouts of the Chaldean army, which he heard, [Jer
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#015). It is like the voice of a woman
in travail, whose pain is exquisite, and the fruit of sin and the curse
too ([Gen 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016)), and exhorts
lamentable outcries, especially of a woman in travail of her first
child, who, having never known before what that pain is, is the more
terrified by it. Troubles are most grievous to those that have not been
used to them. Zion, in this distress, since her neighbours refuse to
pity her, bewails herself, fetching deep sighs (so the word signifies),
and she spreads her hands, either wringing them for grief or reaching
them forth for succour. All the cry is, Woe is me now! (now that the
decree has gone forth against her and is past recall), for my soul is
wearied because of murderers. The Chaldean soldiers put all to the sword
that gave them any opposition, so that the land was full of murders.
Zion was weary of hearing tragical stories from all parts of the
country, and cried out, Woe is me! It was well if their sufferings put
them in mind of their sins, the murders committed upon them of the
murders committed by them; for God was now making inquisition for the
innocent blood shed in Jerusalem, which the Lord would not pardon, [Kg2
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#004). Note, As sin will find out the
sinner, so sorrow will, sooner or later, find out the secure.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 5](jer005)

</div>
