<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer030)  [Next](jer032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 31:0</span></span>

This chapter goes on with the good words and comfortable words which we
had in the chapter before, for the encouragement of the captives,
assuring them that God would in due time restore them or their children
to their own land, and make them a great and happy nation again,
especially by sending them the Messiah, in whose kingdom and grace many
of these promises were to have their full accomplishment. I. They shall
be restored to peace and honour, and joy and great plenty ([Jer
31:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001)). II. Their sorrow for the
loss of their children shall be at an end ([Jer
31:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015)). III. They shall repent of
their sins, and God will graciously accept them in their repentance
([Jer 31:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018)). IV. They shall be
multiplied and increased, both their children and their cattle, and not
be cut off and diminished as they had been ([Jer
31:21-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#021)). V. God will renew his
covenant with them, and enrich it with spiritual blessings ([Jer
31:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)). VI. These blessings shall
be secured to theirs after them, even to the spiritual seed of Israel
for ever ([Jer 31:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035)). VII. As an
earnest of this the city of Jerusalem shall be rebuilt ([Jer
31:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038)). These exceedingly great and
precious promises were firm foundations of hope and full fountains of
joy to the poor captives; and we also may apply them to ourselves and
mix faith with them.

[Jeremiah 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 31:1</span></span>

God here assures his people,

I. That he will again take them into a covenant relation to himself,
from which they seemed to be cut off. At the same time, when God's anger
breaks out against the wicked ([Jer
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#024)), his own people shall be owned
by him as the children of his love: I will be the God (that is, I will
show myself to be the God) of all the families of Israel ([Jer
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001)), - not of the two tribes only,
but of all the tribes, - not of the house of Aaron only, and the
families of Levi, but of all their families; not only their state in
general, but their particular families, and the interests of them, shall
have the benefit of a special relation to God. Note, The families of
good people, in their family capacity, may apply to God and stay
themselves upon him as their God. If we and our houses serve the Lord,
we and our houses shall be protected and blessed by him, [Pro
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#033).

II\. That he will do for them, in bringing them out of Babylon, as he
had done for their fathers when he delivered them out of Egypt, and as
he had purposed to do when he first took them to be his people. 1. He
puts them in mind of what he did for their fathers when he brought them
out of Egypt, [Jer 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#002). They were
then, as these were, a people left of the sword, that sword of Pharaoh
with which he cut off all the male children as soon as they were born (a
bloody sword indeed they had narrowly escaped) and that sword with which
he threatened to cut them off when he pursued them to the Red Sea. They
were then in the wilderness, where they seemed to be lost and forgotten,
as these were now in a strange land, and yet they found grace in God's
sight, were owned and highly honoured by him, and blessed with wonderful
instances of his peculiar favour, and he was at this time going to cause
them to rest in Canaan. Note, When we are brought very low, and
insuperable difficulties appear in the way of our deliverance, it is
good to remember that it has been so with the church formerly, and yet
that it has been raised up from its low estate and has got to Canaan
through all the hardships of a wilderness; and God is still the same. 2.
They put him in mind of what God had done for their fathers, intimating
that they now saw not such signs, and were ready to ask, as Gideon did,
Where are all the wonders that our fathers told us of? It is true, The
Lord hath appeared of old unto me ([Jer
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#003)), in Egypt, in the wilderness,
hath appeared with me and for me, hath been seen in his glory as my God.
The years of ancient times were glorious years; but now it is otherwise;
what good will it do us that he appeared of old to us when now he is a
God that hides himself from us? [Isa
45:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#015). Note, It is hard to take
comfort from former smiles under present frowns. 3. To this he answers
with an assurance of the constancy of his love: Yea, I have loved thee,
not only with an ancient love, but with an everlasting love, a love that
shall never fail, however the comforts of it may for a time be
suspended. It is an everlasting love; therefore have I extended or drawn
out lovingkindness unto thee also, as well as to thy ancestors, or, with
lovingkindness have I drawn thee to myself as thy God, from all the
idols to which thou hadst turned aside. Note, It is the happiness of
those who are through grace interested in the love of God that it is an
everlasting love (from everlasting in the counsels of it, to everlasting
in the continuance and consequences of it), and that nothing can
separate them from that love. Those whom God loves with this love he
will draw into covenant and communion with himself, by the influences of
his Spirit upon their souls; he will draw them with lovingkindness, with
the cords of a man and bands of love, than which no attractive can be
more powerful.

III\. That he will again form them into a people, and give them a very
joyful settlement in their own land, [Jer
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#004), [Jer
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#005). Is the church of God his house,
his temple? Is it now in ruins? It is so; but, Again I will build thee,
and thou shalt be built. Are they parts of this building dispersed? They
shall be collected and put together again, each in its place. If God
undertake to build them, they shall be built, whatever opposition may be
given to it? Is Israel a beautiful virgin? Is she now stripped of her
ornaments and reduced to a melancholy state? She is so; but thou shalt
again be adorned and made fine, adorned with thy tabrets, or timbrels,
the ornaments of thy chamber, and made merry. They shall resume their
harps which had been hung upon the willow-trees, shall tune them, and
shall themselves be in tune to make use of them. They shall be adorned
with their tabrets, for now their mirth and music shall be seasonable;
it shall be a proper time for it, God in his providence shall call them
to it, and then it shall be an ornament to them; whereas tabrets, at a
time of common calamity, when God called to mourning, were a shame to
them. Or it may refer to their use of tabrets in the solemnizing of
their religious feasts and their going forth in dances then, as the
daughters of Shiloh, [Jdg 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#019), [Jdg
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#021). Our mirth is then indeed an
ornament to us when we serve God and honour him with it. Is the joy of
the city maintained by the products of the country? It is so; and
therefore it is promised ([Jer 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#005)),
Thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountains of Samaria, which had been
the head city of the kingdom of Israel, in opposition to that of Judah;
but they shall now be united ([Eze
37:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#022)), and there shall be such
perfect peace and security that men shall apply themselves wholly to the
improvement of their ground: The planters shall plant, not fearing the
soldiers' coming to eat the fruits of what they had planted, or to pluck
it up; but they themselves shall eat them freely, as common things, not
forbidden fruits, not forbidden by the law of God (as they were till the
fifth year, [Lev 19:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#023)), not
forbidden by the owners, because there shall be such plenty as to yield
enough for all, enough for each.

IV\. That they shall have liberty and opportunity to worship God in the
ordinances of his own appointment, and shall have both invitations and
inclinations to do so ([Jer 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#006)):
There shall be a day, and a glorious day it will be, when the watchmen
upon Mount Ephraim, that are set to stand sentinel there, to give notice
of the approach of the enemy, finding that all is very quiet and that
there is no appearance of danger, shall desire for a time to be
discharged from their post, that they may go up to Zion, to praise God
for the public peace. Or the watchmen that tend the vineyards (spoken of
[Jer 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#005)) shall stir up themselves,
and one another, and all their neighbours, to go and keep the solemn
feasts at Jerusalem. Now this implies that the service of God shall be
again set up in Zion, that there shall be a general resort to it, with
much affection and mutual excitement, as in David's time, [Psa
122:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001). But that which is most
observable here is that the watchmen of Ephraim are forward to promote
the worship of God at Jerusalem, whereas formerly the watchman of
Ephraim was hatred against the house of his God ([Hos
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#008)), and, in stead of inviting people
to Zion, laid snares for those that set their faces thitherward, [Hos
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#001). Note, God can make those who have
been enemies to religion and the true worship of God to become
encouragers of them and leaders in them. This promise was to have its
full accomplishment in the days of the Messiah, when the gospel should
be preached to all these countries, and a general invitation thereby
given into the church of Christ, of which Zion was a type.

V. That God shall have the glory and the church both the honour and
comfort of this blessed change ([Jer
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#007)): Sing with gladness for Jacob,
that is, let all her friends and well-wishers rejoice with her, [Deu
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043). Rejoice, you Gentiles with his
people, [Rom 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#010). The restoration of
Jacob will be taken notice of by all the neighbours, it will be matter
of joy to them all, and they shall all join with Jacob in his joys, and
thereby pay him respect and put a reputation upon him. Even the chief of
the nations, that make the greatest figure, shall think it an honour to
them to congratulate the restoration of Jacob, and shall do themselves
the honour to send their ambassadors on that errand. Publish you, praise
you. In publishing these tidings, praise the God of Israel, praise the
Israel of God, speak honourably of both. The publishers of the gospel
must publish it with praise, and therefore it is often spoken of in the
Psalms as mingled with praises, [Psa
67:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002), [Psa
67:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#003); [Psa
96:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#002), [Psa
96:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#003). What we either bring to others
or take to ourselves the comfort of we must be sure to give God the
praise of. Praise you, and say, O Lord! save thy people; that is,
perfect their salvation, go on to save the remnant of Israel, that are
yet in bondage; as [Psa 126:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#003), [Psa
126:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#004). Note, When we are praising God
for what he has done we must call upon him for the future favours which
his church is in need and expectation of; and in praying to him we
really praise him and give him glory; he takes it so.

VI\. That, in order to a happy settlement in their own land, they shall
have a joyful return out of the land of their captivity and a very
comfortable passage homeward ([Jer
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#008), [Jer
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009)), and this beginning of mercy
shall be to them a pledge of all the other blessings here promised. 1.
Though they are scattered to places far remote, yet they shall be
brought together from the north country, and from the coasts of the
earth; wherever they are, God will find them out. 2. Though many of them
are very unfit for travel, yet that shall be no hindrance to them: The
blind and the lame shall come; such a good-will shall they have to their
journey, and such a good heart upon it, that they shall not make their
blindness and lameness an excuse for staying where they are. There
companions will be ready to help them, will be eyes to the blind and
legs to the lame, as good Christians ought to be to one another in their
travels heavenward, [Job 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#015). But,
above all, their God will help them; and let none plead that he is blind
who has God for his guide, or lame who has God for his strength. The
women with child are heavy, and it is not fit that they should undertake
such a journey, much less those that travail with child; and yet, when
it is to return to Zion, neither the one nor the other shall make any
difficulty of it. Note, When God calls we must not plead any inability
to come; for he that calls us will help us, will strengthen us. 3.
Though they seem to be diminished, and to have become few in numbers,
yet, when they come all together, they shall be a great company; and so
will God's spiritual Israel be when there shall be a general rendezvous
of them, though now they are but a little flock. 4. Though their return
will be matter of joy to them, yet prayers and tears will be both their
stores and their artillery ([Jer
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009)): They shall come with weeping
and with supplications, weeping for sin, supplication for pardon; for
the goodness of God shall lead them to repentance; and they shall weep
with more bitterness and more tenderness for sin, when they are
delivered out of their captivity, than ever they did when they were
groaning under it. Weeping and praying do well together; tears put life
into prayers, and express the liveliness of the, and prayers help to
wipe away tears. With favours will I lead them (so the margin reads it);
in their journey they shall be compassed with God's favours, the fruits
of his favour. 5. Though they have a perilous journey, yet they shall be
safe under a divine convoy. Is the country they pass through dry and
thirsty? I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters, not the
waters of a land-flood, which fail in summer. Is it a wilderness where
there is no road, no track? I will cause them t walk in a straight way,
which they shall not miss. Is it a rough and rocky country? Yet they
shall not stumble. Note, Whithersoever God gives his people a clear call
he will either find them or make them a ready way; and while we are
following Providence we may be sure that Providence will not be wanting
to us. And, lastly, here is a reason given why God will take all this
care of his people: For I am a Father to Israel, a Father that begat
him, and therefore will maintain him, that have the care and compassion
of a father for him ([Psa 103:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#013)); and
Ephraim is my first-born; even Ephraim, who, having gone astray from
God, was no more worthy to be called a son, shall yet be owned as a
first-born, particularly dear, and heir of a double portion of
blessings. The same reason that was given for their release out of Egypt
is given for their release out of Babylon; they are free-born and
therefore must not be enslaved, are born to God and therefore must not
be the servants of men. [Exo 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022),
[Exo 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#023), Israel is my son, even my
first-born; let my son go that he may serve me. If we take God for our
Father, and join ourselves to the church of the first-born, we may be
assured that we shall want nothing that is good for us.

[Jeremiah 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 31:10</span></span>

This paragraph is much to the same purport with the last, publishing to
the world, as well as to the church, the purposes of God's love
concerning his people. This is a word of the Lord which the nations must
hear, for it is a prophecy of a work of the Lord which the nations
cannot but take notice of. Let them hear the prophecy, that they may the
better understand and improve the performance; and let those that hear
it themselves declare it to others, declare it in the isles afar off. It
will be a piece of news that will spread all the world over. it will
look very great in history; let us see how it looks in prophecy.

It is foretold, 1. That those who are dispersed shall be brought
together again from their dispersions: He that scattereth Israel will
gather him; for he knows whither he scattered them and therefore where
to find them, [Jer 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#010). Una eademque
manus vulnus opemque tulit - The hand that inflicted the wound shall
heal it. And when he has gathered him into one body, one fold, he will
keep him, as a shepherd does his flock, from being scattered again. 2.
That those who are sold and alienated shall be redeemed and brought
back, [Jer 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#011). Though the enemy
that had got possession of him was stronger than he, yet the Lord, who
is stronger than all. has redeemed and ransomed him, not by price, but
by power, as of old out of the Egyptians' hands. 3. That with their
liberty they shall have plenty and joy, and God shall be honoured and
served with it, [Jer 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#012), [Jer
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#013). When they shall have returned
to their own land they shall come and sing in the high place of Zion; on
the top of that holy mountain they shall sing to the praise and glory of
God. We read that they did so when the foundation of the temple was laid
there; they sang together, praising and giving thanks to the Lord, [Ezr
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#011). They shall flow together to the
goodness of the Lord; that is, they shall flock in great numbers and
with great forwardness and cheerfulness, as streams of water, to the
goodness of the Lord, to the temple where he causes his goodness to pass
before his people. They shall come together in solemn assemblies, to
praise him for his goodness, and to pray for the fruits of it and the
continuance of it; they shall come to bless him for his goodness, in
giving them wheat, and wine, and oil, and the young of the flock and of
the herd, which, now that they have obtained their freedom, they have an
uncontested property in and the quiet and peaceable enjoyment of, and
which therefore they honour God with the first-fruits of and out of
which they bring offerings to his altar. Note, It is comfortable to
observe the goodness of the Lord in the gifts of common providence, and
even in them to taste covenant-love. Having plenty (plenty out of want
and scarcity) they shall greatly rejoice, their soul shall be as a
watered garden, flourishing and fruitful ([Isa
58:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011)), pleasant and fragrant, and
abounding in all good things. Note, Our souls are never valuable as
gardens but when they are watered with the dews of God's Spirit and
grace. It is a precious promise which follows, and which will not have
its full accomplishment any where on this side the height of the
heavenly Zion, that they shall not sorrow any more at all; for it is
only in that new Jerusalem that all tears shall be wiped away, [Rev
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004). However, so far it was fulfilled
to the returned captives that they had not any more those causes for
sorrow which they had formerly had; and therefore ([Jer
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#013)) young men and old shall rejoice
together; so grave shall the young men be in their joys as to keep
company with the old men, and so transported shall the old men be as to
associate with the young. Salva res est, saltat senex - The state
prospers, and the aged dance. God will turn their mourning into joy,
their fasts into solemn feasts, [Zac
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#019). It was in the return out of
Babylon that those who sowed in tears were made to reap in joy, [Psa
126:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#005), [Psa
126:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#006). Those are comforted indeed whom
God comforts, and may forget their troubles when he makes them to
rejoice from their sorrow, not only rejoice after it, but rejoice from
it their joy shall borrow lustre from their sorrow, which shall serve as
a foil to it; and the more they think of their troubles the more they
rejoice in their deliverance. 4. That both the ministers and those they
minister to shall have abundant satisfaction in what God gives them
([Jer 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#014)): I will satiate the soul
of the priests with fatness; there shall be such a plenty of sacrifices
brought to the altar that those who live upon the altar shall live very
comfortably, they and their families shall be satiated with fatness,
they shall have enough, and that of the best; and my people shall be
satisfied with my goodness, and shall think there is enough in that to
make them happy; and so there is. God's people have an abundant
satisfaction in God's goodness, though they have but little of this
world. Let them be satisfied of God's lovingkindness, and they will be
satisfied with it and desire no more to make them happy. All this is
applicable to the spiritual blessings which the redeemed of the Lord
enjoy by Jesus Christ, infinitely more valuable than corn, and wine, and
oil, and the satisfaction of soul which they have in the enjoyment of
them. 5. That those particularly who had been in sorrow for the loss of
their children who were carried into captivity should have that sorrow
turned into joy upon their return, [Jer
31:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015). Here we have, (1.) The sad
lamentation which the mothers made for the loss of their children ([Jer
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015)): In Ramah was there a voice
heard, at the time when the general captivity was, nothing but
lamentation, and bitter weeping, more there than in other places,
because there Nebuzaradan had the general rendezvous of his captives, as
appears, [Jer 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#001), where we find him
sending Jeremiah back from Ramah. Rachel is here said to weep for her
children. The sepulchre of Rachel was between Ramah and Bethlehem.
Benjamin, one of the two tribes, and Ephraim, head of the ten tribes,
were both descendants from Rachel. She had but two sons, the elder of
whom was one for whom his father grieved andrefused to be comforted
([Gen 37:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#035)); the other she herself
called Benoni - the son of my sorrow. Now the inhabitants of Ramah did
in like manner grieve for their sons and their daughters that were
carried away (as [Sa1 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#006)), and such
a voice of lamentation was there as, to speak poetically, might even
have raised Rachel out of her grave to mourn with them. The tender
parents even refused to be comforted for their children, because they
were not, were not with them, but were in the hands of their enemies;
they were never likely to see them any more. This is applied by the
evangelists to the great mourning that was at Bethlehem for the murder
of the infants there by Herod ([Mat
2:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#017)), and this scripture is said
to be then fulfilled. They wept for them, and would not be comforted,
supposing the case would not admit any ground of comfort, because they
were not. Note, Sorrow for the loss of children cannot but be great
sorrow, especially if we so far mistake as to think they are not. (2.)
Seasonable comfort administered to them in reference hereunto, [Jer
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#016), [Jer
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#017). They are advised to moderate
that sorrow, and to set bounds to it: Refrain thy voice from weeping and
thy eyes from tears. We are not forbidden to mourn in such a case;
allowances are made for natural affection. But we must not suffer our
sorrow to run into an extreme, to hinder our joy in God, or take us off
from our duty to him. Though we mourn, we must not murmur, nor must we
resolve, as Jacob did, to go to the grave mourning. In order to repress
inordinate grief, we must consider that there is hope in our end, hope
that there will be an end (the trouble will not last always), that it
will be a happy and - the end will be peace. Note, It ought to support
us under our troubles that we have reason to hope they will end well.
The righteous has hope in his death; that will be the blessed period of
his grief and the blessed passage to his joys. "There is hope for thy
posterity" (so some read it); "though thou mayest not live to see these
glorious days thyself, there is hope that thy posterity shall. Though
one generation falls in the wilderness, the next shall enter Canaan. Two
things thou mayest comfort thyself with the hope of:" - \[1.\] "The
reward of thy work: - Thy suffering work shall be rewarded. The comforts
of the deliverance shall be sufficient to balance all the grievances of
thy captivity." God makes his people glad according to the days wherein
he has afflicted them, and so there is a proportion between the joys and
the sorrows, as between the reward and the work. The glory to be
revealed, which the saints hope for in the end, will abundantly
countervail the sufferings of this present time, [Rom
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018). \[2.\] "The restoration of thy
children: They shall come again from the land of the enemy ([Jer
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#016)); they shall come again to their
own border," [Jer 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#017). There is hope
that children at a distance may be brought home. Jacob had a comfortable
meeting with Joseph after he had despaired of ever seeing him. There is
hope concerning children removed by death that they shall return to
their own border, to the happy lot assigned them in the resurrection, a
lot in the heavenly Canaan, that border of his sanctuary. We shall see
reason to repress our grief for the death of our children that are taken
into covenant with God when we consider the hopes we have of their
resurrection to eternal life. They are not lost, but gone before.

[Jeremiah 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 31:18</span></span>

We have here,

I. Ephraim's repentance, and return to God. Not only Judah, but Ephraim
the ten tribes, shall be restored, and therefore shall thus be prepared
and qualified for it, [Hos 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#008).
Ephraim shall say, What have I do to any more with idols? Ephraim the
people, is here spoken of as a single person to denote their unanimity;
they shall be as one man in their repentance and shall glorify God in it
with one mind and one mouth, one and all. it is likewise thus expressed
that it might be the better accommodated to particular penitents, for
whose direction and encouragement this passage is intended. Ephraim is
here brought in weeping for sin, perhaps because Ephraim, the person
from whom that tribe had its denomination, was a man of a tender spirit,
mourned for his children many days ([Ch1
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#021), [Ch1
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#022)), and sorrow for sin is compared
to that for an only son. This penitent is here brought in, 1. Bemoaning
himself and the miseries of his present case. True penitents do thus
bemoan themselves. 2. Accusing himself, laying a load upon himself as a
sinner, a great sinner. He charges upon himself, in the first place,
that sin which his conscience told him that he was more especially
guilty of at this time, and that was impatience under correction: "Thou
has chastised me; I have been under the rod, and I needed it, I deserved
it; I was justly chastised, chastised as a bullock, who would never have
felt the goad if he had not first rebelled against the yoke." True
penitents look upon their afflictions as fatherly chastisements: "Thou
hast chastised me and I was chastised; that is, it was well that I was
chastised, otherwise I should have been undone; it did me good, or at
least was intended to do me good; and yet I have been impatient under
it." Or it may intimate his want of feeling under the affliction: "Thou
hast chastised me and I was chastised, that was all; I was not awakened
by it and quickened by it; I looked no further than the chastisement. I
have been under the chastisement as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke,
unruly and unmanageable, kicking against the pricks, like a wild bull in
a net," [Isa 51:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#020). This is the sin he
finds himself guilty of now; but ([Jer
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#019)) he reflects upon his former
sins and looks as far back as the days of his youth. The discovery of
one sin should put us upon searching out more; now he remembers the
reproach of his youth. Ephraim, as a people, reflect upon the misconduct
of their ancestors when they were first formed in a people. It is
applicable to particular persons. Note, The sin of our youth was the
reproach of our youth, and we ought often to remember it against
ourselves and to bear it in a penitential sorrow and shame. 3. He is
here brought in angry at himself, having a holy indignation at himself
for his sin and folly: He smote upon his thigh, as the publican upon his
breast. He was even amazed at himself, and at his own stupidity and
frowardness: He was ashamed, yea even confounded, could not with any
confidence look up to God, nor with any comfort reflect upon himself. 4.
He is here recommending himself to the mercy and grace of God. He finds
he is bent to backslide from God, and cannot by any power of his own
keep himself close with God, much less, when he has revolted, bring
himself back to God, and therefore he prays, Turn thou me and I shall be
turned, which implies that unless God do turn him by his grace he shall
never be turned, but wander endlessly, that therefore he is very
desirous of converting grace, has a dependence upon it, and doubts not
but that that grace will be sufficient for him, to help him over all the
difficulties that were in the way of his return to God. See [Jer
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#014), Heal me and I shall be healed.
God works with power, can make the unwilling willing; if he undertake
the conversion of a soul, it will be converted. 5. He is here pleasing
himself with the experience he had of the blessed effect of divine
grace: Surely after that I was turned I repented. Note, All the pious
workings of our heart towards God are the fruit and consequence of the
powerful working of his grace in us. And observe, He was turned, he was
instructed, his will was bowed to the will of God, by the right
informing of his judgment concerning the truths of God. Note, The way
God takes of converting souls to himself is by opening the eyes of their
understandings, and all good follows thereupon: After that I was
instructed I yielded, I smote upon my thigh. When sinners come to a
right knowledge they will come to a right way. Ephraim was chastised,
and that did not produce the desired effect, it went no further: I was
chastised, and that was all. But, when the instructions of God's Spirit
accompanied the corrections of his providence, then the work was done,
then he smote upon his thigh, was so humbled for sin as to have no more
to do with it.

II\. God's compassion on Ephraim and the kind reception he finds with
God, [Jer 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020). 1. God owns him for a
child and a prodigal: Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he a pleasant child?
Thus when Ephraim bemoans himself God bemoans him, as one whom his
mother comforts, though she had chidden him, [Isa
66:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#013). Is this Ephraim my dear son? Is
this that pleasant child? Is it he that is thus sad in spirit and that
complains so bitterly? So it is like that of Saul ([Sa1
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#017)), Is this thy voice, my son
David? Or, as it is sometimes supplied, Is not Ephraim my dear son? Is
he not a pleasant child? Yes, now he is, now he repents and returns.
Note, Those that have been undutiful backsliding children, if they
sincerely return and repent, however they have been under the
chastisement of the rod, shall be accepted of God as dear and pleasant
children. Ephraim had afflicted himself, but God thus heals him - had
abased himself, but God thus honours him; as the returning prodigal who
thought himself no more worthy to be called a son, yet, by his father,
had the best robe put on him and a ring on his hand. 2. He relents
towards him, and speaks of him with a great deal of tender compassion:
Since I spoke against him, by the threatenings of the word and the
rebukes of providence, I do earnestly remember him still, my thoughts
towards him are thoughts of peace. Note, When God afflicts his people,
yet he does not forget them; when he casts them out of their land, yet
he does not cast them out of sight, nor out of mind. Even then when God
is speaking against us, yet he is acting for us, and designing our good
in all; and this is our comfort in our affliction, thatthe Lord thinks
upon us, though we have forgotten him. I remember him still, and
therefore my bowels are troubled for him, as Joseph's yearned towards
his brethren, even when he spoke roughly to them. When Israel's
afflictions extorted a penitent confession and submission it is said
that his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel ([Jdg
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#016)), for he always afflicts with
the greatest tenderness. It was God's compassion that mitigated
Ephraim's punishment: My heart is turned within me ([Hos
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#008), [Hos
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#009)); and now the same compassion
accepted Ephraim's repentance. Ephraim had pleaded ([Jer
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018)), Thou art the Lord my God,
therefore to thee will I return, therefore on thy mercy and grace I will
depend; and God shows that it was a valid plea and prevailing, for he
makes it appear both that he is God and not man and that he is his God.
3. He resolves to do him good: I will surely have mercy upon him, saith
the Lord, Note, God has mercy in store, rich mercy, sure mercy, suitable
mercy, for all that in sincerity seek him and submit to him; and the
more we are afflicted for sin the better prepared we are for the
comforts of that mercy.

III\. Gracious excitements and encouragements given to the people of God
in Babylon to prepare for their return to their own land. Let them not
tremble and lose their spirits; let them not trifle and lose their time;
but with a firm resolution and a close application address themselves to
their journey, [Jer 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#021), [Jer
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022). 1. They must think of nothing
but of coming back to their own country, out of which they had been
driven: "Turn again, O virgin of Israel! a virgin to be again espoused
to thy God; turn again to these thy cities; though they are laid waste
and in ruins, they are thy cities, which thy God gave thee, and
therefore turn again to them." They must be content in Babylon no longer
than till they had liberty to return to Zion. 2. They must return the
same way that they went, that the remembrance of the sorrows which
attended them, or which their fathers had told them of, in such and such
places upon the road, the sight of which would, by a local memory, put
them in mind of them, might make them the more thankful for their
deliverance. Those that have departed from God into the bondage of sin
must return by the way in which they went astray, to the duties they
neglected, must do their first works. 3. They must engage themselves and
all that is within them in this affair: Set thy heart towards the
highway; bring thy mind to it; consider thy duty, the interest, and go
about it with a good-will. Note, The way from Babylon to Zion, from the
bondage of sin to the glorious liberty of God's children, is a highway;
it is right, it is plain, it is safe, it is well-tracked ([Isa
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008)); yet none are likely to walk in
it, unless they set their hearts towards it. 4. They must furnish
themselves with all needful accommodations for the journey: Set thee up
way-marks, and make thee high heaps or pillars; send before to have such
set up in all places where there is any danger of missing the road. Let
those that go first, and are best acquainted with the way, set up such
directions for those that follow. 5. They must compose themselves for
their journey: How long will thou go about, O backsliding daughter? Let
not their minds fluctuate, or be uncertain about it, but resolve upon
it; let them not distract themselves with care and fear; let them not
seek about to creatures for assistance, not hurry hither and thither in
courting them, which had often been an instance of their backsliding
from God; but let them cast themselves upon God, and then let their
minds be fixed. 6. They are encouraged to do this by an assurance God
gives them that he would create a new thing (strange and surprising) in
the earth (in that land), a woman shall compass a man. The church of
God, that is weak and feeble as a woman, altogether unapt for military
employments and of a timorous spirit ([Isa
54:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#006)), shall surround, besiege, and
prevail against a mighty man. The church is compared to a woman, [Rev
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001). And, whereas we find armies
compassing the camp of the saints ([Rev
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009)), now the camp of the saints
shall compass them. Many good interpreters understand this new thing
created in that land to be the incarnation of Christ, which God an eye
to in bringing them back to that land, and which had sometimes been
given them for a sign, [Isa 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014); [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006). A woman, the virgin Mary,
enclosed in her womb the Mighty One; for so Geber, the word here used,
signifies; and God is called Gibbor, the Mighty God ([Jer
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#018)), as also is Christ in [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006), where his incarnation is spoken
of, as it is supposed to be here. He is El-Gibbor, the mighty God. Let
this assure them that God would not cast off this people, for that
blessing was to be among them, [Isa
65:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008).

IV\. A comfortable prospect given them of a happy settlement in their
own land again. 1. They shall have an interest in the esteem and
good-will of all their neighbours, who will give them a good word and
put up a good prayer for them ([Jer
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#023)): As yet or rather yet again
(though Judah and Jerusalem have long been an astonishment and a
hissing), this speech shall be used, as it was formerly, concerning the
land of Judah and the cities thereof, The Lord bless you, O habitation
of justice and mountain of holiness! This intimates that they shall
return much reformed and every way better; and this reformation shall be
so conspicuous that all about them shall take notice of it. The cities,
that used to be nests of pirates, shall be habitations of justice; the
mountain of Israel (so the whole land is called, [Psa
78:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#054)), and especially Mount Zion,
shall be a mountain of holiness. Observe, Justice towards men, and
holiness towards God, must go together. Godliness and honesty are what
God has joined, and let no man think to put them asunder, not to make
one to atone for the want of the other. It is well with a people when
they come out of trouble thus refined, and it is a sure presage of
further happiness. And we may with great comfort pray for the blessing
of God upon those houses that are habitations of justice, those cities
and countries that are mountains of holiness. There the Lord will
undoubtedly command the blessing. 2. There shall be great plenty of all
good things among them ([Jer 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#024),
[Jer 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#025)): There shall dwell in
Judah itself, even in it, though it has now long lain waste, both
husbandmen and shepherds, the two ancient and honourable employments of
Cain and Abel, [Gen 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#002). It is
comfortable dwelling in a habitation of justice and a mountain of
holiness. "And the husbandmen and shepherds shall eat of the fruit of
their labours; for I have satiated the weary and sorrowful soul;" that
is, those that came weary from their journey, and have been long
sorrowful in their captivity, shall now enjoy great plenty. This is
applicable to the spiritual blessings God has in store for all true
penitents, for all that are just and holy; they shall be abundantly
satisfied with divine graces and comforts. In the love and favour of God
the weary soul shall find rest and the sorrowful soul joy.

V. The prophet tells us what pleasure the discovery of this brought to
his mind, [Jer 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#026). The foresights
God had given him sometimes of the calamities of Judah and Jerusalem
were exceedingly painful to him (as [Jer
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#019)), but these views were pleasant
ones, though at a distance. "Upon this I awaked, overcome with joy,
which burst the fetters of sleep; and I reflected upon my dream, and it
was such as had made my sleep sweet to me; I was refreshed, as men are
with quiet sleep." Those may sleep sweetly that lie down and rise up in
the favour of God and in communion with him. Nor is any prospect in this
world more pleasing to good men, and good ministers, than that of the
flourishing state of the church of God. What can we see with more
satisfaction than the good of Jerusalem, all the days of our life, and
peace upon Israel?

[Jeremiah 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 31:27</span></span>

The prophet, having found his sleep sweet, made so by the revelations of
divine grace, sets himself to sleep again, in hopes of further
discoveries, and is not disappointed; for it is here further promised,

I. That the people of God shall become both numerous and prosperous.
Israel and Judah shall be replenished both with men and cattle, as if
they were sown with the seed of both, [Jer
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027). They shall increase and
multiply like a field sown with corn; and this is the product of God's
blessing ([Jer 31:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#023)), for whom God
blessed, to them he said, Be fruitful. This should be a type of the
wonderful increase of the gospel-church. God will build them, and plant
them, [Jer 31:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#028). He will watch over
them to do them good; no opportunity shall be lost that may further
their prosperity. Every thing for a long time had turned so much against
them, and all occurrences did so transpire to ruin them, that it seemed
as if God had watched over them to pluck up and to throw down; but now
every thing that falls out shall happily fall in to strengthen and
advance their interests. God will be as ready to comfort those that
repent of their sins, and are humbled for them, as he is to punish those
that continue in love with their sins, and are hardened in them.

II\. That they shall be reckoned with no further for the sins of their
fathers ([Jer 31:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#029), [Jer
31:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#030)),: They shall say no more (they
shall have no more occasion to say) that God visits the iniquity of the
parents upon the children, which God had done in the captivity, for the
sins of their ancestors came into the account against them, particularly
those of Manasseh: this they had complained of as a hardship. Other
scriptures justify God in this method of proceeding, and our Saviour
tells the wicked Jews in his days that they should smart for their
fathers' sins, because they persisted in them, [Mat
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035), [Mat
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#036). But it is here promised that
this severe dispensation with them should now be brought to an end, that
God would proceed no further in his controversy with them for their
fathers' sins, but remember for them his covenant with their fathers and
do them good according to that covenant: They shall no more complain, as
they have done, that the fathers have eaten sour grapes and the
children's teeth are set on edge (which speaks something of an
absurdity, and is an invidious reflection upon God's proceedings), but
every one shall die for his own iniquity still; though God will cease to
punish them in their national capacity, yet he will still reckon with
particular persons that provoke him. Note, Public salvations will give
no impunity, no security, to private sinners: still every man that eats
the sour grapes shall have his teeth set on edge. Note, Those that eat
forbidden fruit, how tempting soever it looks, will find it a sour
grape, and it will set their teeth on edge; sooner or later they will
feel from it and reflect upon it with bitterness. There is as direct a
tendency in sin to make a man uneasy as there is in sour grapes to set
the teeth on edge.

III\. That God will renew his covenant with them, so that all these
blessings they shall have, not by providence only, but by promise, and
thereby they shall be both sweetened and secured. But this covenant
refers to gospel times, the latter days that shall come; for of gospel
grace the apostle understands it ([Heb
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008), [Heb
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#009), etc.), where this whole passage
is quoted as a summary of the covenant of grace made with believers in
Jesus Christ. Observe, 1. Who the persons are with whom this covenant is
made - with the house of Israel and Judah, with the gospel church, the
Israel of God on which peace shall be ([Gal
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016)), with the spiritual seed of
believing Abraham and praying Jacob. Judah and Israel had been two
separate kingdoms, but were united after their return, in the joint
favours God bestowed upon them; so Jews and Gentiles were in the gospel
church and covenant. 2. What is the nature of this covenant in general:
it is a new covenant and not according to the covenant made with them
when they came out of Egypt; not as if that made with them at Mount
Sinai were a covenant of nature and innocency, such as was made with
Adam in the day he was created; no, that was, for substance, a covenant
of grace, but it was a dark dispensation of that covenant in comparison
with this in gospel times. Sinners were saved by that covenant upon
their repentance, and faith in a Messiah to come, whose blood,
confirming that covenant, was typified by that of the legal sacrifices,
[Exo 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007), [Exo
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008). Yet this may upon many accounts
be called new, in comparison with that; the ordinances and promises are
more spiritual and heavenly, and the discoveries much more clear. That
covenant God made with them when he took them by the hand, as they had
been blind, or lame, or weak, to lead them out of the land of Egypt,
which covenant they broke. Observe, It was God that made this covenant,
but it was the people that broke it; for our salvation is of God, but
our sin and ruin are of ourselves. It was an aggravation of their breach
of it that God was a husband to them, that he had espoused them to
himself; it was a marriage-covenant that was between him and them, which
they broke by idolatry, that spiritual adultery. It is a great
aggravation of our treacherous departures from God that he has been a
husband to us, a loving, tender, careful husband, faithful to us, and
yet we false to him. 3. What are the particular articles of his
covenant. They all contain spiritual blessings; not, "I will give them
the land of Canaan and a numerous issue," but, "I will give them pardon,
and peace, and grace, good heads and good hearts." He promises, (1.)
That he will incline them to their duty; I will put my law in their
inward part and write it in their heart; not, I will give them a new law
(as Mr. Gataker well observes), for Christ came not to destroy the law,
but to fulfil it; but the law shall be written in their hearts by the
finger of the Spirit as formerly it was written in the tables of stone.
God writes his law in the hearts of all believers, makes it ready and
familiar to them, at hand when they have occasion to use it, as that
which is written in the heart, [Pro
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003). He makes them in care to observe
it, for that which we are solicitous about is said to lie near our
hearts. He works in them a disposition to obedience, a conformity of
thought and affection to the rules of the divine law, as that of the
copy to the original. This is here promised, and ought to be prayed for,
that our duty may be done conscientiously and with delight. (2.) That he
will take them into relation to himself: I will be their God, a God
all-sufficient to them, and they shall be my people, a loyal obedient
people to me. God's being to us a God is the summary of all happiness;
heaven itself is no more, [Heb 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#016);
[Rev 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003). Our being to him a people
may be taken either as the condition on our part (those and those only
shall have God to be to them a God that are truly willing to engage
themselves to be to him a people) or as a further branch of the promise
that God will by his grace make us his people, a willing people, in the
day of his power; and, whoever are his people, it is his grace that
makes them so. (3.) That there shall be an abundance of the knowledge of
God among all sorts of people, and this will have an influence upon all
good: for those that rightly know God's name will seek him, and serve
him, and put their trust in him ([Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034)): All shall know me; all shall
be welcome to the knowledge of God and shall have the means of that
knowledge; his ways shall be known upon earth, whereas, for many ages,
in Judah only was God known. Many more shall know God than did in the
Old Testament times, which among the Gentiles were times of ignorance,
the true God being to them an unknown God. The things of God shall in
gospel times be made more plain and intelligible, and level to the
capacities of the meanest, than they were while Moses had a veil upon
his face. There shall be such a general knowledge of God that there
shall not be so much need as had formerly been of teaching. Some take it
as a hyperbolical expression (and the dulness of the Jews needed such
expressions to awaken them), designed only to show that the knowledge of
God in gospel times should vastly exceed that knowledge of him which
they had under the law. Or perhaps it intimates that in gospel times
there shall be such great plenty of public preaching, statedly and
constantly, by men authorized and appointed to preach the word in season
and out of season, much beyond what was under the law, that there shall
be less need than there was then of fraternal teaching, by a neighbour
and a brother. The priests preached but now and then, and in the temple,
and to a few in comparison; but now all shall or may know God by
frequenting the assemblies of Christians, wherein, through all parts of
the church, the good knowledge of God shall be taught. Some give this
sense of it (Mr. Gataker mentions it), That many shall have such
clearness of understanding in the things of God that they may seem
rather to have been taught by some immediate irradiation than by any
means of instruction. In short, the things of God shall by the gospel of
Christ be brought to a clearer light than ever ([Ti2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#010)), and the people of God shall by
the grace of Christ be brought to a clearer sight of those things than
ever, [Eph 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#017), [Eph
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018). (4.) That, in order to all these
blessings, sin shall be pardoned. This is made the reason of all the
rest: For I will forgive their iniquity, will not impute that to them,
nor deal with them according to the desert of that, will forgive and
forget: I will remember their sin no more. It is sin that keeps good
things from us, that stops the current of God's favours; let sin betaken
away by pardoning mercy, and the obstruction is removed, and divine
grace runs down like a river, like a mighty stream.

[Jeremiah 31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jer 31:35</span></span>

Glorious things have been spoken in the foregoing verses concerning the
gospel church, which that epocha of the Jewish church that was to
commence at the return from captivity would at length terminate in, and
which all those promises were to have their full accomplishment in. But
may we depend upon these promises? Yes, we have here a ratification of
them, and the utmost assurance imaginable given of the perpetuity of the
blessings contained in them. The great thing here secured to us is that
while the world stands God will have a church in it, which, though
sometimes it may be brought very low, shall yet be raised again, and its
interests re-established; it is built upon a rock, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it. Now here are two things offered for the
confirmation of our faith in this matter - the building of the world and
the rebuilding of Jerusalem.

I. The building of the world, and the firmness and lastingness of that
building, are evidences of the power and faithfulness of that God who
has undertaken the establishment of his church. He that built all things
at first is God ([Heb 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#004)), and the
same is he that makes all things now. The constancy of the glories of
the kingdom of nature may encourage us to depend upon the divine promise
for the continuance of the glories of the kingdom of grace, for this is
as the waters of Noah, [Isa 54:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#009). Let
us observe here,

1\. The glories of the kingdom of nature, and infer thence how happy
those are that have this God, the God of nature, to be their God for
ever and ever. Take notice, (1.) Of the steady and regular motion of the
heavenly bodies, which God is the first mover and supreme director of:
He gives the sun for a light by day ([Jer
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035)), not only made it at first to
be so, but still gives it to be so; for the light and heat, and all the
influences of the sun, continually depend upon its great Creator. He
gives the ordinances of the moon and stars for a light by night; their
motions are called ordinances both because they are regular and by rule
and because they are determined and under rule. See [Job
38:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#031). (2.) Take notice of the
government of the sea, and the check that is given to its proud billows:
The Lord of hosts divides the sea, or (as some read it) settles the sea,
when the waves thereof roar (divide et impera - divide and rule); when
it is most tossed God keeps it within compass ([Jer
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022)), and soon quiets it and makes it
calm again. The power of God is to be magnified by us, not only in
maintaining the regular motions of the heavens, but in controlling the
irregular motions of the seas. (3.) Take notice of the vastness of the
heavens and the unmeasurable extent of the firmament; he must needs be a
great God who manages such a great world as this is; the heavens above
cannot be measured ([Jer 31:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#037)), and
yet God fills them. (4.) Take notice of the mysteriousness even of that
part of the creation in which our lot is cast and which we are most
conversant with. The foundations of the earth cannot be searched out
beneath, for the Creator hangs the earth upon nothing ([Job
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#007)), and we know not how the
foundations thereof are fastened, [Job
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#006). (5.) Take notice of the
immovable stedfastness of all these ([Jer
31:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#036)): These ordinances cannot depart
from before God; he has all the hosts of heaven and earth continually
under his eye and all the motions of both; he has established them, and
they abide, abide according to his ordinance, for all are his servants,
[Psa 119:90](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#090), [Psa
119:91](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#091). The heavens are often clouded,
and the sun and moon often eclipsed, the earth may quake and the sea be
tossed, but they all keep their place, are moved, but not removed.
Herein we must acknowledge the power, goodness, and faithfulness of the
Creator.

2\. The securities of the kingdom of grace inferred hence: we may be
confident of this very thing that the seed of Israel shall not cease
from being a nation, for the spiritual Israel, the gospel church, shall
be a holy nation, a peculiar people, [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009). When Israel according to the
flesh is no longer a nation the children of the promise are counted for
the seed ([Rom 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008)) and God will not
cast off all the seed of Israel, no, not for all that they have done,
though they have done very wickedly, [Jer
31:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#037). He justly might cast them off,
but he will not. Though he cast them out from their land, and cast them
down for a time, yet he will not cast them off. Some of them he casts
off, but not all; to this the apostle seems to refer ([Rom
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001)), Hath God cast away his people?
God forbid that we should think so! For ([Jer
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#005)) at this time there is a remnant,
enough to save the credit of the promise that God will not cast off all
the seed of Israel, though many among them throw away themselves by
unbelief. Now we may be assisted in the belief of this by considering,
(1.) That the God that has undertaken the preservation of the church is
a God of almighty power, who upholds all things by his almighty word.
Our help stands in his name who made heaven and earth, and therefore can
do any thing. (2.) That God would not take all this care of the world
but that he designs to have some glory to himself out of it; and how
shall he have it but by securing to himself a church in it, a people
that shall be to him for a name and a praise? (3.) That if the order of
the creation therefore continues firm because it was well-fixed at
first, and is not altered because it needs no alteration, the method of
grace shall for the same reason continue invariable, as it was a first
well settled. (4.) That he who has promised to preserve a church for
himself has approved himself faithful to the word which he has spoken
concerning the stability of the world. He that is true to his covenant
with Noah and his sons, because he established it for an everlasting
covenant ([Gen 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#009), [Gen
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#016)), will not, we may be sure, be
false to his covenant with Abraham and his seed, his spiritual seed, for
that also is an everlasting covenant. Even that which they have done
amiss, though they have done much, shall not prevail to defeat the
gracious intentions of the covenant. See [Psa
89:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030), etc.

II\. The rebuilding of Jerusalem which was now in ruins, and the
enlargement and establishment of that, shall be an earnest of these
great things that God will do for the gospel church, the heavenly
Jerusalem, [Jer 31:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038). The days
will come, though they may be long in coming, when, 1. Jerusalem shall
be entirely built again, as large as ever it was; the dimensions are
here exactly described by the places through which the circumference
passed, and no doubt the wall which Nehemiah built, and which, the more
punctually to fulfil the prophecy, began about the tower of Hananeel,
here mentioned ([Neh 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001)), enclosed as
much ground as is here intended, though we cannot certainly determine
the places here called the gate of the corner, the hill Gareb, etc. 2.
When built it shall be consecrated to God and to his service. It shall
be built to the Lord ([Jer 31:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038)), and
even the suburbs and fields adjacent shall be holy unto the Lord. It
shall not be polluted with idols as formerly, but God shall be praised
and honoured there; the whole city shall be as it were one temple, one
holy place, as the new Jerusalem is, which therefore has no temple,
because it is all temple. 3. Being thus built by virtue of the promise
of God, it shall not be plucked up, nor thrown down, any more for ever;
that is, it shall continue very long, the time of the new city from the
return to its last destruction being fully as long as that of the old
from David to the captivity. But this promise was to have its full
accomplishment in the gospel church, which, as it is the spiritual
Israel, and therefore God will not cast it off, so it is the holy city,
and therefore all the powers of men shall not pluck it up, nor throw it
down. It may lie waste for a time, as Jerusalem did, but shall recover
itself, shall weather the storm and gain its point, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 32](jer032)

</div>
