<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer024)  [Next](jer026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 25:0</span></span>

The prophecy of this chapter bears date some time before those
prophecies in the chapters next foregoing, for they are not placed in
the exact order of time in which they were delivered. This is dated in
the first year of Nebuchadrezzar, that remarkable year when the sword of
the Lord began to be drawn and furbished. Here is, I. A review of the
prophecies that had been delivered to Judah and Jerusalem for many years
past, by Jeremiah himself and other prophets, with the little regard
given to them and the little success of them ([Jer
25:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001)). II. A very express
threatening of the destruction of Judah and Jerusalem, by the king of
Babylon, for their contempt of God, and their continuance in sin ([Jer
25:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#008)), to which is annexed a
promise of their deliverance out of their captivity in Babylon, after 70
years ([Jer 25:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#012)). III. A
prediction of the devastation of divers other nations about, by
Nebuchadrezzar, represented by a "cup of fury" put into their hands
([Jer 25:15-28](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015)), by a sword sent among
them ([Jer 25:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#029)), and a desolation
made among the shepherds and their flocks and pastures ([Jer
25:34-38](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#034)); so that we have here
judgment beginning at the house of God, but not ending there.

[Jeremiah 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 25:1</span></span>

We have here a message from God concerning all the people of Judah ([Jer
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001)), which Jeremiah delivered, in
his name, unto all the people of Judah, [Jer
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#002). Note, That which is of universal
concern ought to be of universal cognizance. It is fit that the word
which concerns all the people, as the word of God does, the word of the
gospel particularly, should be divulged to all in general, and, as far
as may be, addressed to each in particular. Jeremiah had been sent to
the house of the king ([Jer 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#001)), and
he took courage to deliver his message to them, probably when they had
all come up to Jerusalem to worship at one of the solemn feasts; then he
had them together, and it was to be hoped then, if ever, they would be
well disposed to hear counsel and receive instruction.

This prophecy is dated in the fourth year of Jehoiakim and the first of
Nebuchadrezzar. It was in the latter end of Jehoiakim's third year that
Nebuchadrezzar began to reign by himself alone (having reigned some time
before in conjunction with his father), as appears, [Dan
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001). But Jehoiakim's fourth year was
begun before Nebuchadrezzar's first was completed. Now that that active,
daring, martial prince began to set up for the world's master, God, by
his prophet, gives notice that he is his servant, and intimates what
work he intends to employ him in, that his growing greatness, which was
so formidable to the nations, might not be construed as any reflection
upon the power and providence of God in the government of the world.
Nebuchadrezzar should not bid so fair for universal monarchy (I should
have said universal tyranny) but that God had purposes of his own to
serve by him, in the execution of which the world shall see the meaning
of God's permitting and ordering a thing that seemed such a reflection
on his sovereignty and goodness.

Now in this message we may observe the great pains that had been taken
with the people to bring them to repentance, which they are here put in
mind of, as an aggravation of their sin and a justification of God in
his proceedings against them.

I. Jeremiah, for his part, had been a constant preacher among them
twenty-three years; he began in the thirteenth year of Josiah, who
reigned thirty-one years, so that he prophesied about eighteen or
nineteen years in his reign, then in the reign of Jehoahaz, and now four
years of Jehoiakim's reign. Note, God keeps an account, whether we do or
no, how long we have enjoyed the means of grace; and the longer we have
enjoyed them the heavier will our account be if we have not improved
them. These three years (these three and twenty years) have I come
seeking fruit on this fig-tree. All this while, 1. God had been constant
in sending messages to them, as there was occasion for them: "From that
time to this very day the word of the Lord has come into me, for your
use." Though they had the substance of the warning sent them already in
the books of Moses, yet, because those were not duly regarded and
applied, God sent to enforce them and make them more particular, that
they might be without excuse. Thus God's Spirit was striving with them,
as with the old world, [Gen 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003). 2.
Jeremiah had been faithful and industrious in delivering those messages.
He could appeal to themselves, as well as to God and his own conscience,
concerning this: I have spoken to you, rising early and speaking. He had
declared to them the whole counsel of God; he had taken a great deal of
care and pains to discharge his thrust in such a manner as might be most
likely to win and work upon them. What men are solicitous about and
intent upon they rise up early to prosecute. It intimates that his head
was so full of thoughts about it, and his heart so intent upon doing
good, that it broke his sleep, and made him get up betimes to project
which way he might take that would be most likely to do them good. He
rose early, both because he would lose no time and because he would lay
hold on and improve the best time to work upon them, when, if ever, they
were sober and sedate. Christ came early in the morning to preach in the
temple, and the people as early to hear him, [Luk
21:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#038). Morning lectures have their
advantages. My voice shalt thou hear in the morning.

II\. Besides him, God had sent them other prophets, on the same errand,
[Jer 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#004). Of the writing prophets
Micah, Nahum, and Habakkuk, were a little before him, and Zephaniah
contemporary with him. But, besides those, there were many other of
God's servants the prophets who preached awakening sermons, which were
never published. And here God himself is said to rise early and send
them, intimating how much his heart also was upon it, that this people
should turn and live, and not go on and die, [Eze
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011).

III\. All the messages sent them were to the purpose, and much to the
same purport, [Jer 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#005), [Jer
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#006). 1. They all told them of their
faults, their evil way, and the evil of their doings. Those were not of
God's sending who flattered them as if there were nothing amiss among
them. 2. They all reproved them particularly for their idolatry, as a
sin that was in a special manner provoking to God, their going after
other gods, to serve them and to worship them, gods that were the work
of their own hands. 3. They all called on them to repent of their sins
and to reform their lives. This was the burden of every song, Turn you
now every one from his evil way. Note, Personal and particular
reformation must be insisted on as necessary to a national deliverance:
every one must turn from his own evil way. The street will not be clean
unless every one sweep before his own door. 4. They all assured them
that, if they did so, it would certainly be the lengthening out of their
tranquillity. The mercies they enjoyed should be continued to them: "You
shall dwell in the land, dwell at ease, dwell in peace, in this good
land, which the Lord has given you and your fathers. Nothing but sin
will turn you out of it, and that shall not if you turn from it." The
judgments they feared should be prevented: Provoke me not, and I will do
you no hurt. Note, We should never receive from God the evil punishment
if we did not provoke him by the evil of sin. God deals fairly with us,
never corrects his children without cause, nor causes grief to us unless
we give offence to him.

IV\. Yet all was to no purpose. They were not wrought upon to take the
right and only method to turn away the wrath of God. Jeremiah was a very
lively affectionate preacher, yet they hearkened not to him, [Jer
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#003). The other prophets dealt
faithfully with them, but neither did they hearken to them, nor incline
their ear, [Jer 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#004). That very
particular sin which they were told, of all others, was most offensive
to God, and made them obnoxious to his justice, they wilfully persisted
in: You provoke me with the works of your hands to your own hurt. Note,
What is a provocation to God will prove, in the end, hurt to ourselves,
and we must bear the blame of it. O Israel! thou hast destroyed thyself.

[Jeremiah 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 25:8</span></span>

Here is the sentence grounded upon the foregoing charge: "Because you
have not heard my words, I must take another course with you," [Jer
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#008). Note, When men will not regard
the judgments of God's mouth they may expect to feel the judgments of
his hands, to hear the rod, since they would not hear the word; for the
sinner must either be parted from his sin or perish in it. Wrath comes
without remedy against those only that sin without repentance. It is not
so much men's turning aside that ruins them as their not returning.

I. The ruin of the land of Judah by the king of Babylon's armies is here
decreed, [Jer 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#009). God sent to them
his servants the prophets, and they were not heeded, and therefore God
will send for his servant the king of Babylon, whom they cannot mock,
and despise, and persecute, as they did his servants the prophets. Note,
The messengers of God's wrath will be sent against those that would not
receive the messengers of his mercy. One way or other God will be
heeded, and will make men know that he is the Lord. Nebuchadrezzar,
though a stranger to the true God, the God of Israel, nay, an enemy to
him and afterwards a rival with him, was yet, in the descent he made
upon his country. God's servant, accomplished his purpose, was employed
by him, and was an instrument in his hand for the correction of his
people. He was really serving God's designs when he thought he was
serving his own ends. Justly therefore does God here call himself The
Lord of hosts ([Jer 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#008)), for here is
an instance of his sovereign dominion, not only over the inhabitants,
but over the armies of this earth, of which he makes what use he
pleases. He has them all at his command. The most potent and absolute
monarchs are his servants. Nebuchadrezzar, who is an instrument of his
wrath, is as truly his servant as Cyrus, who is an instrument of his
mercy. The land of Judah being to be made desolate, God here musters his
army that is to make it so, gathers it together, takes all the families
of the north, if there be occasion for them, leads them on as their
commander-in-chief, brings them against this land, gives them success,
not only against Judah and Jerusalem, but against all the nations round
about, that there might be no dependence upon them as allies or
assistants against that threatening force. The utter destruction of this
and all the neighbouring lands is here described, [Jer
25:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#009). It shall be total: The whole
land shall be a desolation, not only desolate, but a desolation itself;
both city and country shall be laid waste, and all the wealth of both be
made a prey of. It shall be lasting, even perpetual desolations; they
shall continue so long in ruins, and after long waiting there shall
appear so little prospect of relief, that every one shall call it
perpetual. This desolation shall be the ruin of their credit among their
neighbours; it shall bury their honour in the dust, shall make them an
astonishment and a hissing; every one will be amazed at them, and hiss
them off the stage of action with just disgrace for deserting a God who
would have been their protection for impostors who would certainly be
their destruction. It will likewise be the ruin of all their comfort
among themselves; it shall be a final period of all their joy: I will
take from them the voice of mirth, hang their harps on the willow-trees,
and put them out of tune for songs. I will take from them the voice of
mirth; they shall neither have cause for it nor hearts for it. They
would not hear the voice of God's word and therefore the voice of mirth
shall no more be heard among them. They shall be deprived of food: The
sound of the mill-stones shall not be heard; for, when the enemy has
seized their stores, the sound of the grinding must needs be low, [Ecc
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#004). An end shall be put to all
business; there shall not be seen the light of a candle, for there shall
be no work to be done worth candle-light. And, lastly, they shall be
deprived of their liberty: Those nations shall serve the king of Babylon
seventy years. The fixing of time during which the captivity should last
would be of great use, not only for the confirmation of the prophecy,
when the event (which in this particular could by no human sagacity be
foreseen) should exactly answer the prediction, but for the comfort of
the people of God in their calamity and the encouragement of faith and
prayer. Daniel, who was himself a prophet, had an eye to it, [Dan
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#002). Nay, God himself had an eye to it
([Ch2 36:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#022)); for therefore he stirred
up the spirit of Cyrus, that the word spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah
might be accomplished. Known unto God are all his works from the
beginning of the world, which appears by this, that, when he has thought
fit, some of them have been made known to his servants the prophets and
by them to his church.

II\. The ruin of Babylon, at last, is here likewise foretold, as it had
been, long before, by Isaiah, [Jer
25:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#012). The destroyers must
themselves be destroyed, and the rod thrown into the fire, when the
correcting work is done with it. This shall be done when seventy years
are accomplished; for the destruction of Babylon must make way for the
deliverance of the captives. It is a great doubt when these seventy
years commence; some date them from the captivity in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim and first of Nebuchadrezzar, others from the captivity of
Jehoiachin eight years after. I rather incline to the former, because
then these nations began to serve the king of Babylon, and because
usually God has taken the earliest time from which to reckon the
accomplishment of a promise of mercy, as will appear in computing the
400 years' servitude in Egypt. And, if so, eighteen or nineteen years of
the seventy had run out before Jerusalem and the temple were quite
destroyed in the eleventh year of Zedekiah. However that be, when the
time, the set time, to favour Zion, has come, the king of Babylon must
be visited, and all the instances of his tyranny reckoned for; then that
nation shall be punished for their iniquity, as the other nations have
been punished for theirs. That land must then be a perpetual desolation,
such as they had made other lands; for the Judge of all the earth will
both do right and avenge wrong, as King of nations and King of saints.
Let proud conquerors and oppressors be moderate in the use of their
power and success, for it will come at last to their own turn to suffer;
their day will come to fall. In this destruction of Babylon, which was
to be brought about by the Medes and Persians, reference shall be had,
1. To what God had said: I will bring upon that land all my words; for
all the wealth and honour of Babylon shall be sacrificed to the truth of
the divine predictions, and all its power broken, rather than one iota
or tittle of God's word shall fall to the ground. The same Jeremiah that
prophesied the destruction of other nations by the Chaldeans foretold
also the destruction of the Chaldeans themselves; and this must be
brought upon them, [Jer 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#013). It is
with reference to this very event that God says, I will confirm the word
of my servant, and perform the counsel of my messengers, [Isa
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#026). 2. Two what they had done ([Jer
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#014)): I will recompense them
according to their deeds, by which they transgressed the law of God,
even then when they were made to serve his purposes. They had made many
nations to serve them, and trampled upon them with the greatest
insolence imaginable; but not that the measure of their iniquity is full
many nations and great kings, that are in alliance with and come in to
the assistance of Cyrus king of Persia, shall serve themselves of them
also, shall make themselves masters of their country, enrich themselves
with their spoils, and make them the footstool by which to mount the
throne of universal monarchy. They shall make use of them for servants
and soldiers. He that leads into captivity shall go into captivity.

[Jeremiah 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 25:15</span></span>

Under the similitude of a cup going round, which all the company must
drink of, is here represented the universal desolation that was now
coming upon that part of the world which Nebuchadrezzar, who just now
began to reign and act, was to be the instrument of, and which should at
length recoil upon his own country. The cup in the vision is to be a
sword in the accomplishment of it: so it is explained, [Jer
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#016). It is the sword that I will
send among them, the sword of war, that should be irresistibly strong
and implacably cruel.

I. As to the circumstances of this judgment, observe,

1\. Whence this destroying sword should come - from the hand of God. It
is the sword of the Lord ([Jer 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#006)),
bathed in heaven, [Isa 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005). Wicked
men are made use of as his sword, [Psa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#013). It is the wine-cup of his fury.
It is the just anger of God that sends this judgment. The nations have
provoked him by their sins, and they must fall under the tokens of his
wrath. These are compared to some intoxicating liquor, which they shall
be forced to drink of, as, formerly, condemned malefactors were
sometimes executed by being compelled to drink poison. The wicked are
said to drink the wrath of the Almighty, [Job
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#020); [Rev
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010). Their share of troubles in his
world is represented by the dregs of a cup of red wine full of mixture,
[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008). See [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006). The wrath of God in this world
is but as a cup, in comparison of the full streams of it in the other
world.

2\. By whose hand it should be sent to them - by the hand of Jeremiah as
the judge set over the nations ([Jer
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)), to pass his sentence upon them,
and by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar as the executioner. What a much
greater figure then does the poor prophet make than what the potent
prince makes, if we look upon their relation to God, though in the eye
of the world it was the reverse of it! Jeremiah must take the cup at
God's hand, and compel the nations to drink it. He foretells no hurt to
them but what God appoints him to foretell; and what is foretold by a
divine authority will certainly be fulfilled by a divine power.

3\. On whom it should be sent - on all the nations within the verge of
Israel's acquaintance and the lines of their communication. Jeremiah
took the cup, and made all the nations to drink of it, that is, he
prophesied concerning each of the nations here mentioned that they
should share in this great desolation that was coming. Jerusalem and the
cities of Judah are put first ([Jer
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#018)); for judgment begins at the
house of God ([Pe1 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)), at the
sanctuary, [Eze 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#006). Whether
Nebuchadrezzar had his eye principally upon Jerusalem and Judah in this
expedition or no does not appear; probably he had; for it was as
considerable as any of the nations here mentioned. However God had his
eye principally to them. And this part of the prophecy was already begun
to be accomplished; this is denoted by that melancholy parenthesis (as
it is this day), for in the fourth year of Jehoiakim things had come
into a very bad posture, and all the foundations were out of course.
Pharaoh king of Egypt comes next, because the Jews trusted to that
broken reed (v. 19); the remains of them fled to Egypt, and there
Jeremiah particularly foretold the destruction of that country, [Jer
43:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#010), [Jer
43:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#011). All the other nations that
bordered upon Canaan must pledge Jerusalem in this bitter cup, this cup
of trembling. The mingled people, the Arabians (so some), some rovers of
divers nations that lived by rapine (so others); the kings of the land
of Uz, joined to the country of the Edomites. The Philistines had been
vexatious to Israel, but now their cities and their lords become a prey
to this mighty conqueror. Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyre, and Zidon, are places
well known to border upon Israel; the Isles beyond, or beside, the sea,
are supposed to be those parts of Phoenicia and Syria that lay upon the
coast of the Mediterranean Sea. Dedan and the other countries mentioned
([Jer 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#023), [Jer
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#024)) seem to have lain upon the
confines of Idumea and Arabia the desert. Those of Elam are the
Persians, with whom the Medes are joined, now looked upon as
inconsiderable and yet afterwards able to make reprisals upon Babylon
for themselves and all their neighbours. The kings of the north, that
lay nearer to Babylon, and others that lay at some distance, will be
sure to be seized on and made a prey of by the victorious sword of
Nebuchadrezzar. Nay, he shall push on his victories with such incredible
fury and success that all the kingdoms of the world that were then and
there known should become sacrifices to his ambition. Thus Alexander is
said to have conquered the world, and the Roman empire is called the
world, [Luk 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001). Or it may be taken as
reading the doom of all the kingdoms of the earth; one time or other,
they shall feel the dreadful effects of war. The world has been, and
will be, a great cockpit, while men's lusts war as they do in their
members, [Jam 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001). But, that the
conquerors may see their fate with the conquered, it concludes, The king
of Sheshach shall drink after them, that is, the king of Babylon
himself, who has given his neighbours all this trouble and vexation,
shall at length have it return upon his own head. That by Sheshach is
meant Babylon is plain from [Jer
51:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#041); but whether it was another name
of the same city or the name of another city of the same kingdom is
uncertain. Babylon's ruin was foretold, [Jer
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#012), [Jer
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#013). Upon this prophecy of its being
the author of the ruin of so many nations it is very fitly repeated here
again.

4\. What should be the effect of it. The desolations which the sword
should make in all these kingdoms are represented by the consequences of
excessive drinking ([Jer 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#016)): They
shall drink, and be moved, and be mad. They shall be drunken, and spue,
and fall and rise no more, [Jer 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#027).
Now this may serve, (1.) To make us loathe the sin of drunkenness, that
the consequences of it are made use of to set forth a most woeful and
miserable condition. Drunkenness deprives men, for the present, of the
use of their reason, makes them mad. It takes from them likewise that
which, next to reason, is the most valuable blessing, and that is
health; it makes them sick, and endangers the bones and the life. Men in
drink often fall and rise no more; it is a sin that is its own
punishment. How wretchedly are those intoxicated and besotted that
suffer themselves at any time to be intoxicated, especially to be by the
frequent commission of the sin besotted with wine or strong drink! (2.)
To make us dread the judgments of war. When God sends the sword upon a
nation, with warrant to make it desolate, it soon becomes like a drunken
man, filled with confusion at the alarms of war, put into a hurry; its
counsellors mad, and at their wits' end, staggering in all the measures
they take, all the motions they make, sick at heart with continual
vexation, vomiting up the riches they have greedily swallowed down ([Job
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#015)), falling down before the enemy,
and as unable to get up again, or do any thing to help themselves, as a
man dead drunk is, [Hab 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#016).

5\. The undoubted certainty of it, with the reason given for it, [Jer
25:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#028), [Jer
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#029). They will refuse to take the
cup at thy hand; not only they will be loth that the judgment should
come, but they will be loth to believe that ever it will come; they will
not give credit to the prediction of so despicable a man as Jeremiah.
But he must tell them that it is the word of the Lord of hosts, he hath
said it; and it is in vain for them to struggle with Omnipotence: You
shall certainly drink. And he must give them this reason, It is a time
of visitation, it is a reckoning day, and Jerusalem has been called to
an account already: I begin to bring evil on the city that is called by
my name; its relation to me will not exempt it from punishment, and
should you be utterly unpunished? No; If this be done in the green tree,
what shall be done in the dry? If those who have some good in them smart
so severely for the evil that is found in them, can those expect to
escape who have worse evils, and no good, found among them? If Jerusalem
be punished for learning idolatry of the nations, shall not the nations
be punished, of whom they learned it? No doubt they shall: I will call
for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, for they have helped
to debauch the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

II\. Upon this whole matter we may observe, 1. That there is a God that
judges in the earth, to whom all the nations of the earth are
accountable, and by whose judgment they must abide. 2. That God can
easily bring to ruin the greatest nations, the most numerous and
powerful, and such as have been most secure. 3. That those who have been
vexatious and mischievous to the people of God will be reckoned with for
it at last. Many of these nations had in their turns given disturbance
to Israel, but now comes destruction on them. The year of the redeemer
will come, even the year of recompenses for the controversy of Zion. 4.
That the burden of the word of the Lord will at last become the burden
of his judgments. Isaiah had prophesied long since against most of these
nations (ch. 13, etc.) and now at length all his prophecies will have
their complete fulfilling. 5. That those who are ambitious of power and
dominion commonly become the troublers of the earth and the plagues of
their generation. Nebuchadrezzar was so proud of his might that he had
no sense of right. These are the men that turn the world upside down,
and yet expect to be admired and adored. Alexander thought himself a
great prince when others thought him no better than a great pirate. 6.
That the greatest pomp and power in this world are of very uncertain
continuance. Before Nebuchadrezzar's greater force kings themselves must
yield and become captives.

[Jeremiah 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 25:30</span></span>

We have, in these verses, a further description of those terrible
desolations which the king of Babylon with his armies should make in all
the countries and nations round about Jerusalem. In Jerusalem God had
erected his temple; there were his oracles and ordinances, which the
neighbouring nations should have attended to and might have received
benefit by; thither they should have applied for the knowledge of God
and their duty, and then they might have had reason to bless God for
their neighbourhood to Jerusalem; but they, instead of that, taking all
opportunities either to debauch or to disturb that holy city, when God
came to reckon with Jerusalem because it learned so much of the way of
the nations, he reckoned with the nations because they learned so little
of the way of Jerusalem.

They will soon be aware of Nebuchadrezzar's making war upon them; but
the prophet is here directed to tell them that it is God himself that
makes war upon them, a God with whom there is no contending. 1. The war
is here proclaimed ([Jer 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#030)): The
Lord shall roar from on high; not from Mount Zion and Jerusalem (as [Joe
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#016), [Amo
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#002)), but from heaven, from his holy
habitation there; for now Jerusalem is one of the places against which
he roars. He shall mightily roar upon his habitation on earth from that
above. He has been long silent, and seemed not to take notice of the
wickedness of the nations; the times of this ignorance God winked at;
but now he shall give a shout, as the assailants in battle do, against
all the inhabitants of the earth, to whom it shall be a shout of terror,
and yet a shout of joy in heaven, as theirs that tread the grapes; for,
when God is reckoning with the proud enemies of his kingdom among men,
there is a great voice of much people heard in heaven, saying,
Hallelujah, [Rev 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001). He roars as a
lion ([Amo 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#004), [Amo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#008)), as a lion that has forsaken his
covert ([Jer 25:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#038)), and is going
abroad to seek his prey, upon which he roars, that he may the more
easily seize it. 2. The manifesto is here published, showing the causes
and reasons why God proclaims this war ([Jer
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#031)): The Lord has a controversy
with the nations; he has just cause to contend with them, and he will
take this way of pleading with them. His quarrel with them is, in one
word, for their wickedness, their contempt of him, and his authority
over them and kindness to them. He will give those that are wicked to
the sword. They have provoked God to anger, and thence comes all this
destruction; it is because of the fierce anger of the Lord ([Jer
25:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#037) and again [Jer
25:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#038)), the fierceness of the
oppressor, or (as it might better be read) the fierceness of the
oppressing sword (for the word is feminine) is because of his fierce
anger; and we are sure that he is never angry without cause; but who
knows the power of his anger? 3. The alarm is here given and taken: A
noise will come even to the ends of the earth, so loud shall it roar, so
far shall it reach, [Jer 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#031). The
alarm is not given by sound of trumpet, or beat of drum, but by a
whirlwind, a great whirlwind, storm, or tempest, which shall be raised
up from the coasts, the remote coasts of the earth, [Jer
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#032). The Chaldean army shall be like
a hurricane raised in the north, but thence carried on with incredible
fierceness and swiftness, bearing down all before it. It is like the
whirlwind out of which God answered Job, which was exceedingly terrible,
[Job 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#001); [Job
38:1](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001). And, when the wrath of God thus
roars like a lion from heaven, no marvel if it be echoed with shrieks
from earth; for who can choose but tremble when God thus speaks in
displeasure? See [Hos 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#010). Now the
shepherds shall howl and cry, the kings, and princes, and the great ones
of the earth, the principal of the flock. They used to be the most
courageous and secure, but now their hearts shall fail them; they shall
wallow themselves in the ashes, [Jer
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#034). Seeing themselves utterly
unable to make head against the enemy, and seeing their country, which
they have the charge of and a concern for, inevitably ruined, they shall
abandon themselves to sorrow. There shall be a voice of the cry of the
shepherds, and a howling of the principal of the flock shall be heard,
[Jer 25:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#036). Those are great calamities
indeed that strike such a terror upon the great men, and put them into
this consternation. The Lord hath spoiled their pasture, in which they
fed their flock, and out of which they fed themselves; the spoiling of
that makes them cry-out thus. Perhaps, carrying on the metaphor of a
lion roaring, it alludes to the great fright that shepherds are in when
they hear a roaring lion coming towards their flocks, and find they have
no way to flee ([Jer 25:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#035)) for their
own safety, neither can the principal of their flock escape. The enemy
will be so numerous, so furious, so sedulous, and the extent of their
armies so vast, that it will be impossible to avoid falling into their
hands. Note, As we cannot out-face, so we cannot out-run, the judgments
of God. This is that for which the shepherds howl and cry. 4. The
progress of this war is here described ([Jer
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#032)): Behold, evil shall go forth
from nation to nation; as the cup goes round, every nation shall have
its share and take warning by the calamities of another to repent and
reform. Nay, as if this ere to be a little representation of the last
and general judgment, it shall reach from one end of the earth even unto
the other end of the earth, [Jer
25:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#033). The day of vengeance is in his
heart, and now his hand shall find out all his enemies, wherever they
are, [Psa 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#008). Note, When our
neighbour's house is on fire it is time to be concerned for our own.
When one nation is a seat of war every neighbouring nation should hear,
and fear, and make its peace with God. 5. The dismal consequences of
this war are here foretold: The days of slaughter and dispersions are
accomplished, that is, they are fully come ([Jer
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#034)), the time fixed in the divine
counsel for the slaughter of some and the dispersion of the rest, which
will make the nations completely desolate. Multitudes shall fall by the
sword of the merciless Chaldeans, so that the slain of the Lord shall be
every where found: they are slain by commission from him, and are
sacrificed to his justice. The slain for sin are the slain of the Lord.
To complete the misery of their slaughter, they shall not be lamented in
particular, so general shall the matter of lamentation be. Nay, they
shall not be gathered up, nor buried, for they shall have no friends
left to bury them, and the enemies shall not have so much humanity in
them as to do it; and then they shall be as dung upon the earth, so vile
and noisome: and it is well if, as dung manures the earth and makes it
fruitful, so these horrid spectacles, which lie as monuments of divine
justice, might be a means to awaken the inhabitants of the earth to
learn righteousness. The effect of this war will be the desolation of
the whole land that is the seat of it ([Jer
25:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#038)), one land after another. But
here are two expressions more that seem to make the case in a particular
manner piteous. (1.) You shall fall like a pleasant vessel, [Jer
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#034). The most desirable persons
among them, who most valued themselves and were most valued, who were
looked upon as vessels of honour, shall fall by the sword. You shall
fall as a Venice glass or a China dish, which is soon broken all to
pieces. Even the tender and delicate shall share in the common calamity;
the sword devours one as well as another. (2.) Even the peaceable
habitations are cut down. Those that used to be quiet, and not molested,
the habitations in which you have long dwelt in peace, shall now be no
longer such, but cut down by the war. Or, Those who used to be quiet,
and not molesting any of their neighbours, those who lived in peace,
easily, and gave no provocation to any, even those shall not escape.
This is one of the direful effects of war, that even those who were most
harmless and inoffensive suffer hard things. Blessed be God, there is a
peaceable habitation above for all the sons of peace, which is out of
the reach of fire and sword.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 26](jer026)

</div>
