<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer016)  [Next](jer018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 17:0</span></span>

In this chapter, I. God convicts the Jews of the sin of idolatry by the
notorious evidence of the fact, and condemns them to captivity for it
([Jer 17:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)). II. He shows them the
folly of all their carnal confidences, which should stand them in no
stead when God's time came to contend with them, and that this was one
of the sins upon which his controversy with them was grounded ([Jer
17:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)). III. The prophet makes his
appeal and address to God upon occasion of the malice of his enemies
against him, committing himself to the divine protection, and begging of
God to appear for him ([Jer 17:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012)).
IV. God, by the prophet, warns the people to keep holy the sabbath day,
assuring them that, if they did, it should be the lengthening out of
their tranquility, but that, if not, God would by some desolating
judgment assert the honour of his sabbaths ([Jer
17:19-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#019)).

[Jeremiah 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 17:1</span></span>

The people had asked ([Jer 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#010)),
What is our iniquity, and what is our sin? as if they could not be
charged with any thing worth speaking of, for which God should enter
into judgment with them; their challenge was answered there, but here we
have a further reply to it, in which,

I. The indictment is fully proved upon the prisoners, both the fact and
the fault; their sin is too plain to be denied and too bad to be
excused, and they have nothing to plead either in extenuation of the
crime or in arrest and mitigation of the judgment. 1. They cannot plead,
Not guilty, for their sins are upon record in the book of God's
omniscience and their own conscience; nay, and they are obvious to the
eye and observation of the world, [Jer
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001), [Jer
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#002). They are written before God in
the most legible and indelible characters, and sealed among his
treasures, never to be forgotten, [Deu
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#034). They are written there with a
pen of iron and with the point of a diamond; what is so written will not
be worn out by time, but is, as Job speaks, graven in the rock for ever.
Note, The sin of sinners is never forgotten till it is forgiven. It is
ever before God, till by repentance it comes to be ever before us. It is
graven upon the table of their heart; their own consciences witness
against them, and are instead of a thousand witnesses. What is graven on
the heart, though it may be covered and closed up for a time, yet, being
graven, it cannot be erased, but will be produced in evidence when the
books shall be opened. Nay, we need not appeal to the tables of the
heart, perhaps they will not own the convictions of their consciences.
We need go no further, for proof of the charge, than the horns of their
altars, on which the blood of their idolatrous sacrifices was sprinkled,
and perhaps the names of the idols to whose honour they were erected
were inscribed. Their neighbours will witness against them, and all the
creatures they have abused by using them in the service of their lusts.
To complete the evidence, their own children shall be witnesses against
them; they will tell truth when their fathers dissemble and prevaricate;
they remember the altars and the groves to which their parents took them
when they were little, v. 2. It appears that they were full of them, and
acquainted with them betimes, they talked of them so frequently, so
familiarly, and with so much delight. 2. They cannot plead that they
repent, or are brought to a better mind. No, as the guilt of their sin
is undeniable, so their inclination to sin is invincible and incurable.
In this sense many understand [Jer
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001), [Jer
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#002). Their sin is deeply engraven as
with a pen of iron in the tables of their hearts. They have a rooted
affection to it; it is woven into their very nature; their sin is dear
to them, as that is dear to us of which we say, It is engraven on our
hearts. The bias of their minds is still as strong as ever towards their
idols, and they are not wrought upon either by the word or rod of God to
forget them and abate their affection to them. It is written upon the
horns of their altars, for they have given up their names to their idols
and resolve to abide by what they have done; they have bound themselves,
as with cords, to the horns of their altars. And [Jer
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#002) may be read fully to this sense:
As they remember their children, so remember they their altars and their
groves; they are as fond of them and take as much pleasure in them as
men do in their own children, and are as loth to part with them; they
will live and die with their idols, and can no more forget them than a
woman can forget her sucking child.

II\. The indictment being thus fully proved, the judgment is affirmed
and the sentence ratified, [Jer 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#003),
[Jer 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#004). Forasmuch as they are thus
wedded to their sins, and will not part with them, 1. They shall be made
to part with their treasures, and those shall be given into the hands of
strangers. Jerusalem is God's mountain in the field; it was built on a
hill in the midst of a plain. All the treasures of that wealthy city
will God give to the spoil. Or, My mountains with the fields, thy wealth
and all thy treasures will I expose to spoil; both the products of the
country and the stores of the city shall be seized by the Chaldeans.
Justly are men stripped of that which they have served their idols with
and have made the food and the fuel of their lusts. My mountain (so the
whole land was, [Psa 78:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#054), [Deu
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#011)) you have turned into your high
places for sin, have worshipped your idols upon the high hills ([Jer
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#002)), and now they shall be give for
a spoil in all your borders. What we make for a sin God will make for a
spoil; for what comfort can we expect in that wherewith God is
dishonoured? 2. They shall be made to part with their inheritance, and
shall be carried captives into a strange land ([Jer
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#004)): Thou, even thyself (or thou
thyself and those that are in thee, all the inhabitants), shall
discontinue from thy heritage that I gave thee. God owns that it was
their heritage, and that he gave it to them; they had an unquestionable
title to it, which was an aggravation of their folly in throwing
themselves out of the possession of it. It is through thyself (so some
read it), through thy own default, that thou art disseised. Thou shalt
discontinue, or intermit, the occupation of thy land. The law appointed
them to let their land rest (it is the word here used) one year in
seven, [Exo 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#011). They did not
observe that law, and now God would compel them to let it rest (the land
shall enjoy her sabbaths, [Lev 26:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#034));
and yet it shall be not rest to them; they shall serve their enemies in
a land they know not. Observe, (1.) Sin works a discontinuance of our
comforts and deprives us of the enjoyment of that which God has given
us. Yet, (2.) A discontinuance of the possession is not a defeasance of
the right, but it is intimated that upon their repentance they shall
recover possession again. For the present, you have kindled a fire in my
anger, which burns so fiercely that it seems as if it would burn for
ever; and so it will unless you repent, for it is the anger of an
everlasting God fastening upon the immortal souls, and who knows the
power of that anger?

[Jeremiah 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 17:5</span></span>

It is excellent doctrine that is preached in these verses, and of
general concern and use to us all, and it does not appear to have any
particular reference to the present state of Judah and Jerusalem. The
prophet's sermons were not all prophetical, but some of them practical;
yet this discourse, which probably we have here only the heads of, would
be of singular use to them by way of caution not to misplace their
confidence in the day of their distress. Let us all learn what we are
taught here,

I. Concerning the disappointment and vexation those will certainly meet
with who depend upon creatures for success and relief when they are in
trouble ([Jer 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005), [Jer
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006)): Cursed be the man that trusts
in man. God pronounces him cursed for the affront he thereby puts upon
him. Or, Cursed (that is, miserable) is the man that does so, for he
leans upon a broken reed, which will not only fail him, but will run
into his hand and pierce it. Observe, 1. The sin here condemned; it is
trusting in man, putting that confidence in the wisdom and power, the
kindness and faithfulness, of men, which should be placed in those
attributes of God only, making our applications to men and raising our
expectations from them as principal agents, whereas they are but
instruments in the hand of Providence. It is making flesh the arm we
stay upon, the arm we work with and with which we hope to work our
point, the arm under which we shelter ourselves and on which we depend
for protection. God is his people's arm, [Isa
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002). We must not think to make any
creature to be that to us which God has undertaken to be. Man is called
flesh, to show the folly of those that make him their confidence; he is
flesh, weak and feeble as flesh without bones or sinews, that has no
strength at all in it; he is inactive as flesh without spirit, which is
a dead thing; he is mortal and dying as flesh, which soon putrefies and
corrupts, and is continually wasting. Nay, he is false and sinful, and
has lost his integrity; so his being flesh signifies, [Gen
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003). The great malignity there is in
this sin; it is the departure of the evil heart of unbelief from the
living God. Those that trust in man perhaps draw nigh to God with their
mouth and honour him with their lips, they call him their hope and say
that they trust in him, but really their heart departs from him; they
distrust him, despise him, and decline a correspondence with him.
Cleaving to the cistern is leaving the fountain, and is resented
accordingly. 3. The fatal consequences of this sin. He that puts a
confidence in man puts a cheat upon himself; for ([Jer
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006)) he shall be like the heath in
the desert, a sorry shrub, the product of barren ground, sapless,
useless, and worthless; his comforts shall all fail him and his hopes be
blasted; he shall wither, be dejected in himself and trampled on by all
about him. When good comes he shall not see it, he shall not share in
it; when the times mend they shall not mend with him, but he shall
inhabit the parched places in the wilderness; his expectation shall be
continually frustrated; when others have a harvest he shall have none.
Those that trust to their own righteousness and strength, and think they
can do well enough without the merit and grace of Christ, thus make
flesh their arm, and their souls cannot prosper in graces or comforts;
they can neither produce the fruits of acceptable services to God nor
reap the fruits of saving blessings from him; they dwell in a dry land.

II\. Concerning the abundant satisfaction which those have, and will
have, who make God their confidence, who live by faith in his providence
and promise, who refer themselves to him and his guidance at all times
and repose themselves in him and his love in the most unquiet times,
[Jer 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#007), [Jer
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#008). Observe, 1. The duty required of
us - to trust in the Lord, to do our duty to him and then depend upon
him to bear us out in doing it - when creatures and second causes either
deceive or threaten us, either are false to us or fierce against us, to
commit ourselves to God as all-sufficient both to fill up the place of
those who fail us and to protect us from those who set upon us. It is to
make the Lord our hope, his favour the good we hope for and his power
the strength we hope in. 2. The comfort that attends the doing of this
duty. He that does so shall be as a tree planted by the waters, a choice
tree, about which great care has been taken to set it in the best soil,
so far from being like the heath in the wilderness; he shall be like a
tree that spreads out its roots, and thereby is firmly fixed, spreads
them out by the rivers, whence it draws abundance of sap, which denotes
both the establishment and the comfort which those have who make God
their hope; they are easy, they are pleasant, and enjoy a continual
security and serenity of mind. A tree thus planted, thus watered, shall
not see when heat comes, shall not sustain any damage from the most
scorching heats of summer; it is so well moistened from its roots that
it shall be sufficiently guarded against drought. Those that make God
their hope, (1.) They shall flourish in credit and comfort, like a tree
that is always green, whose leaf does not wither; they shall be cheerful
to themselves and beautiful in the eyes of others. Those who thus give
honour to God by giving him credit God will put honour upon, and make
them the ornament and delight of the places where they live, as green
trees are. (2.) They shall be fixed in an inward peace and satisfaction:
They shall not be careful in a year of drought, when there is want of
rain; for, as the tree has seed in itself, so it has its moisture. Those
who make God their hope have enough in him to make up the want of all
creature-comforts. We need not be solicitous about the breaking of a
cistern as long as we have the fountain. (3.) They shall be fruitful in
holiness, and in all good works. Those who trust in God, and by faith
derive strength and grace from him, shall not cease from yielding fruit;
they shall still be enabled to do that which will redound to the glory
of God, the benefit of others, and their own account.

III\. Concerning the sinfulness of man's heart, and the divine
inspection it is always under, [Jer
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009), [Jer
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#010). It is folly to trust in man,
for he is not only frail, but false and deceitful. We are apt to think
that we trust in God, and are entitled to the blessings here promised to
those who do so. But this is a thing about which our own hearts deceive
us as much as any thing. We think that we trust in God when really we do
not, as appears by this, that our hopes and fears rise or fall according
as second causes smile or frown.

1\. It is true in general. (1.) There is that wickedness in our hearts
which we ourselves are not aware of and do not suspect to be there; nay,
it is a common mistake among the children of men to think themselves,
their own hearts at least, a great deal better than they really are. The
heart, the conscience of man, in his corrupt and fallen state, is
deceitful above all things. It is subtle and false; it is apt to
supplant (so the word properly signifies); it is that from which Jacob
had his name, a supplanter. It calls evil good and good evil, puts false
colours upon things, and cries peace to those to whom peace does not
belong. When men say in their hearts (that is, suffer their hearts to
whisper to them) that there is no God, or he does not see, or he will
not require, or they shall have peace though they go on; in these, and a
thousand similar suggestions the heart is deceitful. It cheats men into
their own ruin; and this will be the aggravation of it, that they are
self-deceivers, self-destroyers. Herein the heart is desperately wicked;
it is deadly, it is desperate. The case is bad indeed, and in a manner
deplorable and past relief, if the conscience which should rectify the
errors of the other faculties is itself a mother of falsehood and a
ring-leader in the delusion. What will become of a man if that in him
which should be the candle of the Lord give a false light, if God's
deputy in the soul, that is entrusted to support his interests, betrays
them? Such is the deceitfulness of the heart that we may truly say, Who
can know it? Who can describe how bad the heart is? We cannot know our
own hearts, not what they will do in an hour of temptation (Hezekiah did
not, Peter did not), not what corrupt dispositions there are in them,
nor in how many things they have turned aside; who can understand his
errors? Much less can we know the hearts of others, or have any
dependence upon them. But, (2.) Whatever wickedness there is in the
heart God sees it, and knows it, is perfectly acquainted with it and
apprised of it: I the Lord search the heart. This is true of all that is
in the heart, all the thoughts of it, the quickest, and those that are
most carelessly overlooked by ourselves - all the intents of it, the
closest, and those that are most artfully disguised, and industriously
concealed from others. Men may be imposed upon, but God cannot. He not
only searches the heart with a piercing eye, but he tries the reins, to
pass a judgment upon what he discovers, to give every thing its true
character and due weight. He tries it, as the gold is tried whether it
be standard or no, as the prisoner is tried whether he be guilty or no.
And this judgment which he makes of the heart is in order to his passing
judgment upon the man; it is to give to every man according to his ways
(according to the desert and the tendency of them, life to those that
walked in the ways of life, and death to those that persisted in the
paths of the destroyer) and according to the fruit of his doings, the
effect and influence his doings have had upon others, or according to
what is settled by the word of God to be the fruit of men's doings,
blessings to the obedient and curses to the disobedient. Note, Therefore
God is Judge himself, and he alone, because he, and none besides, knows
the hearts of the children of men.

2\. It is true especially of all the deceitfulness and wickedness of the
heart, all its corrupt devices, desires, and designs. God observes and
discerns them; and (which is more than any man can do) he judges of the
overt act by the heart. Note, God knows more evil of us than we do of
ourselves, which is a good reason why we should not flatter ourselves,
but always stand in awe of the judgment of God.

IV\. Concerning the curse that attends wealth unjustly gotten. Fraud and
violence had been reigning crying sins in Judah and Jerusalem; now the
prophet would have those who had been guilty of these sins, and were now
stripped of all they had, to read their sin in their punishment ([Jer
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#011)): He that gets riches and not by
right, though he may make them his hope, shall never have joy of them.
Observe, It is possible that those who use unlawful means to get wealth
may succeed therein and prosper for a time; and it is a temptation to
many to defraud and oppress their neighbours when there is money to be
got by it. He who has got treasures by vanity and a lying tongue may hug
himself in his success, and say, I am rich; nay, and I am innocent too
([Hos 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#008)), but he shall leave them
in the midst of his days; they shall be taken from him, or he from them;
God shall cut him off with some surprising stroke then when he says,
Soul, take thy ease, thou hast goods laid up for many years, [Luk
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019), [Luk
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#020). He shall leave them to he knows
not whom, and shall not be able to take any of his riches away with him.
It intimates what a great vexation it is to a worldly man at death that
he must leave his riches behind him; and justly may it be a terror to
those who got them unjustly, for, though the wealth will not follow them
to another world, the guilt will, and the torment of an everlasting,
Son, remember, [Luk 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#025). Thus, at
his end, he shall be a fool, a Nabal, whose wealth did him no good,
which he had so sordidly hoarded, when his heart became dead as a stone.
He was a fool all along; sometimes perhaps his own conscience told him
so, but at his end he will appear to be so. Those are fools indeed who
are fools in their latter end; and such multitudes will prove who were
applauded as wise men, that did well for themselves, [Psa
49:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#013), [Psa
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#018). Those that get grace will be
wise in the latter end, will have the comfort of it in death and the
benefit of it to eternity ([Pro
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#020)); but those that place their
happiness in the wealth of the world, and, right or wrong, will be rich,
will rue the folly of it when it is too late to rectify the fatal
mistake. This is like the partridge that sits on eggs and hatches them
not, but they are broken (as [Job
39:15](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#015)), or stolen (as [Isa
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#014)), or they become addle: some
sort of fowl there was, well known among the Jews, whose case this
commonly was. The rich man takes a great deal of pains to get an estate
together, and sits brooding upon it, but never has any comfort nor
satisfaction in it; his projects to enrich himself by sinful courses
miscarry and come to nothing. Let us therefore be wise in time - what we
get to get it honestly, and what we have to use it charitably, that we
may lay up in store a good foundation and be wise for eternity.

[Jeremiah 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 17:12</span></span>

Here, as often before, we have the prophet retired for private
meditation, and alone with God. Those ministers that would have comfort
in their work must be much so. In his converse here with God and his own
heart he takes the liberty which devout souls sometimes use in their
soliloquies, to pass from one thing to another, without tying themselves
too strictly to the laws of method and coherence.

I. He acknowledges the great favour of God to his people in setting up a
revealed religion among them, and dignifying them with divine
institutions ([Jer 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012)): A glorious
high throne from the beginning is the place of our sanctuary. The temple
at Jerusalem, where God manifested his special presence, where the
lively oracles were lodged, where the people paid their homage to their
Sovereign, and whither they fled for refuge in distress, was the place
of their sanctuary. That was a glorious high throne. It was a throne of
holiness, which made it truly glorious; it was God's throne, which made
it truly high. Jerusalem is called the city of the great King, not only
Israel's King, but the King of the whole earth, so that it might justly
be deemed the metropolis, or royal city, of the world. It was from the
beginning, so, from the first projecting of it by David and building of
it by Solomon, [Ch2 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#009). It was the
honour of Israel that God set up such a glorious throne among them. As
the glorious and high throne (that is, heaven) is the place of our
sanctuary; so some read it. Note, All good men have a high value and
veneration for the ordinances of God, and reckon the place of the
sanctuary a glorious high throne. Jeremiah here mentions this either as
a plea with God for mercy to their land, in honour of the throne of his
glory ([Jer 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#021)), or as an
aggravation of the sin of his people in forsaking God though his throne
was among them, and so profaning his crown and the place of his
sanctuary.

II\. He acknowledges the righteousness of God in abandoning those to
ruin that forsook him and revolted from their allegiance to him, [Jer
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#013). He speaks it to God, as
subscribing both to the certainty and to the equity of it: O Lord! the
hope of those in Israel that adhere to thee, all that forsake thee shall
be ashamed. They must of necessity be so, for they forsake thee for
lying vanities, which will deceive them and make them ashamed. They will
be ashamed, for they shame themselves. They will justly be put to shame,
for they have forsaken him who alone can keep them in countenance when
troubles come. Let them be ashamed (so some read it); and so it is a
pious imprecation of the wrath of God upon them, or a petition for his
grace, to make them penitently ashamed. "Those that depart from me, from
the word of God which I have preached, do in effect depart from God;" as
those that return to God are said to return to the prophet, [Jer
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#019). Those that depart from thee (so
some read it) shall be written in the earth. They shall soon be blotted
out, as that is which is written in the dust. They shall be trampled
upon and exposed to contempt. They belong to the earth, and shall be
numbered among earthly people, who lay up their treasure on earth and
whose names are not written in heaven. And they deserve to be thus
written with the fools in Israel, that their folly may be made manifest
unto all, because they have forsaken the Lord, the fountain of living
waters (that is, spring waters), and that for broken cisterns. Note, God
is to all that are his a fountain of living waters. There is a fulness
of comfort in him, an over-flowing ever-flowing fulness, like that of a
fountain; it is always fresh, and clear, and clean, like spring water,
while the pleasures of sin are puddle-waters. They are free to it; it is
not a fountain sealed. They deserve therefore to be condemned, as Adam,
to red earth, to which by the corruption of their nature they are
allied, because they have forsaken the garden of the Lord, which is so
well-watered. Those that depart from God are written in the earth.

III\. He prays to God for healing saving mercy for himself. "If the case
of those that depart from God be so miserable, let me always draw nigh
to him ([Psa 73:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#027), [Psa
73:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#028)), and, in order to do that,
Lord, heal me, and save me, [Jer
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#014). Heal my backslidings, my bent
to backslide, and save me from being carried away by the strength of the
stream to forsake thee." He was wounded in spirit with grief upon many
accounts. "Lord, heal me with thy comforts, and make me easy." He was
continually exposed to the malice of unreasonable men. "Lord, save me
from them, and let me not fall into their wicked hands. Heal me, that
is, sanctify me by thy grace; save me, that is, bring me to thy glory."
All that shall be saved hereafter are sanctified now; unless the disease
of sin be purged out the soul cannot live. To enforce this petition he
pleads, 1. The firm belief he had of God's power: Heal thou me, and then
I shall be healed; the cure will certainly be wrought if thou undertake
it; it will be a thorough cure and not a palliative one. Those that come
to God to be healed ought to be abundantly satisfied in the
all-sufficiency of their physician. Save me, and then I shall certainly
be saved, be my dangers and enemies ever so threatening. If God hold us
up, we shall live; if he protect us, we shall be safe. 2. The sincere
regard he had to God's glory: "For thou art my praise, and for that
reason I desire to be healed and saved, that I may live and praise thee,
[Psa 119:175](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#175). Thou art he whom I
praise, and the praise due to thee I never gave to another. Thou art he
whom I glory in, and boast of, for on thee do I depend. Thou art he that
furnishes me with continual matter for praise, and I have given thee the
praise of the favours already bestowed upon me. Thou shalt be my praise"
(so some read it); "heal me, and save me, and thou shalt have the glory
of it. My praise shall be continually of thee," [Psa
71:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#006); [Psa
79:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#013).

IV\. He complains of the infidelity and daring impiety of the people to
whom he preached. It greatly troubled him, and he shows before God this
trouble, as the servant that had slights put upon him by the guests he
was sent to invite came and showed his Lord these things. He had
faithfully delivered God's message to them; and what answer has he to
return to him that sent him? Behold, they say unto me, Where is the word
of the Lord? Let it come now, [Jer
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#015), [Isa
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#019). They bantered the prophet, and
made a jest of that which he delivered with the greatest seriousness. 1.
They denied the truth of what he said: "If that be the word of the Lord
which thou speakest to us, where is it? Why is it not fulfilled?" Thus
the patience of God was impudently abused as a ground to question his
veracity. 2. They defied the terror of what he said. "Let God Almighty
do his worst; let all he has said come to pass; we shall do well enough;
the lion is not so fierce as he is painted," [Amo
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018). "Lord, to what purpose is it to
speak to men that will neither believe nor fear?"

V. He appeals to God concerning his faithful discharge of the duty to
which he was called, [Jer 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#016). The
people did all they could to make him weary of his work, to exasperate
him and make him uneasy, and to tempt him to prevaricate and alter his
message for fear of displeasing them; but, "Lord," says he, "thou
knowest I have not yielded to them." 1. He continued constant to his
work. His office, instead of being his credit and protection, exposed
him to reproach, contempt, and injury. "Yet," says he, "I have not
hastened from being a pastor after thee; I have not left my work, nor
sued for a discharge or a quietus." Prophets were pastors to the people,
to feed them with the good word of God; but they were to be pastors
after God, and all ministers must be so, according to his heart ([Jer
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#015)), to follow him and the
directions and instructions he gives. Such a pastor Jeremiah was; and,
though he met with as much difficulty and discouragement as ever any man
did, yet he did not fly off as Jonah did, nor desire to be excused from
going any more on God's errands. Note, Those that are employed for God,
though their success answer nor their expectations, must not therefore
throw up their commission. but continue to follow God, though the storm
be in their faces. 2. He kept up his affection to the people. Though
they were very abusive to him, he was compassionate to them: I have not
desired the woeful day. The day of the accomplishment of his prophecies
would be a woeful day indeed to Jerusalem, and therefore he deprecated
it, and wished it might never come, though, as to himself, it would be
the avenging of him upon his persecutors and the proving of him a true
prophet (which they had questioned, [Jer
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#015)), and upon those accounts he
might be tempted to desire it. Note, God does not, and therefore
ministers must not, desire the death of sinners, but rather that they
may turn and live. Though we warn of the woeful day, we must not wish
for it, but rather weep because of it, as Jeremiah did. 3. He kept
closely to his instructions. Though he might have curried favour with
the people, or at least have avoided their displeasure, if he had not
been so sharp in his reproofs and severe in his threatenings, yet he
would deliver his message faithfully; and that he had done so was a
comfort to him. "Lord, thou knowest that that which came out of my lips
was right before thee; it exactly agreed with what I received from thee,
and therefore thou art reflected upon in their quarrelling with me."
Note, If what we say and do be right before God, we may easily despise
the reproaches and censures of men. It is a small thing to be judged of
their judgment.

VI\. He humbly begs of God that he would own him, and protect him, and
carry him on cheerfully in that work to which God had so plainly called
him and to which he had so sincerely devoted himself. Two things he here
desires: - 1. That he might have comfort in serving the God that sent
him ([Jer 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#017)): Be not thou a terror
to me. Surely more is implied than is expressed. "Be thou a comfort to
me, and let thy favour rejoice my heart and encourage me, when my
enemies do all they can to terrify me and either to drive me from my
work or to make me drive on heavily in it." Note, The best have that in
them which might justly make God a terror to them, as he was for some
time to Job ([Job 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#004)), to Asaph ([Psa
77:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#003)), to Heman, [Psa
88:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#015). And this is that which good
men, knowing the terrors of the Lord, dread and deprecate more than any
thing; nay, whatever frightful accidents may befal them, or how
formidable soever their enemies may appear to them, they can do well
enough so long as God is not a terror to them. He pleads, "Thou art my
hope; and then nothing else is my fear, no, not in the day of evil, when
it is most threatening, most pressing. My dependence is upon thee; and
therefore be not a terror to me." Note, Those that by faith make God
their confidence shall have him for their comfort in the worst of times,
if it be not their own fault: if we make him our trust, we shall not
find him our terror. 2. That he might have courage in dealing with the
people to whom he was sent, [Jer
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#018). Those persecuted him who should
have entertained and encouraged him. "Lord," says he, "let them be
confounded (let them be overpowered by the convictions of the word and
made ashamed of their obstinacy, or else let the judgments threatened be
at length executed upon them), but let not me confounded, let not me be
terrified by their menaces, so as to betray my trust." Note, God's
ministers have work to do which they need not be either ashamed or
afraid to go on in, but they do need to be helped by the divine grace to
go on in it without shame or fear. Jeremiah had not desired the woeful
day upon his country in general; but as to his persecutors, in a just
and holy indignation at their malice, he prays, Bring upon them the day
of evil, in hope that the bringing of it upon them might prevent the
bringing of it upon the country; if they were taken away, the people
would be better; "therefore destroy them with a double destruction; let
them be utterly destroyed, root and branch, and let the prospect of that
destruction be their present confusion." This the prophet prays, not at
all that he might be avenged, nor so much that he might be eased, but
that the Lord may be known by the judgments which he executes.

[Jeremiah 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 17:19</span></span>

These verses are a sermon concerning sabbath-sanctification. It is a
word which the prophet received from the Lord, and was ordered to
deliver in the most solemn and public manner to the people; for they
were sent not only to reprove sin, and to press obedience, in general,
but they must descend to particulars. This message concerning the
sabbath was probably sent in the days of Josiah, for the furtherance of
that work of reformation which he set on foot; for the promises here
([Jer 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#025), [Jer
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#026)) are such as I think we scarcely
find when things come nearer to the extremity. This message must be
proclaimed in all the places of concourse, and therefore inthe gates,
not only because through them people were continually passing and
repassing, but because in them they kept their courts and laid up their
stores. It must be proclaimed (as the king or queen is usually
proclaimed) at the court-gate first, the gate by which the kings of
Judah come in and go out, [Jer 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#019).
Let them be told their duty first, particularly this duty; for, if
sabbaths be not sanctified as they should be, the rulers of Judah are to
be contended with (so they were, [Neh
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#017)), for they are certainly wanting
in their duty. He must also preach it in all the gates of Jerusalem. It
is a matter of great and general concern; therefore let all take notice
of it. Let the kings of Judah hear the word of the Lord (for, high as
they are, he is above them), and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for,
mean as they are, he takes notice of them, and of what they say and do
on sabbath days. Observe,

I. How the sabbath is to be sanctified, and what is the law concerning
it, [Jer 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#021), [Jer
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#011). 1. They must rest from their
worldly employment on the sabbath day, must do no servile work. They
must bear no burden into the city nor out of it, into their houses nor
out of them; husbandmen's burdens of corn must not be carried in, nor
manure carried out; nor must tradesmen's burdens of wares or
merchandises be imported or exported. There must not a loaded horse, or
cart, or wagon, be seen on the sabbath day either in the streets or in
the roads; the porters must not ply on that day, nor must the servants
be suffered to fetch in provisions or fuel. It is a day of rest, and
must not be made a day of labour, unless in case of necessity. 2. They
must apply themselves to that which is the proper work and business of
the day: "Hallow you the sabbath, that is, consecrate it to the honour
of God and spend it in his service and worship." It is in order to this
that worldly business must be laid aside, that we may be entire for, and
intent upon, that work, which requires and deserves the whole man. 3.
They must herein be very circumspect: "Take heed to yourselves, watch
against every thing that borders upon the profanation of the sabbath."
Where God is jealous we must be cautious. "Take heed to yourselves, for
it is at your peril if you rob God of that part of your time which he
has reserved to himself." Take heed to your souls (so the word is); in
order to the right sanctifying of sabbaths, we must look well to the
frame of our spirits and have a watchful eye upon all the motions of the
inward man. Let not the soul be burdened with the cares of this world on
sabbath days, but let that be employed, even all that is within us, in
the work of the day. And, 4. He refers them to the law, the statute in
this case made and provided: "This is no new imposition upon you, but is
what I commanded your fathers; it is an ancient law; it was an article
of the original contract; nay, it was a command to the patriarchs."

II\. How the sabbath had been profaned ([Jer
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#023)): "Your fathers were required to
keep holy the sabbath day, but they obeyed not; they hardened their
necks against this as well as other commands that were given them." This
is mentioned to show that there needed a reformation in this matter, and
that God had a just controversy with them for the long transgression of
this law which they had been guilty of. They hardened their necks
against this command, that they might not hear and receive instruction
concerning other commands. Where sabbaths are neglected all religion
sensibly goes to decay.

III\. What blessings God had in store for them if they would make
conscience of sabbath-sanctification. Though their fathers had been
guilty of the profanation of the sabbath they should not only not smart
for it, but their city and nation should recover its ancient glory, if
they would keep sabbaths better, [Jer
17:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#024). Let them take care to hallow
the sabbath and do no work therein; and then, 1. The court shall
flourish. Kings in succession, or the many branches of the royal family
at the same time, all as great as kings, with the other princes that sit
upon the thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house of David ([Psa
122:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#005)), shall ride in great pomp
through the gates of Jerusalem, some in chariots and some on horses,
attended with a numerous retinue of the men of Judah. Note, The honour
of the government is the joy of the kingdom; and the support of religion
would contribute greatly to both. 2. The city shall flourish. Let there
be a face of religion kept up in Jerusalem, by sabbath-sanctification,
that it may answer to its title, the holy city, and then it shall remain
for ever, shall for ever be inhabited (so the word may be rendered); it
shall not be destroyed and dispeopled, as it is threatened to be.
Whatever supports religion tends to establish the civil interests of a
land. 3. The country shall flourish: The cities of Judah and the land of
Benjamin shall be replenished with vast numbers of inhabitants, and
those abounding in plenty and living in peace, which will appear by the
multitude and value of their offerings, which they shall present to God.
By this the flourishing of a country may be judged of, What does it do
for the honour of God? Those that starve their religion either are poor
or are in a fair way to be so. 4. The church shall flourish:
Meat-offerings, and incense, and sacrifices of praise, shall be brought
to the house of the Lord, for the maintenance of the service of that
house and the servants that attend it. God's institutions shall be
conscientiously observed; no sacrifice nor incense shall be offered to
idols, nor alienated from God, but every thing shall go in the right
channel. They shall have both occasion and hearts to bring sacrifices of
praise to God. This is made an instance of their prosperity. Then a
people truly flourish when religion flourishes among them. And this is
the effect of sabbath-sanctification; when that branch of religion is
kept up other instances of it are kept up likewise; but, when that is
lost, devotion is lost either in superstition or in profaneness. It is a
true observation, which some have made, that the streams of all religion
run either deep or shallow according as the banks of the sabbath are
kept up or neglected.

IV\. What judgments they must expect would come upon them if they
persisted in the profanation of the sabbath ([Jer
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#027)): "If you will not hearken to me
in this matter, to keep the gates shut on sabbath days, so that there
may be no unnecessary entering in, or going out, on that day - if you
will break through the enclosure of the divine law, and lay that day in
common with other days - know that God will kindle a fire in the gates
of your city," intimating that it shall be kindled by an enemy besieging
the city and assaulting the gates, who shall take this course to force
an entrance. Justly shall those gates be fired that are not used as they
ought to be to shut out sin and to keep people in to an attendance on
their duty. This fire shall devour even the palaces of Jerusalem, where
the princes and nobles dwelt, who did not use their power and interest
as they ought to have done to keep up the honour of God's sabbaths; but
it shall not be quenched until it has laid the whole city in ruins. This
was fulfilled by the army of the Chaldeans, [Jer
52:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#013). The profanation of the sabbath
is a sin for which God has often contended with a people by fire.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 18](jer018)

</div>
