<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer042)  [Next](jer044) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 43](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 43:0</span></span>

Jeremiah had faithfully delivered his message from God in the foregoing
chapter, and the case was made so very plain by it that one would have
thought there needed no more words about it; but we find it quite
otherwise. Here is, I. The people's contempt of this message; they
denied it to be the word of God ([Jer
43:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#001)) and then made no difficulty of
going directly contrary to it. Into Egypt they went, and took Jeremiah
himself along with them ([Jer 43:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#004)).
II. God's pursuit of them with another message, foretelling the king of
Babylon's pursuit of them into Egypt ([Jer
43:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#008)).

[Jeremiah 43:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 43:1</span></span>

What God said to the builders of Babel may be truly said of this people
that Jeremiah is now dealing with: Now nothing will be restrained from
them which they have imagined to do, [Gen
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#006). They have a fancy for Egypt, and
to Egypt they will go, whatever God himself says to the contrary.
Jeremiah made them hear all he had to say, though he saw them uneasy at
it; it was what the Lord their God had sent him to speak to them, and
they shall have it all. And now let us see what they have to say to it.

I. They deny it to be a message from God: Johanan, and all the proud
men, said to Jeremiah, Thou speakest falsely, [Jer
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#002). See here, 1. What was the cause
of their disobedience - it was pride; only by that comes contention both
with God and man. They were proud men that gave the lie to the prophet.
They could not bear the contradiction of their sentiments and the
control of their designs, no, not by the divine wisdom, by the divine
will itself. Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord, that I should obey him? [Exo
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#002). The proud unhumbled heart of man
is one of the most daring enemies God has on this side hell. 2. What was
the colour for their disobedience. They would not acknowledge it to be
the word of God: The Lord hath not sent thee on this errand to us.
Either they were not convinced that what was said came from God or
(which I rather think) though they were convinced of it they would not
own it. The light shone strongly in their face, but they either shut
their eyes against it or would not confess that they saw it. Note, The
reason why men deny the scriptures to be the word of God is because they
are resolved not to conform to scripture-rules, and so an obstinate
infidelity is made the sorry subterfuge of a wilful disobedience. If God
had spoken to them by an angel, or as he did from Mount Sinai, they
would have said that it was a delusion. Had they not consulted Jeremiah
as a prophet? Had he not waited to receive instructions from God what to
say to them? Had not what he said all the usual marks of prophecy upon
it? Was not the prophet himself embarked in the same bottom with them?
What interests could he have separate from theirs? Had he not always
approved himself an Israelite indeed? And had not God proved him a
prophet indeed? Had any of his words ever fallen to the ground? Why,
truly, they had some good thoughts of Jeremiah, but they suggest ([Jer
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#003)), Baruch sets thee on against us.
A likely thing, that Baruch should be in a plot to deliver them into the
hands of the Chaldeans; and what would he get by that? If Jeremiah and
he had been so well affected to the Chaldeans as they would represent
them, they would have gone away at first with Nebuzaradan, when he
courted them, to Babylon, and not have staid to take their lot with this
despised ungrateful remnant. But the best services are no fences against
malice and slander. Or, if Baruch had been so ill disposed, could they
think Jeremiah would be so influenced by him as to make God's name an
authority to patronise so villainous a purpose? Note, Those that are
resolved to contradict the great ends of the ministry are industrious to
bring a bad name upon it. When men will persist in sin they represent
those that would turn them from it as designing men for themselves, nay,
as ill-designing men against their neighbours. It is well for persons
who are thus misrepresented that their witness is in heaven and their
record on high.

II\. They determine to go to Egypt notwithstanding. They resolve not to
dwell in the land of Judah, as God had ordered them ([Jer
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#004)), but to go themselves with one
consent and to take all that they had under their power along with them
to Egypt. Those that came from all the nations whither they had been
driven, to dwell in the land of Judah, out of a sincere affection to
that land, they would not leave to their liberty, but forced them to go
with them into Egypt ([Jer 43:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#005)), men,
women, and children ([Jer 43:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#006)), a
long journey into a strange country, an idolatrous country, a country
that had never been kind of faithful to Israel; yet thither they would
go, though they deserted their own land and threw themselves out of
God's protection. It is the folly of men that they know not when they
are well off, and often ruin themselves by endeavouring to better
themselves; and it is the pride of great men to force those they have
under their power to follow them, though ever so much against their duty
and interest. These proud men compelled even Jeremiah the prophet and
Baruch his scribe to go along with them to Egypt; they carried them away
as prisoners, partly to punish them (and a greater punishment they could
not inflict upon them than to force them against their consciences;
theirs is the worst of tyranny who say to men's souls, even to good
men's souls, Bow down, that we may go over), partly to put some
reputation upon themselves and their own way. Though the prophets were
under a force, they would make the world believe that they were
voluntary in going along with them; and who could have blamed them for
acting contrary to the word of the Lord if the prophets themselves had
acted so? They came to Tahpanhes, a famous city of Egypt (so called from
a queen of that name, [Kg1 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#019)), the
same with Hanes ([Isa 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#004)); it was
now the metropolis, for Pharaoh's house was there, [Jer
43:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#009). No place could serve these proud
men to settle in but the royal city and near the court, so little
mindful were they of Joseph's wisdom, who would have his brethren settle
in Goshen. If they had had the spirit of Israelites, they would have
chosen rather to dwell in the wilderness of Judah than in the most
pompous populous cities of Egypt.

[Jeremiah 43:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 43:8</span></span>

We have here, as also in the next chapter, Jeremiah prophesying in
Egypt. Jeremiah was now in Tahpanhes, for there his lords and masters
were; he was there among idolatrous Egyptians and treacherous
Israelites; but there, 1. He received the word of the Lord; it came to
him. God can find his people, with the visits of his grace, wherever
they are; and, when his ministers are bound, yet the word of the Lord is
not bound. The spirit of prophecy was not confined to the land of
Israel. When Jeremiah went into Egypt, not out of choice, but by
constraint, God withdrew not his wonted favour from him. 2. What he
received of the Lord he delivered to the people. Wherever we are we must
endeavour to do good, for that is our business in this world. Now we
find two messages which Jeremiah was appointed and entrusted to deliver
when he was in Egypt. We may suppose that he rendered what services he
could to his countrymen in Egypt, at least as far as they would be
acceptable, in performing the ordinary duties of a prophet, praying for
them and instructing and comforting them; but only two messages of his,
which he had received immediately from God, are recorded, one in this
chapter, relating to Egypt itself and foretelling its destruction, the
other in the next chapter, relating to the Jews in Egypt. God had told
them before that if they went into Egypt the sword they feared should
follow them; here he tells them further that the sword of
Nebuchadnezzar, which they were in a particular manner afraid of, should
follow them.

I. This is foretold by a sign. Jeremiah must take great stones, such as
are used for foundations, and lay them in the clay of the furnace, or
brick-kiln, which is in the open way, or beside the way that leads to
Pharaoh's house ([Jer 43:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#009)), some
remarkable place in view of the royal palace. Egypt was famous for
brick-kilns, witness the slavery of the Israelites there, whom they
forced to make bricks ([Exo 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#007)),
which perhaps was now remembered against them. The foundation of Egypt's
desolation was laid in those brick-kilns, in that clay. This he must do,
not in the sight of the Egyptians (they knew not Jeremiah's character),
but in the sight of the men of Judah to whom he was sent, that, since he
could not prevent their going into Egypt, he might bring them to repent
of their going.

II\. It is foretold in express words, as express as can be, 1. That the
king, the present king of Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar, the very same that
had been employed in the destruction of Jerusalem, should come in person
against the land of Egypt, should make himself master even of this royal
city, by the same token that he should set his throne in that very place
where these stones were laid, [Jer
43:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#010). This minute circumstance is
particularly foretold, that, when it was accomplished, they might be put
in mind of the prophecy and confirmed in their belief of the extent and
certainly of the divine prescience, to which the smallest and most
contingent events are evident. God calls Nebuchadnezzar his servant,
because herein he executed God's will, accomplished his purposes, and
was instrumental to carry on his designs. Note, The world's princes are
God's servants and he makes what use he pleases of them, and even those
that know him not, nor aim at his honour, are the tools which his
providence makes use of. 2. That he should destroy many of the
Egyptians, and have them all at his mercy ([Jer
43:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#011)): He shall smite the land of
Egypt; and, though it has been always a warlike nation, yet none shall
be able to make head against him, but whom he will he shall slay, and by
what sort of death he will, whether pestilence (for that is here meant
by death, as [Jer 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#002)) by shutting
them up in places infected, or by the sword of war or justice, in cold
blood or hot. And whom he will he shall save alive and carry into
captivity. The Jews, by going into Egypt, brought the Chaldeans thither,
and so did but ill repay those that entertained them. Those who promised
to protect Israel from the king of Babylon exposed themselves to him. 3.
That he shall destroy the idols of Egypt, both the temples and the
images of their gods ([Jer 43:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#012)): He
shall burn, the houses of the gods of Egypt, but it shall be with a fire
of God's kindling; the fire of God's wrath fastens upon them, and then
he burns some of them and carries others captive, [Isa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001). Beth-shemesh, or the house of
the sun, was so called from a temple there built to the sun, where at
certain times there was a general meeting of the worshippers of the sun.
The statues or standing images there he shall break in pieces ([Jer
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#013)) and carry away the rich
materials of them. It intimates that he should lay all waste when even
the temple and the images should not escape the fury of the victorious
army. The king of Babylon was himself a great idolater and a patron of
idolatry; he had his temples and images in honour of the sun as well as
the Egyptians; and yet he is employed to destroy the idols of Egypt.
Thus God sometimes makes one wicked man, or wicked nation, a scourge and
plague to another. 4. That he shall make himself master of the land of
Egypt, and none shall be able to plead its cause or avenge its quarrel
([Jer 43:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#012)): He shall array himself
with the rich spoils of the land of Egypt, both beautify and fortify
himself with them. He shall array himself with them as ornaments and as
armour; and this, though it shall be a rich and heavy booty, being
expert in war, and expeditious, he shall slip on with as much ease and
in as little time, in comparison, as a shepherd slips on his garment,
when he goes to turn out his sheep in a morning. And being loaded with
the wealth of many other nations, the fruits of his conquests, he shall
make no more of the spoils of the land of Egypt than of a shepherd's
coat. And when he has taken what he pleases (as Benhadad threatened to
do, [Kg1 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#006)) he shall go forth in
peace, without any molestation given him, or any precipitation for fear
of it, so effectually reduced shall the land of Egypt be. This
destruction of Egypt by the king of Babylon is foretold, [Eze
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#019) and [Eze
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#010). Babylon lay at a great distance
from Egypt, and yet thence the destruction of Egypt comes; for God can
make those judgments strike home which are far-fetched.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 44](jer044)

</div>
