<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[3 John Index](jo3.md)  
  [Previous](jo3000)  [Next](jde000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#001.md)

In this epistle the apostle congratulates Gaius upon the prosperity of
his soul ([Jo3 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#001.md), [Jo3
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#002).md), upon the fame he had among good
Christians ([Jo3 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#003.md), [Jo3
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#004).md), and upon his charity and
hospitality to the servants of Christ ([Jo3
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#005.md), [Jo3
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#006).md). He complains of contemptuous
treatment by an ambitious Diotrephes ([Jo3
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#009.md), [Jo3
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#010).md), recommends Demetrius ([Jo3
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#012).md), and expresses his hope of
visiting Gaius shortly ([Jo3 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#013.md),
[Jo3 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#014).md).

[3 John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo3 1:1</span></span>

Here we see, I. The sacred penman who writes and sends the letter; not
here indeed notified by his name, but a more general character: The
elder, he that is so by years and by office; honour and deference are
due to both. Some have questioned whether this were John the apostle or
no; but his style and spirit seem to shine in the epistle. Those that
are beloved of Christ will love the brethren for his sake. Gaius could
not question from whom the letter came. The apostle might have assumed
many more illustrious characters, but it becomes not Christ's ministers
to affect swelling pompous titles. He almost levels himself with the
more ordinary pastors of the church, while he styles himself the elder.
Or, possibly, most of the extraordinary ministers, the apostles, were
now dead, and this holy survivor would countenance the continued
standing ministry, by assuming the more common title - the elder. The
elders I exhort, who am also an elder, [Pe1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001.md).

II\. The person saluted and honoured by the letter. The former is
directed to an elect lady, this to a choice gentleman; such are worthy
of esteem and value. He is notified, 1. By his name, - Gaius. We read of
several of that name, particularly of one whom the apostle Paul baptized
at Corinth, who possibly might be also the apostle's host and kind
entertainer there ([Rom 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023).md); if
this be not he, it is his brother in name, estate, and disposition.
Then, 2. By the kind expressions of the apostle to him: The
well-beloved, and whom I love in the truth. Love expressed is wont to
kindle love. Here seems to be either the sincerity of the apostle's love
or the religion of it. The sincerity of it: Whom I love in the truth,
for the truth's sake, as abiding and walking in the truth as it is in
Jesus. To love our friends for the truth's sake is true love, religious
gospel love.

III\. The salutation or greeting, containing a prayer, introduced by an
affectionate compellation - Beloved, thou beloved one in Christ. The
minister who would gain love must show it himself. Here is, 1. The
apostle's good opinion of his friend, that his soul prospered. There is
such a thing as soul-prosperity - the greatest blessing on this side
heaven. This supposes regeneration, and an inward fund of spiritual
life; this stock is increasing, and, while spiritual treasures are
advancing, the soul is in a fair way to the kingdom of glory. 2. His
good wish for his friend that his body may prosper and be in health as
well as his soul. Grace and health are two rich companions; grace will
improve health, health will employ grace. It frequently falls out that a
rich soul is lodged in a crazy body; grace must be exercised in
submission to such a dispensation; but we may well wish and pray that
those who have prosperous souls may have healthful bodies too; their
grace will shine in a larger sphere of activity.

[3 John 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jo3 1:3</span></span>

In these verses we have,

I. The good report that the apostle had received concerning this friend
of his: The brethren came and testified of the truth that is in thee
([Jo3 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#003).md), who have borne witness of
thy charity before the church, [Jo3
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#006.md). Here we may see, 1. The testimony
or thing testified concerning Gaius - the truth that was in him, the
reality of his faith, the sincerity of his religion, and his devotedness
to God; and this evinced by his charity, which includes his love to the
brethren, kindness to the poor, hospitality to Christian strangers, and
readiness to accommodate them for the service of the gospel. Faith
should work by love; it gives a lustre in and by the offices of love,
and induces others to commend its integrity. 2. The witnesses - brethren
that came from Gaius testified and bore witness. A good report is due
from those who have received good; though a good name is but a small
reward for costly service, yet it is better than precious ointment, and
will not be refused by the ingenuous and religious. 3. The auditory or
judicatory before which the report and testimony were given - before the
church. This seems to be the church at which the apostle now resided.
What church this was we are not sure; what occasion they had thus to
testify his faith and love before the church we cannot tell; possibly
out of the fulness of the heart the mouth spoke; they could not but
testify what they found and felt; possibly they would engage the
church's prayer for the continued life and usefulness of such a patron,
that he might prosper and be in health as his soul prospered.

II\. The report the apostle himself gives of him, introduced by an
endearing appellation again: Beloved, thou doest faithfully whatsoever
thou doest to the brethren, and to strangers, [Jo3
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#005.md). 1. He was hospitable, good to the
brethren, even to strangers; it was enough to recommend them to Gaius's
house that they belonged to Christ. Or he was good to the brethren of
the same church with himself, and to those who came from far; all who
were of the household of faith were welcome to him. 2. He seems to have
been of a catholic spirit; he could overlook the petty differences among
serious Christians, and be communicative to all who bore the image and
did the work of Christ. And, 3. He was conscientious in what he did:
"Thou doest faithfully (thou makest faithful work of) whatsoever thou
doest; thou doest it as a faithful servant, and from the Lord Christ
mayest thou expect the reward of the inheritance." Such faithful souls
can hear their own praises without being puffed up; the commendation of
what is good in us is designed, not for our pride, but for our
encouragement to continue therein, and should be accordingly improved.

III\. The apostle's joy therein, in the good report itself, and the good
ground of it: I rejoiced greatly when the brethren came and testified,
etc., [Jo3 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#003.md). I have no greater joy
than to hear that my children walk in the truth, in the prescripts of
the Christian religion. The best evidence of our having the truth is our
walking in the truth. Good men will greatly rejoice in the
soul-prosperity of others; and they are glad to hear of the grace and
goodness of others. They glorified God in me. Love envieth not, but
rejoiceth in the good name of other folks. As it is joy to good parents,
it will be joy to good ministers, to see their children evidence their
sincerity in religion, and adorn their profession.

IV\. The direction the apostle gives his friend concerning further
treatment of the brethren that were with him: Whom if thou bring forward
on their journey, after a godly sort, thou shalt do well. It seems to
have been customary in those days of love to attend travelling ministers
and Christians, at least some part of their road, [Co1
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#006.md). It is a kindness to a stranger
to be guided in his way, and a pleasure to travellers to meet with
suitable company: this is a work that may be done after a godly sort, in
a manner worthy of God, or suitable to the deference and relation we
bear to God. Christians should consider not only what they must do, but
what they may do, what they may most honourably and laudably do: the
liberal mind deviseth liberal generous things. Christians should do even
the common actions of life and of good-will after a godly sort, as
serving God therein, and designing his glory.

V. The reasons of this directed conduct; these are two: - 1. Because
that for his name's sake these brethren went forth, taking nothing of
the Gentiles. It appears thus that these were ministerial brethren, that
they went forth to preach the gospel and propagate Christianity;
possibly they might be sent out by this apostle himself: they went forth
to convert the Gentiles; this was excellent service: they went forth for
God and his name's sake; this is the minister's highest end, and should
be his principal spring and motive, to gather and to build up a people
for his name: they went forth also to carry a free gospel about with
them, to publish it without charge wherever they came: Taking nothing of
the Gentiles. These were worthy of double honour. There are those who
are not called to preach the gospel themselves who may yet contribute to
the progress of it. The gospel should be made without charge to those to
whom it is first preached. Those who know it not cannot be expected to
value it; churches and Christian patriots ought to concur to support the
propagation of holy religion in the pagan countries; public spirits
should concur according to their several capacities; those who are
freely communicative of Christ's gospel should be assisted by those who
are communicative of their purses. 2. We ought therefore to receive
such, that we may be fellow-helpers to the truth, to true religion. The
institution of Christ is the true religion; it has been attested by God.
Those that are true in it and true to it will earnestly desire, and pray
for, and contribute to, its propagation in the world. In many ways may
the truth be befriended and assisted; those who cannot themselves
proclaim it may yet receive, accompany, help, and countenance those who
do.

[3 John 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jo3 1:9</span></span>

I. Here is a very different example and character, an officer, a
minister in the church, less generous, catholic, and communicative than
the private Christians. Ministers may sometimes be out-shone, out-done.
In reference to this minister, we see,

1\. His name - a Gentile name: Diotrephes, attended with an unchristian
spirit.

2\. His temper and spirit - full of pride and ambition: He loves to have
the pre-eminence. This ferment sprang and wrought betimes. It is an ill
unbeseeming character of Christ's ministers to love pre-eminence, to
affect presidency in the church of God.

3\. His contempt of the apostle's authority, and letter, and friends.
(1.) Of his authority: The deeds which he doeth contrary to our
appointment, prating against us with malicious words. Strange that the
contempt should run so high! But ambition will breed malice against
those who oppose it. Malice and ill-will in the heart will be apt to
vent themselves by the lips. The heart and mouth are both to be watched.
(2.) Of his letter: "I wrote to the church ([Jo3
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#009).md), namely, in recommendation of
such and such brethren. But Diotrephes receiveth us not, admits not our
letter and testimony therein." This seems to be the church of which
Gaius was a member. A gospel church seems to be such a society as to
which a letter may be written and communicated. Gospel churches may well
expect and be allowed credentials with the strangers who desire to be
admitted among them. The apostle seems to write by and with these
brethren. To an ambitious aspiring spirit apostolical authority or
epistle signifies but little. (3.) Of his friends, the brethren he
recommended: Neither doth he himself receive the brethren, and
forbiddeth those that would, and casteth them out of the church, [Jo3
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#010.md). There might be some differences
or different customs between the Jewish and Gentile Christians. Pastors
should seriously consider what differences are tolerable. The pastor is
not at absolute liberty, nor lord over God's heritage. It is bad to do
no good ourselves; but it is worse to hinder those who would.
Church-power and church-censures are often abused. Many are cast out of
the church who should be received there with satisfaction and welcome.
But woe to those who cast out the brethren whom the Lord Christ will
take into his own communion and kingdom!

4\. The apostle's menace of this proud domineerer: Wherefore, if I come,
I will remember his deeds which he doeth ([Jo3
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#010).md), will remember to censure them.
This seems to intimate apostolical authority. But the apostle seems not
to hold an episcopal court, to which Diotrephes must be summoned; but he
will come to take cognizance of this affair in the church to which it
belongs. Acts of ecclesiastical domination and tyranny ought to be
animadverted upon. May it be better agreed to whom that power belongs!

II\. Here is counsel upon that different character, dissuasion from
copying such a pattern, and indeed any evil at all: Beloved, follow not
that which is evil, but that which is good, [Jo3
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#011.md). Imitate not such unchristian
pernicious evil; but pursue the contrary good, in wisdom, purity, peace,
and love. Caution and counsel are not needless to those who are good
already. Those cautions and counsels are most likely to be accepted that
are seasoned with love. Beloved, follow not that which is evil. To this
caution and counsel a reason is respectively subjoined. 1. To the
counsel: Follow that which is good; for he that doeth good (naturally
and genuinely doeth good, as delighting therein) is of God, is born of
God. The practice of goodness is the evidence of our filial happy
relation to God. 2. To the caution: Follow not that which is evil, for
he that doeth evil (with bent of mind pursues it) hath not seen God, is
not duly sensible of his holy nature and will. Evil-workers vainly
pretend or boast an acquaintance with God.

[3 John 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jo3 1:12</span></span>

Here we have, I. The character of another person, one Demetrius, not
much known otherwise. But here his name will live. A name in the gospel,
a fame in the churches, is better than that of sons and daughters. His
character was his commendation. His commendation was, 1. General:
Demetrius has a good report of all men. Few are well spoken of by all;
and sometimes it is ill to be so. But universal integrity and goodness
are the way to (and sometimes obtain) universal applause. 2. Deserved
and well founded: And of the truth itself, [Jo3
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#012.md). Some have a good report, but not
of the truth itself. Happy are those whose spirit and conduct commend
them before God and men. 3. Confirmed by the apostle's and his friends'
testimony: Yea, and we also bear record; and that with an appeal to
Gaius's own knowledge: And you (you and your friends) know that our
record is true. Probably this Demetrius was known to the church where
the apostle now resided, and to that where Gaius was. It is good to be
well known, or known for good. We must be ready to bear our testimony to
those who are good: it is well for those who are commended when those
who commend them can appeal to the consciences of those who know them
most.

II\. The conclusion of the epistle, in which we may observe, 1. The
referring of some things to personal interview: I have many things to
write, but I will not with ink and pen, but I trust I shall shortly see
thee, [Jo3 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#013.md), [Jo3
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#014.md). Many things may be more proper
for immediate communication than for letter. A little personal
conference may spare the time, trouble, and charge, of many letters; and
good Christians may well be glad to see one another. 2. The benediction:
Peace be to you; all felicity attend you. Those that are good and happy
themselves wish others so too. 3. The public salutation sent to Gaius:
Our friends salute thee. A friend to the propagation of religion
deserves a common remembrance. And these pious persons show their
friendship to religion as well as to Gaius. 4. The apostle's particular
salutation of the Christians in Gaius's church or vicinity: Greet thy
friends by name. I doubt they were not very many who must be so
personally saluted. But we must learn humility as well as love. The
lowest in the church of Christ should be greeted. And those may well
salute and greet one another on earth who hope to live together in
heaven. And the apostle who had lain in Christ's bosom lays Christ's
friends in his heart.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jude Introduction](jde000.md)

</div>
