<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job017)  [Next](job019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 18:0</span></span>

In this chapter Bildad makes a second assault upon Job. In his first
discourse (ch. 8) he had given him encouragement to hope that all should
yet be well with him. But here there is not a word of that; he has grown
more peevish, and is so far from being convinced by Job's reasonings
that he is but more exasperated. I. He sharply reproves Job as haughty
and passionate, and obstinate in his opinion ([Job
18:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#001)). II. He enlarges upon the
doctrine he had before maintained, concerning the miser of wicked people
and the ruin that attends them (v. 5-21). In this he seems, all along,
to have an eye to Job's complaints of the miserable condition he was in,
that he was in the dark, bewildered, ensnared, terrified, and hastening
out of the world. "This," says Bildad, "is the condition of a wicked
man; and therefore thou art one."

[Job 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 18:1</span></span>

Bildad here shoots his arrows, even bitter words, against poor Job,
little thinking that, though he was a wise and good man, in this
instance he was serving Satan's design in adding to Job's affliction.

I. He charges him with idle endless talk, as Eliphaz had done ([Job
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#002), [Job
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#003)): How long will it be ere you
make an end of words? [Job 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#002). Here
he reflects, not only upon Job himself, but either upon all the managers
of the conference (thinking perhaps that Eliphaz and Zophar did not
speak so closely to the purpose as they might have done) or upon some
that were present, who possibly took part with Job, and put in a word
now and then in his favour, though it be not recorded. Bildad was weary
of hearing others speak, and impatient till it came to his turn, which
cannot be observed to any man's praise, for we ought to be swift to hear
and slow to speak. It is common for contenders to monopolize the
reputation of wisdom, and then to insist upon it as their privilege to
be dictators. How unbecoming this conduct is in others every one can
see; but few that are guilty of it can see it in themselves. Time was
when Job had the last word in all debates ([Job
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#022)): After my words they spoke not
again. Then he was in power and prosperity; but now that he was
impoverished and brought low he could scarcely be allowed to speak at
all, and every thing he said was as much vilified as formerly it had
been magnified. Wisdom therefore (as the world goes) is good with an
inheritance ([Ecc 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#011)); for the poor
man's wisdom is despised, and, because he is poor, his words are not
heard, [Ecc 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#016).

II\. With a regardlessness of what was said to him, intimated in that,
Mark, and afterwards we will speak. And it is to no purpose to speak,
though what is said be ever so much to the purpose, if those to whom it
is addressed will not mark and observe it. Let the ear be opened to hear
as the learned, and then the tongues of the learned will do good service
([Isa 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004)) and not otherwise. It is
an encouragement to those that speak of the things of God to see the
hearers attentive.

III\. With a haughty contempt and disdain of his friends and of that
which they offered ([Job 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#003)):
Wherefore are we counted as beasts? This was invidious. Job had indeed
called them mockers, had represented them both as unwise and as unkind,
wanting both in the reason and tenderness of men, but he did not count
them beasts; yet Bildad so represents the matter, 1. Because his high
spirit resented what Job had said as if it had been the greatest affront
imaginable. Proud men are apt to think themselves slighted more than
really they are. 2. Because his hot spirit was willing to find a
pretence to be hard upon Job. Those that incline to be severe upon
others will have it thought that others have first been so upon them.

IV\. With outrageous passion: He teareth himself in his anger, [Job
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#004). Herein he seems to reflect upon
what Job had said ([Job 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#014)):
Wherefore did I take my flesh in my teeth? "It is thy own fault," says
Bildad. Or he reflected upon what he said [Job
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#009), where he seemed to charge it
upon God, or, as some think, upon Eliphaz: He teareth me in his wrath.
"No," says Bildad; "thou alone shalt bear it." He teareth himself in his
anger. Note, Anger is a sin that is its own punishment. Fretful
passionate people tear and torment themselves. He teareth his soul (so
the word is); every sin wounds the soul, tears that, wrongs that ([Pro
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#036)), unbridled passion particularly.

V. With a proud and arrogant expectation to give law even to Providence
itself: "Shall the earth be forsaken for thee? Surely not; there is no
reason for that, that the course of nature should be changed and the
settled rules of government violated to gratify the humour of one man.
Job, dost thou think the world cannot stand without thee; but that, if
thou art ruined, all the world is ruined and forsaken with thee?" Some
make it a reproof of Job's justification of himself, falsely insinuating
that either Job was a wicked man or we must deny a Providence and
suppose that God has forsaken the earth and the rock of ages is removed.
It is rather a just reproof of his passionate complaints. When we
quarrel with the events of Providence we forget that, whatever befals
us, it is, 1. According to the eternal purpose and counsel of God. 2.
According to the written word. Thus it is written that in the world we
must have tribulation, that, since we sin daily, we must expect to smart
for it; and, 3. According to the usual way and custom, the track of
Providence, nothing but what is common to men; and to expect that God's
counsels should change, his method alter, and his word fail, to please
us, is as absurd and unreasonable as to think the earth should be
forsaken for us and the rock removed out of its place.

[Job 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 18:5</span></span>

The rest of Bildad's discourse is entirely taken up in an elegant
description of the miserable condition of a wicked man, in which there
is a great deal of certain truth, and which will be of excellent use if
duly considered - that a sinful condition is a sad condition, and that
iniquity will be men's ruin if they do not repent of it. But it is not
true that all wicked people are visibly and openly made thus miserable
in this world; nor is it true that all who are brought into great
distress and trouble in this world are therefore to be deemed and
adjudged wicked men, when no other proof appears against them; and
therefore, though Bildad thought the application of it to Job was easy,
yet it was not safe nor just. In these verses we have,

I. The destruction of the wicked foreseen and foretold, under the
similitude of darkness ([Job 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#005),
[Job 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#006)): Yea, the light of the
wicked shall be put out. Even his light, the best and brightest part of
him, shall be put out; even that which he rejoiced in shall fail him. Or
the yea may refer to Job's complaints of the great distress he was in
and the darkness he should shortly make his bed in. "Yea," says Bildad,
"So it is; thou art clouded, and straitened, and made miserable, and no
better could be expected; for the light of the wicked shall be put out,
and therefore thine shall." Observe here, 1. The wicked may have some
light for a while, some pleasure, some joy, some hope within, as well as
wealth, and honour, and power without. But his light is but a spark
([Job 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#005)), a little thing and soon
extinguished. It is but a candle ([Job
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#006)), wasting, and burning down, and
easily blown out. It is not the light of the Lord (that is sun-light),
but the light of his own fire and sparks of his own kindling, [Isa
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#011). 2. His light will certainly be
put out at length, quite put out, so that not the least spark of it
shall remain with which to kindle another fire. Even while he is in his
tabernacle, while he is in the body, which is the tabernacle of the soul
([Co2 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001)), the light shall be dark;
he shall have no true solid comfort, no joy that is satisfying, no hope
that is supporting. Even the light that is in him is darkness; and how
great is that darkness! But, when he is put out of this tabernacle by
death, his candle shall be put out with him. The period of his life will
be the final period of all his days and will turn all his hopes into
endless despair. When a wicked man dies his expectation shall perish,
[Pro 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#007). He shall lie down in
sorrow.

II\. The preparatives for that destruction represented under the
similitude of a beast or bird caught in a snare, or a malefactor
arrested and taken into custody in order to his punishment, [Job
18:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#007). 1. Satan is preparing for his
destruction. He is the robber that shall prevail against him ([Job
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#009)); for, as he was a murderer, so
he was a robber, from the beginning. He, as the tempter, lays snares for
sinners in the way, wherever they go, and he shall prevail. If he make
them sinful like himself, he will make them miserable like himself. He
hunts for the precious life. 2. He is himself preparing for his own
destruction by going on in sin, and so treasuring up wrath against the
day of wrath. God gives him up, as he deserves and desires, to his own
counsels, and then his own counsels cast him down, [Job
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#007). His sinful projects and pursuits
bring him into mischief. He is cast into a net by his own feet ([Job
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#008)), runs upon his own destruction,
is snared in the work of his own hands ([Psa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016)); his own tongue falls upon him,
[Psa 64:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#008). In the transgression of an
evil man there is a snare. 3. God is preparing for his destruction. The
sinner by his sin is preparing the fuel and then God by his wrath is
preparing the fire. See here, (1.) How the sinner is infatuated, to run
himself into the snare; and whom God will destroy he infatuates. (2.)
How he is embarrassed: The steps of his strength, his mighty designs and
efforts, shall be straitened, so that he shall not compass what he
intended; and the more he strives to extricate himself the more will he
be entangled. Evil men wax worse and worse. (3.) How he is secured and
kept from escaping the judgments of God that are in pursuit of him. The
gin shall take him by the heel. He can no more escape the divine wrath
that is in pursuit of him than a man, so held, can flee from the
pursuer. God knows how to reserve the wicked for the day of judgment,
[Pe2 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#009).

[Job 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 18:11</span></span>

Bildad here describes the destruction itself which wicked people are
reserved for in the other world, and which, in some degree, often seizes
them in this world. Come, and see what a miserable condition the sinner
is in when his day comes to fall.

I. See him disheartened and weakened by continual terrors arising from
the sense of his own guilt and the dread of God's wrath ([Job
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#011), [Job
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#012)): Terror shall make him afraid
on every side. The terrors of his own conscience shall haunt him, so
that he shall never be easy. Wherever he goes, these shall follow him;
which way soever he looks, these shall stare him in the face. It will
make him tremble to see himself fought against by the whole creation, to
see Heaven frowning on him, hell gaping for him, and earth sick of him.
He that carries his own accuser, and his own tormentor, always in his
bosom, cannot but be afraid on every side. This will drive him to his
feet, like the malefactor, who, being conscious of his own guilt, takes
to his heels and flees when none pursues, [Pro
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#001). But his feet will do him no
service; they are fast in the snare, [Job
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#009). The sinner may as soon overpower
the divine omnipotence as flee from the divine omniscience, [Amo
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#002), [Amo
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#003). No marvel that the sinner is
dispirited and distracted with fear, for, 1. He sees his ruin
approaching: Destruction shall be ready at his side, to seize him
whenever justice gives the word, so that he is brought into desolation
in a moment, [Psa 73:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#019). 2. He feels
himself utterly unable to grapple with it, either to escape it or to
bear up under it. That which he relied upon as his strength (his wealth,
power, pomp, friends, and the hardiness of his own spirit) shall fail
him in the time of need, and be hunger-bitten, that is, it shall do him
no more service than a famished man, pining away for hunger, would do in
work or war. The case being thus with him, no marvel that he is a terror
to himself. Note, The way of sin is a way of fear, and leads to
everlasting confusion, of which the present terrors of an impure and
unpacified conscience are earnests, as they were to Cain and Judas.

II\. See him devoured and swallowed up by a miserable death; and
miserable indeed a wicked man's death is, how secure and jovial soever
his life was. 1. See him dying, arrested by the first-born of death
(some disease, or some stroke that has in it a more than ordinary
resemblance of death itself; so great a death, as it is called, [Co2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#010), a messenger of death that has in
it an uncommon strength and terror), weakened by the harbingers of
death, which devour the strength of his skin, that is, it shall bring
rottenness into his bones and consume them. His confidence shall then be
rooted out of his tabernacle ([Job
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#014)), that is, all that he trusted
to for his support shall be taken from him, and he shall have nothing to
rely upon, no, not his own tabernacle. His own soul was his confidence,
but that shall be rooted out of the tabernacle of the body, as a tree
that cumbered the ground. "Thy soul shall be required of thee." 2. See
him dead, and see his case then with an eye of faith. (1.) He is then
brought to the king of terrors. He was surrounded with terrors while he
lived ([Job 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#011)), and death was the
king of all those terrors; they fought against the sinner in death's
name, for it is by reason of death that sinners are all their lifetime
subject to bondage ([Heb 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#015)), and at
length they will be brought to that which they so long feared, as a
captive to the conqueror. Death is terrible to nature; our Saviour
himself prayed, Father, save me from this hour. But to the wicked it is
in a special manner the king of terrors, both as it is a period to that
life in which they placed their happiness and a passage to that life
where they will find their endless misery. How happy then are the
saints, and how much indebted to the Lord Jesus, by whom death is so far
abolished, and the property of it altered, that this king of terrors
becomes a friend and servant! (2.) He is then driven from the light into
darkness ([Job 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#018)), from the light
of this world, and his prosperous condition in it, into darkness, the
darkness of the grave, the darkness of hell, into utter darkness, never
to see light ([Psa 49:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#019)), not the
least gleam, nor any hopes of it. (3.) He is then chased out of the
world, hurried and dragged away by the messengers of death, sorely
against his will, chased as Adam out of paradise, for the world is his
paradise. It intimates that he would fain stay here; he is loth to
depart, but go he must; all the world is weary of him, and therefore
chases him out, as glad to get rid of him. This is death to a wicked
man.

III\. See his family sunk and cut off, [Job
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#015). The wrath and curse of God
light and lie, not only upon his head and heart, but upon his house too,
to consume it with the timber and stones thereof, [Zac
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#004). Death itself shall dwell in his
tabernacle, and, having expelled him, shall take possession of his
house, to the terror and destruction of all that he leaves behind. Even
the dwelling shall be ruined for the sake of its owner: Brimstone shall
be scattered upon his habitation, rained upon it as upon Sodom, to the
destruction of which this seems to have reference. Some think he here
upbraids Job with the burning of his sheep and servants with fire from
heaven. The reason is here given why his tabernacle is thus marked for
ruin: Because it is none of his; that is, it was unjustly got, and kept,
from the rightful owner, and therefore let him not expect either the
comfort or the continuance of it. His children shall perish, either with
him or after him, [Job 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#016). So that,
his roots being in his own person dried up beneath, above his branch
(every child of his family) shall be cut off. Thus the houses of
Jeroboam, Baasha, and Ahab, were cut off; none that descended from them
were left alive. Those who take root in the earth may expect it will
thus be dried up; but, if we be rooted in Christ, even our leaf shall
not wither, much less shall our branch be cut off. Those who consult the
true honour of their family, and the welfare of its branches, will be
afraid of withering it by sin. The extirpation of the sinner's family is
mentioned again ([Job 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#019)): He shall
neither have son nor nephew, child nor grandchild, to enjoy his estate
and bear up his name, nor shall there be any remaining in his dwelling
akin to him. Sin entails a curse upon posterity, and the iniquity of the
fathers is often visited upon the children. Herein, also, it is probable
that Bildad reflects upon the death of Job's children and servants, as a
further proof of his being a wicked man; whereas all that are written
childless are not thereby written graceless; there is a name better than
that of sons and daughters.

IV\. See his memory buried with him, or made odious; he shall either be
forgotten or spoken of with dishonour ([Job
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#017)): His remembrance shall perish
from the earth; and, if it perish thence, it perishes wholly, for it was
never written in heaven, as the names of the saints are, [Luk
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020). All his honour shall be laid
and lost in the dust, or stained with perpetual infamy, so that he shall
have no name in the street, departing without being desired. Thus the
judgments of God follow him, after death, in this world, as an
indication of the misery his soul is in after death, and an earnest of
that everlasting shame and contempt to which he shall rise in the great
day. The memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall
rot, [Pro 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007).

V. See a universal amazement at his fall, [Job
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#020). Those that see it are
affrighted, so sudden is the change, so dreadful the execution, so
threatening to all about him: and those that come after, and hear the
report of it, are astonished at it; their ears are made to tingle, and
their hearts to tremble, and they cry out, Lord, how terrible art thou
in thy judgments! A place or person utterly ruined is said to be made an
astonishment, [Deu 28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037); [Ch2
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#021); [Jer
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#009), [Jer
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#018). Horrible sins bring strange
punishments.

VI\. See all this averred as the unanimous sense of the patriarchal age,
grounded upon their knowledge of God and their many observations of his
providence ([Job 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#021)): Surely such
are the dwellings of the wicked, and this is the place (this the
condition) of him that knows not God! See here what is the beginning,
and what is the end, of the wickedness of this wicked world. 1. The
beginning of it is ignorance of God, and it is a wilful ignorance, for
there is that to be known of him which is sufficient to leave them for
ever inexcusable. They know not God, and then they commit all iniquity.
Pharaoh knows not the Lord, and therefore will not obey his voice. 2.
The end of it, and that is utter destruction. Such, so miserable, are
the dwellings of the wicked. Vengeance will be taken of those that know
not God, [Th2 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008). For those whom he
has not honour from he will get himself honour upon. Let us therefore
stand in awe and not sin, for it will certainly be bitterness in the
latter end.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 19](job019)

</div>
