<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job014)  [Next](job016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 15:0</span></span>

Perhaps Job was so clear, and so well satisfied, in the goodness of his
own cause, that he thought, if he had not convinced, yet he had at least
silenced all his three friends; but, it seems he had not: in this
chapter they begin a second attack upon him, each of them charging him
afresh with as much vehemence as before. It is natural to us to be fond
of our own sentiments, and therefore to be firm to them, and with
difficulty to be brought to recede from them. Eliphaz here keeps close
to the principles upon which he had condemned Job, and, I. He reproves
him for justifying himself, and fathers on him many evil things which
are unfairly inferred thence ([Job
15:2-13](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#002)). II. He persuades him to
humble himself before God and to take shame to himself ([Job
15:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#014)). III. He reads him a long
lecture concerning the woeful estate of wicked people, who harden their
hearts against God and the judgments which are prepared for them (v.
17-35). A good use may be made both of his reproofs (for they are plain)
and of his doctrine (for it is sound), though both the one and the other
are misapplied to Job.

[Job 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 15:1</span></span>

Eliphaz here falls very foul upon Job, because he contradicted what he
and his colleagues had said, and did not acquiesce in it and applaud it,
as they expected. Proud people are apt thus to take it very much amiss
if they may not have leave to dictate and give law to all about them,
and to censure those as ignorant and obstinate, and all that is naught,
who cannot in every thing say as they say. Several great crimes Eliphaz
here charges Job with, only because he would not own himself a
hypocrite.

I. He charges him with folly and absurdity ([Job
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#002), [Job
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#003)), that, whereas he had been
reputed a wise man, he had now quite forfeited his reputation; any one
would say that his wisdom had departed from him, he talked so
extravagantly and so little to the purpose. Bildad began thus ([Job
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#002)), and Zophar, [Job
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#002), [Job
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#003). It is common for angry
disputants thus to represent one another's reasonings as impertinent and
ridiculous more than there is cause, forgetting the doom of him that
calls his brother Raca, and Thou fool. It is true, 1. That there is in
the world a great deal of vain knowledge, science falsely so called,
that is useless, and therefore worthless. 2. That this is the knowledge
that puffs up, with which men swell in a fond conceit of their own
accomplishments. 3. That, whatever vain knowledge a man may have in his
head, if he would be thought a wise man he must not utter it, but let it
die with himself as it deserves. 4. Unprofitable talk is evil talk. We
must give an account in the great day not only for wicked words, but for
idle words. Speeches therefore which do no good, which do no service
either to God or our neighbour, or no justice to ourselves, which are no
way to the use of edifying, were better unspoken. Those words which are
as wind, light and empty, especially which are as the east wind, hurtful
and pernicious, it will be pernicious to fill either ourselves or others
with, for they will pass very ill in the account. 5. Vain knowledge or
unprofitable talk ought to be reproved and checked, especially in a wise
man, whom it worst becomes and who does most hurt by the bad example of
it.

II\. He charges him with impiety and irreligion ([Job
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#004)): "Thou castest off fear," that
is, "the fear of God, and that regard to him which thou shouldst have;
and then thou restrainest prayer." See what religion is summed up in,
fearing God and praying to him, the former the most needful principle,
the latter the most needful practice. Where no fear of God is no good is
to be expected; and those who live without prayer certainly live without
God in the world. Those who restrain prayer do thereby give evidence
that they cast off fear. Surely those have no reverence of God's
majesty, no dread of his wrath, and are in no care about their souls and
eternity, who make no applications to God for his grace. Those who are
prayerless are fearless and graceless. When the fear of God is cast off
all sin is let in and a door opened to all manner of profaneness. It is
especially bad with those who have had some fear of God, but have now
cast it off - have been frequent in prayer, but now restrain it. How
have they fallen! How is their first love lost! It denotes a kind of
force put upon themselves. The fear of God would cleave to them, but
they throw it off; prayer would be uttered, but they restrain it; and,
in both, they baffle their convictions. Those who either omit prayer or
straiten and abridge themselves in it, quenching the spirit of adoption
and denying themselves the liberty they might take in the duty, restrain
prayer. This is bad enough, but it is worse to restrain others from
prayer, to prohibit and discourage prayer, as Darius, [Dan
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#007). Now,

1\. Eliphaz charges this upon Job, either, (1.) As that which was his
own practice. He thought that Job talked of God with such liberty as if
he had been his equal, and that he charged him so vehemently with hard
usage of him, and challenged him so often to a fair trial, that he had
quite thrown off all religious regard to him. This charge was utterly
false, and yet wanted not some colour. We ought not only to take care
that we keep up prayer and the fear of God, but that we never drop any
unwary expressions which may give occasion to those who seek occasion to
question our sincerity and constancy in religion. Or, (2.) As that which
others would infer from the doctrine he maintained. "If this be true"
(thinks Eliphaz) "which Job says, that a man may be thus sorely
afflicted and yet be a good man, then farewell all religion, farewell
prayer and the fear of God. If all things come alike to all, and the
best men may have the worst treatment in this world, every one will be
ready to say, It is vain to serve God; and what profit is it to keep his
ordinances? [Mal 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#014). Verily I have
cleansed my hands in vain, [Psa 73:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#013),
[Psa 73:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#014). Who will be honest if the
tabernacles of robbers prosper? [Job
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#006). If there be no forgiveness with
God ([Job 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#021)), who will fear him?
[Psa 130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004). If he laugh at the trial
of the innocent ([Job 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#023)), if he be
so difficult of access ([Job 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#032)),
who will pray to him?" Note, It is a piece of injustice which even wise
and good men are too often guilty of, in the heat of disputation, to
charge upon their adversaries those consequences of their opinions which
are not fairly drawn from them and which really they abhor. This is not
doing as we would be done by.

2\. Upon this strained innuendo Eliphaz grounds that high charge of
impiety ([Job 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#005)): Thy mouth utters
thy iniquity - teaches it, so the word is. "Thou teachest others to have
the same hard thoughts of God and religion that thou thyself hast." It
is bad to break even the least of the commandments, but worse to teach
men so, [Mat 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#019). If we ever thought
evil, let us lay our hand upon our mouth to suppress the evil thought
([Pro 30:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#032)), and let us by no means
utter it; that is putting an imprimatur to it, publishing it with
allowance, to the dishonour of God and the damage of others. Observe,
When men have cast off fear and prayer their mouths utter iniquity.
Those that cease to do good soon learn to do evil. What can we expect
but all manner of iniquity from those that arm not themselves with the
grace of God against it? But thou choosest the tongue of the crafty,
that is, "Thou utterest thy iniquity with some show and pretence of
piety, mixing some good words with the bad, as tradesmen do with their
wares to help them off." The mouth of iniquity could not do so much
mischief as it does without the tongue of the crafty. The serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtlety. See [Rom
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018). The tongue of the crafty speaks
with design and deliberation; and therefore those that use it may be
said to choose it, as that which will serve their purpose better than
the tongue of the upright: but it will be found, at last, that honesty
is the best policy. Eliphaz, in his first discourse, had proceeded
against Job upon mere surmise ([Job
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#006), [Job
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007)), but now he has got proof against
him from his own discourses ([Job
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#006)): Thy own mouth condemns thee,
and not I. But he should have considered that he and his fellows had
provoked him to say that which now they took advantage of; and that was
not fair. Those are most effectually condemned that are condemned by
themselves, [Tit 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#011); [Luk
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#022). Many a man needs no more to
sink him than for his own tongue to fall upon him.

III\. He charges him with intolerable arrogancy and self-conceitedness.
It was a just, and reasonable, and modest demand that Job had made ([Job
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#003)), Allow that I have understanding
as well as you; but see how they seek occasion against him: that is
misconstrued, as if he pretended to be wiser than any man. Because he
will not grant to them the monopoly of wisdom, they will have it thought
that he claims it to himself, [Job
15:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#007). As if he thought he had the
advantage of all mankind, 1. In length of acquaintance with the world,
which furnishes men with so much the more experience: "Art thou the
first man that was born; and, consequently, senior to us, and better
able to give the sense of antiquity and the judgment of the first and
earliest, the wisest and purest, ages? Art thou prior to Adam?" So it
may be read. "Did not he suffer for sin; and yet wilt not thou, who art
so great a sufferer, own thyself a sinner? Wast thou made before the
hills, as Wisdom herself was? [Pro
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#023), etc. Must God's counsels, which
are as the great mountains ([Psa
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)), and immovable as the
everlasting hills, be subject to thy notions and bow to them? Dost thou
know more of the world than any of us do? No, thou art but of yesterday
even as we are," [Job 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#009). Or, 2. In
intimacy of acquaintance with God ([Job
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#008)): "Hast thou heard the secret of
God? Dost thou pretend to be of the cabinet-council of heaven, that thou
canst give better reasons than others can for God's proceedings?" There
are secret things of God, which belong not to us, and which therefore we
must not pretend to account for. Those are daringly presumptuous who do.
He also represents him, (1.) As assuming to himself such knowledge as
none else had: "Dost thou restrain wisdom to thyself, as if none were
wise besides?" Job had said ([Job
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#002)), What you know, the same do I
know also; and now they return upon him, according to the usage of eager
disputants, who think they have a privilege to commend themselves: What
knowest thou that we know not? How natural are such replies as these in
the heat of argument! But how simple do they look afterwards, upon the
review! (2.) As opposing the stream of antiquity, a venerable name,
under the shade of which all contending parties strive to shelter
themselves: "With us are the gray-headed and very aged men, [Job
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#010). We have the fathers on our
side; all the ancient doctors of the church are of our opinion." A thing
soon said, but not so soon proved; and, when proved, truth is not so
soon discovered and proved by it as most people imagine. David preferred
right scripture-knowledge before that of antiquity ([Psa
119:100](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#100)): I understand more than the
ancients, because I keep thy precepts. Or perhaps one or more, if not
all three, of these friends of Job, were older than he ([Job
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#006)), and therefore they thought he
was bound to acknowledge them to be in the right. This also serves
contenders to make a noise with to very little purpose. If they are
older than their adversaries, and can say they knew such a thing before
their opponents were born, this will not serve to justify them in being
arrogant and overbearing; for the oldest are not always the wisest, [Job
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#009).

IV\. He charges him with a contempt of the counsels and comforts that
were given him by his friends ([Job
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#011)): Are the consolations of God
small with thee? 1. Eliphaz takes it ill that Job did not value the
comforts which he and his friends administered to him more than it seems
he did, and did not welcome every word they said as true and important.
It is true they had said some very good things, but, in their
application to Job, they were miserable comforters. Note, We are apt to
think that great and considerable which we ourselves say, when others
perhaps with good reason think it small and trifling. Paul found that
those who seemed to be somewhat, yet, in conference, added nothing to
him, [Gal 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006). 2. He represents this
as a slight put upon divine consolations in general, as if they were of
small account with him, whereas really they were not. If he had not
highly valued them, he could not have borne up as he did under his
sufferings. Note, (1.) The consolations of God are not in themselves
small. Divine comforts are great things, that is, the comfort which is
from God, especially the comfort which is in God. (2.) The consolations
of God not being small in themselves, it is very lamentable if they be
small with us. It is a great affront to God, and an evidence of a
degenerate depraved mind, to disesteem and undervalue spiritual delights
and despise the pleasant land. "What!" (says Eliphaz) "is there any
secret thing with thee? Hast thou some cordial to support thyself with,
that is a proprium, an arcanum, that nobody else can pretend to, or
knows any thing of?" Or, "Is there some secret sin harboured and
indulged in thy bosom, which hinders the operation of divine comforts?"
None disesteem divine comforts but those that secretly affect the world
and the flesh.

V. He charges him with opposition to God himself and to religion ([Job
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#012), [Job
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#013)): "Why doth thy heart carry thee
away into such indecent irreligious expressions?" Note, Every man is
tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, [Jam
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#014). if we fly off from God and our
duty, or fly out into anything amiss, it is our own heart that carries
us away. If thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it. There is a
violence, an ungovernable impetus, in the turnings of the soul; the
corrupt heart carries men away, as it were, by force, against their
convictions. "What is it that thy eyes wink at? Why so careless and
mindless of what is said to thee, hearing it as if thou wert half
asleep? Why so scornful, disdaining what we say, as if it were below
thee to take notice of it? What have we said that deserves to be thus
slighted - nay, that thou turnest thy spirit against God?" It was bad
that his heart was carried away from God, but much worse that it was
turned against God. But those that forsake God will soon break out in
open enmity to him. But how did this appear? Why, "Thou lettest such
words go out of thy mouth, reflecting on God, and his justice and
goodness." It is the character of the wicked that they set their mouth
against the heavens ([Psa 73:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#009)), which
is a certain indication that the spirit is turned against God. He
thought Job's spirit was soured against God, and so turned from what it
had been, and exasperated at his dealings with him. Eliphaz wanted
candour and charity, else he would not have put such a harsh
construction upon the speeches of one that had such a settled reputation
for piety and was now in temptation. This was, in effect, to give the
cause on Satan's side, and to own that Job had done as Satan said he
would, had cursed God to his face.

VI\. He charges him with justifying himself to such a degree as even to
deny his share in the common corruption and pollution of the human
nature ([Job 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#014)): What is man, that
he should be clean? that is, that he should pretend to be so, or that
any should expect to find him so. What is he that is born of a woman, a
sinful woman, that he should be righteous? Note, 1. Righteousness is
cleanness; it makes us acceptable to God and easy to ourselves, [Psa
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#024). 2. Man, in his fallen state,
cannot pretend to be clean and righteous before God, either to acquit
himself to God's justice or recommend himself to his favour. 3. He is to
be adjudged unclean and unrighteous because born of a woman, from whom
he derives a corrupt nature, which is both his guilt and his pollution.
With these plain truths Eliphaz thinks to convince Job, whereas he had
just now said the same ([Job 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004)):
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? But does it therefore
follow that Job is a hypocrite, and a wicked man, which is all that he
denied? By no means. Though man, as born of a woman, is not clean, yet,
as born again of the Spirit, he is clean. 4. Further to evince this he
here shows, (1.) That the brightest creatures are imperfect and impure
before God, [Job 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#015). God places no
confidence in saints and angels; he employs both, but trusts neither
with his service, without giving them fresh supplies of strength and
wisdom for it, as knowing they are not sufficient of themselves, neither
more nor better than his grace makes them. He takes no complacency in
the heavens themselves. How pure soever they seem to us, in his eye they
have many a speck and many a flaw: The heavens are not clean in his
sight. If the stars (says Mr. Caryl) have no light in the sight of the
sun, what light has the sun in the sight of God! See [Isa
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023). (2.) That man is much more so
([Job 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#016)): How much more abominable
and filthy is man! If saints are not to be trusted, much less sinners.
If the heavens are not pure, which are as God made them, much less man,
who is degenerated. Nay, he is abominable and filthy in the sight of
God, and if ever he repent he is so in his own sight, and therefore he
abhors himself. Sin is an odious thing, it makes men hateful. The body
of sin is so, and is therefore called a dead body, a loathsome thing. Is
it not a filthy thing, and enough to make any one sick, to see a man
eating swine's food or drinking some nauseous and offensive stuff? Such
is the filthiness of man that he drinks iniquity (that abominable thing
which the Lord hates) as greedily, and with as much pleasure, as a man
drinks water when he is thirsty. It is his constant drink; it is natural
to sinners to commit iniquity. It gratifies, but does not satisfy, the
appetites of the old man. It is like water to a man in a dropsy. The
more men sin the more they would sin.

[Job 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 15:17</span></span>

Eliphaz, having reproved Job for his answers, here comes to maintain his
own thesis, upon which he built his censure of Job. His opinion is that
those who are wicked are certainly miserable, whence he would infer that
those who are miserable are certainly wicked, and that therefore Job was
so. Observe,

I. His solemn preface to this discourse, in which he bespeaks Job's
attention, which he had little reason to expect, he having given so
little heed to and put so little value upon what Job had said ([Job
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#017)): "I will show thee that which
is worth hearing, and not reason, as thou dost, with unprofitable talk."
Thus apt are men, when they condemn the reasonings of others, to commend
their own. He promises to teach him, 1. From his own experience and
observation: "That which I have myself seen, in divers instances, I will
declare." It is of good use to take notice of the providences of God
concerning the children of men, from which many a good lesson may be
learned. What good observations we have made, and have found benefit by
ourselves, we should be ready to communicate for the benefit of others;
and we may speak boldly when we declare what we have seen. 2. From the
wisdom of the ancients ([Job 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#018)):
Which wise men have told from their fathers. Note, The wisdom and
learning of the moderns are very much derived from those of the
ancients. Good children will learn a good deal from their good parents;
and what we have learned from our ancestors we must transmit to our
posterity and not hide from the generations to come. See [Psa
78:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#003). If the thread of the knowledge
of many ages be cut off by the carelessness of one, and nothing be done
to preserve it pure and entire, all that succeed fare the worse. The
authorities Eliphaz vouched were authorities indeed, men of rank and
figure ([Job 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#019)), unto whom alone
the earth was given, and therefore you may suppose them favourites of
Heaven and best capable of making observations concerning the affairs of
this earth. The dictates of wisdom come with advantage from those who
are in places of dignity and power, as Solomon; yet there is a wisdom
which none of the princes of this world knew, [Co1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007), [Co1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008).

II\. The discourse itself. He here aims to show,

1\. That those who are wise and good do ordinarily prosper in this
world. This he only hints at ([Job
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#019)), that those of whose mind he
was were such as had the earth given to them, and to them only; they
enjoyed it entirely and peaceably, and no stranger passed among them,
either to share with them or give disturbance to them. Job had said, The
earth is given into the hand of the wicked, [Job
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#024). "No," says Eliphaz, "it is given
into the hands of the saints, and runs along with the faith committed
unto them; and they are not robbed and plundered by strangers and
enemies making inroads upon them, as thou art by the Sabeans and
Chaldeans." But because many of God's people have remarkably prospered
in this world, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, it does not therefore
follow that those who are crossed and impoverished, as Job, are not
God's people.

2\. That wicked people, and particularly oppressors and tyrannizing
rulers, are subject to continual terrors, live very uncomfortably, and
perish very miserably. On this head he enlarges, showing that even those
who impiously dare God's judgments yet cannot but dread them and will
feel them at last. He speaks in the singular number - the wicked man,
meaning (as some think) Nimrod; or perhaps Chedorlaomer, or some such
mighty hunter before the Lord. I fear he meant Job himself, whom he
expressly charges both with the tyranny and with the timorousness here
described, [Job 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#009), [Job
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#010). Here he thinks the application
easy, and that Job might, in this description, as in a glass, see his
own face. Now,

(1.) Let us see how he describes the sinner who lives thus miserably. He
does not begin with that, but brings it in as a reason of his doom, [Job
15:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#025). It is no ordinary sinner,
but one of the first rate, an oppressor ([Job
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#020)), a blasphemer, and a
persecutor, one that neither fears God nor regards man. \[1.\] He bids
defiance to God, and to his authority and power, [Job
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#025). Tell him of the divine law, and
its obligations; he breaks those bonds asunder, and will not have, no,
not him that made him, to restrain him or rule over him. Tell him of the
divine wrath, and its terrors; he bids the Almighty do his worst, he
will have his will, he will have his way, in spite of him, and will not
be controlled by law, or conscience, or the notices of a judgment to
come. He stretches out his hand against God, in defiance of him and of
the power of his wrath. God is indeed out of his reach, but he stretches
out his hand against him, to show that, if it were in his power, he
would ungod him. This applies to the audacious impiety of some sinners
who are really haters of God ([Rom
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#030)), and whose carnal mind is not
only an enemy to him, but enmity itself, [Rom
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007). But, alas! the sinner's malice is
as impotent as it is impudent; what can he do? He strengthens himself
(he would be valiant, so some read it) against the Almighty. He thinks
with his exorbitant despotic power to change times and laws ([Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025)), and, in spite of Providence, to
carry the day for rapine and wrong, clear of the check of conscience.
Note, It is the prodigious madness of presumptuous sinners that they
enter the lists with Omnipotence. Woe unto him that strives with his
Maker. That is generally taken for a further description of the sinner's
daring presumption ([Job 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#026)): He
runs upon him, upon God himself, in a direct opposition to him, to his
precepts and providences, even upon his neck, as a desperate combatant,
when he finds himself an unequal match for his adversary, flies in his
face, though, at the same time, he falls on his sword's point, or the
sharp spike of his buckler. Sinners, in general, run from God; but the
presumptuous sinner, who sins with a high hand, runs upon him, fights
against him, and bids defiance to him; and it is easy to foretel what
will be the issue. \[2.\] He wraps himself up in security and sensuality
([Job 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#027)): He covers his face with
his fatness. This signifies both the pampering of his flesh with daily
delicious fare and the hardening of his heart thereby against the
judgments of God. Note, The gratifying of the appetites of the body,
feeding and feasting that to the full, often turns to the damage of the
soul and its interests. Why is God forgotten and slighted, but because
the belly is made a god of and happiness placed in the delights of
sense? Those that fill themselves with wine and strong drink abandon all
that is serious and flatter themselves with hopes that tomorrow shall be
as this day, [Isa 56:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#012). Woe to those
that are thus at ease in Zion, [Amo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001), [Amo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#003), [Amo
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004); [Luk
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019). The fat that covers his face
makes him look bold and haughty, and that which covers his flanks makes
him lie easy and soft, and feel little; but this will prove poor shelter
against the darts of God's wrath. \[3.\] He enriches himself with the
spoils of all about him, [Job 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#028).
He dwells in cities which he himself has made desolate by expelling the
inhabitants out of them, that he might be placed alone in them, [Isa
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#008) Proud and cruel men take a strange
pleasure in ruins, when they are of their own making, in destroying
cities ([Psa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#006)) and triumphing in
the destruction, since they cannot make them their own but by making
them ready to become heaps, and frightening the inhabitants out of them.
Note, Those that aim to engross the world to themselves, and grasp at
all, lose the comfort of all, and make themselves miserable in the midst
of all. How does this tyrant gain his point, and make himself master of
cities that have all the marks of antiquity upon them? We are told ([Job
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#035)) that he does it by malice and
falsehood, the two chief ingredients of his wickedness who was a liar
and a murderer from the beginning, They conceive mischief, and then they
effect it by preparing deceit, pretending to protect those whom they
design to subdue, and making leagues of peace the more effectually to
carry on the operations of war. From such wicked men God deliver all
good men.

(2.) Let us see now what is the miserable condition of this wicked man,
both in spiritual and temporal judgments.

\[1.\] His inward peace is continually disturbed. He seems to those
about him to be easy, and they therefore envy him and wish themselves in
his condition; but he who knows what is in men tells us that a wicked
man has so little comfort and satisfaction in his own breast that he is
rather to be pitied than envied. First, His own conscience accuses him,
and with the pangs and throes of that he travaileth in pain all his
days, [Job 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#020). He is continually
uneasy at the thought of the cruelties he as been guilty of and the
blood in which he has imbrued his hands. His sins stare him in the face
at every turn. Diri conscia facti mens habet attonitos - Conscious guilt
astonishes and confounds. Secondly, He is vexed at the uncertainty of
the continuance of his wealth and power: The number of years is hidden
to the oppressor. He knows, whatever he pretends, that they will not
last always, and has reason to fear that they will not last long and
this he frets at. Thirdly, He is under a certain fearful expectation of
judgment and fiery indignation ([Heb
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#027)), which puts him into, and keeps
him in, a continual terror and consternation, so that he dwells with
Cain in the land of Nod, or commotion ([Gen
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#016)), and is made like, Pashur,
Magor-missabib - a terror round about, [Jer
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#003), [Jer
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#004). A dreadful sound is in his ears,
[Job 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#021). He knows that both heaven
and earth are incensed against him, that God is angry with him and that
all the world hates him; he has done nothing to make his peace with
either, and therefore he thinks that every one who meets him will slay
him, [Gen 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#014). Or he is like a man
absconding for debt, who thinks every man a bailiff. Fear came in, at
first, with sin ([Gen 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#010)) and still
attends it. Even in prosperity he is apprehensive that the destroyer
will come upon him, either some destroying angel sent of God to avenge
his quarrel or some of his injured subjects who will be their own
avengers. Those who are the terror of the mighty in the land of the
living usually go down slain to the pit ([Eze
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#025)), the expectation of which makes
them a terror to themselves. This is further set forth ([Job
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#022)): He is, in his own
apprehension, waited for of the sword; for he knows that he who killeth
with the sword must be killed with the sword, [Rev
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010). A guilty conscience represents
to the sinner a flaming sword turning every way ([Gen
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#024)) and himself inevitably running
on it. Again ([Job 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#023)): He knows
that the day of darkness (or the night of darkness rather) is ready at
his hand, that it is appointed to him and cannot be put by, that it is
hastening on apace and cannot be put off. This day of darkness is
something beyond death; it is that day of the Lord which to all wicked
people will be darkness and not light and in which they will be doomed
to utter, endless, darkness. Note, Some wicked people, though they seem
secure, have already received the sentence of death, eternal death,
within themselves, and plainly see hell gaping for them. No marvel that
it follows ([Job 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#024)), Trouble and
anguish (that inward tribulation and anguish of soul spoken of [Rom
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#008), [Rom
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#009), which are the effect of God's
indignation and wrath fastening upon the conscience) shall make him
afraid of worse to come. What is the hell before him if this be the hell
within him? And though he would fain shake off his fears, drink them
away, and jest them away, it will not do; they shall prevail against
him, and overpower him, as a king ready to the battle, with forces too
strong to be resisted. He that would keep his peace, let him keep a good
conscience. Fourthly, If at any time he be in trouble, he despairs of
getting out ([Job 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#022)): He believeth
not that he shall return out of darkness, but he gives himself up for
gone and lost in an endless night. Good men expect light at evening
time, light out of darkness; but what reason have those to expect that
they shall return out of the darkness of trouble who would not return
from the darkness of sin, but went on in it? [Psa
82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005). It is the misery of damned
sinners that they know they shall never return out of that utter
darkness, nor pass the gulf there fixed. Fifthly, He perplexes himself
with continual care, especially if Providence ever so little frown upon
him, [Job 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#023). Such a dread he has
of poverty, and such a waste does he discern upon his estate, that he is
already, in his own imagination, wandering abroad for bread, going a
begging for a meal's meat, and saying, Where is it? The rich man, in his
abundance, cried out, What shall I do? [Luk
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#017). Perhaps he pretends fear of
wanting, as an excuse of his covetous practices; and justly may he be
brought to this extremity at last. We read of those who were full, but
have hired out themselves for bread ([Sa1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#005)), which this sinner will not do.
He cannot dig; he is too fat ([Job
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#027)): but to beg he may well be
ashamed. See [Psa 109:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#010). David never
saw the righteous so far forsaken as to beg their bread; for, verily,
they shall be fed by the charitable unasked, [Psa
37:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#003), [Psa
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#025). But the wicked want it, and
cannot expect it should be readily given them. How should those find
mercy who never showed mercy?

\[2.\] His outward prosperity will soon come to an end, and all his
confidence and all his comfort will come to an end with it. How can he
prosper when God runs upon him? so some understand that, [Job
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#026). Whom God runs upon he will
certainly run down; for when he judges he will overcome. See how the
judgments of God cross this worldly wicked man in all his cares,
desires, and projects, and so complete his misery. First, He is in care
to get, but he shall not be rich, [Job
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#029). His own covetous mind keeps him
from being truly rich. He is not rich that has not enough, and he has
not enough that does not think he has. It is contentment only that is
great gain. Providence remarkably keeps some from being rich, defeating
their enterprises, breaking their measures, and keeping them always
behind-hand. Many that get much by fraud and injustice, yet do not grow
rich: it goes as it comes; it is got by one sin and spent upon another.
Secondly, He is in care to keep what he has got, but in vain: His
substance shall not continue; it will dwindle and come to nothing. God
blasts it, and what came up in a night perishes in a night. Wealth
gotten by vanity will certainly be diminished. Some have themselves
lived to see the ruin of those estates which have been raised by
oppression; but, where this is not the case, that which is left goes
with a curse to those who succeed. De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius
haeres - Ill-gotten property will scarcely be enjoyed by the third
generation. He purchases estates to him and his heirs for ever; but to
what purpose? He shall not prolong the perfection thereof upon the
earth; neither the credit nor the comfort of his riches shall be
prolonged; and, when those are gone, where is the perfection of them?
How indeed can we expect the perfection of any thing to be prolonged
upon the earth, where every thing is transitory, and we soon see the end
of all perfection? Thirdly, He is in care to leave what he has got and
kept to his children after him. But in this he is crossed; the branches
of his family shall perish, in whom he hoped to live and flourish and to
have the reputation of making them all great men. They shall not be
green, [Job 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#032). The flame shall dry
them up, [Job 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#030). he shall shake
them off as blossoms that never knit, or as the unripe grape, [Job
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#033). They shall die in the beginning
of their days and never come to maturity. Many a man's family is ruined
by his iniquity. Fourthly, He is in care to enjoy it a great while
himself; but in that also he is crossed. 1. He may perhaps be taken from
it ([Job 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#030)): By the breath of
God's mouth shall he go away, and leave his wealth to others; that is,
by God's wrath, which, like a stream of brimstone, kindles the fire that
devours him ([Isa 30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033)), or by his
word; he speaks, and it is done immediately. This night thy soul shall
be required of thee; and so the wicked is driven away in his wickedness,
the worldling in his worldliness. 2. It may perhaps be taken from him,
and fly away like an eagle towards heaven: It shall be accomplished (or
cut off) before his time ([Job 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#032));
that is, he shall survive his prosperity, and see himself stripped of
it. Fifthly, He is in care, when he is in trouble, how to get out of it
(not how to get good by it); but in this also he is crossed ([Job
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#030)): He shall not depart out of
darkness. When he begins to fall, like Haman, all men say, "Down with
him." It was said of him ([Job 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#022)),
He believeth not that he shall return out of darkness. He frightened
himself with the perpetuity of his calamity, and God also shall choose
his delusions and bring his fears upon him ([Isa
66:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#004)), as he did upon Israel, [Num
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#028). God says Amen to his distrust
and despair. Sixthly, He is in care to secure his partners, and hopes to
secure himself by his partnership with them; but that is in vain too,
[Job 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#034), [Job
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#035). The congregation of them, the
whole confederacy, they and all their tabernacles, shall be desolate and
consumed with fire. Hypocrisy and bribery are here charged upon them;
that is, deceitful dealing both with God and man - God affronted under
colour of religion, man wronged under colour of justice. It is
impossible that these should end well. Though hand join in hand for the
support of these perfidious practices, yet shall not the wicked go
unpunished. (3.) The use and application of all this. Will the
prosperity of presumptuous sinners end thus miserably? Then ([Job
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#031)) let not him that is deceived
trust in vanity. Let the mischiefs which befal others be our warnings,
and let not us rest on that broken reed which always failed those who
leaned on it. \[1.\] Those who trust to their sinful ways of getting
wealth trust in vanity, and vanity will be their recompence, for they
shall not get what they expected. Their arts will deceive them and
perhaps ruin them in this world. \[2.\] Those who trust to their wealth
when they have gotten it, especially to the wealth they have gotten
dishonestly, trust in vanity; for it will yield them no satisfaction.
The guilt that cleaves to it will ruin the joy of it. They sow the wind,
and will reap the whirlwind, and will own at length, with the utmost
confusion, that a deceived heart turned them aside, and that they
cheated themselves with a lie in their right hand.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 16](job016)

</div>
