<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job023)  [Next](job025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 24:0</span></span>

Job having by his complaints in the foregoing chapter given vent to his
passion, and thereby gained some ease, breaks them off abruptly, and now
applies himself to a further discussion of the doctrinal controversy
between him and his friends concerning the prosperity of wicked people.
That many live at ease who yet are ungodly and profane, and despise all
the exercises of devotion, he had shown, ch. 21. Now here he goes
further, and shows that many who are mischievous to mankind, and live in
open defiance to all the laws of justice and common honesty, yet thrive
and succeed in their unrighteous practices; and we do not see them
reckoned with in this world. What he had said before ([Job
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#006)), "The tabernacles of robbers
prosper," he here enlarges upon. He lays down his general proposition
([Job 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001)), that the punishment of
wicked people is not so visible and apparent as his friends supposed,
and then proves it by an induction of particulars. I. Those that openly
do wrong to their poor neighbours are not reckoned with, nor the injured
righted ([Job 24:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#002)), though the
former are very barbarous ([Job 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#021),
[Job 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022)). II. Those that secretly
practise mischief often go undiscovered and unpunished ([Job
24:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#013)). III. That God punished such
by secret judgments and reserves them for future judgments ([Job
24:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018), and [Job
24:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#023)), so that, upon the whole
matter, we cannot say that all who are in trouble are wicked; for it is
certain that all who are in prosperity are not righteous.

[Job 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 24:1</span></span>

Job's friends had been very positive in it that they should soon see the
fall of wicked people, how much soever they might prosper for a while.
By no means, says Job; though times are not hidden from the Almighty,
yet those that know him do not presently see his day, [Job
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001). 1. He takes it for granted that
times are not hidden from the Almighty; past times are not hidden from
his judgment ([Ecc 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#015)), present
times are not hidden from his providence ([Mat
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029)), future times are not hidden
from his prescience, [Act 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#018). God
governs the world, and therefore we may be sure he takes cognizance of
it. Bad times are not hidden from him, though the bad men that make the
times bad say one to another, He has forsaken the earth, [Psa
94:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#006), [Psa
94:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#007). Every man's times are in his
hand, and under his eye, and therefore it is in his power to make the
times of wicked men in this world miserable. He foresees the time of
every man's death, and therefore, if wicked men die before they are
punished for their wickedness, we cannot say, "They escaped him by
surprise;" he foresaw it, nay, he ordered it. Before Job will enquire
into the reasons of the prosperity of wicked men he asserts God's
omniscience, as one prophet, in a similar case, asserts his
righteousness ([Jer 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)), another his
holiness ([Hab 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013)), another his
goodness to his own people, [Psa 73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001).
General truths must be held fast, though we may find it difficult to
reconcile them to particular events. 2. He yet asserts that those who
know him (that is, wise and good people who are acquainted with him, and
with whom his secret is) do not see his day, - the day of his judging
for them; this was the thing he complained of in his own case ([Job
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008)), that he could not see God
appearing on his behalf to plead his cause, - the day of his judging
against open and notorious sinners, that is called his day, [Psa
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#013). We believe that day will come,
but we do not see it, because it is future, and its presages are secret.
3. Though this is a mystery of Providence, yet there is a reason for it,
and we shall shortly know why the judgment is deferred; even the wisest,
and those who know God best, do not yet see it. God will exercise their
faith and patience, and excite their prayers for the coming of his
kingdom, for which they are to cry day and night to him, [Luk
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#007).

For the proof of this, that wicked people prosper, Job specifies two
sorts of unrighteous ones, whom all the world saw thriving in their
iniquity: -

I. Tyrants, and those that do wrong under pretence of law and authority.
It is a melancholy sight which has often been seen under the sun,
wickedness in the place of judgment ([Ecc
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016)), the unregarded tears of the
oppressed, while on the side of the oppressors there was power ([Ecc
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#001)), the violent perverting of
justice and judgment, [Ecc 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#008). 1.
They disseize their neighbours of their real estates, which came to them
by descent from their ancestors. They remove the land-marks, under
pretence that they were misplaced ([Job
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#002)), and so they encroach upon their
neighbours' rights and think they effectually secure that to their
posterity which they have got wrongfully, by making that to be an
evidence for them which should have been an evidence for the rightful
owner. This was forbidden by the law of Moses ([Deu
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#014)), under a curse, [Deu
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#017). Forging or destroying deeds is
now a crime equivalent to this. 2. They dispossess them of their
personal estates, under colour of justice. They violently take away
flocks, pretending they are forfeited, and feed thereof; as the rich man
took the poor man's ewe lamb, [Sa2
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#004). If a poor fatherless child has
but an ass of his own to get a little money with, they find some colour
or other to take it away, because the owner is not able to contest with
them. It is all one if a widow has but an ox for what little husbandry
she has; under pretence of distraining for some small debt, or arrears
of rent, this ox shall be taken for a pledge, though perhaps it is the
widow's all. God has taken it among the titles of his honour to be a
Father of the fatherless and a judge of the widows; and therefore those
will not be reckoned his friends that do not to their utmost protect and
help them; but those he will certainly reckon with as his enemies that
vex and oppress them. 3. They take all occasions to offer personal
abuses to them, [Job 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#004). They will
mislead them if they can when they meet them on the high-way, so that
the poor and needy are forced to hide themselves from them, having no
other way to secure themselves from them. They love in their hearts to
banter people, and to make fools of them, and do them a mischief if they
can, especially to triumph over poor people, whom they turn out of the
way of getting relief, threaten to punish them as vagabonds, and so
force them to abscond, and laugh at them when they have done. Some
understand those barbarous actions ([Job
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#009), [Job
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#010)) to be done by those oppressors
that pretend law for what they do: They pluck the fatherless from the
breast; that is, having made poor infants fatherless, they make them
motherless too; having taken away the father's life, they break the
mother's heart, and so starve the children and leave them to perish.
Pharaoh and Herod plucked children from the breast to the sword; and we
read of children brought forth to the murderers, [Hos
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#013). Those are inhuman murderers
indeed that can with so much pleasure suck innocent blood. They take a
pledge of the poor, and so they rob the spital; nay, they take the poor
themselves for a pledge (as some read it), and probably it was under
this pretence that they plucked the fatherless from the breast,
distraining them for slaves, as [Neh
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#005). Cruelty to the poor is great
wickedness and cries aloud for vengeance. Those who show no mercy to
such as lie at their mercy shall themselves have judgment without mercy.
Another instance of their barbarous treatment of those they have
advantage against is that they take from them even their necessary food
and raiment; they squeeze them so with their extortion that they cause
them to go naked without clothing ([Job
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#010)) and so catch their death. And
if a poor hungry family has gleaned a sheaf of corn, to make a little
cake of, that they may eat it and die, even that they take away from
them, being well pleased to see them perish for want, while they
themselves are fed to the full. 4. They are very oppressive to the
labourers they employ in their service. They not only give them no
wages, though the labourer is worthy of his hire (and this is a crying
sin, [Jam 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004)), but they will not so
much as give them meat and drink: Those that carry their sheaves are
hungry; so some read it ([Job 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#010)),
and it agrees with [Job 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#011), that
those who make oil within their walls, and with a great deal of toil
labour at the wine-presses, yet suffer thirst, which was worse than
muzzling the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn. Those masters
forget that they have a Master in heaven who will not allow the
necessary supports of life to their servants and labourers, not caring
whether they can live by their labour or no. 5. It is not only among the
poor country people, but in the cities also, that we see the tears of
the oppressed ([Job 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#012)): Men groan
from out of the city, where the rich merchants and traders are as cruel
with their poor debtors as the landlords in the country are with their
poor tenants. In cities such cruel actions as these are more observed
than in obscure corners of the country and the wronged have easier
access to justice to right themselves; and yet the oppressors there fear
neither the restraints of the law nor the just censures of their
neighbours, but the oppressed groan and cry out like wounded men, and
can no more ease and help themselves, for the oppressors are inexorable
and deaf to their groans.

II\. He speaks of robbers, and those that do wrong by downright force,
as the bands of the Sabeans and Chaldeans, which had lately plundered
him. He does not mention them particularly, lest he should seem partial
to his own cause, and to judge of men (as we are apt to do) by what they
are to us; but among the Arabians, the children of the east (Job's
country), there were those that lived by spoil and rapine, making
incursions upon their neighbours, and robbing travellers. See how they
are described here, and what mischief they do, [Job
24:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#005). 1. Their character is that
they are as wild asses in the desert, untamed, untractable,
unreasonable, Ishmael's character ([Gen
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012)), fierce and furious, and under
no restraint of law or government, [Jer
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#023), [Jer
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#024). They choose the deserts for
their dwelling, that they may be lawless and unsociable, and that they
may have opportunity of doing the more mischief. The desert is indeed
the fittest place for such wild people, [Job
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#006). But no desert can set men out of
the reach of God's eye and hand. 2. Their trade is to steal, and to make
a prey of all about them. They have chosen it as their trade; it is
their work, because there is more to be got by it, and it is got more
easily, than by an honest calling. They follow it as their trade; they
follow it closely; they go forth to it as their work, as man goes forth
to his labour, [Psa 104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023). They are
diligent and take pains at it: They rise betimes for a prey. If a
traveller be out early, they will be out as soon to rob him. They live
by it as a man lives by his trade: The wilderness (not the grounds there
but the roads there) yieldeth food for them and for their children; they
maintain themselves and their families by robbing on the high-way, and
bless themselves in it without any remorse of compassion or conscience,
and with as much security as if it were honestly got; as Ephraim, [Hos
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#007), [Hos
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#008). 3. See the mischief they do to
the country. They not only rob travellers, but they make incursions upon
their neighbours, and reap every one his corn in the field ([Job
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#006)), that is, they enter upon other
people's ground, cut their corn, and carry it away as freely as if it
were their own. Even the wicked gather the vintage, and it is their
wickedness; or, as we read it, They gather the vintage of the wicked,
and so one wicked man is made a scourge to another. What the wicked got
by extortion (which is their way of stealing) these robbers get from
them in their way of stealing; thus oftentimes are the spoilers spoiled,
[Isa 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001). 4. The misery of those that
fall into their hands ([Job 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#007), [Job
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#008)): They cause the naked, whom they
have stripped, not leaving them the clothes to their backs, to lodge, in
the cold nights, without clothing, so that they are wet with the showers
of the mountains, and, for want of a better shelter, embrace the rock,
and are glad of a cave or den in it to preserve them from the injuries
of the weather. Eliphaz had charged Job with such inhumanity as this,
concluding that Providence would not thus have stripped him if he had
not first stripped the naked of their clothing, [Job
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#006). Job here tells him there were
those that were really guilty of those crimes with which he was unjustly
charged and yet prospered and had success in their villanies, the curse
they laid themselves under working invisibly; and Job thinks it more
just to argue as he did, from an open notorious course of wickedness
inferring a secret and future punishment, than to argue as Eliphaz did,
who from nothing but present trouble inferred a course of past secret
iniquity. The impunity of these oppressors and spoilers is expressed in
one word ([Job 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#012)): Yet God layeth
not folly to them, that is, he does not immediately prosecute them with
his judgments for these crimes, nor make them examples, and so evince
their folly to all the world. He that gets riches, and not by right, at
his end shall be a fool, [Jer 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#011).
But while he prospers he passes for a wise man, and God lays not folly
to him until he saith, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required
of thee, [Luk 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#020).

[Job 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 24:13</span></span>

These verses describe another sort of sinners who therefore go
unpunished, because they go undiscovered. They rebel against the light,
[Job 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#013). Some understand it
figuratively: they sin against the light of nature, the light of God's
law, and that of their own consciences; they profess to know God, but
they rebel against the knowledge they have of him, and will not be
guided and governed, commanded and controlled, by it. Others understand
it literally: they have the day-light and choose the night as the most
advantageous season for their wickedness. Sinful works are therefore
called works of darkness, because he that does evil hates the light
([Joh 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020)), knows not the ways
thereof, that is, keeps out of the way of it, or, if he happen to be
seen, abides not where he thinks he is known. So that he here describes
the worst of sinners, - those that sin wilfully, and against the
convictions of their own consciences, whereby they add rebellion to
their sin, - those that sin deliberately, and with a great deal of plot
and contrivance, using a thousand arts to conceal their villanies,
fondly imagining that, if they can but hide them from the eye of men,
they are safe, but forgetting that there is no darkness or shadow of
death in which the workers of iniquity can hide themselves from God's
eye, [Job 34:22](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#022). In this paragraph Job
specifies three sorts of sinners that shun the light: - 1. Murderers,
[Job 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#014). They rise with the light,
as soon as ever the day breaks, to kill the poor travellers that are up
early and abroad about their business, going to market with a little
money or goods; and though it is so little that they are really to be
called poor and needy, who with much ado get a sorry livelihood by their
marketings, yet, to get it, the murderer will both take his neighbour's
life and venture his own, will rather play at such small game than not
play at all; nay, he kills for killing sake, thirsting more for blood
than for booty. See what care and pains wicked men take to compass their
wicked designs, and let the sight shame us out of our negligence and
slothfulness in doing good.

Ut jugulent homines, surgunt de nocte latrones,

Tuque ut te serves non expergisceris? -

Rogues nightly rise to murder men for pelf;

Will you not rouse you to preserve yourself?

2\. Adulterers. The eyes that are full of adultery ([Pe2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014)), the unclean and wanton eyes,
wait for the twilight, [Job 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#015). The
eye of the adulteress did so, [Pro
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#009). Adultery hides its head for
shame. The sinners themselves, even the most impudent, do what they can
to hide their sin: si non caste, tamen caute - if not chastely, yet
cautiously; and after all the wretched endeavours of the factors for
hell to take away the reproach of it, it is and ever will be a shame
even to speak of those things which are done of them in secret, [Eph
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#012). It hides its head also for fear,
knowing that jealousy is the rage of a husband, who will not spare in
the day of vengeance, [Pro 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#024), [Pro
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#025). See what pains those take that
make provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts of it, pains to
compass, and then to conceal, that provision which, after all, will be
death and hell at last. Less pains would serve to mortify and crucify
the flesh, which would be life and heaven at last. Let the sinner change
his heart, and then he needs not disguise his face, but may lift it up
without spot. 3. House-breakers, [Job
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#016). These mark houses in the
day-time, mark the avenues of a house, and on which side they can most
easily force their entrance, and then, in the night, dig through them,
either to kill, or steal, or commit adultery. The night favours the
assault, and makes the defence the more difficult; for the good man of
the house knows not what hour the thief will come and therefore is
asleep ([Luk 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#039)) and he and his lie
exposed. For this reason our law makes burglary, which is the breaking
and entering of a dwelling-house in the night time with a felonious
intent, to be felony without benefit of clergy.

And, lastly, Job observes (and perhaps observes it as part of the
present, though secret, punishment of such sinners as these) that they
are in a continual terror for fear of being discovered ([Job
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#017)): The morning is to them even as
the shadow of death. The light of the day, which is welcome to honest
people, is a terror to bad people. They curse the sun, not as the Moors,
because it scorches them, but because it discovers them. If one know
them, their consciences fly in their faces, and they are ready to become
their own accusers; for they are in the terrors of the shadow of death.
Shame came in with sin, and everlasting shame is at the end of it. See
the misery of sinners - they are exposed to continual frights; and yet
see their folly - they are afraid of coming under the eye of men, but
have no dread of God's eye, which is always upon them: they are not
afraid of doing that which yet they are so terribly afraid of being
known to do.

[Job 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 24:18</span></span>

Job here, in the conclusion of his discourse,

I. Gives some further instances of the wickedness of these cruel bloody
men. 1. Some are pirates and robbers at sea. To this many learned
interpreters apply those difficult expressions ([Job
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018)), He is swift upon the waters.
Privateers choose those ships that are the best sailors. In these swift
ships they cruise from one channel to another, to pick up prizes; and
this brings them in so much wealth that their portion is cursed in the
earth, and they behold not the way of the vineyards, that is (as bishop
Patrick explains it), they despise the employment of those who till the
ground and plant vineyards as poor and unprofitable. But others make
this a further description of the conduct of those sinners that are
afraid of the light: if they be discovered, they get away as fast as
they can, and choose to lurk, not in the vineyards, for fear of being
discovered, but in some cursed portion, a lonely and desolate place,
which nobody looks after. 2. Some are abusive to those that are in
trouble, and add affliction to the afflicted. Barrenness was looked upon
as a great reproach, and those that fall under that affliction they
upbraid with it, as Peninnah did Hannah, on purpose to vex them and make
them to fret, which is a barbarous thing. This is evil entreating the
barren that beareth not ([Job 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#021)),
or those that are childless, and so want the arrows others have in their
quiver, which enable them to deal with their enemy in the gate, [Psa
127:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#005). They take that advantage
against and are oppressive to them. As the fatherless, so the childless,
are in some degree helpless. For the same reason it is a cruel thing to
hurt the widow, to whom we ought to do good; and not doing good, when it
is in our power, is doing hurt. 3. There are those who, by inuring
themselves to cruelty, come at last to be so exceedingly boisterous that
they are the terror of the mighty in the land of the living ([Job
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022)): "He draws the mighty into a
snare with his power; even the greatest are not able to stand before him
when he is in his mad fits: he rises up in his passion, and lays about
him with so much fury that no man is sure of his life; nor can he at the
same time be sure of his own, for his hand is against every man and
every man's hand against him," [Gen
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012). One would wonder how any man
can take pleasure in making all about him afraid of him, yet there are
those that do.

II\. He shows that these daring sinners prosper, and are at ease for a
while, nay, and often end their days in peace, as Ishmael, who, though
he was a man of such a character as is here given, yet both lived and
died in the presence of all his brethren, as we are told, [Gen
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012); [Gen
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#018) : Of these sinners here it is
said, 1. That it is given them to be in safety, [Job
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#023). They seem to be under the
special protection of the divine Providence; and one would wonder how
they escape with life through so many dangers as they run themselves
into. 2. That they rest upon this, that is, they rely upon this as
sufficient to warrant all their violences. Because sentence against
their evil works is not executed speedily they think that there is no
great evil in them, and that God is not displeased with them, nor will
ever call them to an account. Their prosperity is their security. 3.
That they are exalted for a while. They seem to be the favourites of
heaven, and value themselves as making the best figure on earth. They
are set up in honour, set up (as they think) out of the reach of danger,
and lifted up in the pride of their own spirits. 4. That, at length,
they are carried out of the world very silently and gently, and without
any remarkable disgrace or terror. "They go down to the grave as easily
as snow-water sinks into the dry ground when it is melted by the sun;"
so bishop Patrick explains [Job 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#019).
To the same purport he paraphrases [Job
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#020), The womb shall forget him, etc.
"God sets no such mark of his displeasure upon him but that his mother
may soon forget him. The hand of justice does not hang him on a gibbet
for the birds to feed on; but he is carried to his grave like other men,
to be the sweet food of worms. There he lies quietly, and neither he nor
his wickedness is any more remembered than a tree which is broken to
shivers." And [Job 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#024), They are
taken out of the way as all others, that is, "they are shut up in their
graves like all other men; nay, they die as easily (without those
tedious pains which some endure) as an ear of corn is cropped with your
hand." Compare this with Solomon's observation ([Ecc
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#010)), I saw the wicked buried, who
had come and gone from the place of the holy, and they were forgotten.

III\. He foresees their fall however, and that their death, though they
die in ease and honour, will be their ruin. God's eyes are upon their
ways, [Job 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#023). Though he keep
silence, and seem to connive at them, yet he takes notice, and keeps
account of all their wickedness, and will make it to appear shortly that
their most secret sins, which they thought no eye should see ([Job
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#015)), were under his eye and will be
called over again. Here is no mention of the punishment of these sinners
in the other world, but it is intimated in the particular notice taken
of the consequences of their death. 1. The consumption of the body in
the grave, though common to all, yet to them is in the nature of a
punishment for their sin. The grave shall consume those that have
sinned; that land of darkness will be the lot of those that love
darkness rather than light. The bodies they pampered shall be a feast
for worms, which shall feed as sweetly on them as ever they fed on the
pleasures and gains of their sins. 2. Though they thought to make
themselves a great name by their wealth, and power, and mighty
achievements, yet their memorial perished with them, [Psa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#006). He that made himself so much
talked of shall, when he is dead, be no more remembered with honour; his
name shall rot, [Pro 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007). Those that
durst not give him his due character while he lived shall not spare him
when he is dead; so that the womb that bore him, his own mother, shall
forget him, that is, shall avoid making mention of him, and shall think
that the greatest kindness she can do him, since no good can be said of
him. That honour which is got by sin will soon turn into shame. 3. The
wickedness they thought to establish in their families shall be broken
as a tree; all their wicked projects shall be blasted, and all their
wicked hopes dashed and buried with them. 4. Their pride shall be
brought down and laid in the dust ([Job
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#024)); and, in mercy to the world,
they shall be taken out of the way, and all their power and prosperity
shall be cut off. You may seek them, and they shall not be found. Job
owns that wicked people will be miserable at last, miserable on the
other side death, but utterly denies what his friends asserted, that
ordinarily they are miserable in this life.

IV\. He concludes with a bold challenge to all that were present to
disprove what he had said if they could ([Job
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#025)): "If it be not so now, as I
have declared, and if it do not thence follow that I am unjustly
condemned and censured, let those that can undertake to prove that my
discourse is either, 1. False in itself, and then they prove me a liar;
or, 2. Foreign, and nothing to the purpose, and then they prove my
speech frivolous and nothing worth." That indeed which is false is
nothing worth; where there is not truth, how can there be goodness? But
those that speak the words of truth and soberness need not fear having
what they say brought to the test, but can cheerfully submit it to a
fair examination, as Job does here.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 25](job025)

</div>
