<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job029)  [Next](job031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 30:0</span></span>

It is a melancholy "But now" which this chapter begins with. Adversity
is here described as much to the life as prosperity was in the foregoing
chapter, and the height of that did but increase the depth of this. God
sets the one over-against the other, and so did Job, that his
afflictions might appear the more grievous, and consequently his case
the more pitiable. I. he had lived in great honour, but now he had
fallen into disgrace, and was as much vilified, even by the meanest, as
ever he had been magnified by the greatest; this he insists much on
([Job 30:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001)). II. He had had much
inward comfort and delight, but now he was a terror and burden to
himself ([Job 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#015), [Job
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#016)) and overwhelmed with sorrow
([Job 30:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#028)). III. He had long
enjoyed a good state of health, but now he was sick and in pain ([Job
30:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#017), [Job
30:29](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#029), [Job
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#030)). IV. Time was when the secret
of God was with him, but now his communication with heaven was cut off
([Job 30:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#020)). V. He had promised
himself a long life, but now he saw death at the door ([Job
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#023)). One thing he mentions, which
aggravated his affliction, that it surprised him when he looked for
peace. But two things gave him some relief: - 1. That his troubles would
not follow him to the grave ([Job
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024)). 2. That his conscience
witnessed for him that, in his prosperity, he had sympathized with those
that were in misery ([Job 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#025)).

[Job 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 30:1</span></span>

Here Job makes a very large and sad complaint of the great disgrace he
had fallen into, from the height of honour and reputation, which was
exceedingly grievous and cutting to such an ingenuous spirit as Job's
was. Two things he insists upon as greatly aggravating his affliction: -

I. The meanness of the persons that affronted him. As it added much to
his honour, in the day of his prosperity, that princes and nobles showed
him respect and paid a deference to him, so it added no less to his
disgrace in his adversity that he was spurned by the footmen, and
trampled upon by those that were not only every way his inferiors, but
were the meanest and most contemptible of all mankind. None can be
represented as more base than those are here represented who insulted
Job, upon all accounts. 1. They were young, younger than he ([Job
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001)), the youth ([Job
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#012)), who ought to have behaved
themselves respectfully towards him for his age and gravity. Even the
children, in their play, played upon him, as the children of Bethel upon
the prophet, Go up, thou bald-head. Children soon learn to be scornful
when they see their parents so. 2. They were of a mean extraction. Their
fathers were so very despicable that such a man as Job would have
disdained to take them into the lowest service about his house, as that
of tending the sheep and attending the shepherds with the dogs of his
flock, [Job 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001). They were so shabby
that they were not fit to be seen among his servants, so silly that they
were not fit to be employed, and so false that they were not fit to be
trusted in the meanest post. Job here speaks of what he might have done,
not of what he did: he was not of such a spirit as to set any of the
children of men with the dogs of his flock; he knew the dignity of human
nature better than to do so. 3. They and their families were the
unprofitable burdens of the earth, and good for nothing. Job himself,
with all his prudence and patience, could make nothing of them, [Job
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#002). The young were not fit for
labour, they were so lazy, and went about their work so awkwardly:
Whereto might the strength of their hands profit me? The old were not to
be advised with in the smallest matters, for in them was old age indeed,
but their old age was perished, they were twice children. 4. They were
extremely poor, [Job 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#003). They were
ready to starve, for they would not dig, and to beg they were ashamed.
Had they been brought to necessity by the providence of God, their
neighbours would have sought them out as proper objects of charity and
would have relieved them; but, being brought into straits by their own
slothfulness and wastefulness, nobody was forward to relieve them. Hence
they were forced to flee into the deserts both for shelter and
sustenance, and were put to sorry shifts indeed, when they cut up
mallows by the bushes, and were glad to eat them, for want of food that
was fit for them, [Job 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#004). See what
hunger will bring men to: one half of the world does not know how the
other half lives; yet those that have abundance ought to think sometimes
of those whose fare is very coarse and who are brought to a short
allowance of that too. But we must own the righteousness of God, and not
think it strange, if slothfulness clothe men with rags and the idle soul
be made to suffer hunger. This beggarly world is full of the devil's
poor. 5. They were very scandalous wicked people, not only the burdens,
but the plagues, of the places where they lived, arrant scoundrels, the
scum of the country: They were driven forth from among men, [Job
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#005). They were such lying, thieving,
lurking, mischievous people, that the best service the magistrates could
do was to rid the country of them, while the very mob cried after them
as after a thief. Away with such fellows from the earth; it is not fit
they should live. They were lazy and would not work, and therefore they
were exclaimed against as thieves, and justly; for those that do not
earn their own bread by honest labour do, in effect, steal the bread out
of other people's mouths. An idle fellow is a public nuisance; but it is
better to drive such into a workhouse than, as here, into a wilderness,
which will punish them indeed, but never reform them. They were forced
to dwell in caves of the earth, and they brayed like asses among the
bushes, [Job 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#006), [Job
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#007). See what is the lot of those
that have the cry of the country, the cry of their own conscience,
against them; they cannot but be in a continual terror and confusion.
They groan among the trees (so Broughton) and smart among the nettles;
they are stung and scratched there, where they hoped to be sheltered and
protected. See what miseries wicked people bring themselves to in this
world; yet this is nothing to what is in reserve for them in the other
world. 8. They had nothing at all in them to recommend them to any man's
esteem. They were a vile kind; yea, a kind without fame, people that
nobody could give a good word to nor had a good wish for; they were
banished from the earth as being viler than the earth. One would not
think it possible that ever the human nature should sink so low, and
degenerate so far, as it did in these people. When we thank God that we
are men we have reason to thank him that we are not such men. But such
as these were abusive to Job, (1.) In revenge, because when he was in
prosperity and power, like a good magistrate, he put in execution the
laws which were in force against vagabonds, and rogues, and sturdy
beggars, which these base people now remembered against him. (2.) In
triumph over him, because they thought he had now become like one of
them. [Isa 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#010), [Isa
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#011). The abjects, men of mean
spirits, insult over the miserable, [Psa
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015).

II\. The greatness of the affronts that were given him. It cannot be
imagined how abusive they were.

1\. They made ballads on him, with which they made themselves and their
companions merry ([Job 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#009)): I am
their song and their byword. Those have a very base spirit that turn the
calamities of their honest neighbours into a jest, and can sport
themselves with their griefs.

2\. They shunned him as a loathsome spectacle, abhorred him, fled far
from him, ([Job 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#010)), as an ugly
monster or as one infected. Those that were themselves driven out from
among men would have had him driven out. For,

3\. They expressed the greatest scorn and indignation against him. They
spat in his face, or were ready to do so; they tripped up his heels,
pushed away his feet ([Job 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#012)),
kicked him, either in wrath, because they hated him, or in sport, to
make themselves merry with him, as they did with their companions at
foot-ball. The best of saints have sometimes received the worst of
injuries and indignities from a spiteful, scornful, wicked world, and
must not think it strange; our Master himself was thus abused.

4\. They were very malicious against him, and not only made a jest of
him, but made a prey of him - not only affronted him, but set themselves
to do him all the real mischief they could devise: They raise up against
me the ways of their destruction; or (as some read it), They cast upon
me the cause of their woe; that is, "They lay the blame of their being
driven out upon me;" and it is common for criminals to hate the judges
and laws by which they are punished. But under this pretence, (1.) They
accused him falsely, and misrepresented his former conversation, which
is here called marring his path. They reflected upon him as a tyrant and
an oppressor because he had done justice upon them; and perhaps Job's
friends grounded their uncharitable censures of him ([Job
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#006), etc.) upon the unjust and
unreasonable clamours of these sorry people; and it was an instance of
their great weakness and inconsideration, for who can be innocent if the
accusations of such persons may be heeded? (2.) They not only triumphed
in his calamity, but set it forward, and did all they could to add to
his miseries and make them more grievous to him. It is a great sin to
forward the calamity of any, especially of good people. In this they
have no helper, nobody to set them on or to countenance them in it,
nobody to bear them out or to protect them, but they do it of their own
accord; they are fools in other things, but wise enough to do mischief,
and need no help in inventing that. Some read it thus, They hold my
heaviness a profit, though they be never the better. Wicked people,
though they get nothing by the calamities of others, yet rejoice in
them.

5\. Those that did him all this mischief were numerous, unanimous, and
violent ([Job 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#014)): They came upon
me as a wide breaking in of waters, when the dam is broken; or, "They
came as soldiers into a broad breach which they have made in the wall of
a besieged city, pouring in upon me with the utmost fury;" and in this
they took a pride and a pleasure: They rolled themselves in the
desolation as a man rolls himself in a soft and easy bed, and they
rolled themselves upon him with all the weight of their malice.

III\. All this contempt put upon him was caused by the troubles he was
in ([Job 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#011)): "Because he has
loosed my cord, has taken away the honour and power with which I was
girded ([Job 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#018)), has scattered
what I had got together and untwisted all my affairs - because he has
afflicted me, therefore they have let loose the bridle before me," that
is, "have given themselves a liberty to say and do what they please
against me." Those that by Providence are stripped of their honour may
expect to be loaded with contempt by inconsiderate ill-natured people.
"Because he hath loosed his cord" (the original has that reading also),
that is, "because he has taken off his bridle of restraint from off
their malice, they cast away the bridle from me," that is, "they make no
account of my authority, nor stand in any awe of me." It is owing to the
hold God has of the consciences even of bad men, and the restraints he
lays upon them, that we are not continually thus insulted and abused;
and, if at any time we meet with such ill treatment, we must acknowledge
the hand of God in taking off those restraints, as David did when Shimei
cursed him: So let him curse, for the Lord hath bidden him. Now in all
this, 1. We may see the uncertainty of worldly honour, and particularly
of popular applause, how suddenly a man may fail from the height of
dignity into the depth of disgrace. What little cause therefore have men
to be ambitious or proud of that which may be so easily lost, and what
little confidence is to be put in it! Those that today cry Hosannah may
tomorrow cry Crucify. But there is an honour which comes from God, which
if we secure, we shall find it not thus changeable and loseable. 2. We
may see that it has often been the lot of very wise and good men to be
trampled upon and abused. And, 3. That those who look only at the things
that are seen despise those whom the world frowns upon, though they are
ever so much the favourites of Heaven. Nothing is more grievous in
poverty than that it renders men contemptible. Turba Remi sequitur
fortunam, ut semper odit damnatos - The Roman populace, faithful to the
turns of fortune, still persecute the fallen. 4. We may see in Job a
type of Christ, who was thus made a reproach of men and despised of the
people ([Psa 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#006); [Isa
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003)), and who hid not his face from
shame and spitting, but bore the indignity better than Job did.

[Job 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 30:15</span></span>

In this second part of Job's complaint, which is very bitter, and has a
great many sorrowful accents in it, we may observe a great deal that he
complains of and some little that he comforts himself with.

I. Here is much that he complains of.

1\. In general, it was a day of great affliction and sorrow. (1.)
Affliction seized him, and surprised him. It seized him ([Job
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#016)): The days of affliction have
taken hold upon me, have caught me (so some); they have arrested me, as
the bailiff arrests the debtor, claps him on the back, and secures him.
When trouble comes with commission it will take fast hold, and not lose
its hold. It surprised him ([Job
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#027)): "The days of affliction
prevented me," that is, "they came upon me without giving me any
previous warning. I did not expect them, nor make any provision for such
an evil day." Observe, He reckons his affliction by days, which will
soon be numbered and finished, and are nothing to the ages of eternity,
[Co2 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017). (2.) He was in great sorrow
by reason of it. His bowels boiled with grief, and rested not, [Job
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#027). The sense of his calamities was
continually preying upon his spirits without any intermission. He went
mourning from day to day, always sighing, always weeping; and such cloud
was constantly upon his mind that he went, in effect, without the sun,
[Job 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#028). He had nothing that he
could take any comfort in. He abandoned himself to perpetual sorrow, as
one that, like Jacob, resolved to go to the grave mourning. He walked
out of the sun (so some) in dark shady places, as melancholy people use
to do. If he went into the congregation, to join with them in solemn
worship, instead of standing up calmly to desire their prayers, he stood
up and cried aloud, through pain of body, or anguish of mind, like one
half distracted. If he appeared in public, to receive visits, when the
fit came upon him he could not contain himself, nor preserve due
decorum, but stood up and shrieked aloud. Thus he was a brother to
dragons and owls ([Job 30:29](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#029)), both in
choosing solitude and retirement, as they do ([Isa
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#013)), and in making a fearful
hideous noise as they do; his inconsiderate complaints were fitly
compared to their inarticulate ones.

2\. The terror and trouble that seized his soul were the sorest part of
his calamity, [Job 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#015), [Job
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#016). (1.) If he looked forward, he
saw every thing frightful before him: if he endeavoured to shake off his
terrors, they turned furiously upon him: if he endeavoured to escape
from them, they pursued his soul as swiftly and violently as the wind.
He complained, at first, of the terrors of God setting themselves in
array against him, [Job 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#004). And
still, which way soever he looked, they turned upon him; which way
soever he fled, they pursued him. My soul (Heb., my principal one, my
princess); the soul is the principal part of the man; it is our glory;
it is every way more excellent than the body, and therefore that which
pursues the soul, and threatens that, should be most dreaded. (2.) If he
looked back, he saw all the good he had formerly enjoyed removed from
him, and nothing left him but the bitter remembrance of it: My welfare
and prosperity pass away, as suddenly, swiftly, and irrecoverably, as a
cloud. (3.) If he looked within, he found his spirit quite sunk and
unable to bear his infirmity, not only wounded, but poured out upon him,
[Job 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#016). He was not only weak as
water, but, in his own apprehension, lost as water spilt upon the
ground. Compare [Psa 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#014), My heart
is melted like wax.

3\. His bodily diseases were very grievous; for, (1.) He was full of
pain, piercing pain, pain that went to the bone, to all his bones, [Job
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#017). It was a sword in his bones,
which pierced him in the night season, when he should have been
refreshed with sleep. His nerves were affected with strong convulsions;
his sinews took no rest. By reason of his pain, he could take no rest,
but sleep departed from his eyes. His bones were burnt with heat, [Job
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#030). He was in a constant fever,
which dried up the radical moisture and even consumed the marrow in his
bones. See how frail our bodies are, which carry in themselves the seeds
of our own disease and death. (2.) He was full of sores. Some that are
pained in their bones, yet sleep in a whole skin, but, Satan's
commission against Job extending both to his bone and to his flesh, he
spared neither. His skin was black upon him, [Job
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#030). The blood settled, and the
sores suppurated and by degrees scabbed over, which made his skin look
black. Even his garment had its colour changed with the continual
running of his boils, and the soft clothing he used to wear had now
grown so stiff that all his garments were like his collar, [Job
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#018). It would be noisome to describe
what a condition poor Job was in for want of clean linen and good
attendance, and what filthy rags all his clothes were. Some think that,
among other diseases, Job was ill of a quinsy or swelling in his throat,
and that it was this which bound him about like a stiff collar. Thus was
he cast into the mire ([Job 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#019)),
compared to mire (so some); his body looked more like a heap of dirt
than any thing else. Let none be proud of their clothing nor proud of
their cleanness; they know not but some disease or other may change
their garments, and even throw them into the mire, and make them noisome
both to themselves and others. Instead of sweet smell, there shall be a
stench, [Isa 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024). We are but dust and
ashes at the best, and our bodies are vile bodies; but we are apt to
forget it, till God, by some sore disease, makes us sensibly to feel and
own what we are. "I have become already like that dust and ashes into
which I must shortly be resolved: wherever I go I carry my grave about
with me."

4\. That which afflicted him most of all was that God seemed to be his
enemy and to fight against him. It was he that cast him into the mire
([Job 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#019)), and seemed to trample on
him when he had him there. This cut him to the heart more than any thing
else, (1.) That God did not appear for him. He addressed himself to him,
but gained no grant - appealed to him, but gained no sentence; he was
very importunate in his applications, but in vain ([Job
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#020)): "I cry unto thee, as one in
earnest, I stand up, and cry, as one waiting for an answer, but thou
hearest not, thou regardest not, for any thing I can perceive." If our
most fervent prayers bring not in speedy and sensible returns, we must
not think it strange. Though the seed of Jacob did never seek in vain,
yet they have often thought that they did and that God has not only been
deaf, but angry, at the prayers of his people, [Psa
80:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#004). (2.) That God did appear against
him. That which he here says of God is one of the worst words that ever
Job spoke ([Job 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#021)): Thou hast
become cruel to me. Far be it from the God of mercy and grace that he
should be cruel to any (his compassions fail not), but especially that
he should be so to his own children. Job was unjust and ungrateful when
he said so of him: but harbouring hard thoughts of God was the sin which
did, at this time, most easily beset him. Here, \[1.\] He thought God
fought against him and stirred up his whole strength to ruin him: With
thy strong hand thou opposest thyself, or art an adversary against me.
He had better thoughts of God ([Job
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#006)) when he concluded he would not
plead against him with his great power. God has an absolute sovereignty
and an irresistible strength, but he never uses either the one or the
other for the crushing or oppressing of any. \[2.\] He thought he
insulted over him ([Job 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#022)): Thou
lifted me up to the wind, as a feather or the chaff which the wind plays
with; so unequal a match did Job think himself for Omnipotence, and so
unable was he to help himself when he was made to ride, not in triumph,
but in terror, upon the wings of the wind, and the judgments of God did
even dissolve his substance, as a cloud is dissolved and dispersed by
the wind. Man's substance, take him in his best estate, is nothing
before the power of God; it is soon dissolved.

5\. He expected no other now than that God, by these troubles, would
shortly make an end of him: "If I be made to ride upon the wind, I can
count upon no other than to break my neck shortly;" and he speaks as if
God had no other design upon him than that in all his dealings with him:
"I know that thou wilt bring me, with so much the more terror, to death,
though I might have been brought thither without all this ado, for it is
the house appointed for all living," [Job
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#023). The grave is a house, a narrow,
dark, cold, ill-furnished house, but it will be our residence, where we
shall rest and be safe. It is our long home, our own home; for it is our
mother's lap, and in it we are gathered to our fathers. It is a house
appointed for us by him that has appointed us the bounds of all our
habitations. It is appointed for all the living. It is the common
receptacle, where rich and poor meet; it is appointed for the general
rendezvous. We must all be brought thither shortly. It is God that
brings us to it, for the keys of death and the grave are in his hand,
and we may all know that, sooner or later, he will bring us thither. It
would be well for us if we would duly consider it. The living know that
they shall die; let us, each of us, know it with application.

6\. There were two things that aggravated his trouble, and made it the
less tolerable: - (1.) That it was a very great disappointment to his
expectation ([Job 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#026)): "When I
looked for good, for more good, or at least for the continuance of what
I had, then evil came" - such uncertain things are all our worldly
enjoyments, and such a folly is it to feed ourselves with great
expectations from them. Those that wait for light from the sparks of
their creature comforts will be wretchedly disappointed and will make
their bed in the darkness. (2.) That is was a very great change in his
condition ([Job 30:31](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#031)): "My harp is
not only laid by, and hung upon the willow-trees, but it is turned to
mourning, and my organ into the voice of those that weep." Job, in his
prosperity, had taken the timbrel and harp, and rejoiced at the sound of
the organ, [Job 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#012). Notwithstanding
his gravity and grace, he had found time to be cheerful; but now his
tune was altered. Let those therefore that rejoice be as though they
rejoiced not, for they know not how soon their laughter will be turned
into mourning and their joy into heaviness. Thus we see how much Job
complains of; but,

II\. Here is something in the midst of all with which he comforts
himself, and it is but a little. 1. He foresees, with comfort, that
death will be the period of all his calamities ([Job
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024)): Though God now, with a strong
hand, opposed himself against him, "yet," says he, "he will not stretch
out his hand to the grave." The hand of God's wrath would bring him to
death, but would not follow him beyond death; his soul would be safe and
happy in the world of spirits, his body safe and easy in the dust.
Though men cry in his destruction (though, when they are dying, there is
a great deal of agony and out-cry, many a sigh, and groan, and
complaint), yet in the grave they feel nothing, they fear nothing, but
all is quiet there. "Though in hell, which is called destruction, they
cry, yet not in the grave; and, being delivered from the second death,
the first to me will be an effectual relief." Therefore he wished he
might be hidden in the grave, [Job
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#013). 2. He reflects with comfort
upon the concern he always had for the calamities of others when he was
himself at ease ([Job 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#025)): Did not
I weep for him that was in trouble? Some think he herein complains of
God, thinking it very hard that he who had shown mercy to others should
not himself find mercy. I would rather take it as a quieting
consideration to himself; his conscience witnessed for him that he had
always sympathized with persons in misery and done what he could to help
them, and therefore he had reason to expect that, at length, both God
and his friends would pity him. Those who mourn with them that mourn
will bear their own sorrows the better when it comes to their turn to
drink of the bitter cup. Did not my soul burn for the poor? so some read
it, comparing it with that of St. Paul, [Co2
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029), Who is offended, and I burn
not? As those who have been unmerciful and hard-hearted to others may
expect to hear of it from their own consciences, when they are
themselves in trouble, so those who have considered the poor and
succoured them shall have the remembrance thereof to make their bed easy
in their sickness, [Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001), [Psa
41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 31](job031)

</div>
