<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joel Index](joe)  
  [Previous](joe002)  [Next](amo000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joel Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001)

[Joel](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joe 3:0</span></span>

In the close of the foregoing chapter we had a gracious promise of
deliverance in Mount Zion and Jerusalem; now this whole chapter is a
comment upon that promise, showing what that deliverance shall be, how
it shall be wrought by the destruction of the church's enemies, and how
it shall be perfected in the everlasting rest and joy of the church.
This was in part accomplished in the deliverance of Jerusalem from the
attempt that Sennacherib made upon it in Hezekiah's time, and afterwards
in the return of the Jews out of their captivity in Babylon, and other
deliverances wrought for the Jewish church between that and Christ's
coming. But it has a further reference, to the great redemption wrought
out for us by Jesus Christ, and the destruction of our spiritual enemies
and all their agents, and will have its full accomplishment in the
judgment of the great day. Here is a prediction, I. Of God's reckoning
with the enemies of his people for all the injuries and indignities that
they had done them, and returning them upon their own head ([Joe
3:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001)). II. Of God's judging all
nations when the measure of their iniquity is full, and appearing
publicly, to the everlasting confusion of all impenitent sinners and the
everlasting comfort of all his faithful servants ([Joe
3:9-17](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#009)). III. Of the provision God has
made for the refreshment of his people, for their safety and purity,
when their enemies shall be made desolate ([Joe
3:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018)). These promises were not of
private interpretation only, but were written for our learning, "that
we, through patience and comfort of this scripture, might have hope."

[Joel 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joe 3:1</span></span>

We have often heard of the year of the redeemed, and the year of
recompences for the controversy of Zion; now here we have a description
of the transactions of that year, and a prophecy of what shall be done
when it comes, whenever it comes, for it comes often, and at the end of
time it will come once for all.

I. It shall be the year of the redeemed, for God will bring again the
captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, [Joe
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001). Though the bondage of God's
people may be grievous and very long, yet it shall not be everlasting.
That in Egypt ended at length in their deliverance into the glorious
liberty of the children of God. Let my son go, the he may serve me. That
in Babylon shall likewise end well. And the Lord Jesus will provide for
the effectual redemption of poor enslaved souls from under the dominion
of sin and Satan, and will proclaim that acceptable year, the year of
jubilee, the release of debts and servants, and the opening of the
prison to those that were bound. There is a day, there is a time, fixed
for the bringing again of the captivity of God's children, for the
redeeming of them from the power of the grave; and it shall be the last
day and the end of all time.

II\. It shall be the year of recompences for the controversy of Zion.
Though God may suffer the enemies of his people to prevail against them
very far and for a long time, yet he will call them to an account for
it, and will lead captivity captive ([Psa
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)), will lead those captive that
led his people captive, [Rev 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010).
Observe,

1\. Who those are that shall be reckoned with - all nations, [Joe
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#002). This intimates, (1.) That all the
nations had made themselves liable to the judgment of God for wrong done
to his people. Persecution is the reigning crying sin of the world; that
lying in wickedness itself is set against godliness. The enmity that is
in the old serpent, the god of this world, against the seed of the
woman, appears more or less in the children of this world. Marvel not if
the world hate you. (2.) That, whatsoever nation injured God's nation,
they should not go unpunished; for he that touches the Israel of God
shall be made to know that he touches the apple of his eye. Jerusalem
will be a burdensome stone to all people, [Zac
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#003). But the neighboring nations
shall be particularly reckoned with - Tyre, and Sidon, and all the
coasts of Palestine, or the Philistines, who have been troublesome
neighbours to the Israel of God, [Joe
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#004). When the more remote and potent
nations that laid Israel wastes are reckoned with the impotent malice of
those that lay near them, and helped forward the affliction, ([Zac
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015)), and made a hand of it ([Eze
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#002)), shall not be passed by. Note,
Little persecutors shall be called to an account as well as great ones;
and, though they could not do much mischief, shall be reckoned with
according to the wickedness of their endeavors and the mischief they
would have done.

2\. The sitting of this court for judgment. They shall all be gathered
([Joe 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#002)), that those who have
combined together against God's people, with one consent ([Psa
83:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#005)), may together receive their
doom. They shall be brought down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, which
lay near Jerusalem, and there God will plead with them, (1.) Because it
is fit that criminals should be tried in the same country where they did
the fact. (2.) For their greater confusion, when they shall see that
Jerusalem which they have so long endeavored and hoped for the ruin of,
in spite of all their rage, made a praise in the earth. (3.) For the
greater comfort and honor of God's Jerusalem, which shall see God
pleading their cause. (4.) Then shall be re-acted what God did for
Jehoshaphat when he gave him victory over those that invaded him, and
furnished him and his people with matter of joy and praise, in the
valley of Berachah. See [Ch2 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#026).
(5.) It was in this valley of Jehoshaphat (as Dr. Lightfoot suggests)
that Sennacherib's army, or part of it, lay, when it was destroyed by an
angel. They came together to ruin Jerusalem, but God brought them
together for their own ruin, as sheaves into the floor, [Mic
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012).

3\. The plaintiff called, on whose behalf this prosecution is set on
foot; it is for my people, and for my heritage Israel. It is their cause
that God will now plead with jealousy. Note, God's people are his
heritage, his peculiar, his portion, his treasure, above all people,
[Exo 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005); [Deu
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009). They are his demesne, and
therefore he has a good action against those that trespass upon them.

4\. The charge exhibited against them, which is very particular. Many
affronts they had put upon God by their idolatries, but that for which
God has a quarrel with them is the affront they have put upon his people
and upon the vessels of his sanctuary.

(1.) They had been very abusive to the people of Israel, had scattered
them among the nations and forced them to seek for shelter where they
could find a place, or carried them captive into their respective
countries and there industriously dispersed them, for fear of their
incorporating for their common safety. They parted their land, and took
every one his share of it as their own; nay, they have cast lots for my
people, and sold them. When they had taken them prisoners, \[1.\] They
made a jest of them, made a scorn of them as of no value. They would not
release them and yet thought them not worth the keeping; they made
nothing of playing them away at dice. Or they made a dividend of the
prisoners by lot, as the soldiers did of Christ's garments. \[2.\] They
made a gain of them. When they had them they sold them, yet with so much
contempt that they did not increase their wealth by their price, but
sold them for their pleasure rather than their profit; they gave a boy
taken in war for the hire of a harlot, and a girl for so many bottles of
wine as would serve them for one sitting, a goodly price at which they
valued them, and goodly preferment for a son and daughter of Israel to
be a slave and a drudge in a tavern or a brothel. Observe, here, how
that which is got by sin is commonly spent upon another. The spoil which
these enemies of the Jews gathered by injustice and violence they
scattered and threw away in drinking and whoring; such is frequently the
character, and such the conversation, of the enemies and persecutors of
the people of God. The Tyrians and Philistines, when they seized any of
the children of Judah and Jerusalem, either took them prisoners in war
or kidnapped them, they sold them to the Grecians (with whom the men of
Tyre traded in the persons of men, [Eze
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#013)), that they might remove them
far from their own border, [Joe 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#006).
It was a great reproach to Israel, God's first-born, his free-born, to
be thus bought and sold among the heathen.

(2.) They had unjustly seized God's silver and gold ([Joe
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#005)), by which some understand the
wealth of Israel. The silver and gold which God's people had he calls
his, because they had received it from him and devoted it to him; and
whosoever robbed them God took it as if they had robbed him and would
make reprisals accordingly. Those who take away the estates of good men
for well-doing will be found guilty of sacrilege; they take God's silver
and gold. But it seems rather to be meant of the vessels and treasures
of the temple, which God here calls his goodly pleasant things, precious
and desirable to him and all that are his. These they carried into their
temples as trophies of their victory over God's Israel, thinking that
therein they triumphed over Israel's God, nay, and that their idols
triumphed over him. Thus the ark was put in Dagon's temple. Thus they
did unjustly. "What have you to do with me ([Joe
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#004)), with my people; what wrong have
they done you? What provocation have they given you? You had nothing to
do with them, and yet you do all this against them. Devices are devised
against the quiet in the land, and those offended and harmed that are
harmless and inoffensive: Will you render me a recompence?" Can they
pretend that either God or his people have done them any injury, for
which they may justify themselves by the law of retaliation in doing
them these mischiefs? No; they have no colour for it. Note, It is no new
thing for those who have been very civil and obliging to their
neighbours to find them very unkind and unneighbourly and for those who
do no injuries to suffer many.

5\. The sentence passed upon them. In general ([Joe
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#004)), "If you recompense me, if you
pretend a quarrel with me, if you provoke me thus to jealousy, if you
touch the apple of my eye, I will swiftly and speedily return your
recompence upon your own head." Those that contend with God will find
themselves unable to make their part good with him. He will recompense
them suddenly, when they little think of it, and have not time to
prevent it; if he take them to task, he will soon effect their ruin.
Particularly, it is threatened, (1.) That they should not gain their end
in the mischief they designed against God's people. They thought to
remove them so far from their border that they should never return to it
again, [Joe 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#006). But (says God) "I
will raise them out of the place whither you have sold them, and they
shall not, as you intended, be buried alive there." Men's selling the
people of God will not deprive him of his property in them. (2.) That
they shall be paid in their own coin, as Adonibezek was ([Joe
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#008)): "I will sell your sons and your
daughters into the hands of the children of Judah; you shall lie as much
at their mercy as they have been at yours," [Isa
60:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#014). Thus the Jews had rule over
those that hated them, [Est 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#001). And
then they shall justly be sold to the Sabeans, to a people far off. This
(some think) had its accomplishment in the victories obtained by the
Maccabees over the enemies of the Jews; others think it looks as far
forward as the last day, when the upright shall have dominion ([Psa
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#014)) and the saints shall judge the
world. It is certain that none ever hardened his heart against God, or
his church, and prospered long; no, not Pharaoh himself, for the Lord
has spoken it, for the comfort of all his suffering servants, that
vengeance is his and he will repay.

[Joel 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joe 3:9</span></span>

What the psalmist had long before ordered to be said among the heathen
([Psa 96:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#010)) the prophet here will
have in like manner to be published to all nations, That the Lord
reigns, and that he comes, he comes to judge the earth, as he had long
been judging in the earth. The notice here given of God's judging the
nations may have reference to the destruction of Sennacherib,
Nebuchadnezzar, Antiochus, and to the Antichrist especially, and all the
proud enemies of the Christian church; but some of the best
interpreters, ancient and modern (particularly the learned Dr. Polock),
think the scope of these verses is to set forth the day of the last
judgment under the similitude of God's making war upon the enemies of
his kingdom, and his gathering in the harvest of the earth, both which
similitudes we find used in the Revelation, [Rev
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011); [Rev
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#018). Here we have,

I. A challenge given to all the enemies of God's kingdom to do their
worst. To signify to them that God is preparing war against them, they
are called upon to prepare war against him, [Joe
3:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#009). When the hour of God's
judgment shall come effectual methods shall be taken to gather all
nations to the battle of that great day of God Almighty, [Rev
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#014); [Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008). It seems to be here spoken
ironically: "Proclaim you this among the Gentiles; let all the forces of
the nations be summoned to join in confederacy against God and his
people." It is like that, [Isa 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009),
"Associate yourselves, O you people! and gird yourselves, but you shall
be broken to pieces. Prepare war; muster up all your strength; wake up
the mighty men; call them into your service; excite them to vigilance
and resolution; let all the men of war draw near. Let them come and
enter the lists with Omnipotence if they dare; let them not complain for
want of weapons, but let them beat their ploughshares into swords and
their pruning-hooks into spears. Let them resolve, if they will, never
to return to their husbandry again, but either to conquer or die; let
none plead unfitness to bear arms, but let the weak say, I am strong and
will venture into the field of battle." Thus does a God of almighty
power bid defiance to all the opposition of the powers of darkness; let
the heathen rage, and the kings of the earth take counsel together,
against the Lord and his Christ; let them assemble, and come, and gather
themselves together; but he that sits in heaven shall laugh at them,
and, while he thus calls them, he has them in derision, [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001), [Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004). The heathen must be wakened, must
be raised from the dead, that they may come up to the valley of
Jehoshaphat, to receive their doom ([Joe
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#012)), may come up out of their
graves, come up into the air, to meet the Lord there. Jehoshaphat
signifies the judgment of the Lord. Let them come to the place of God's
judgment, which perhaps is the chief reason for the using of this name
here, but it is put together as a proper name for the sake of allusions
to the place so called, which we observed before; let them come thither
where God will sit to judge the heathen, to that throne of glory before
which shall be gathered all nations ([Mat
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032)), for before the judgment-seat
of Christ we must all appear. The challenge ([Joe
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#009)) is turned into a summons, [Joe
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#012). It is not only, Come if you
dare, but You shall come whether you will or no, for there is no
escaping the judgments of God.

II\. A charge given to the ministers of God's justice to appear and act
against these daring enemies of his kingdom among men: And therefore
cause thy mighty ones to come down, O Lord! [Joe
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#011). When they bring their forces
into the field, let God bring his, let the archangel's trumpet sound a
charge, to call together his mighty ones, that is, his angels. Perhaps
it is with reference to this that Christ's coming from heaven at the
last day is said to be with his mighty angels, [Th2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007). These are the hosts of the Lord,
that shall fight his battles when he shall put down all opposing rule,
principality, and power when he shall judge among the heathen, [Psa
110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006). Some think these words ([Joe
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#009), [Joe
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#010)), Prepare war, wake up the mighty
men, are not a challenge to the enemies' hosts, but a charge to God's
hosts; let them draw near, and come up. When God's cause is to be
pleaded, either by the law or by the sword, he has those ready that
shall please it effectually, witnesses ready to appear for him in the
court of judgment, soldiers ready to appear for him in the field of
battle. They shall beat ploughshares into swords, if need be. However,
it is plain that to them the charge in given ([Joe
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#013)), Put you in the sickle, for the
harvest is ripe; that is, their wickedness is great, the measure of it
is full, and they are ripe for ruin. Our Saviour has expounded this,
[Mat 13:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#039). The harvest is the end of
the world, and the reapers are the angels. And they are commanded to
thrust in their sickle. their sharp sickle, and gather in both the
harvest and the vintage, [Rev 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015),
[Rev 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#018). Note, The greatness of
men's wickedness makes them ripe for God's judgment.

III\. The vast appearance that shall be in that great and solemn day
([Joe 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#014)): Multitudes, multitudes,
in the valley of decision, the same which before was called the valley
of Jehoshaphat, or of the judgment of the Lord, for the day of the Lord
is near in that valley. Note, 1. The judgment-day, that day of the Lord,
has all along been looked upon, and spoken of, as nigh at hand. Enoch
said, Behold, the Lord comes, as if the Judge were then standing before
the door, because it is certain that that day will come and will come
according to the appointment, and a thousand years with God are but as
one day; things are ripening apace for it; we ought always to be ready
for it, because our judgment is at hand. 2. The day of judgment will be
the day of decision, when every man's eternal state will be determined,
and the controversy that has been long depending between the kingdom of
Christ and that of Satan shall be finally decided, and an end put to the
struggle. The valley of the distribution of judgment (so the Chaldee),
when every man shall receive according to the things done in the body.
The valley of threshing (so the margin), carrying on the metaphor of the
harvest, [Joe 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#013). The proud enemies
of God's people will then be crushed and broken to pieces, and made as
the dust of the summer threshing-floors. 3. Innumerable multitudes will
be gathered together to receive their final doom in that day, as in the
destruction of Gog we read of the valley of Hamon-Gog, and the city of
Hamonah ([Eze 39:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#015), [Eze
39:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#016)), both signifying the multitude
of the vanquished enemies; it is the word here used, Hamonim, Hamonim,
expressed by the way of admiration - O what vast multitudes of sinners
will divine justice be glorified in the ruin of at that day! A multitude
of living (says one of the rabbin) and a multitude of dead, for Christ
shall come to judge both the quick and the dead.

IV\. The amazing change that shall then be made in the kingdom of nature
([Joe 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#015)): The sun and moon shall be
darkened, as before, [Joe 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#031). Their
glory and lustre shall be eclipsed by the far greater brightness of that
glory in which the Judge shall then appear. Nay, they shall themselves
be set aside in the dissolution of all things; for the damned sinners in
hell shall not be allowed their light, for God himself will be their
everlasting light, [Isa 60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019). Those
that fall under the wrath of God in that day of wrath shall be cut off
from all comfort and joy, signified by the darkening not only of sun and
moon, but of the stars also.

V. The different impressions which that day will make upon the children
of this world and the children of God, according as it will be to them.
1. To the wicked it will be a terrible day. The Lord shall then speak
from Zion and Jerusalem, from the throne of his glory, from heaven,
where he manifests himself in a peculiar manner, as sometimes he has
done in the glorious high throne of his sanctuary, which yet was but a
faint resemblance of the glory of that day. He shall speak from heaven,
from the midst of his saints and angels (so some understand it), the
holy society of which may be called Zion and Jerusalem; for, when we
come to the heavenly Jerusalem, we come to the innumerable company of
angels; see [Heb 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022), [Heb
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#025). Now is speaking in that day
will be to the wicked as roaring, terrible as the roaring of a lion (for
so the word signifies); he long kept silence, but now our God shall
come, and shall not keep silence, [Psa
50:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003), [Psa
50:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#021). Note, The judgment of the great
day will make the ears of those to tingle that continue the implacable
enemies of God's kingdom. God's voice will then shake terribly both
heaven and earth ([Isa 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#021)), yet once
more, [Hag 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#006); [Heb
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#026). This denotes that the voice of
God will in the great day speak such terror to the wicked as were enough
to put even heaven and earth into a consternation. When God comes to
pull down and destroy his enemies, and make them all his footstool,
though heaven and earth should stand up in defence of them and undertake
their protection, it shall be all in vain. Even they shall shake before
him and be an insufficient shelter to those whom he comforts forth to
contend with. Note, As blessings out of Zion are the sweetest blessings,
and enough to make heaven and earth sing, so terrors out of Zion are the
sorest terrors, and enough to make heaven and earth shake. 2. To the
righteous it will be a joyful day. When the heaven and earth shall
tremble, and be dissolved and burnt up, then will the Lord be the hope
of his people and the strength of the children of Israel ([Joe
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#016)), and then shall Jerusalem be
holy, [Joe 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#017). The saints are the
Israel of God; they are his people; the church is his Jerusalem. They
are in covenant and communion with him; now in the great day, (1.) Their
longings shall be satisfied: The Lord will be the hope of his people. As
he always was the founder and foundation of their hopes, so he then will
be the crown of their hopes. He will be the harbour of his people (so
the word is), their receptacle, refuge, and home. The saints in the
great day shall arrive at the desired haven, shall put to shore after a
stormy voyage; they shall go to be for ever at home with God, to their
Father's house, the house not made with hands. (2.) Their happiness
shall be confirmed. God will be in that day the strength of the children
of Israel, enabling them to bid that day welcome and to bear up under
the weight of its glories and joys. In this world, when the judgments of
God are abroad, and sinners are falling under them, God is and will be
the hope and strength of his people, the strength of their heart, and
their portion, when other men's hearts fail them for fear. (3.) Their
holiness shall be completed ([Joe
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#017)): Then shall Jerusalem be holy,
the holy city indeed; such shall the heavenly Jerusalem be, such the
glorious church, without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing. Jerusalem
shall be holiness (so the word is); it shall be perfectly holy; there
shall be no remainder of sin in it. The gospel-church is a holy society,
even in its militant state, but will never be holiness itself till it
comes to be triumphant. Then no stranger shall pass through her any
more; there shall not enter into the New Jerusalem any thing that
defiles or works iniquity; none shall be there but those who have a
right to be there, none but its own citizens; for it shall be an unmixed
society. (4.) God shall in all this be manifested and magnified: So
shall you know that I am the Lord your God. By the sanctifying and
glorifying of the church God will be known in his holiness and glory, as
the God that dwells in his holy mountain and makes it holy by dwelling
in it; and those that are sanctified and glorified are so through the
knowledge of him that called them. The knowledge which true believers
have of God is, \[1.\] An appropriating knowledge. They know that he is
the Lord their God, yet not theirs only, but theirs in common with the
whole church, that he is their God, but dwelling in Zion his holy
mountain; for, though faith appropriates, it does not engross or
monopolize the privileges of the covenant. \[2.\] It is an experimental
knowledge. They shall find him their hope and strength in the worst of
times, and so they shall know that he is the Lord their God. Those know
best the goodness of God who have tasted and seen it, and have found him
good to them.

[Joel 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joe 3:18</span></span>

These promises with which this prophecy concludes have their
accomplishments in part in the kingdom of grace, and the comforts and
graces of all the faithful subjects of that kingdom, but will have their
full accomplishment in the kingdom of glory; for, as to the Jewish
church, we know not of any event concerning that which answers to the
extent of these promises, and what instances of peace and prosperity
they were blessed with, which they may be supposed to be a hyperbolical
description of, they were but figures of better things reserved for us,
that they in their best estate without us might not be made perfect.

I. It is promised that the enemies of the church shall be vanquished and
brought down, [Joe 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#019). Egypt, that
old enemy of Israel, and Edom, which had an inveterate enmity to Israel,
derived from Esau, these shall be a desolation, a desolate wilderness,
no more to be inhabited; they have become the people of God's curse; so
the Idumeans were, [Isa 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005). No
strength nor wealth of a nation is a defence against the judgment of
God. But what is the quarrel God has with these potent kingdoms? It is
for their violence against the children of Judah, and the injuries they
had done them; see [Eze 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#003), [Eze
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#008), [Eze
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#012), [Eze
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#015); [Eze
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#002). They had shed the innocent blood
of the Jews that fled to them for shelter or were making their escape
through their country. Note, The innocent blood of God's people is very
precious to him, and not a drop of it shall be shed but it shall be
reckoned for. In the last day this earth, which has been filled with
violence against the people of God, shall be made a desolation, when it
and all the works that are therein shall be burnt up. And, sooner or
later, the oppressors and persecutors of God's Israel shall be brought
down and laid in the dust, nay, they will at length be brought down and
laid in the flames.

II\. It is promised that the church shall be very happy; and truly happy
it is in spiritual privileges, even during its militant state, but much
more when it comes to be triumphant. Three things are here promised it:
-

1\. Purity. This is put last here, as a reason for the rest ([Joe
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#021)); but we may consider it first,
as the ground and foundation of the rest: I will cleanse their blood
that I have not cleansed, that is, their bloody heinous sins, especially
shedding innocent blood; that filth and guilt they had contracted by
sin, which rendered them unfit for communion with God, and made them
odious to his holiness and obnoxious to his justice; this they shall be
washed from in the fountain opened, [Zac
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001). That shall be cleansed by the
blood of Christ which could not be cleansed by the sacrifices and
purifications of the ceremonial law. Or, if we apply it to the happiness
of a future state, it intimates the cleansing of the saints from all
these corruptions from which they were not cleansed either by ordinances
or providences in the world; there shall not be the least remains of sin
in them there. Here, though they are washing daily, there is still
something that is not cleansed; but in heaven, even that also shall be
done away. Ands the reason is because the Lord dwells in Zion, dwells
with his church, and much more gloriously with that in heaven, and
holiness becomes his house for ever, for which reason, where he dwells
there must be, there shall be, a perfection of holiness. Note, Though
the refining and reforming of the church is work that goes on slowly,
and still there is something we complain of that is not cleansed, yet
there is a day coming when every thing that is amiss shall be amended,
and the church shall be all fair, and no spot, no stain in her; and we
must wait for that day.

2\. Plenty, [Joe 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018). This is put
first, because it is the reverse of the judgment threatened in the
foregoing chapters. (1.) The streams of this plenty overflow the land
and enrich it: The mountains shall drop new wine and the hills shall
flow with milk, such great abundance shall they have of suitable
provision, both for babes and for strong men. It intimates the abundance
of vineyards, and all fruitful; and the abundance of cattle in the
pastures that fill them with milk. And, to make the corn-land fruitful,
the rivers of Judah shall flow with water, so that the country shall be
like the garden of Eden, well-watered every where and greatly enriched,
[Psa 65:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009). But this seems to be meant
spiritually; the graces and comforts of the new covenant are compared to
wine and milk ([Isa 55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001)), and the
Spirit to rivers of living water, [Joh
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038). And these gifts abound much more
under the New Testament than they did under the Old; when believers
receive grace for grace from Christ's fulness, when they are enriched
with everlasting consolations, and filled with joy and peace in
believing, then the mountains drop new wine, and the hills flow with
milk. Drink you, drink abundantly, O beloved! When there is plentiful
effusion of the Spirit of grace, then the rivers of Judah flow with
water, and make glad, not only the city of our God ([Psa
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)), but the whole land. (2.) The
fountain of this plenty is in the house of God, whence the streams take
their rise, as those waters of the sanctuary ([Eze
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001)) from under the threshold of the
house, and the river of life out of the throne of God and the Lamb, [Rev
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001). The psalmist, speaking of Zion,
says, All my springs are in thee, [Psa
87:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#007). Those that take temporal
blessings to be meant in the former part of the verse, yet by this
fountain out of the house of the Lord understand the grace of God,
which, if we abound in temporal blessings, we have so much more need of,
that we may not abuse them. Christ himself is the fountain; his merit
and grace cleanse us, refresh us, and make us fruitful. This is said to
water the valley of Shittim, which lay a great way off from the temple
at Jerusalem, on the other side of Jordan, and was a dry and barren
valley, which intimates that gospel-grace, flowing from Christ, shall
reach far, even to the Gentile world, to the most remote regions of it,
and shall make those to abound in the fruits of righteousness who had
long lain as the barren wilderness. This grace is a fountain
overflowing, ever-flowing, from which we may be continually drawing, and
yet need not fear its being drawn dry. This fountain comes out of the
house of the Lord above, from his temple in heaven, flows all that good
which here we are daily tasting the streams of, but hope to be shortly,
hope to be eternally, drinking at the fountain-head of.

3\. Perpetuity. This crowns all the rest ([Joe
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#020)): Judah shall dwell for ever
(when Egypt and Edom are made a desolation), and Jerusalem shall
continue from generation to generation. This is a promise, and a
precious promise it is, (1.) That the church of Christ shall continue in
the world to the end of time. As one generation of professing Christians
passes away, another shall come, in whom the throne of Christ shall
endure for ever, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
(2.) That all the living members of that church (Judah and Jerusalem are
put for the inhabitants of that city and country, [Mat
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#005)) shall be established in their
happiness to the utmost ages of eternity. This new Jerusalem shall be
from generation to generation, for it is a city that has foundations,
not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Introduction](amo000)

</div>
