<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh012)  [Next](joh014.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001.md)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 13:0</span></span>

Our Saviour having finished his public discourses, in which he "endured
the contradiction of sinners," now applies himself to a private
conversation with his friends, in which he designed the consolation of
saints. Henceforward we have an account of what passed between him and
his disciples, who were to be entrusted with the affairs of his
household, when he was gone into a far country; the necessary
instructions and comforts he furnished them with. His hour being at
hand, he applies himself to set his house in order. In this chapter I.
He washes his disciples' feet (v. 1-17). II. He foretels who should
betray him ([Joh 13:18-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018).md). III. He
instructs them in the great doctrine of his own death, and the great
duty of brotherly love ([Joh
13:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#031).md). IV. He foretels Peter's
denying him ([Joh 13:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036).md).

[John 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 13:1</span></span>

It has generally been taken for granted by commentators that Christ's
washing his disciples' feet, and the discourse that followed it, were
the same night in which he was betrayed, and at the same sitting wherein
he ate the passover and instituted the Lord's supper; but whether before
the solemnity began, or after it was all over, or between the eating of
the passover and the institution of the Lord's supper, they are not
agreed. This evangelist, making it his business to gather up those
passages which the others had omitted, industriously omits those which
the others had recorded, which occasions some difficulty in putting them
together. If it was then, we suppose that Judas went out ([Joh
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#030).md) to get his men ready that were
to apprehend the Lord Jesus in the garden. But Dr. Lightfoot is clearly
of opinion that this was done and said, even all that is recorded to the
end of ch. 14, not at the passover supper, for it is here said ([Joh
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001).md) to be before the feast of the
passover, but at the supper in Bethany, two days before the passover (of
which we read [Mat 26:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#002).md), at which
Mary the second time anointed Christ's head with the remainder of her
box of ointment. Or, it might be at some other supper the night before
the passover, not as that was in the house of Simon the leper, but in
his own lodgings, where he had none but his disciples about him, and
could be more free with them.

In these verses we have the story of Christ's washing his disciples'
feet; it was an action of a singular nature; no miracle, unless we call
it a miracle of humility. Mary had just anointed his head; now, lest his
acceptance of this should look like taking state, he presently balances
it with this act of abasement. But why would Christ do this? If the
disciples' feet needed washing, they could wash them themselves; a wise
man will not do a thing that looks odd and unusual, but for very good
causes and considerations. We are sure that it was not in a humour or a
frolic that this was done; no, the transaction was very solemn, and
carried on with a great deal of seriousness; and four reasons are here
intimated why Christ did this: - 1. That he might testify his love to
his disciples, [Joh 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001.md), [Joh
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#002.md). 2. That he might give an
instance of his own voluntary humility and condescension, [Joh
13:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#003.md). 3. That he might signify to
them spiritual washing, which is referred to in his discourse with
Peter, [Joh 13:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#006.md). 4. That he might
set them an example, [Joh 13:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#012.md).
And the opening of these four reasons will take in the exposition of the
whole story.

I. Christ washed his disciples' feet that he might give a proof of that
great love wherewith he loved them; loved them to the end, [Joh
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001.md), [Joh
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#002.md).

1\. It is here laid down as an undoubted truth that our Lord Jesus,
having loved his own that were in the world, loved them to the end, [Joh
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001.md).

(1.) This is true of the disciples that were his immediate followers, in
particular the twelve. These were his own in the world, his family, his
school, his bosom-friends. Children he had none to call his own, but he
adopted them, and took them as his own. He had those that were his own
in the other world, but he left them for a time, to look after his own
in this world. These he loved, he called them into fellowship with
himself, conversed familiarly with them, was always tender of them, and
of their comfort and reputation. He allowed them to be very free with
him, and bore with their infirmities. He loved them to the end,
continued his love to them as long as he lived, and after his
resurrection; he never took away his loving kindness. Though there were
some persons of quality that espoused his cause, he did not lay aside
his old friends, to make room for new ones, but still stuck to his poor
fishermen. They were weak and defective in knowledge and grace, dull and
forgetful; and yet, though he reproved them often, he never ceased to
love them and take care of them.

(2.) It is true of all believers, for these twelve patriarchs were the
representatives of all the tribes of God's spiritual Israel. Note,
\[1.\] Our Lord Jesus has a people in the world that are his own, - his
own, for they were given him by the Father, he has purchased them, and
paid dearly for them, and he has set them apart for himself, - his own,
for they have devoted themselves to him as a peculiar people. His own;
where his own were spoken of that received him not, it is tous idious -
his own persons, as a man's wife and children are his own, to whom he
stands in a constant relation. \[2.\] Christ has a cordial love for his
own that are in the world. He did love them with a love of goodwill when
he gave himself for their redemption. He does love them with a love of
complacency when he admits them into communion with himself. Though they
are in this world, a world of darkness and distance, of sin and
corruption, yet he loves them. He was now going to his own in heaven,
the spirits of just men made perfect there; but he seems most concerned
for his own on earth, because they most needed his care: the sickly
child is most indulged. \[3.\] Those whom Christ loves he loves to the
end; he is constant in his love to his people; he rests in his love. He
loves with an everlasting love ([Jer
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#003).md), from everlasting in the
counsels of it to everlasting in the consequences of it. Nothing can
separate a believer from the love of Christ; he loves his own, eis telos
- unto perfection, for he will perfect what concerns them, will bring
them to that world where love is perfect.

2\. Christ manifested his love to them by washing their feet, as that
good woman ([Luk 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#038).md) showed her love
to Christ by washing his feet and wiping them. Thus he would show that
as his love to them was constant so it was condescending, - that in
prosecution of the designs of it he was willing to humble himself, - and
that the glories of his exalted state, which he was now entering upon,
should be no obstruction at all to the favour he bore to his chosen; and
thus he would confirm the promise he had made to all the saints that he
would make them sit down to meat, and would come forth and serve them
([Luk 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#037).md), would put honour upon
them as great and surprising as for a lord to serve his servants. The
disciples had just now betrayed the weakness of their love to him, in
grudging the ointment that was poured upon his head ([Mat
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#008).md), yet he presently gives this
proof of his love to them. Our infirmities are foils to Christ's
kindnesses, and set them off.

3\. He chose this time to do it, a little before his last passover, for
two reasons: -

(1.) Because now he knew that his hour was come, which he had long
expected, when he should depart out of this world to the Father. Observe
here, \[1.\] The change that was to pass over our Lord Jesus; he must
depart. This began at his death, but was completed at his ascension. As
Christ himself, so all believers, by virtue of their union with him,
when they depart out of the world, are absent from the body, go to the
Father, are present with the Lord. It is a departure out of the world,
this unkind, injurious world, this faithless, treacherous world - this
world of labour, toil, and temptation - this vale of tears; and it is a
going to the Father, to the vision of the Father of spirits, and the
fruition of him as ours. \[2.\] The time of this change: His hour was
come. It is sometimes called his enemies' hour ([Luk
22:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#053).md), the hour of their triumph;
sometimes his hour, the hour of his triumph, the hour he had had in his
eye all along. The time of his sufferings was fixed to an hour, and the
continuance of them but for an hour. \[3.\] His foresight of it: He knew
that his hour was come; he knew from the beginning that it would come,
and when, but now he knew that it was come. We know not when our hour
will come, and therefore what we have to do in habitual preparation for
it ought never to be undone; but, when we know by the harbingers that
our hour is come, we must vigorously apply ourselves to an actual
preparation, as our Master did, [Pe2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#014.md). Now it was in the immediate
foresight of his departure that he washed his disciples' feet; that, as
his own head was anointed just now against the day of his burial, so
their feet might be washed against the day of their consecration by the
descent of the Holy Ghost fifty days after, as the priests were washed,
[Lev 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#006.md). When we see our day
approaching, we should do what good we can to those we leave behind.

(2.) Because the devil had now put it into the heart of Judas to betray
him, [Joh 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#002.md). These words in a
parenthesis may be considered, \[1.\] As tracing Judas's treason to its
origin; it was a sin of such a nature that it evidently bore the devil's
image and superscription. What way of access the devil has to men's
hearts, and by what methods he darts in his suggestions, and mingles
them undiscerned with those thoughts which are the natives of the heart,
we cannot tell. But there are some sins in their own nature so
exceedingly sinful, and to which there is so little temptation from the
world and the flesh, that it is plain Satan lays the egg of them in a
heart disposed to be the nest to hatch them in. For Judas to betray such
a master, to betray him so cheaply and upon no provocation, was such
downright enmity to God as could not be forged but by Satan himself, who
thereby thought to ruin the Redeemer's kingdom, but did in fact ruin his
own. \[2.\] As intimating a reason why Christ now washed his disciples'
feet. First, Judas being now resolved to betray him, the time of his
departure could not be far off; if this matter be determined, it is easy
to infer with St. Paul, I am now ready to be offered. Note, The more
malicious we perceive our enemies to be against us, the more industrious
we should be to prepare for the worst that may come. Secondly, Judas
being now got into the snare, and the devil aiming at Peter and the rest
of them ([Luk 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031).md), Christ would
fortify his own against him. If the wolf has seized one of the flock, it
is time for the shepherd to look well to the rest. Antidotes must be
stirring, when the infection is begun. Dr. Lightfoot observes that the
disciples had learned of Judas to murmur at the anointing of Christ;
compare [Joh 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#004.md), etc. with [Mat
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#008.md). Now, lest those that had learned
that of him should learn worse, he fortifies them by a lesson of
humility against his most dangerous assaults. Thirdly, Judas, who was
now plotting to betray him, was one of the twelve. Now Christ would
hereby show that he did not design to cast them all off for the faults
of one. Though one of their college had a devil, and was a traitor, yet
they should fare never the worse for that. Christ loves his church
though there are hypocrites in it, and had still a kindness for his
disciples though there was a Judas among them and he knew it.

II\. Christ washed his disciples' feet that he might give an instance of
his own wonderful humility, and show how lowly and condescending he was,
and let all the world know how low he could stoop in love to his own.
This is intimated, [Joh 13:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#003.md). Jesus
knowing, and now actually considering, and perhaps discoursing of, his
honours as Mediator, and telling his friends that the Father had given
all things into his hand, rises from supper, and, to the great surprise
of the company, who wondered what he was going to do, washed his
disciples' feet.

1\. Here is the rightful advancement of the Lord Jesus. Glorious things
are here said of Christ as Mediator.

(1.) The Father had given all things into his hands; had given him a
propriety in all, and a power over all, as possessor of heaven and
earth, in pursuance of the great designs of his undertaking; see [Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027.md). The accommodation and
arbitration of all matters in variance between God and man were
committed into his hands as the great umpire and referee; and the
administration of the kingdom of God among men, in all the branches of
it, was committed to him; so that all acts, both of government and
judgment, were to pass through his hands; he is heir of all things.

(2.) He came from God. This implies that he was in the beginning with
God, and had a being and glory, not only before he was born into this
world, but before the world itself was born; and that when he came into
the world he came as God's ambassador, with a commission from him. He
came from God as the son of God, and the sent of God. The Old Testament
prophets were raised up and employed for God, but Christ came directly
from him.

(3.) He went to God, to be glorified with him with the same glory which
he had with God from eternity. That which comes from God shall go to
God; those that are born from heaven are bound for heaven. As Christ
came from God to be an agent for him on earth, so he went to God to be
an agent for us in heaven; and it is a comfort to us to think how
welcome he was there: he was brought near to the Ancient of days, [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013.md). And it was said to him, Sit thou
at my right hand, [Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001.md).

(4.) He knew all this; was not like a prince in the cradle, that knows
nothing of the honour he is born to, or like Moses, who wist not that
his face shone; no, he had a full view of all the honours of his exalted
state, and yet stooped thus low. But how does this come in here? \[1.\]
As an inducement to him now quickly to leave what lessons and legacies
he had to leave to his disciples, because his hour was now come when he
must take his leave of them, and be exalted above that familiar converse
which he now had with them, [Joh 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001.md).
\[2.\] It may come in as that which supported him under his sufferings,
and carried him cheerfully through this sharp encounter. Judas was now
betraying him, and he knew it, and knew what would be the consequence of
it; yet, knowing also that he came from God and went to God, he did not
draw back, but went on cheerfully. \[3.\] It seems to come in as a foil
to his condescension, to make it the more admirable. The reasons of
divine grace are sometimes represented in scripture as strange and
surprising (as [Isa 57:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#017.md), [Isa
57:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#018.md); [Hos
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#013.md), [Hos
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#014).md); so here, that is given as an
inducement to Christ to stoop which should rather have been a reason for
his taking state; for God's thoughts are not as ours. Compare with this
those passages which preface the most signal instances of condescending
grace with the displays of divine glory, as [Psa
68:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#004.md), [Psa
68:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005.md); [Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015.md); [Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001.md), [Isa
66:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002.md).

2\. Here is the voluntary abasement of our Lord Jesus notwithstanding
this. Jesus knowing his own glory as God, and his own authority and
power as Mediator, one would think it should follow, He rises from
supper, lays aside his ordinary garments, calls for robes, bids them
keep their distance, and do him homage; but no, quite the contrary, when
he considered this he gave the greatest instance of humility. Note, A
well-grounded assurance of heaven and happiness, instead of puffing a
man up with pride, will make and keep him very humble. Those that would
be found conformable to Christ, and partakers of his Spirit, must study
to keep their minds low in the midst of the greatest advancements. Now
that which Christ humbled himself to was to wash his disciples' feet.

(1.) The action itself was mean and servile, and that which servants of
the lowest rank were employed in. Let thine handmaid (saith Abigail) be
a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord; let me be in the
meanest employment, [Sa1 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#041.md). If he
had washed their hands or faces, it had been great condescension (Elisha
poured water on the hands of Elijah, [Kg2
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#011).md); but for Christ to stoop to such
a piece of drudgery as this may well excite our admiration. Thus he
would teach us to think nothing below us wherein we may be serviceable
to God's glory and the good of our brethren.

(2.) The condescension was so much the greater that he did this for his
own disciples, who in themselves were of a low and despicable condition,
not curious about their bodies; their feet, it is likely, were seldom
washed, and therefore very dirty. In relation to him, they were his
scholars, his servants, and such as should have washed his feet, whose
dependence was upon him, and their expectations from him. Many of great
spirits otherwise will do a mean thing to curry favour with their
superiors; they rise by stooping, and climb by cringing; but for Christ
to do this to his disciples could be no act of policy nor complaisance,
but pure humility.

(3.) He rose from supper to do it. Though we translate it ([Joh
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#002).md) supper being ended, it might be
better read, there being a supper made, or he being at supper, for he
sat down again ([Joh 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#012).md), and we
find him dipping a sop ([Joh 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#026).md),
so that he did it in the midst of his meal, and thereby taught us,
\[1.\] Not to reckon it a disturbance, nor any just cause of uneasiness,
to be called from our meal to do God or our brother any real service,
esteeming the discharge of our duty more than our necessary food, [Joh
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034.md). Christ would not leave his
preaching to oblige his nearest relations ([Mar
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#033).md), but would leave his supper to
show his love to his disciples. \[2.\] Not to be over nice about our
meat. It would have turned many a squeamish stomach to wash dirty feet
at supper-time; but Christ did it, not that we might learn to be rude
and slovenly (cleanliness and godliness will do well together), but to
teach us not to be curious, not to indulge, but mortify, the delicacy of
the appetite, giving good manners their due place, and no more.

(4.) He put himself into the garb of a servant, to do it: he laid aside
his loose and upper garments, that he might apply himself to this
service the more expeditely. We must address ourselves to duty as those
that are resolved not to take state, but to take pains; we must divest
ourselves of every thing that would either feed our pride or hang in our
way and hinder us in what we have to do, must gird up the loins of our
mind, as those that in earnest buckle to business.

(5.) He did it with all the humble ceremony that could be, went through
all the parts of the service distinctly, and passed by none of them; he
did it as if he had been used thus to serve; did it himself alone, and
had none to minister to him in it. He girded himself with the towel, as
servants throw a napkin on their arm, or put an apron before them; he
poured water into the basin out of the water-pots that stood by ([Joh
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#006).md), and then washed their feet; and,
to complete the service, wiped them. Some think that he did not wash the
feet of them all, but only four or five of them, that being thought
sufficient to answer the end; but I see nothing to countenance this
conjecture, for in other places where he did make a difference it is
taken notice of; and his washing the feet of them all, without
exception, teaches us a catholic and extensive charity to all Christ's
disciples, even the least.

(6.) Nothing appears to the contrary but that he washed the feet of
Judas among the rest, for he was present, [Joh
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#026.md). It is the character of a widow
indeed that she had washed the saints' feet ([Ti1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010).md), and there is some comfort in
this; but the blessed Jesus here washed the feet of a sinner, the worst
of sinners, the worst to him, who was at this time contriving to betray
him.

Many interpreters consider Christ's washing his disciples' feet as a
representation of his whole undertaking. He knew that he was equal with
God, and all things were his; and yet he rose from his table in glory,
laid aside his robes of light, girded himself with our nature, took upon
him the form of a servant, came not to be ministered to, but to
minister, poured out his blood, poured out his soul unto death, and
thereby prepared a laver to wash us from our sins, [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005.md).

III\. Christ washed his disciples' feet that he might signify to them
spiritual washing, and the cleansing of the soul from the pollutions of
sin. This is plainly intimated in his discourse with Peter upon it, [Joh
13:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#006.md), in which we may observe,

1\. The surprise Peter was in when he saw his Master go about this mean
service ([Joh 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#006).md): Then cometh he to
Simon Peter, with his towel and basin, and bids him put out his feet to
be washed. Chrysostom conjectures that he first washed the feet of
Judas, who readily admitted the honour, and was pleased to see his
Master so disparage himself. It is most probable that when he went about
this service (which is all that is meant by his beginning to wash, [Joh
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#005).md) he took Peter first, and that
the rest would not have suffered it, if they had not first heard it
explained in what passed between Christ and Peter. Whether Christ came
first to Peter or no, when he did come to him, Peter was startled at the
proposal: Lord (saith he) dost thou wash my feet? Here is an emphasis to
be laid upon the persons, thou and me; and the placing of the words is
observable, su mou - what, thou mine? Tu mihi lavas pedes? Quid est tu?
Quid est mihi? Cogitanda sunt potius quam dicenda - Dost thou wash my
feet? What is it thou? What to me? These things are rather to be
contemplated than uttered. - Aug. in loc. What thou, our Lord and
Master, whom we know and believe to be the Son of God, and Saviour and
ruler of the world, do this for me, a worthless worm of the earth, a
sinful man, O Lord? Shall those hands wash my feet which with a touch
have cleansed lepers, given sight to the blind, and raised the dead? So
Theophylact, and from him Dr. Taylor. Very willingly would Peter have
taken the basin and towel, and washed his Master's feet, and been proud
of the honour, [Luk 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#007.md), [Luk
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#008.md). "This had been natural and
regular; for my Master to wash my feet is such a solecism as never was;
such a paradox as I cannot understand. Is this the manner of men?" Note,
Christ's condescensions, especially his condescensions to us, wherein we
find ourselves taken notice of by his grace, are justly the matter of
our admiration, [Joh 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#022.md). Who am I,
Lord God? And what is my father's house?

2\. The immediate satisfaction Christ gave to this question of surprise.
This was at least sufficient to silence his objections ([Joh
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#007).md): What I do, thou knowest not
now, but thou shalt know hereafter. Here are two reasons why Peter must
submit to what Christ was doing: -

(1.) Because he was at present in the dark concerning it, and ought not
to oppose what he did not understand, but acquiesce in the will and
wisdom of one who could give a good reason for all he said and did.
Christ would teach Peter an implicit obedience: "What I do thou knowest
not now, and therefore art no competent judge of it, but must believe it
is well done because I do it." Note, Consciousness to ourselves of the
darkness we labour under, and our inability to judge of what God does,
should make us sparing and modest in our censures of his proceedings;
see [Heb 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#008.md).

(2.) Because there was something considerable in it, of which he should
hereafter know the meaning: "Thou shalt know hereafter what need thou
hast of being washed, when thou shalt be guilty of the heinous sin of
denying me;" so some. "Thou shalt know, when, in the discharge of the
office of an apostle, thou wilt be employed in washing off from those
under thy charge the sins and defilements of their earthly affections;"
so Dr. Hammond. Note, \[1.\] Our Lord Jesus does many things the meaning
of which even his own disciples do not for the present know, but they
shall know afterwards. What he did when he became man for us and what he
did when he became a worm and no man for us, what he did when he lived
our life and what he did when he laid it down, could not be understood
till afterwards, and then it appeared that it behoved him, [Heb
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#017.md). Subsequent providences explain
preceding ones; and we see afterwards what was the kind tendency of
events that seemed most cross; and the way which we thought was about
proved the right way. \[2.\] Christ's washing his disciples' feet had a
significancy in it, which they themselves did not understand till
afterwards, when Christ explained it to be a specimen of the laver of
regeneration, and till the Spirit was poured out upon them from on high.
We must let Christ take his own way, both in ordinances and providences,
and we shall find in the issue it was the best way.

3\. Peter's peremptory refusal, notwithstanding this, to let Christ wash
his feet ([Joh 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#008).md): Thou shalt by no
means wash my feet; no, never. So it is in the original. It is the
language of a fixed resolution. Now, (1.) Here was a show of humility
and modesty. Peter herein seemed to have, and no doubt he really had, a
great respect for his Master, as he had, [Luk
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#008.md). Thus many are beguiled of their
reward in a voluntary humility ([Col
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018.md), [Col
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023).md), such a self-denial as Christ
neither appoints nor accepts; for, (2.) Under this show of humility
there was a real contradiction to the will of the Lord Jesus: "I will
wash thy feet," saith Christ; "But thou never shalt," saith Peter, "it
is not a fitting thing;" so making himself wiser than Christ. It is not
humility, but infidelity, to put away the offers of the gospel, as if
too rich to be made to us or too good news to be true.

4\. Christ's insisting upon his offer, and a good reason given to Peter
why he should accept it: If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me.
This may be taken, (1.) As a severe caution against disobedience: "If I
wash thee not, if thou continue refractory, and wilt not comply with thy
Master's will in so small a matter, thou shalt not be owned as one of my
disciples, but be justly discarded and cashiered for not observing
orders." Thus several of the ancients understand it; if Peter will make
himself wiser than his Master, and dispute the commands he ought to
obey, he does in effect renounce his allegiance, and say, as they did,
What portion have we in David, in the Son of David? And so shall his
doom be, he shall have no part in him. Let him use no more manners than
will do him good, for to obey is better than sacrifice, [Sa1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022). Or, (2..md) As a declaration of
the necessity of spiritual washing; and so I think it is to be
understood: "If I wash not thy soul from the pollution of sin, thou hast
no part with me, no interest in me, no communion with me, no benefit by
me." Note, All those, and those only, that are spiritually washed by
Christ, have a part in Christ. \[1.\] To have a part in Christ, or with
Christ, has all the happiness of a Christian bound up in it, to be
partakers of Christ ([Heb 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#014).md), to
share in those inestimable privileges which result from a union with him
and relation to him. It is that good part the having of which is the one
thing needful. \[2.\] It is necessary to our having a part in Christ
that he wash us. All those whom Christ owns and saves he justifies and
sanctifies, and both are included in his washing them. We cannot partake
of his glory if we partake not of his merit and righteousness, and of
his Spirit and grace.

5\. Peter's more than submission, his earnest request, to be washed by
Christ, [Joh 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#009.md). If this be the
meaning of it, Lord, wash not my feet only, but also my hands and my
head. How soon is Peter's mind changed! When the mistake of his
understanding was rectified, the corrupt resolution of his will was soon
altered. Let us therefore not be peremptory in any resolve (except in
our resolve to follow Christ), because we may soon see cause to retract
it, but cautious in taking up a purpose we will be tenacious of.
Observe,

(1.) How ready Peter is to recede from what he had said: "Lord, what a
fool was I to speak such a hasty word!" Now that the washing of him
appeared to be an act of Christ's authority and grace he admits it; but
disliked when it seemed only an act of humiliation. Note, \[1.\] Good
men, when they see their error, will not be loth to recant it. \[2.\]
Sooner or later, Christ will bring all to be of his mind.

(2.) How importunate he is for the purifying grace of the Lord Jesus,
and the universal influence of it, even upon his hands and head. Note, A
divorce from Christ, and an exclusion from having a part in him, is the
most formidable evil in the eyes of all that are enlightened, for the
fear of which they will be persuaded to any thing. And for fear of this
we should be earnest with God in prayer, that he will wash us, will
justify and sanctify us. "Lord, that I may not be cut off from thee,
make me fit for thee, by the washing of regeneration. Lord, wash not my
feet only from the gross pollutions that cleave to them, but also my
hands and my head from the spots which they have contracted, and the
undiscerned filth which proceeds by perspiration from the body itself."
Note, Those who truly desire to be sanctified desire to be sanctified
throughout, and to have the whole man, with all its parts and powers,
purified, [Th1 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023.md).

6\. Christ's further explication of this sign, as it represented
spiritual washing.

(1.) With reference to his disciples that were faithful to him ([Joh
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010).md): He that is washed all over in
the bath (as was frequently practised in those countries), when he
returns to his house, needeth not save to wash his feet, his hands and
head having been washed, and he having only dirtied his feet in walking
home. Peter had gone from one extreme to the other. At first he would
not let Christ wash his feet; and now he overlooks what Christ had done
for him in his baptism, and what was signified thereby, and cries out to
have his hands and head washed. Now Christ directs him into the meaning;
he must have his feet washed, but not his hands and head. \[1.\] See
here what is the comfort and privilege of such as are in a justified
state; they are washed by Christ, and are clean every whit, that is,
they are graciously accepted of God, as if they were so; and, though
they offend, yet they need not, upon their repentance, be again put into
a justified state, for then should they often be baptized. The evidence
of a justified state may be clouded, and the comfort of it suspended,
when yet the charter of it is not vacated or taken away. Though we have
occasion to repent daily, God's gifts and callings are without
repentance. The heart may be swept and garnished, and yet still remain
the devil's palace; but, if it be washed, it belongs to Christ, and he
will not lose it. \[2.\] See what ought to be the daily care of those
who through grace are in a justified state, and that is to wash their
feet; to cleanse themselves from the guilt they contract daily through
infirmity and inadvertence, by the renewed exercise of repentance, with
a believing application of the virtue of Christ's blood. We must also
wash our feet by constant watchfulness against every thing that is
defiling, for we must cleanse our way, and cleanse our feet by taking
heed thereto, [Psa 119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009.md). The priests,
when they were consecrated, were washed with water; and, though they did
not need afterwards to be so washed all over, yet, whenever they went in
to minister, they must wash their feet and hands at the laver, on pain
of death, [Exo 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#019.md), [Exo
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#020.md). The provision made for our
cleansing should not make us presumptuous, but the more cautious. I have
washed my feet, how shall I defile them? From yesterday's pardon, we
should fetch an argument against this day's temptation.

(2.) With reflection upon Judas: And you are clean, but not all, [Joh
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010.md), [Joh
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#011.md). He pronounces his disciples
clean, clean through the word he had spoken to them, [Joh
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#003.md). He washed them himself, and then
said, You are clean; but he excepts Judas: not all; they were all
baptized, even Judas, yet not all clean; many have the sign that have
not the thing signified. Note, \[1.\] Even among those who are called
disciples of Christ, and profess relation to him, there are some who are
not clean, [Pro 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#012.md). \[2.\] The Lord
knows those that are his, and those that are not, [Ti2
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019.md). The eye of Christ can separate
between the precious and the vile, the clean and the unclean. \[3.\]
When those that have called themselves disciples afterwards prove
traitors, their apostasy at last is a certain evidence of their
hypocrisy all along. \[4.\] Christ sees it necessary to let his
disciples know that they are not all clean; that we may all be jealous
over ourselves (Is it I? Lord, is it I that am among the clean, yet not
clean?) and that, when hypocrites are discovered, it may be no surprise
nor stumbling to us.

IV\. Christ washed his disciples' feet to set before us an example. This
explication he gave of what he had done, when he had done it, [Joh
13:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#012.md). Observe,

1\. With what solemnity he gave an account of the meaning of what he had
done ([Joh 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#012).md): After he had washed
their feet, he said, Know you what I have done?

(1.) He adjourned the explication till he had finished the transaction,
\[1.\] To try their submission and implicit obedience. What he did they
should not know till afterwards, that they might learn to acquiesce in
his will when they could not give a reason for it. \[2.\] Because it was
proper to finish the riddle before he unriddled it. Thus, as to his
whole undertaking, when his sufferings were finished, when he had
resumed the garments of his exalted state and was ready to sit down
again, then he opened the understandings of his disciples, and poured
out his Spirit, [Luk 24:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#045.md), [Luk
24:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#046.md).

(2.) Before he explained it, he asked them if they could construe it:
Know you what I have done to you? He put this question to them, not only
to make them sensible of their ignorance, and the need they had to be
instructed (as [Zac 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#005.md), [Zac
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#013.md), Knowest thou not what these be?
and I said, No, my Lord), but to raise their desires and expectations of
instruction: "I would have you know, and, if you will give attention, I
will tell you." Note, It is the will of Christ that sacramental signs
should be explained, and that his people should be acquainted with the
meaning of them; otherwise, though ever so significant, to those who
know not the thing signified they are insignificant. Hence they are
directed to ask, What mean you by this service? [Exo
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#026.md).

2\. Upon what he grounds that which he had to say ([Joh
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#013).md): "You call me Master and Lord,
you give me those titles, in speaking of me, in speaking to me, and you
say well, for so I am; you are in the relation of scholars to me, and I
do the part of a master to you." Note, (1.) Jesus Christ is our Master
and Lord; he that is our Redeemer and Saviour is, in order to that, our
Lord and Master. He is our Master, didaskalos - our teacher and
instructor in all necessary truths and rules, as a prophet revealing to
us the will of God. He is our Lord, kurios - our ruler and owner, that
has authority over us and propriety in us. (2.) It becomes the disciples
of Christ to call him Master and Lord, not in compliment, but in
reality; not by constraint, but with delight. Devout Mr. Herbert, when
he mentioned the name of Christ, used to add, my Master; and thus
expresses himself concerning it in one of his poems:

How sweetly doth my Master sound, my Master!

As ambergris leaves a rich scent unto the taster,

So do these words a sweet content, an oriental fragrancy, my Master.

(3.) Our calling Christ Master and Lord is an obligation upon us to
receive and observe the instruction he gives us. Christ would thus
pre-engage their obedience to a command that was displeasing to flesh
and blood. If Christ be our Master and Lord, be so by our own consent,
and we have often called him so, we are bound in honour and honesty to
be observant of him.

3\. The lesson which he hereby taught: You also ought to wash one
another's feet, [Joh 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#014.md).

(1.) Some have understood this literally, and have thought these words
amount to the institution of a standing ordinance in the church; that
Christians should, in a solemn religious manner, wash one another's
feet, in token of their condescending love to one another. St. Ambrose
took it so, and practised it in the church of Milan. St. Austin saith
that those Christians who did not do it with their hands, yet (he hoped)
did it with their hearts in humility; but he saith, It is much better to
do it with the hands also, when there is occasion, as [Ti1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010.md). What Christ has done Christians
should not disdain to do. Calvin saith that the pope, in the annual
observance of this ceremony on Thursday in the passion week, is rather
Christ's ape than his follower, for the duty enjoined, in conformity to
Christ, was mutual: Wash one another's feet. And Jansenius saith, It is
done, Frigid et dissimiliter - Frigidly, and unlike the primitive model.

(2.) But doubtless it is to be understood figuratively; it is an
instructive sign, but not sacramental, as the eucharist. This was a
parable to the eye; and three things our Master hereby designed to teach
us: - \[1.\] A humble condescension. We must learn of our Master to be
lowly in heart ([Mat 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029).md), and walk
with all lowliness; we must think meanly of ourselves and respectfully
of our brethren, and deem nothing below us but sin; we must say of that
which seems mean, but has a tendency to the glory of God and our
brethren's good, as David ([Sa2 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#022).md),
If this be to be vile, I will be yet more vile. Christ had often taught
his disciples humility, and they had forgotten the lesson; but now he
teaches them in such a way as surely they could never forget. \[2.\] A
condescension to be serviceable. To wash one another's feet is to stoop
to the meanest offices of love, for the real good and benefit one of
another, as blessed Paul, who, though free from all, made himself
servant of all; and the blessed Jesus, who came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister. We must not grudge to take care and pains, and to
spend time, and to diminish ourselves for the good of those to whom we
are not under any particular obligations, even of our inferiors, and
such as are not in a capacity of making us any requital. Washing the
feet after travelling contributes both to the decency of the person and
to his ease, so that to wash one another's feet is to consult both the
credit and the comfort one of another, to do what we can both to advance
our brethren's reputation and to make their minds easy. See [Co1
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#024.md); [Heb
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#010.md). The duty is mutual; we must both
accept help from our brethren and afford help to our brethren. \[3.\] A
serviceableness to the sanctification one of another: You ought to wash
one another's feet, from the pollutions of sin. Austin takes it in this
sense, and many others. We cannot satisfy for one another's sins, this
is peculiar to Christ, but we may help to purify one another from sin.
We must in the first place wash ourselves; this charity must begin at
home ([Mat 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#005).md), but it must not end
there; we must sorrow for the failings and follies of our brethren, much
more for their gross pollutions ([Co1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#002).md), must wash our brethren's
polluted feet in tears. We must faithfully reprove them, and do what we
can to bring them to repentance ([Gal
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001).md), and we must admonish them, to
prevent their falling into the mire; this is washing their feet.

4\. Here is the ratifying and enforcing of this command from the example
of what Christ had now done: If I your Lord and Master have done it to
you, you ought to do it to one another. He shows the cogency of this
argument in two things: -

(1.) I am your Master, and you are my disciples, and therefore you ought
to learn of me ([Joh 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#015).md); for in
this, as in other things, I have given you an example, that you should
do to others as I have done to you. Observe, \[1.\] What a good teacher
Christ is. He teaches by example as well as doctrine, and for this end
came into this world, and dwelt among us, that he might set us a copy of
all those graces and duties which his holy religion teaches; and it is a
copy without one false stroke. Hereby he made his own laws more
intelligible and honourable. Christ is a commander like Gideon, who said
to his soldiers, Look on me, and do likewise ([Jdg
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#017).md); like Abimelech, who said, What
you have seen me do, make haste and do as I have done ([Jdg
9:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#048).md); and like Caesar, who called his
soldiers, not milites - soldiers, but, commilitones - fellow-soldiers,
and whose usual word was, not Ite illue, but Venite huc; not Go, but
Come. \[2.\] What good scholars we must be. We must do as he hath done;
for therefore he gave us a copy, that we should write after it, that we
might be as he was in this world ([Jo1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#017).md), and walk as he walked, [Jo1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#006.md). Christ's example herein is to be
followed by ministers in particular, in whom the graces of humility and
holy love should especially appear, and by the exercise thereof they
effectually serve the interests of their Master and the ends of their
ministry. When Christ sent his apostles abroad as his agents, it was
with this charge, that they should not take state upon them, nor carry
things with a high hand, but become all things to all men, [Co1
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#022.md). What I have done to your dirty
feet that do you to the polluted souls of sinners; wash them. Some who
suppose this to have been done at the passover supper think it intimates
a rule in admitting communicants to the Lord's-supper, to see that they
be first washed and cleansed by reformation and a blameless
conversation, and then take them in to compass God's altar. But all
Christians likewise are here taught to condescend to each other in love,
and to do it as Christ did it, unasked, unpaid; we must not be mercenary
in the services of love, nor do them with reluctancy.

(2.) I am your Master, and you are my disciples, and therefore you
cannot think it below you to do that, how mean soever it may seem, which
you have seen me do, for ([Joh 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#016).md)
the servant is not greater than his Lord, neither he that is sent,
though sent with all the pomp and power of an ambassador, greater than
he that sent him. Christ had urged this ([Mat
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024.md), [Mat
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025).md) as a reason why they should not
think it strange if they suffered as he did; here he urges it as a
reason why they should not think it much to humble themselves as he did.
What he did not think a disparagement to him, they must not think a
disparagement to them. Perhaps the disciples were inwardly disgusted at
this precept of washing one another's feet, as inconsistent with the
dignity they expected shortly to be preferred to. To obviate such
thoughts, Christ reminds them of their place as his servants; they were
not better men than their Master, and what was consistent with his
dignity was much more consistent with theirs. If he was humble and
condescending, it ill became them to be proud and assuming. Note, \[1.\]
We must take good heed to ourselves, lest Christ's gracious
condescensions to us, and advancements of us, through the corruption of
nature occasion us to entertain high thoughts of ourselves or low
thoughts of him. We need to be put in mind of this, that we are not
greater than our Lord. \[2.\] Whatever our Master was pleased to
condescend to in favour to us, we should much more condescend to in
conformity to him. Christ, by humbling himself, has dignified humility,
and put an honour upon it, and obliged his followers to think nothing
below them but sin. We commonly say to those who disdain to do such or
such a thing, As good as you have done it, and been never the worse
thought of; and true indeed it is, if our Master has done it. When we
see our Master serving, we cannot but see how ill it becomes us to be
domineering.

[John 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 13:18</span></span>

We have here the discovery of Judas's plot to betray his Master. Christ
knew it from the beginning; but now first he discovered it to his
disciples, who did not expect Christ should be betrayed, though he had
often told them so, much less did they suspect that one of them should
do it. Now here,

I. Christ gives them a general intimation of it ([Joh
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018).md): I speak not of you all, I
cannot expect you will all do these things, for I know whom I have
chosen, and whom I have passed by; but the scripture will be fulfilled
([Psa 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009).md), He that eateth bread with
me hath lifted up his heel against me. He does not yet speak out, either
of the crime or the criminal, but raises their expectations of a further
discovery.

1\. He intimates to them that they were not all right. He had said ([Joh
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010).md), You are clean, but not all. So
here, I speak not of you all. Note, What is said of the excellencies of
Christ's disciples cannot be said of all that are called so. The word of
Christ is a distinguishing word, which separates between cattle and
cattle, and will distinguish thousands into hell who flattered
themselves with hopes that they were going to heaven. I speak not of you
all; you my disciples and followers. Note, There is a mixture of bad
with good in the best societies, a Judas among the apostles; it will be
so till we come to the blessed society into which shall enter nothing
unclean or disguised.

2\. That he himself knew who were right, and who were not: I know whom I
have chosen, who the few are that are chosen among the many that are
called with the common call. Note, (1.) Those that are chosen, Christ
himself had the choosing of them; he nominated the persons he undertook
for. (2.) Those that are chosen are known to Christ, for he never
forgets any whom he has once had in his thoughts of love, [Ti2
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019.md).

3\. That in the treachery of him that proved false to him the scripture
was fulfilled, which takes off very much both the surprise and offence
of the thing. Christ took one into his family whom he foresaw to be a
traitor, and did not by effectual grace prevent his being so, that the
scripture might be fulfilled. Let it not therefore be a stumbling-block
to any; for, though it do not at all lessen Judas's offence, it may
lessen our offence at it. The scripture referred to is David's complaint
of the treachery of some of his enemies; the Jewish expositors, and ours
from them generally understand it of Ahithophel: Grotius thinks it
intimates that the death of Judas would be like that of Ahithophel. But
because that psalm speaks of David's sickness, of which we read nothing
at the time of Ahithophel's deserting him, it may better be understood
of some other friend of his, that proved false to him. This our Saviour
applies to Judas. (1.) Judas, as an apostle, was admitted to the highest
privilege: he did eat bread with Christ. He was familiar with him, and
favoured by him, was one of his family, one of those with whom he was
intimately conversant. David saith of his treacherous friend, He did eat
of my bread; but Christ, being poor, had no bread he could properly call
his own. He saith, He did eat bread with me; such as he had by the
kindness of his friends, that ministered to him, his disciples had their
share of, Judas among the rest. Wherever he went, Judas was welcome with
him, did not dine among servants, but sat at table with his Master, ate
of the same dish, drank of the same cup, and in all respects fared as he
fared. He ate miraculous bread with him, when the loaves were
multiplied, ate the passover with him. Note, All that eat bread with
Christ are not his disciples indeed. See [Co1
10:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003). (2..md) Judas, as an apostate,
was guilty of the basest treachery: he lifted up the heel against
Christ. \[1.\] He forsook him, turned his back upon him, went out from
the society of his disciples, [Joh
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#030.md). \[2.\] He despised him, shook
off the dust of his feet against him, in contempt of him and his gospel.
Nay, \[3.\] He became an enemy to him; spurned at him, as wrestlers do
at their adversaries, whom they would overthrow. Note, It is no new
thing for those that were Christ's seeming friends to prove his real
enemies. Those who pretended to magnify him magnify themselves against
him, and thereby prove themselves guilty, not only of the basest
ingratitude, but the basest treachery and perfidiousness.

II\. He gives them a reason why he told them beforehand of the treachery
of Judas ([Joh 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#019).md): "Now I tell you
before it come, before Judas has begun to put his wicked plot in
execution, that when it is come to pass you may, instead of stumbling at
it, be confirmed in your belief that I am he, he that should come." 1.
By his clear and certain foresight of things to come, of which in this,
as in other instances, he gave incontestable proof, he proved himself to
be the true God, before whom all things are naked and open. Christ
foretold that Judas would betray him when there was no ground to suspect
such a thing, and so proved himself the eternal Word, which is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. The prophecies of
the New Testament concerning the apostasy of the latter times (which we
have, 2 Th. 2; 1 Tim. 4, and in the Apocalypse) being evidently
accomplished is a proof that those writings were divinely inspired, and
confirms our faith in the whole canon of scripture. 2. By this
application of the types and prophecies of the Old Testament to himself,
he proved himself to be the true Messiah, to whom all the prophets bore
witness. Thus it was written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and
he suffered just as it was written, [Luk
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#025.md), [Luk
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#026.md); [Joh
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028.md).

III\. He gives a word of encouragement to his apostles, and all his
ministers whom he employs in his service ([Joh
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#020).md): He that receiveth whomsoever I
send receiveth me. The purport of these words is the same with what we
have in other scriptures, but it is not easy to make out their coherence
here. Christ had told his disciples that they must humble and abase
themselves. "Now," saith he, "though there may be those that will
despise you for your condescension, yet there will be those that will do
you honour, and shall be honoured for so doing." Those who know
themselves dignified by Christ's commission may be content to be
vilified in the world's opinion. Or, he intended to silence the scruples
of those who, because there was a traitor among the apostles, would be
shy of receiving any of them; for, if one of them was false to his
Master, to whom would any of them be true? Ex uno disce omnes - They are
all alike. No, as Christ will think never the worse of them for Judas's
crime, so he will stand by them, and own them, and will raise up such as
shall receive them. Those that had received Judas when he was a
preacher, and perhaps were converted and edified by his preaching, were
never the worse, nor should reflect upon it with any regret, though he
afterwards proved a traitor; for he was one whom Christ sent. We cannot
know what men are, much less what they will be, but those who appear to
be sent of Christ we must receive, till the contrary appear. Though
some, by entertaining strangers, have entertained robbers unawares, yet
we must still be hospitable, for thereby some have entertained angels.
The abuses put upon our charity, though ordered with ever so much
discretion, will neither justify our uncharitableness, nor lose us the
reward of our charity. 1. We are here encouraged to receive ministers as
sent of Christ: "He that receiveth whomsoever I send, though weak and
poor, and subject to like passions as others (for as the law, so the
gospel, makes men priests that have infirmity), yet if he deliver my
message, and be regularly called and appointed to do so, and as an
officer give himself to the word and prayer, he that entertains him
shall be owned as a friend of mine." Christ was now leaving the world,
but he would leave an order of men to be his agents, to deliver his
word, and those who receive this, in the light and love of it, receive
him. To believe the doctrine of Christ, and obey his law, and accept the
salvation offered upon the terms proposed; this is receiving those whom
Christ sends, and it is receiving Christ Jesus the Lord himself. 2. We
are here encouraged to receive Christ as sent of God: He that thus
receiveth me, that receiveth Christ in his ministers, receiveth the
Father also, for they come upon his errand likewise, baptizing in the
name of the Father, as well as of the Son. Or, in general, He that
receiveth me as his prince and Saviour receiveth him that sent me as his
portion and felicity. Christ was sent of God, and in embracing his
religion we embrace the only true religion.

IV\. Christ more particularly notifies to them the plot which one of
their number was now hatching against him ([Joh
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#021).md): When Jesus had thus said in
general, to prepare them for a more particular discovery, he was
troubled in spirit, and showed it by some gesture or sign, and he
testified, he solemnly declared it (cum animo testandi - with the
solemnity of a witness on oath), "One of you shall betray me; one of you
my apostles and constant followers." None indeed could be said to betray
him but those in whom he reposed a confidence, and who were the
witnesses of his retirements. This did not determine Judas to the sin by
any fatal necessity; for, though the event did follow according to the
prediction, yet not from the prediction. Christ is not the author of
sin; yet as to this heinous sin of Judas, 1. Christ foresaw it; for even
that which is secret and future, and hidden from the eyes of all living,
naked and open before the eyes of Christ. He knows what is in men better
than they do themselves ([Kg2 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#012).md),
and therefore sees what will be done by them. I knew that thou wouldest
deal very treacherously, [Isa 48:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#008.md). 2.
He foretold it, not only for the sake of the rest of the disciples, but
for the sake of Judas himself, that he might take warning, and recover
himself out of the snare of the devil. Traitors proceed not in their
plots when they find they are discovered; surely Judas, when he finds
that his Master knows his design, will retreat in time; if not, it will
aggravate his condemnation. 3. He spoke of it with a manifest concern;
he was troubled in spirit when he mentioned it. He had often spoken of
his own sufferings and death, without any such trouble of spirit as he
here manifested when he spoke of the ingratitude and treachery of Judas.
This touched him in a tender part. Note, The falls and miscarriages of
the disciples of Christ are a great trouble of spirit to their Master;
the sins of Christians are the grief of Christ. "What! One of you betray
me? You that have received from me such distinguishing favours; you that
I had reason to think would be firm to me, that have professed such a
respect for me; what iniquity have you found in me that one of you
should betray me?" This went to his heart, as the undutifulness of
children grieves those who have nourished and brought them up, [Isa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002.md). See [Psa
95:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#010.md); [Isa
63:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010.md).

V. The disciples quickly take the alarm. They knew their Master would
neither deceive them nor jest with them; and therefore looked one upon
another, with a manifest concern, doubting of whom he spake. 1. By
looking one upon another they evinced the trouble they were in upon this
notice given them; it struck such a horror upon them that they knew not
well which way to look, nor what to say. They saw their Master troubled,
and therefore they were troubled. This was at a feast where they were
cheerfully entertained; but hence we must be taught to rejoice with
trembling, and as though we rejoiced not. When David wept for his son's
rebellion, all his followers wept with him ([Sa2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030).md); so Christ's disciples here.
Note, That which grieves Christ is, and should be, a grief to all that
are his, particularly the scandalous miscarriages of those that are
called by his name: Who is offended, and I burn not? 2. Hereby they
endeavoured to discover the traitor. They looked wistfully in one
another's face, to see who blushed, or, by some disorder in the
countenance, manifested guilt in the heart, upon this notice; but, while
those who were faithful had their consciences so clear that they could
lift up their faces without spot, he that was false had his conscience
so seared that he was not ashamed, neither could he blush, and so no
discovery could be made in this way. Christ thus perplexed his disciples
for a time, and put them into confusion, that he might humble them, and
prove them, might excite in them a jealousy of themselves, and an
indignation at the baseness of Judas. It is good for us sometimes to be
put to a gaze, to be put to a pause.

VI\. The disciples were solicitous to get their Master to explain
himself, and to tell them particularly whom he meant; for nothing but
this can put them out of their present pain, for each of them thought he
had as much reason to suspect himself as any of his brethren; now,

1\. Of all the disciples John was most fit to ask, because he was the
favourite, and sat next his Master ([Joh
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023).md): There was leaning on Jesus's
bosom one of the disciples whom Jesus loved. It appears that this was
John, by comparing [Joh 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#020.md), [Joh
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#024). Observe, (1..md) The particular
kindness which Jesus had for him; he was known by this periphrasis, that
he was the disciple whom Jesus loved. He loved them all ([Joh
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001).md), but John was particularly dear
to him. His name signifies gracious. Daniel, who was honoured with the
revelations of the Old Testament, as John of the New, was a man greatly
beloved, [Dan 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023.md). Note, Among the
disciples of Christ some are dearer to him than others. (2.) His place
and posture at this time: He was leaning on Jesus's bosom. Some say that
it was the fashion in those countries to sit at meat in a leaning
posture, so that the second lay in the bosom of the first, and so on,
which does not seem probable to me, for in such a posture as this they
could neither eat nor drink conveniently; but, whether this was the case
or not, John now leaned on Christ's bosom, and it seems to be an
extraordinary expression of endearment used at this time. Note, There
are some of Christ's disciples whom he lays in his bosom, who have more
free and intimate communion with him than others. The Father loved the
Son, and laid him in his bosom ([Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018).md), and believers are in like
manner one with Christ, [Joh 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021.md).
This honour all the saints shall have shortly in the bosom of Abraham.
Those who lay themselves at Christ's feet, he will lay in his bosom.
(3.) Yet he conceals his name, because he himself was the penman of the
story. He put this instead of his name, to show that he was pleased with
it; it is his title of honour, that he was the disciple whom Jesus
loved, as in David's and Solomon's court there was one that was the
king's friend; yet he does not put his name down, to show that he was
not proud of it, nor would seem to boast of it. Paul in a like case
saith, I knew a man in Christ.

2\. Of all the disciples Peter was most forward to know, [Joh
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#024.md). Peter, sitting at some
distance, beckoned to John, by some sign or other, to ask. Peter was
generally the leading man, most apt to put himself forth; and, where
men's natural tempers lead them to be thus bold in answering and asking,
if kept under the laws of humility and wisdom, they make men very
serviceable. God gives his gifts variously; but that the forward men in
the church may not think too well of themselves, nor the modest be
discouraged, it must be noted that it was not Peter, but John, that was
the beloved disciple. Peter was desirous to know, not only that he might
be sure it was not he, but that, knowing who it was, they might withdraw
from him, and guard against him, and, if possible, prevent his design.
It were a desirable thing, we should think, to know who in the church
will deceive us; yet let this suffice - Christ knows, though we do not.
The reason why Peter did not himself ask was because John had a much
fairer opportunity, by the advantage of his seat at table, to whisper
the question into the ear of Christ, and to receive a like private
answer. It is good to improve our interest in those that are near to
Christ, and to engage their prayers for us. Do we know any that we have
reason to think lie in Christ's bosom? Let us beg of them to speak a
good word for us.

3\. The question was asked accordingly ([Joh
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#025).md): He then, lying at the breast
of Jesus, and so having the convenience of whispering with him, saith
unto him, Lord, who is it? Now here John shows, (1.) A regard to his
fellow-disciple, and to the motion he made. Though Peter had not the
honour he had at this time, yet he did not therefore disdain to take the
hint and intimation he gave him. Note, Those who lie in Christ's bosom
may often learn from those who lie at his feet something that will be
profitable for them, and be reminded of that which they did not of
themselves think of. John was willing to gratify Peter herein, having so
fair an opportunity for it. As every one hath received the gift, so let
him minister the same for a common good, [Rom
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006). (2..md) A reverence of his Master.
Though he whispered this in Christ's ear, yet he called him Lord; the
familiarity he was admitted to did not at all lessen his respect for his
Master. It becomes us to use a reverence in expression, and to observe a
decorum even in our secret devotions, which no eye is a witness to, as
well as in public assemblies. The more intimate communion gracious souls
have with Christ, the more sensible they are of his worthiness and their
own unworthiness, as [Gen 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#027.md).

4\. Christ gave a speedy answer to this question, but whispered it in
John's ear; for it appears ([Joh
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#029).md) that the rest were still
ignorant of the matter. He it is to whom I shall give a sop, psōmion - a
morsel, a crust, when I have dipped it in the sauce. And when he had
dipped the sop, John strictly observing his motion, he gave it to Judas;
and Judas took it readily enough, not suspecting the design of it, but
glad of a savoury bit, to make up his mouth with. (1.) Christ notified
the traitor by a sign. He could have told John by name who he was (The
adversary and enemy is that wicked Judas, he is the traitor, and none
but he); but thus he would exercise the observation of John, and
intimate what need his ministers have of a spirit of discerning; for the
false brethren we are to stand upon our guard against are not made known
to us by words, but by signs; they are to be known to us by their
fruits, by their spirits; it requires great diligence and care to form a
right judgment upon them. (2.) That sign was a sop which Christ gave
him, a very proper sign, because it was the fulfilling of the scripture
([Joh 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018).md) that the traitor should
be one that ate bread with him, that was at this time a fellow-commoner
with him. It had likewise a significancy in it, and teaches us, \[1.\]
That Christ sometimes gives sops to traitors; worldly riches, honours,
and pleasures are sops (if I may so speak), which Providence sometimes
gives into the hands of wicked men. Judas perhaps thought himself a
favourite because he had the sop, like Benjamin at Joseph's table, a
mess by himself; thus the prosperity of fools, like a stupifying sop,
helps to destroy them. \[2.\] That we must not be outrageous against
those whom we know to be very malicious against us. Christ carved to
Judas as kindly as to any at the table, though he knew he was then
plotting his death. If thine enemy hunger, feed him; this is to do as
Christ does.

VII\. Judas himself, instead of being convinced hereby of his
wickedness, was the more confirmed in it, and the warning given him was
to him a savour of death unto death; for it follows,

1\. The devil hereupon took possession of him ([Joh
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027).md): After the sop, Satan entered
into him: not to make him melancholy, nor drive him distracted, which
was the effect of his possessing some; not to hurry him into the fire,
nor into the water; happy had it been for him if that had been the worst
of it, or if with the swine he had been choked in the sea; but Satan
entered into him to possess him with a prevailing prejudice against
Christ and his doctrine, and a contempt of him, as one whose life was of
small value, to excite in him a covetous desire of the wages of
unrighteousness and a resolution to stick at nothing for the obtaining
of them. But,

(1.) Was not Satan in him before? How then is it said that now Satan
entered into him? Judas was all along a devil ([Joh
6:70](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#070).md), a son of perdition, but now
Satan gained a more full possession of him, had a more abundant entrance
into him. His purpose to betray his Master was now ripened into a fixed
resolution; now he returned with seven other spirits more wicked than
himself, [Luk 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#026.md). Note, \[1.\]
Though the devil is in every wicked man that does his works ([Eph
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002).md), yet sometimes he enters more
manifestly and more powerfully than at other times, when he puts them
upon some enormous wickedness, which humanity and natural conscience
startle at. \[2.\] Betrayers of Christ have much of the devil in them.
Christ speaks of the sin of Judas as greater than that of any of his
persecutors.

(2.) How came Satan to enter into him after the sop? Perhaps he was
presently aware that it was the discovery of him, and it made him
desperate in his resolutions. Many are made worse by the gifts of
Christ's bounty, and are confirmed in their impenitency by that which
should have led them to repentance. The coals of fire heaped upon their
heads, instead of melting them, harden them.

2\. Christ hereupon dismissed him, and delivered him up to his own
heart's lusts: Then said Jesus unto him, What thou doest, do quickly.
This is not to be understood as either advising him to his wickedness or
warranting him in it; but either, (1.) As abandoning him to the conduct
and power of Satan. Christ knew that Satan had entered into him, and had
peaceable possession; and now he gives him up as hopeless. The various
methods Christ had used for his conviction were ineffectual; and
therefore, "What thou doest thou wilt do quickly; if thou art resolved
to ruin thyself, go on, and take what comes." Note, When the evil spirit
is willingly admitted, the good Spirit justly withdraws. Or, (2.) As
challenging him to do his worst: "Thou art plotting against me, put thy
plot in execution and welcome, the sooner the better, I do not fear
thee, I am ready for thee." Note, our Lord Jesus was very forward to
suffer and die for us, and was impatient of delay in the perfecting of
his undertaking. Christ speaks of Judas's betraying him as a thing he
was now doing, though he was only purposing it. Those who are contriving
and designing mischief are, in God's account, doing mischief.

3\. Those that were at table understood not what he meant, because they
did not hear what he whispered to John ([Joh
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#028.md), [Joh
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#029).md): No man at table, neither the
disciples nor any other of the guests, except John, knew for what intent
he spoke this to him. (1.) They did not suspect that Christ said it to
Judas as a traitor, because it did not enter into their heads that Judas
was such a one, or would prove so. Note, It is an excusable dulness in
the disciples of Christ not to be quick-sighted in their censures. Most
are ready enough to say, when they hear harsh things spoken in general,
Now such a one is meant, and now such a one; but Christ's disciples were
so well taught to love one another that they could not easily learn to
suspect one another; charity thinks no evil. (2.) They therefore took it
for granted that he said it to him as a trustee, or treasurer of the
household, giving him order for the laying out of some money. Their
surmises in this case discover to us for what uses and purposes our Lord
Jesus commonly directed payments out of that little stock he had, and so
teach us how to honour the Lord with our substance. They concluded
something was to be laid out, either, \[1.\] In works of piety: Buy
those things that we have need of against the feast. Though he borrowed
a room to eat the passover in, yet he bought in provision for it. That
is to be reckoned well bestowed which is laid out upon those things we
have need of for the maintenance of God's ordinances among us; and we
have the less reason to grudge that expense now because our
gospel-worship is far from being so chargeable as the legal worship was.
\[2.\] Or in works of charity: That he should give something to the
poor. By this it appears, First, That our Lord Jesus, though he lived
upon alms himself ([Luk 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#003).md), yet gave
alms to the poor, a little out of a little. Though he might very well be
excused, not only because he was poor himself, but because he did so
much good in other ways, curing so many gratis; yet, to set us an
example, he gave, for the relief of the poor, out of that which he had
for the subsistence of his family; see [Eph
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028.md). Secondly, That the time of a
religious feast was thought a proper time for works of charity. When he
celebrated the passover he ordered something for the poor. When we
experience God's bounty to us, this should make us bountiful to the
poor.

4\. Judas hereupon sets himself vigorously to pursue his design against
him: He went away. Notice is taken,

(1.) Of his speedy departure: He went out presently, and quitted the
house, \[1.\] For fear of being more plainly discovered to the company,
for, if he were, he expected they would all fall upon him, and be the
death of him, or at least of his project. \[2.\] He went out as one
weary of Christ's company and the society of his apostles. Christ needed
not to expel him, he expelled himself. Note, Withdrawing from the
communion of the faithful is commonly the first overt-act of a
backslider, and the beginning of an apostasy. \[3.\] He went out to
prosecute his design, to look for those with whom he was to make his
bargain, and to settle the agreement with them. Now that Satan had got
into him he hurried him on with precipitation, lest he should see his
error and repent of it.

(2.) Of the time of his departure: It was night. \[1.\] Though it was
night, an unseasonable time for business, yet, Satan having entered into
him, he made no difficulty of the coldness and darkness of the night.
This should shame us out of our slothfulness and cowardice in the
service of Christ, that the devil's servants are so earnest and
venturous in his service. \[2.\] Because it was night, and this gave him
advantage of privacy and concealment. He was not willing to be seen
treating with the chief priests, and therefore chose the dark night as
the fittest time for such works of darkness. Those whose deeds are evil
love darkness rather than light. See [Job
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#013.md), etc.

[John 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 13:31</span></span>

This and what follows, to the end of ch. 14, was Christ's table-talk
with his disciples. When supper was done, Judas went out; but what did
the Master and his disciples do, whom he left sitting at table? They
applied themselves to profitable discourse, to teach us as much as we
can to make conversation with our friends at table serviceable to
religion. Christ begins this discourse. The more forward we are humbly
to promote that communication which is good, and to the use of edifying,
the more like we are to Jesus Christ. Those especially that by their
place, reputation, and gifts, command the company, to whom men give ear,
ought to use the interest they have in other respects as an opportunity
of doing them good. Now our Lord Jesus discourses with them (and
probably discourses much more largely than is here recorded),

I. Concerning the great mystery of his own death and sufferings, about
which they were as yet so much in the dark that they could not persuade
themselves to expect the thing itself, much less did they understand the
meaning of it; and therefore Christ gives them such instructions
concerning it as made the offence of the cross to cease. Christ did not
begin this discourse till Judas was gone out, for he was a false
brother. The presence of wicked people is often a hindrance to good
discourse. When Judas was gone out, Christ said, now is the Son of man
glorified; now that Judas is discovered and discarded, who was a spot in
their love-feast and a scandal to their family, now is the Son of man
glorified. Note, Christ is glorified by the purifying of Christian
societies: corruptions in his church are a reproach to him; the purging
out of those corruptions rolls away the reproach. Or, rather, now Judas
was gone to set the wheels a-going, in order to his being put to death,
and the thing was likely to be effected shortly: Now is the Son of man
glorified, meaning, Now he is crucified.

1\. Here is something which Christ instructs them in, concerning his
sufferings, that was very comforting.

(1.) That he should himself be glorified in them. Now the Son of man is
to be exposed to the greatest ignominy and disgrace, to be despitefully
used to the last degree, and dishonoured both by the cowardice of his
friends and the insolence of his enemies; yet now he is glorified; For,
\[1.\] Now he is to obtain a glorious victory over Satan and all the
powers of darkness, to spoil them, and triumph over them. He is now
girding on the harness, to take the field against these adversaries of
God and man, with as great an assurance as if he had put it off. \[2.\]
Now he is to work out a glorious deliverance for his people, by his
death to reconcile them to God, and bring in an everlasting
righteousness and happiness for them; to shed that blood which is to be
an inexhaustible fountain of joys and blessings to all believers. \[3.\]
Now he is to give a glorious example of self-denial and patience under
the cross, courage and contempt of the world, zeal for the glory of God,
and love to the souls of men, such as will make him to be for ever
admired and had in honour. Christ had been glorified in many miracles he
had wrought, and yet he speaks of his being glorified now in his
sufferings, as if that were more than all his other glories in his
humble state.

(2.) That God the Father should be glorified in them. The sufferings of
Christ were, \[1.\] The satisfaction of God's justice, and so God was
glorified in them. Reparation was thereby made with great advantage for
the wrong done him in his honour by the sin of man. The ends of the law
were abundantly answered, and the glory of his government effectually
asserted and maintained. \[2.\] They were the manifestation of his
holiness and mercy. The attributes of God shine brightly in creation and
providence, but much more in the work of redemption; see [Co1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024.md); [Co2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006.md). God is love, and herein he hath
commended his love.

(3.) That he should himself be greatly glorified after them, in
consideration of God's being greatly glorified by them, [Joh
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#032.md). Observe how he enlarges upon
it. \[1.\] He is sure that God will glorify him; and those whom God
glorifies are glorious indeed. Hell and earth set themselves to vilify
Christ, but God resolved to glorify him, and he did it. He glorified him
in his sufferings by the amazing signs and wonders, both in heaven and
earth, which attended them, and extorted even from his crucifiers an
acknowledgment that he was the Son of God. But especially after his
sufferings he glorified him, when he set him at his own right hand, gave
him a name above every name. \[2.\] That he will glorify him in himself
- en heautō. Either, First, In Christ himself. He will glorify him in
his own person, and not only in his kingdom among men. This supposes his
speedy resurrection. A common person may be honoured after his death, in
his memory or posterity, but Christ was honoured in himself. Or,
secondly, in God himself. God will glorify him with himself, as it is
explained, [Joh 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005.md). He shall sit
down with the Father upon his throne, [Rev
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#021.md). This is true glory. \[3.\] That
he will glorify him straightway. He looked upon the joy and glory set
before him, not only as great, but as near; and his sorrows and
sufferings short and soon over. Good services done to earthly princes
often remain long unrewarded; but Christ had his preferments presently.
It was but forty hours (or not so much) from his death to his
resurrection, and forty days thence to his ascension, so that it might
well be said that he was straightway glorified, [Psa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010.md). \[4.\] All this in
consideration of God's being glorified in and by his sufferings: Seeing
God is glorified in him, and receives honour from his sufferings, God
shall in like manner glorify him in himself, and give honour to him.
Note, first, In the exaltation of Christ there was a regard had to his
humiliation, and a reward given for it. Because he humbled himself,
therefore God highly exalted him. If the Father be so great a gainer in
his glory by the death of Christ, we may be sure that the Son shall be
no loser in his. See the covenant between them, [Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012.md). Secondly, Those who mind the
business of glorifying God no doubt shall have the happiness of being
glorified with him.

2\. Here is something that Christ instructs them in, concerning his
sufferings, which was awakening, for as yet they were slow of heart to
understand it ([Joh 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#033).md): Little
children, yet a little while I am with you, etc. Two things Christ here
suggests, to quicken his disciples to improve their present
opportunities; two serious words: -

(1.) That his stay in this world, to be with them here, they would find
to be very short. Little children. This compellation does not bespeak so
much their weakness as his tenderness and compassion; he speaks to them
with the affection of a father, now that he is about to leaven them, and
to leave blessings with them. Know this, then, that yet a little while I
am with you. Whether we understand this as referring to his death or his
ascension it comes much to one; he had but a little time to spend with
them, and therefore, \[1.\] Let them improve the advantage they now had.
If they had any good question to ask, if they would have any advice,
instruction, or comfort, let them speak quickly; for yet a little while
I am with you. We must make the best of the helps we have for our souls
while we have them, because we shall not have them long; they will be
taken from us, or we from them. \[2.\] Let them not doat upon his bodily
presence, as if their happiness and comfort were bound up in that; no,
they must think of living without it; not be always little children, but
go alone, without their nurses. Ways and means are appointed but for a
little while, and are not to be rested in, but pressed through to our
rest, to which they have a reference.

(2.) That their following him to the other world, to be with him there,
they would find to be very difficult. What he had said to the Jews ([Joh
7:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#034).md) he saith to his disciples; for
they have need to be quickened by the same considerations that are
propounded for the convincing and awakening of sinners. Christ tells
them here, \[1.\] That when he was gone they would feel the want of him;
You shall seek me, that is "you shall wish you had me again with you."
We are often taught the worth of mercies by the want of them. Though the
presence of the Comforter yielded them real and effectual relief in
straits and difficulties, yet it was not such a sensible satisfaction as
his bodily presence would have been to those who had been used to it.
But observe, Christ said to the Jews, You shall seek me and not find me;
but to the disciples he only saith, You shall seek me, intimating that
though they should not find his bodily presence any more than the Jews,
yet they should find that which was tantamount, and should not seek in
vain. When they sought his body in the sepulchre, though they did not
find it, yet they sought to good purpose. \[2.\] That whither he went
they could not come, which suggests to them high thoughts of him, who
was going to an invisible inaccessible world, to dwell in that light
which none can approach unto; and also low thoughts of themselves, and
serious thoughts of their future state. Christ tells them that they
could not follow him (as Joshua told the people that they could not
serve the Lord) only to quicken them to so much the more diligence and
care. They could not follow him to his cross, for they had not courage
and resolution; it appeared that they could not when they all forsook
him and fled. Nor could they follow him to his crown, for they had not a
sufficiency of their own, nor were their work and warfare yet finished.

II\. He discourses with them concerning the great duty of brotherly love
([Joh 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034.md), [Joh
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035).md): You shall love one another.
Judas was now gone out, and had proved himself a false brother; but they
must not therefore harbour such jealousies and suspicions one of another
as would be the bane of love: though there was one Judas among them, yet
they were not all Judases. Now that the enmity of the Jews against
Christ and his followers was swelling to the height, and they must
expect such treatment as their Master had, it concerned them by
brotherly love to strengthen one another's hands. Three arguments for
mutual love are here urged: -

1\. The command of their Master ([Joh
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034).md): A new commandment I give unto
you. He not only commends it as amiable and pleasant, not only counsels
it as excellent and profitable, but commands it, and makes it one of the
fundamental laws of his kingdom; it goes a-breast with the command of
believing in Christ, [Jo1 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#023.md); [Pe1
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#022.md). It is the command of our ruler,
who has a right to give law to us; it is the command of our Redeemer,
who gives us this law in order to the curing of our spiritual diseases
and the preparing of us for our eternal bliss. It is a new commandment;
that is, (1.) It is a renewed commandment; it was a commandment from the
beginning ([Jo1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#007).md), as old as the
law of nature, it was the second great commandment of the law of Moses;
yet, because it is also one of the great commandments of the New
Testament, of Christ the new Lawgiver, it is called a new commandment;
it is like an old book in a new edition corrected and enlarged. This
commandment has been so corrupted by the traditions of the Jewish church
that when Christ revived it, and set it in a true light, it might well
be called a new commandment. Laws of revenge and retaliation were so
much in vogue, and self-love had so much the ascendant, that the law of
brotherly love was forgotten as obsolete and out of date; so that as it
came from Christ new, it was new to the people. (2.) It is an excellent
command, as a new song is an excellent song, that has an uncommon
gratefulness in it. (3.) It is an everlasting command; so strangely new
as to be always so; as the new covenant, which shall never decay ([Heb
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013).md); it shall be new to eternity,
when faith and hope are antiquated. (4.) As Christ gives it, it is new.
Before it was, Thou shalt love thy neighbour; now it is, You shall love
one another; it is pressed in a more winning way when it is thus pressed
as mutual duty owing to one another.

2\. The example of their Saviour is another argument for brotherly love:
As I have loved you. It is this that makes it a new commandment - that
this rule and reason of love (as I have loved you) is perfectly new, and
such as had been hidden from ages and generations. Understand this, (1.)
Of all the instances of Christ's love to his disciples, which they had
already experienced during the time he went in and out among them. He
spoke kindly to them, concerned himself heartily for them, and for their
welfare, instructed, counselled, and comforted them, prayed with them
and for them, vindicated them when they were accused, took their part
when they were run down, and publicly owned them to be dearer to him
that his mother, or sister, or brother. He reproved them for what was
amiss, and yet compassionately bore with their failings, excused them,
made the best of them, and passed by many an oversight. Thus he had
loved them, and just now washed their feet; and thus they must love one
another, and love to the end. Or, (2.) It may be understood of the
special instance of love to all his disciples which he was now about to
give, in laying down his life for them. Greater love hath no man than
this, [Joh 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013.md). Has he thus loved us
all? Justly may he expect that we should be loving to one another. Not
that we are capable of doing any thing of the same nature for each other
([Psa 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#007).md), but we must love one
another in some respects after the same manner; we must set this before
us as our copy, and take directions from it. Our love to one another
must be free and ready, laborious and expensive, constant and
persevering; it must be love to the souls one of another. We must also
love one another from this motive, and upon this consideration - because
Christ has loved us. See [Rom 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001.md),
[Rom 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003.md); [Eph
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002.md), [Eph
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025.md); [Phi
2:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#001.md).

3\. The reputation of their profession ([Joh
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035).md): By this shall all men know
that you are my disciples, if you have love one to another. Observe, We
must have love, not only show love, but have it in the root and habit of
it, and have it when there is not any present occasion to show it; have
it ready. "Hereby it will appear that you are indeed my followers by
following me in this." Note, Brotherly love is the badge of Christ's
disciples. By this he knows them, by this they may know themselves ([Jo1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#014).md), and by this others may know
them. This is the livery of his family, the distinguishing character of
his disciples; this he would have them noted for, as that wherein they
excelled all others - their loving one another. This was what their
Master was famous for; all that ever heard of him have heard of his
love, his great love; and therefore, if you see any people more
affectionate one to another than what is common, say, "Certainly these
are the followers of Christ, they have been with Jesus." Now by this it
appears, (1.) That the heart of Christ was very much upon it, that his
disciples should love one another. In this they must be singular;
whereas the way of the world is to be every one for himself, they should
be hearty for one another. He does not say, By this shall men know that
you are my disciples - if you work miracles, for a worker of miracles is
but a cypher without charity ([Co1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001.md), [Co1
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002).md); but if you love one another
from a principle of self-denial and gratitude to Christ. This Christ
would have to be the proprium of his religion, the principal note of the
true church. (2.) That it is the true honour of Christ's disciples to
excel in brotherly love. Nothing will be more effectual than this to
recommend them to the esteem and respect of others. See what a powerful
attractive it was, [Act 2:46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046.md), [Act
2:47](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#047.md). Tertullian speaks of it as the
glory of the primitive church that the Christians were known by their
affection to one another. Their adversaries took notice of it, and said,
See how these Christians love one another, Apol. cap. 39. (3.) That, if
the followers of Christ do not love one another, they not only cast an
unjust reproach upon their profession, but give just cause to suspect
their own sincerity. O Jesus! are these thy Christians, these
passionate, malicious, spiteful, ill-natured people? Is this thy son's
coat? When our brethren stand in need of help from us, and we have an
opportunity of being serviceable to them, when they differ in opinion
and practice from us, or are any ways rivals with or provoking to us,
and so we have an occasion to condescend and forgive, in such cases as
this it will be known whether we have this badge of Christ's disciples.

[John 13:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 13:36</span></span>

In these verses we have,

I. Peter's curiosity, and the check given to that.

1\. Peter's question was bold and blunt ([Joh
13:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036).md): Lord, whither goest thou?
referring to what Christ had said ([Joh
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#033).md), Whither I go, you cannot come.
The practical instructions Christ had given them concerning brotherly
love he overlooks, and asks no questions upon them, but fastens upon
that concerning which Christ purposely kept them in the dark. Note, It
is a common fault among us to be more inquisitive concerning things
secret, which belong to God only, than concerning things revealed, which
belong to us and our children, more desirous to have our curiosity
gratified than our consciences directed, to know what is done in heaven
than what we may do to get thither. It is easy to observe it in the
converse of Christians, how soon a discourse of that which is plain and
edifying is dropped, and no more said to it, the subject is exhausted;
which in a matter of doubtful disputation runs into an endless strife of
words.

2\. Christ's answer was instructive. He did not gratify him with any
particular account of the world he was going to, nor ever foretold his
glories and joys so distinctly as he did his sufferings, but said what
he had said before ([Joh 13:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036).md): Let
this suffice, thou canst not follow me now, but shalt follow me
hereafter, (1.) We may understand it of his following him to the cross:
"Thou hast not yet strength enough of faith and resolution to drink of
my cup;" and it appeared so by his cowardice when Christ was suffering.
For this reason, when Christ was seized, he provided for the safety of
his disciples. Let these go their way, because they could not follow him
now. Christ considers the frame of his disciples, and will not cut out
for them that work and hardship which they are not as yet fit for; the
day shall be as the strength is. Peter, though designed for martyrdom,
cannot follow Christ now, not being come to his full growth, but he
shall follow him hereafter; he shall be crucified at last, like his
Master. Let him not think that because he escapes suffering now he shall
never suffer. From our missing the cross once, we must not infer that we
shall never meet it; we may be reserved for greater trials than we have
yet known. (2.) We may understand it of his following him to the crown.
Christ was now going to his glory, and Peter was very desirous to go
with him: "No," saith Christ, "thou canst not follow me now, thou art
not yet ripe for heaven, nor hast thou finished thy work on earth. The
forerunner must first enter to prepare a place for thee, but thou shalt
follow me afterwards, after thou hast fought the good fight, and at the
time appointed." Note, Believers must not expect to be glorified as soon
as they are effectually called, for there is a wilderness between the
Red Sea and Canaan.

II\. Peter's confidence, and the check given to that.

1\. Peter makes a daring protestation of his constancy. He is not
content to be left behind, but asks, "Lord why cannot I follow thee now?
Dost thou question my sincerity and resolution? I promise thee, if there
be occasion, I will lay down my life for thy sake." Some think Peter had
a conceit, as the Jews had in a like case ([Joh
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#035).md), that Christ was designing a
journey or voyage into some remote country, and that he declared his
resolution to go along with him wherever he went; but, having heard his
Master so often speak of his own sufferings, surely he could not
understand him any otherwise than of his going away by death; and he
resolves as Thomas did that he will go and die with him; and better die
with him than live without him. See here, (1.) What an affectionate love
Peter had to our Lord Jesus: "I will lay down my life for thy sake, and
I can do no more." I believe Peter spoke as he thought, and though he
was inconsiderate he was not insincere, in his resolution. Note, Christ
should be dearer to us than our own lives, which therefore, when we are
called to it, we should be willing to lay down for his sake, [Act
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#024). (2..md) How ill he took it to have
it questioned, intimated in that expostulation, "Lord, why cannot I
follow thee now? Dost thou suspect my fidelity to thee?" [Sa1
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#008.md). Note, It is with regret that
true love hears its own sincerity arraigned, as [Joh
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#017.md). Christ had indeed said that one
of them was a devil, but he was discovered, and gone out, and therefore
Peter thinks he may speak with the more assurance of his own sincerity;
"Lord, I am resolved I will never leave thee, and therefore why cannot I
follow thee?" We are apt to think that we can do any thing, and take it
amiss to be told that this and the other we cannot do, whereas without
Christ we can do nothing.

2\. Christ gives him a surprising prediction of his inconstancy, [Joh
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#038.md). Jesus Christ knows us better
than we know ourselves, and has many ways of discovering those to
themselves whom he loves, and will hide pride from. (1.) He upbraids
Peter with his confidence: Wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake? Me
thinks, he seems to have said this with a smile: "Peter, thy promises
are too large, too lavish to be relied on; thou dost not consider with
what reluctancy and struggle a life is laid down, and what a hard task
it is to die; not so soon done as said." Christ hereby puts Peter upon
second thoughts, not that he might retract his resolution, or recede
from it, but that he might insert into it that necessary proviso, "Lord,
thy grace enabling me, I will lay down my life for thy sake." "Wilt thou
undertake to die for me? What! thou that trembledst to walk upon the
water to me? What! thou that, when sufferings were spoken of, criedst
out, Be it far from thee, Lord? It was an easy thing to leave thy boats
and nets to follow me, but not so easy to lay down thy life." His Master
himself struggled when it came to his, and the disciple is not greater
than his Lord. Note, It is good for us to shame ourselves out of our
presumptuous confidence in ourselves. Shall a bruised reed set up for a
pillar, or a sickly child undertake to be a champion? What a fool am I
to talk so big. (2.) He plainly foretels his cowardice in the critical
hour. To stop the mouth of his boasting, lest Peter should say it again,
Yea Master, that I will, Christ solemnly asserts it with, Verily,
verily, I say unto thee, the cock shall not crow till thou hast denied
me thrice. He does not say as afterwards, This night, for it seems to
have been two nights before the passover; but, "Shortly thou wilt have
denied me thrice within the space of one night; nay, within so short a
space as between the first and last crowing of the cock: The cock shall
not crow, shall not have crowed his crowing out, till thou has again and
again denied me, and that for fear of suffering." The crowing of the
cock is mentioned, \[1.\] To intimate that the trial in which he would
miscarry thus should be in the night, which was an improbable
circumstance, but Christ's foretelling it was an instance of his
infallible foresight. \[2.\] Because the crowing of the cock was to be
the occasion of his repentance, which of itself would not have been if
Christ had not put this into the prediction. Christ not only foresaw
that Judas would betray him though he only in heart designed it, but he
foresaw that Peter would deny him though he did not design it, but the
contrary. He knows not only the wickedness of sinners, but the weakness
of saints. Christ told Peter, First, That he would deny him, would
renounce and abjure him: "Thou wilt not only not follow me still, but
wilt be ashamed to own that ever thou didst follow me." Secondly, That
he would do this not once only by a hasty slip of the tongue, but after
he had paused would repeat it a second and third time; and it proved too
true. We commonly give it as a reason why the prophecies of scripture
are expressed darkly and figuratively, because, if they did plainly
describe the event, the accomplishment would thereby either be defeated
or necessitated by a fatality inconsistent with human liberty; and yet
this plain and express prophecy of Peter's denying Christ did neither,
nor did in the least make Christ accessary to Peter's sin. But we may
well imagine what a mortification it was to Peter's confidence of his
own courage to be told this, and to be told it in such a manner that he
durst not contradict it, else he would have said as Hazael, What! is thy
servant a dog? This could not but fill him with confusion. Note, The
most secure are commonly the least safe; and those most shamefully
betray their own weakness that most confidently presume upon their own
strength, [Co1 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 14](joh014.md)

</div>
