<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jonah Index](jon.md)  
  [Previous](oba001)  [Next](jon001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001.md)

[Jonah](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jon 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Book of Jonah

This book of Jonah, though it be placed here in the midst of the
prophetical books of scripture, is yet rather a history than a prophecy;
one line of prediction there is in it, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall
be overthrown; the rest of the book is a narrative of the preface to and
the consequences of that prediction. In the midst of the obscure
prophecies before and after this book, wherein are many things dark and
hard to be understood, which are puzzling to the learned, and are strong
meat for strong men, comes in this plain and pleasant story, which is
entertaining to the weakest, and milk for babes. Probably Jonah was
himself the penman of this book, and he, as Moses and other inspired
penmen, records his own faults, which is an evidence that in these
writings they designed God's glory and not their own. We read of this
same Jonah [Kg2 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025.md), where we find
that he was of Gath-hepher in Galilee, a city that belonged to the tribe
of Zebulun, in a remote corner of the land of Israel; for the Spirit,
which like the wind, blows where it listeth, will as easily find out
Jonah in Galilee as Isaiah at Jerusalem. We find also that he was a
messenger of mercy to Israel in the reign of Jeroboam the second; for
the success of his arms, in the restoring of the coast of Israel, is
said to be according to the word of the Lord which he spoke by the hand
of his servant Jonah the prophet. Those prophecies were not committed to
writing, but this against Nineveh was, chiefly for the sake of the story
that depends upon it, and that is recorded chiefly for the sake of
Christ, of whom Jonah was a type; it contains also very remarkable
instances of human infirmity in Jonah, and of God's mercy both in
pardoning repenting sinners, witness Nineveh, and in bearing with
repining saints, witness Jonah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Chapter 1](jon001.md)

</div>
