<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos023)  [Next](jdg000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 24:0</span></span>

This chapter concludes the life and reign of Joshua, in which we have,
I. The great care and pains he took to confirm the people of Israel in
the true faith and worship of God, that they might, after his death,
persevere therein. In order to this he called another general assembly
of the heads of the congregation of Israel ([Jos
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001)) and dealt with them. 1. By way
of narrative, recounting the great things God had done for them and
their fathers ([Jos 24:2-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002)). 2. By
way of charge to them, in consideration thereof, to serve God ([Jos
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#014)). 3. By way of treaty with them,
wherein he aims to bring them, (1.) To make religion their deliberate
choice; and they did so, with reasons for their choice ([Jos
24:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015)). (2.) To make it their
determinate choice, and to resolve to adhere to it ([Jos
24:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#019)). 4. By way of covenant upon
that treaty ([Jos 24:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#025)). II. The
conclusion of this history, with, 1. The death and burial of Joshua
([Jos 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029), [Jos
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#030)) and Eleazar ([Jos
24:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#033)), and the mention of the burial
of Joseph's bones upon that occasion ([Jos
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032)). 2. A general account of the
state of Israel at that time ([Jos
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#031)).

[Joshua 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 24:1</span></span>

Joshua thought he had taken his last farewell of Israel in the solemn
charge he gave them in the foregoing chapter, when he said, I go the way
of all the earth; but God graciously continuing his life longer than
expected, and renewing his strength, he was desirous to improve it for
the good of Israel. He did not say, "I have taken my leave of them once,
and let that serve;" but, having yet a longer space given him, he
summons them together again, that he might try what more he could do to
engage them for God. Note, We must never think our work for God done
till our life is done; and, if he lengthen out our days beyond what we
thought, we must conclude it is because he has some further service for
us to do.

The assembly is the same with that in the foregoing chapter, the elders,
heads, judges, and officers of Israel, [Jos
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001). But it is here made somewhat
more solemn than it was there.

I. The place appointed for their meeting is Shechem, not only because
that lay nearer to Joshua than Shiloh, and therefore more convenient now
that he was infirm and unfit for travelling, but because it was the
place where Abraham, the first trustee of God's covenant with this
people, settled at his coming to Canaan, and where God appeared to him
([Gen 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006), [Gen
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007)), and near which stood mounts
Gerizim and Ebal, where the people had renewed their covenant with God
at their first coming into Canaan, [Jos
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#030). Of the promises God had made to
their fathers, and of the promises they themselves had made to God, this
place might serve to put them in mind.

II\. They presented themselves not only before Joshua, but before God,
in this assembly, that is, they came together in a solemn religious
manner, as into the special presence of God, and with an eye to his
speaking to them by Joshua; and it is probable the service began with
prayer. It is the conjecture of interpreters that upon this great
occasion Joshua ordered the ark of God to be brought by the priests to
Shechem, which, they say, was about ten miles from Shiloh, and to be set
down in the place of their meeting, which is therefore called ([Jos
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#026)) the sanctuary of the Lord, the
presence of the ark making it so at that time; and this was done to
grace the solemnity, and to strike an awe upon the people that attended.
We have not now any such sensible tokens of the divine presence, but are
to believe that where two or three are gathered together in Christ's
name he is as really in the midst of them as God was where the ark was,
and they are indeed presenting themselves before him.

III\. Joshua spoke to them in God's name, and as from him, in the
language of a prophet ([Jos 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002)):
"Thus saith the Lord, Jehovah, the great God, and the God of Israel,
your God in covenant, whom therefore you are bound to hear and give heed
to." Note, The word of God is to be received by us as his, whoever is
the messenger that brings it, whose greatness cannot add to it, nor his
meanness diminish from it. His sermon consists of doctrine and
application.

1\. The doctrinal part is a history of the great things God had done for
his people, and for their fathers before them. God by Joshua recounts
the marvels of old: "I did so and so." They must know and consider, not
only that such and such things were done, but that God did them. It is a
series of wonders that is here recorded, and perhaps many more were
mentioned by Joshua, which for brevity's sake are here omitted. See what
God had wrought. (1.) He brought Abraham out of Ur of the Chaldees, [Jos
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002), [Jos
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#003). He and his ancestors had served
other gods there, for it was the country in which, though celebrated for
learning, idolatry, as some think, had its rise; there the world by
wisdom knew not God. Abraham, who afterwards was the friend of God and
the great favourite of heaven, was bred up in idolatry, and lived long
in it, till God by his grace snatched him as a brand out of that
burning. Let them remember that rock out of which they were hewn, and
not relapse into that sin from which their fathers by a miracle of free
grace were delivered. "I took him," says God, "else he had never come
out of that sinful state." Hence Abraham's justification is made by the
apostle an instance of God's justifying the ungodly, [Rom
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005). (2.) He brought him to Canaan,
and built up his family, led him through the land to Shechem, where they
now were, multiplied his seed by Ishmael, who begat twelve princes, but
at last gave him Isaac the promised son, and in him multiplied his seed.
When Isaac had two sons, Jacob and Esau, God provided an inheritance for
Esau elsewhere in Mount Seir, that the land of Canaan might be reserved
entire for the seed of Jacob, and the posterity of Esau might not
pretend to a share in it. (3.) He delivered the seed of Jacob out of
Egypt with a high hand ([Jos 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#005),
[Jos 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#006)), and rescued them out of
the hands of Pharaoh and his host at the Red Sea, [Jos
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#006), [Jos
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#007). The same waters were the
Israelites' guard and the Egyptians' grave, and this in answer to
prayer; for, though we find in the story that they in that distress
murmured against God ([Exo 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#011), [Exo
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#012)), notice is here taken of their
crying to God; he graciously accepted those that prayed to him, and
overlooked the folly of those that quarrelled with him. (4.) He
protected them in the wilderness, where they are here said, not to
wander, but to dwell for a long season, [Jos
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#007). So wisely were all their motions
directed, and so safely were they kept, that even there they had as
certain a dwelling-place as if they had been in a walled city. (5.) He
gave them the land of the Amorites, on the other side Jordan ([Jos
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#008)), and there defeated the plot of
Balak and Balaam against them, so that Balaam could not curse them as he
desired, and therefore Balak durst not fight them as he designed, and
as, because he designed it, he is here said to have done it. The turning
of Balaam's tongue to bless Israel, when he intended to curse them, is
often mentioned as an instance of the divine power put forth in Israel's
favour as remarkable as any, because in it God proved (and does still,
more than we are aware of) his dominion over the powers of darkness, and
over the spirits of men. (6.) He brought them safely and triumphantly
into Canaan, delivered the Canaanites into their hand ([Jos
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#011)), sent hornets before them, when
they were actually engaged in battle with the enemy, which with their
stings tormented them and with their noise terrified them, so that they
became a very easy prey to Israel. These dreadful swarms first appeared
in their war with Sihon and Og, the two kings of the Amorites, and
afterwards in their other battles, [Jos
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#012). God had promised to do this for
them, [Exo 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#027), [Exo
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#028). And here Joshua takes notice of
the fulfilling of that promise. See [Exo
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#027), [Exo
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#028); [Deu
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#020). These hornets, it should seem,
annoyed the enemy more than the artillery of Israel, and therefore he
adds, not with thy sword nor bow. It was purely the Lord's doing.
Lastly, They were now in the peaceable possession of a good land, and
lived comfortably upon the fruit of other people's labours, [Jos
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#013).

2\. The application of this history of God's mercies to them is by way
of exhortation to fear and serve God, in gratitude for his favour, and
that it might be continued to them, [Jos
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#014). Now therefore, in consideration
of all this, (1.) "Fear the Lord, the Lord and his goodness, [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005). Reverence a God of such infinite
power, fear to offend him and to forfeit his goodness, keep up an awe of
his majesty, a deference to his authority, a dread of his displeasure,
and a continual regard to his all-seeing eye upon you." (2.) "Let your
practice be consonant to this principle, and serve him both by the
outward acts of religious worship and every instance of obedience in
your whole conversation, and this in sincerity and truth, with a single
eye and an upright heart, and inward impressions answerable to outward
expressions." This is the truth in the inward part, which God requires,
[Psa 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006). For what good will it do us
to dissemble with a God that searches the heart? (3.) Put away the
strange gods, both Chaldean and Egyptian idols, for those they were most
in danger of revolting to. It should seem by this charge, which is
repeated ([Jos 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#023)), that there were
some among them that privately kept in their closets the images or
pictures of these dunghill-deities, which came to their hands from their
ancestors, as heir-looms of their families, though, it may be, they did
not worship them; these Joshua earnestly urges them to throw away:
"Deface them, destroy them, lest you be tempted to serve them." Jacob
pressed his household to do this, and at this very place; for, when they
gave him up the little images they had, he buried them under the oak
which was by Shechem, [Gen 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#002), [Gen
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#004). Perhaps the oak mentioned here
([Jos 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#026)) was the same oak, or
another in the same place, which might be well called the oak of
reformation, as there were idolatrous oaks.

[Joshua 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 24:15</span></span>

Never was any treaty carried on with better management, nor brought to a
better issue, than this of Joshua with the people, to engage them to
serve God. The manner of his dealing with them shows him to have been in
earnest, and that his heart was much upon it, to leave them under all
possible obligations to cleave to him, particularly the obligation of a
choice and of a covenant.

I. Would it be any obligation upon them if they made the service of God
their choice? - he here puts them to their choice, not as if it were
antecedently indifferent whether they served God or nor, or as if they
were at liberty to refuse his service, but because it would have a great
influence upon their perseverance in religion if they embraced it with
the reason of men and with the resolution of men. These two things he
here brings them to.

1\. He brings them to embrace their religion rationally and
intelligently, for it is a reasonable service. The will of man is apt to
glory in its native liberty, and, in a jealousy for the honour of this,
adheres with most pleasure to that which is its own choice and is not
imposed upon it; therefore it is God's will that this service should be,
not our chance, or a force upon us, but our choice. Accordingly,

(1.) Joshua fairly puts the matter to their choice, [Jos
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015). Here, \[1.\] He proposes the
candidates that stand for the election. The Lord, Jehovah, on one side,
and on the other side either the gods of their ancestors, which would
pretend to recommend themselves to those that were fond of antiquity,
and that which was received by tradition from their fathers, or the gods
of their neighbours, the Amorites, in whose land they dwelt, which would
insinuate themselves into the affections of those that were complaisant
and fond of good fellowship. \[2.\] He supposes there were those to
whom, upon some account or other, it would seem evil to serve the Lord.
There are prejudices and objections which some people raise against
religion, which, with those that are inclined to the world and the
flesh, have great force. It seems evil to them, hard and unreasonable,
to be obliged to deny themselves, mortify the flesh, take up their
cross, etc. But, being in a state of probation, it is fit there should
be some difficulties in the way, else there were no trial. \[3.\] He
refers it to themselves: "Choose you whom you will serve, choose this
day, now that the matter is laid thus plainly before you, speedily bring
it to a head, and do not stand hesitating." Elijah, long after this,
referred the decision of the controversy between Jehovah and Baal to the
consciences of those with whom he was treating, [Kg1
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021). Joshua's putting the matter
here to this issue plainly intimates two things: - First, That it is the
will of God we should every one of us make religion our serious and
deliberate choice. Let us state the matter impartially to ourselves,
weigh things in an even balance, and then determine for that which we
find to be really true and good. Let us resolve upon a life of serious
godliness, not merely because we know no other way, but because really,
upon search, we find no better. Secondly, That religion has so much
self-evident reason and righteousness on its side that it may safely be
referred to every man that allows himself a free thought either to
choose or refuse it; for the merits of the cause are so plain that no
considerate man can do otherwise but choose it. The case is so clear
that it determines itself. Perhaps Joshua designed, by putting them to
their choice, thus to try if there were any among them who, upon so fair
an occasion given, would show a coolness and indifference towards the
service of God, whether they would desire time to consider and consult
their friends before they gave in an answer, and if any such should
appear he might set a mark upon them, and warn the rest to avoid them.
\[4.\] He directs their choice in this matter by an open declaration of
his own resolutions: "But as for me and my house, whatever you do, we
will serve the Lord, and I hope you will all be of the same mind." Here
he resolves, First, For himself: As for me, I will serve the Lord. Note,
The service of God is nothing below the greatest of men; it is so far
from being a diminution and disparagement to princes and those of the
first rank to be religious that it is their greatest honour, and adds
the brightest crown of glory to them. Observe how positive he is: "I
will serve God." It is no abridgment of our liberty to bind ourselves
with a bond to God. Secondly, For his house, that is, his family, his
children and servants, such as were immediately under his eye and care,
his inspection and influence. Joshua was a ruler, a judge in Israel, yet
he did not make his necessary application to public affairs an excuse
for the neglect of family religion. Those that have the charge of many
families, as magistrates and ministers, must take special care of their
own ([Ti1 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004), [Ti1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#005)): I and my house will serve God.
1. "Not my house, without me." He would not engage them to that work
which he would not set his own hand to. As some who would have their
children and servants good, but will not be so themselves; that is, they
would have them go to heaven, but intend to go to hell themselves. 2.
"Not I, without my house." He supposes he might be forsaken by his
people, but in his house, where his authority was greater and more
immediate, there he would over-rule. Note, When we cannot bring as many
as we would to the service of God we must bring as many as we can, and
extend our endeavours to the utmost sphere of our activity; if we cannot
reform the land, let us put away iniquity far from our own tabernacle.
3. "First I, and then my house." Note, Those that lead and rule in other
things should be first in the service of God, and go before in the best
things. Thirdly, He resolves to do this whatever others did. Though all
the families of Israel should revolt from God, and serve idols, yet
Joshua and his family will stedfastly adhere to the God of Israel. Note,
Those that resolve to serve God must not mind being singular in it, nor
be drawn by the crowd to forsake his service. Those that are bound for
heaven must be willing to swim against the stream, and must not do as
the most do, but as the best do.

(2.) The matter being thus put to their choice, they immediately
determine it by a free, rational, and intelligent declaration, for the
God of Israel, against all competitors whatsoever, [Jos
24:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#016). Here, \[1.\] They concur
with Joshua in his resolution, being influenced by the example of so
great a man, who had been so great a blessing to them ([Jos
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#018)): We also will serve the Lord.
See how much good great men might do, if they were but zealous in
religion, by their influence on their inferiors. \[2.\] They startle at
the thought of apostatizing from God ([Jos
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#016)): God forbid; the word intimates
the greatest dread and detestation imaginable. "Far be it, far be it
from us, that we or ours should ever forsake the Lord to serve other
gods. We must be perfectly lost to all sense of justice, gratitude, and
honour, ere we can harbour the least thought of such a thing." Thus must
our hearts rise against all temptations to desert the service of God.
Get thee behind me, Satan. \[3.\] They give very substantial reasons for
their choice, to show that they did not make it purely in compliance to
Joshua, but from a full conviction of the reasonableness and equity of
it. They make this choice for, and in consideration, First, Of the many
great and very kind things God had done for them, bringing them out of
Egypt through the wilderness into Canaan, [Jos
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#017), [Jos
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#018). Thus they repeat to themselves
Joshua's sermon, and then express their sincere compliance with the
intentions of it. Secondly, Of the relation they stood in to God, and
his covenant with them: "We will serve the Lord ([Jos
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#018)), for he is our God, who has
graciously engaged himself by promise to us, and to whom we have by
solemn vow engaged ourselves."

2\. He brings them to embrace their religion resolutely, and to express
a full purpose of heart to cleave to the Lord. Now that he has them in a
good mind he follows his blow, and drives the nail to the head, that it
might, if possible, be a nail in a sure place. Fast bind, fast find.

(1.) In order to this he sets before them the difficulties of religion,
and that in it which might be thought discouraging ([Jos
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#019), [Jos
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#020)): You cannot serve the Lord, for
he is a holy God, or, as it is in the Hebrew, he is the holy Gods,
intimating the mystery of the Trinity, three in one; holy, holy, holy,
holy Father, holy Son, holy Spirit. He will not forgive. And, if you
forsake him, he will do you hurt. Certainly Joshua does not intend
hereby to deter them from the service of God as impracticable and
dangerous. But, \[1.\] He perhaps intends to represent here the
suggestions of seducers, who tempted Israel from their God, and from the
service of him; with such insinuations as these, that he was a hard
master, his work impossible to be done, and he not to be pleased, and,
if displeased, implacable and revengeful, - that he would confine their
respects to himself only, and would not suffer them to show the least
kindness for any other, - and that herein he was very unlike the gods of
the nations, which were easy, and neither holy nor jealous. It is
probable that this was then commonly objected against the Jewish
religion, as it has all along been the artifice of Satan every since he
tempted our first parents thus to misrepresent God and his laws, as
harsh and severe; and Joshua by his tone and manner of speaking might
make them perceive he intended it as an objection, and would put it to
them how they would keep their ground against the force of it. Or,
\[2.\] He thus expresses his godly jealousy over them, and his fear
concerning them, that, notwithstanding the profession they now made of
zeal for God and his service, they would afterwards draw back, and if
they did they would find him just and jealous to avenge it. Or, \[3.\]
He resolves to let them know the worst of it, and what strict terms they
must expect to stand upon with God, that they might sit down and count
the cost. "You cannot serve the Lord, except you put away all other gods
for he is holy and jealous, and will by no means admit a rival, and
therefore you must be very watchful and careful, for it is at your peril
if you desert his service; better you had never known it." Thus, though
our Master has assured us that his yoke is easy, yet lest, upon the
presumption of this, we should grow remiss and careless, he has also
told us that the gate is strait, and the way narrow, that leads to life,
that we may therefore strive to enter, and not seek only. "You cannot
serve God and Mammon; therefore, if you resolve to serve God, you must
renounce all competitors with him. You cannot serve God in your own
strength, nor will he forgive your transgressions for any righteousness
of your own; but all the seed of Israel must be justified and must glory
in the Lord alone as their righteousness and strength," [Isa
45:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#024), [Isa
45:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#025). They must therefore come off
from all confidence in their own sufficiency, else their purposes would
be to no purpose. Or, \[4.\] Joshua thus urges on them the seeming
discouragements which lay in their way, that he might sharpen their
resolutions, and draw from them a promise yet more express and solemn
that they would continue faithful to God and their religion. He draws it
form them that they might catch at it the more earnestly and hold it the
faster.

(2.) Notwithstanding this statement of the difficulties of religion,
they declare a firm and fixed resolution to continue and persevere
therein ([Jos 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#021)): "Nay, but we
will serve the Lord. We will think never the worse of him for his being
a holy and jealous God, nor for his confining his servants to worship
himself only. Justly will he consume those that forsake him, but we
never will forsake him; not only we have a good mind to serve him, and
we hope we shall, but we are at a point, we cannot bear to hear any
entreaties to leave him or to turn from following after him ([Rut
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#016)); in the strength of divine grace
we are resolved that we will serve the Lord." This resolution they
repeat with an explication ([Jos
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#024)): "The Lord our God will we
serve, not only be called his servants and wear his livery, but our
religion shall rule us in every thing, and his voice will we obey." And
in vain do we call him Master and Lord, if we do not the things which he
saith, [Luk 6:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#046). This last promise
they make in answer to the charge Joshua gave them ([Jos
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#023)), that, in order to their
perseverance, they should, \[1.\] Put away the images and relics of the
strange gods, and not keep any of the tokens of those other lovers in
their custody, if they resolved their Maker should be their husband;
they promise, in this, to obey his voice. \[2.\] That they should
incline their hearts to the God of Israel, use their authority over
their own hearts to engage them for God, not only to set their
affections upon him, but to settle them so. These terms they agree to,
and thus, as Joshua explains the bargain, they strike it: The Lord our
God will we serve.

II\. The service of God being thus made their deliberate choice, Joshua
binds them to it by a solemn covenant, [Jos
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#025). Moses had twice publicly
ratified this covenant between God and Israel, at Mount Sinai (Ex. 24)
and in the plains of Moab, [Deu 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001).
Joshua had likewise done it once ([Jos
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#031), etc.) and now the second time.
It is here called a statute and an ordinance, because of the strength
and perpetuity of its obligation, and because even this covenant bound
them to no more than what they were antecedently bound to by the divine
command. Now, to give it the formalities of a covenant, 1. He calls
witnesses, no other than themselves ([Jos
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#022)): You are witnesses that you
have chosen the Lord. He promises himself that they would never forget
the solemnities of this day; but, if hereafter they should break this
covenant, he assures them that the professions and promises they had now
made would certainly rise up in judgment against them and condemn them;
and they agreed to it: "We are witnesses; let us be judged out of our
own mouths if ever we be false to our God." 2. He put it in writing, and
inserted it, as we find it here, in the sacred canon: He wrote it in the
book of the law ([Jos 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#026)), in that
original which was laid up in the side of the ark, and thence, probably,
it was transcribed into the several copies which the princes had for the
use of each tribe. There it was written, that their obligation to
religion by the divine precept, and that by their own promise, might
remain on record together. 3. He erected a memorandum of it, for the
benefit of those who perhaps were not conversant with writings, [Jos
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#026), [Jos
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#027). He set up a great stone under
an oak, as a monument of this covenant, and perhaps wrote an inscription
upon it (by which stones are made to speak) signifying the intention of
it. When he says, It hath heard what was past, he tacitly upbraids the
people with the hardness of their hearts, as if this stone had heard to
as good purpose as some of them; and, if they should forget what was no
done, this stone would so far preserve the remembrance of it as to
reproach them for their stupidity and carelessness, and be a witness
against them.

The matter being thus settled, Joshua dismissed this assembly of the
grandees of Israel ([Jos 24:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#028)), and
took his last leave of them, well satisfied in having done his part, by
which he had delivered his soul; if they perished, their blood would be
upon their own heads.

[Joshua 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jos 24:29</span></span>

This book, which began with triumphs, here ends with funerals, by which
all the glory of man is stained. We have here 1. The burial of Joseph,
[Jos 24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032). He died about 200 years
before in Egypt, but gave commandment concerning his bones, that they
should not rest in their grave until Israel had rest in the land of
promise; now therefore the children of Israel, who had brought this
coffin full of bones with them out of Egypt, carried it along with them
in all their marches through the wilderness (the two tribes of Ephraim
and Manasseh, it is probable, taking particular care of it), and kept it
in their camp till Canaan was perfectly reduced, now at last they
deposited it in that piece of ground which his father gave him near
Shechem, [Gen 48:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#022). Probably it was
upon this occasion that Joshua called for all Israel to meet him at
Shechem (v. 1), to attend Joseph's coffin to the grave there, so that
the sermon in this chapter served both for Joseph's funeral sermon and
his own farewell sermon; and if it was, as is supposed, in the last year
of his life, the occasion might very well remind him of his own death
being at hand, for he was not just at the same age that his illustrious
ancestor Joseph had arrived at when he died, 110 years old; compare [Jos
24:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029) with [Gen
50:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#026). 2. The death and burial of
Joshua, [Jos 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029), [Jos
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#030). We are not told how long he
lived after the coming of Israel into Canaan. Dr. Lightfoot thinks it
was about seventeen years; but the Jewish chronologers generally say it
was about twenty-seven or twenty-eight years. He is here called the
servant of the Lord, the same title that was given to Moses ([Jos
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)) when mention was made of his
death; for, though Joshua was in many respects inferior to Moses, yet in
this he was equal to him, that, according as his work was, he approved
himself a diligent and faithful servant of God. And he that traded with
his two talents had the same approbation that he had who traded with his
five. Well done, good and faithful servant. Joshua's burying-place is
here said to be on the north side of the hill Gaash, or the quaking
hill; the Jews say it was so called because it trembled at the burial of
Joshua, to upbraid the people of Israel with their stupidity in that
they did not lament the death of that great and good man as they ought
to have done. Thus at the death of Christ, our Joshua, the earth quaked.
The learned bishop Patrick observes that there is no mention of any days
of mourning being observed for Joshua, as there were for Moses and
Aaron, in which, he says, St. Hierom and others of the fathers think
there is a mystery, namely, that under the law, when life and
immortality were not brought to so clear a light as they are now, they
had reason to mourn and weep for the death of their friends; but now
that Jesus, our Joshua, has opened the kingdom of heaven, we may rather
rejoice. 3. The death and burial of Eleazar the chief priest, who, it is
probable, died about the same time that Joshua did, as Aaron in the same
year with Moses, [Jos 24:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#033). The Jews
say that Eleazar, a little before he died, called the elders together,
and gave them a charge as Joshua had done. He was buried in a hill that
pertained to Phinehas his son, which came to him, not by descent, for
then it would have pertained to his father first, nor had the priests
any cities in Mount Ephraim, but either it fell to him by marriage, as
the Jews conjecture, or it was freely bestowed upon him, to build a
country seat on, by some pious Israelite that was well-affected to the
priesthood, for it is here said to have been given him; and there he
buried his dear father. 4. A general idea given us of the state of
Israel at this time, [Jos 24:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#031). While
Joshua lived, religion was kept up among them under his care and
influence; but soon after he and his contemporaries died it went to
decay, so much oftentimes does one head hold up: how well is it for the
gospel church that Christ, our Joshua, is still with it, by his Spirit,
and will be always, even unto the end of the world!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Introduction](jdg000)

</div>
