<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos006)  [Next](jos008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 7:0</span></span>

More than once we have found the affairs of Israel, even when they were
in the happiest posture and gave the most hopeful prospects, perplexed
and embarrassed by sin, and a stop thereby put to the most promising
proceedings. The golden calf, the murmuring at Kadesh, and the iniquity
of Peor, had broken their measures and given them great disturbance; and
in this chapter we have such another instance of the interruption given
to the progress of their arms by sin. But it being only the sin of one
person or family, and soon expiated, the consequences were not so
mischievous as of those other sins; however it served to let them know
that they were still upon their good behaviour. We have here, I. The sin
of Achan in meddling with the accursed thing ([Jos
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)). II. The defeat of Israel before
Ai thereupon ([Jos 7:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#002)). III.
Joshua's humiliation and prayer on occasion of that sad disaster (v.
6-9). IV. The directions God gave him for the putting away of the guilt
which had provoked God thus to contend with them (v. 10-15). V. The
discovery, trial, conviction, condemnation, and execution, of the
criminal, by which the anger of God was turned away (v. 16-26). And by
this story it appears that, as the laws, so Canaan itself, "made nothing
perfect," the perfection both of holiness and peace to God's Israel is
to be expected in the heavenly Canaan only.

[Joshua 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 7:1</span></span>

The story of this chapter begins with a but. The Lord was with Joshua,
and his fame was noised through all that country, so the foregoing
chapter ends, and it left no room to doubt but that he would go on as he
had begun conquering and to conquer. He did right, and observed his
orders in every thing. But the children of Israel committed a trespass,
and so set God against them; and then even Joshua's name and fame, his
wisdom and courage, could do them no service. If we lose our God, we
lose our friends, who cannot help us unless God be for us. Now here is,

I. Achan sinning, [Jos 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001). Here is
only a general mention made of the sin; we shall afterwards have a more
particular account of it from his own mouth. The sin is here said to be
taking of the accursed thing, in disobedience to the command and in
defiance of the threatening, [Jos
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#018). In the sacking of Jericho orders
were given that they should neither spare any lives nor take any
treasure to themselves; we read not of the breach of the former
prohibition (there were none to whom they showed any mercy), but of the
latter: compassion was put off and yielded to the law, but covetousness
was indulged. The love of the world is that root of bitterness which of
all others is most hardly rooted up. Yet the history of Achan is a plain
intimation that he of all the thousands of Israel was the only
delinquent in this matter. Had there been more in like manner guilty, no
doubt we should have heard of it: and it is strange there were no more.
The temptation was strong. It was easy to suggest what a pity it was
that so many things of value should be burnt; to what purpose is this
waste? In plundering cities, every man reckons himself entitled to what
he can lay his hands on. It was easy to promise themselves secrecy and
impunity. Yet by the grace of God such impressions were made upon the
minds of the Israelites by the ordinances of God, circumcision and the
passover, which they had lately been partakers of, and by the
providences of God which had been concerning them, that they stood in
awe of the divine precept and judgment, and generously denied themselves
in obedience to their God. And yet, though it was a single person that
sinned, the children of Israel are said to commit the trespass, because
one of their body did it, and he was not as yet separated from them, nor
disowned by them. They did it, that is, by what Achan did guilt was
brought upon the whole society of which he was a member. This should be
a warning to us to take heed of sin ourselves, lest by it many be
defiled or disquieted ([Heb 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#015)),
and to take heed of having fellowship with sinners, and of being in
league with them, lest we share in their guilt. Many a careful tradesman
has been broken by a careless partner. And it concerns us to watch over
one another for the preventing of sin, because others' sins may redound
to our damage.

II\. The camp of Israel suffering for the same: The anger of the Lord
was kindled against Israel; he saw the offence, though they did not, and
takes a course to make them see it; for one way or other, sooner or
later, secret sins will be brought to light; and, if men enquire not
after them, God will, and with his enquiries will awaken theirs. man a
community is under guilt and wrath and is not aware of it till the fire
breaks out: here it broke out quickly. 1. Joshua sends a detachment to
seize upon the next city that was in their way, and that was Ai. Only
3000 men were sent, advice being brought him by his spies that the place
was inconsiderable, and needed no greater force for the reduction of it,
[Jos 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#002), [Jos
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#003). Now perhaps it was a culpable
assurance, or security rather that led them to send so small a party on
this expedition; it might also be an indulgence of the people in the
love of ease, for they will not have all the people to labour thither.
Perhaps the people were the less forward to go upon this expedition
because they were denied the plunder of Jericho; and these spies were
willing they should be gratified. Whereas when the town was to be taken,
though God by his own power would throw down the walls, yet they must
all labour thither and labour there too, in walking round it. It did not
bode well at all that God's Israel began to think much of their labour,
and contrived how to spare their pains. It is required that we work out
our salvation, though it is God that works in us. It has likewise often
proved of bad consequence to make too light of an enemy. They are but
few (say the spies), but, as few as they were, they were too many for
them. It will awaken our care and diligence in our Christian warfare to
consider that we wrestle with principalities and powers. 2. The party he
sent, in their first attack upon the town, were repulsed with some loss
([Jos 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#004), [Jos
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#005)): They fled before the men of Ai,
finding themselves unaccountably dispirited, and their enemies to sally
out upon them with more vigour and resolution than they expected. In
their retreat they had about thirty-six men cut off: no great loss
indeed out of such a number, but a dreadful surprise to those who had no
reason to expect any other in any attack than clear, cheap, and certain
victory. And now, as it proves, it is well there were but 3000 that fell
under this disgrace. Had the body of the army been there, they would
have been no more able to keep their ground, now they were under guilt
and wrath, than this small party, and to them the defeat would have been
much more grievous and dishonourable. However, it was bad enough as it
was, and served, (1.) To humble God's Israel, and to teach them always
to rejoice with trembling. Let not him that girdeth on the harness boast
as he that putteth if off. (2.) To harden the Canaanites, and to make
them the more secure notwithstanding the terrors they had been struck
with, that their ruin, when it came, might be the more dreadful. (3.) To
be an evidence of God's displeasure against Israel, and a call to them
to purge out the old leaven. And this was principally intended in their
defeat. 3. The retreat of this party in disorder put the whole camp of
Israel into a fright: The hearts of the people melted, not so much for
the loss as for the disappointment. Joshua had assured them that the
living God would without fail drive out the Canaanites from before them,
[Jos 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#010). How can this event be
reconciled to that promise? To every thinking man among them it appeared
an indication of God's displeasure, and an omen of something worse, and
therefore no marvel it put them into such a consternation; if God turn
to be their enemy and fight against them, what will become of them? True
Israelites tremble when God is angry.

[Joshua 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 7:6</span></span>

We have here an account of the deep concern Joshua was in upon this sad
occasion. He, as a public person, interested himself more than any other
in this public loss, and is therein an example to princes and great men,
and teaches them to lay much to heart the calamities that befal their
people: he is also a type of Christ, to whom the blood of his subjects
is precious, [Psa 72:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#014). Observe,

I. How he grieved: He rent his clothes ([Jos
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#006)), in token of great sorrow for
this public disaster, and especially a dread of God's displeasure, which
was certainly the cause of it. Had it been but the common chance of war
(as we are too apt to express it), it would not have become a general to
droop thus under it; but, when God was angry, it was his duty and honour
to feel thus. One of the bravest soldiers that ever was owned that his
flesh trembled for fear of God, [Psa
119:120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120). As one humbling himself under
the mighty had of God, he fell to the earth upon his face, not thinking
it any disparagement to him to lie thus low before the great God, to
whom he directed this token of reverence, by keeping his eye towards the
ark of the Lord. The elders of Israel, being interested in the cause and
influenced by his example, prostrated themselves with him, and, in token
of deep humiliation, put dust upon their heads, not only as mourners,
but as penitents; not doubting but it was for some sin or other that God
did thus contend with them (though they knew not what it was), they
humbled themselves before God, and thus deprecated the progress of his
wrath. This they continued until even-tide, to show that it was not the
result of a sudden feeling, but proceeded from a deep conviction of
their misery and danger if God were any way provoked to depart from
them. Joshua did not fall foul upon his spies for their misinformation
concerning the strength of the enemy, nor upon the soldiers for their
cowardice, though perhaps both were blameworthy, but his eye is up to
God; for is there any evil in the camp and he has not done it? His eye
is upon God as displeased, and that troubles him.

II\. How he prayed, or pleaded rather, humbly expostulating the case
with God, not sullen, as David when the Lord had made a breach upon
Uzzah, but much affected; his spirit seemed to be somewhat ruffled and
discomposed, yet not so as to be put out of frame for prayer; but, by
giving vent to his trouble in a humble address to God, he keeps his
temper and it ends well. 1. Now he wishes they had all taken up with the
lot of the two tribes on the other side Jordan, [Jos
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#007). He thinks it would have been
better to have staid there and been cut short than come hither to be cut
off. This savours too much of discontent and distrust of God, and cannot
be justified, though the surprise and disappointment to one deeply
concerned for the public interest may in part excuse it. Those words,
wherefore hast thou brought us over Jordan to destroy us? are too like
what the murmurers often said ([Exo
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#011), [Exo
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#012); [Exo
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003); [Exo
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#003); [Num
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#002), [Num
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#003)); but he that searches the heart
knew they came from another spirit, and therefore was not extreme to
mark what he said amiss. Had Joshua considered that this disorder which
their affairs were put into no doubt proceeded from something amiss,
which yet might easily be redressed, and all set to rights again (as
often in his predecessor's time), he would not have spoken of it as a
thing taken for granted that they were delivered into the hands of the
Amorites to be destroyed. God knows what he does, though we do not; but
this we may be sure of, he never did nor ever will do us any wrong. 2.
He speaks as one quite at a loss concerning the meaning of this event
(v. 8): "What shall I say, what construction can I put upon it, when
Israel, thy own people, for whom thou hast lately done such great things
and to whom thou hast promised the full possession of this land, when
they turn their backs before their enemies" (their necks, so the word
is), "when they not only flee before them, but fall before them, and
become a prey to them? What shall we think of the divine power? Is the
Lord's arm shortened? Of the divine promise? Is his word yea and nay? Of
what God has done for us? Shall this be all undone again and prove in
vain?" Note, The methods of Providence are often intricate and
perplexing, and such as the wisest and best of men know not what to say
to; but they shall know hereafter, [Joh
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#007). 3. He pleads the danger Israel
was now in of being ruined. He gives up all for lost: "The Canaanites
will environ us round, concluding that now our defence having departed,
and the scales being turned in their favour, we shall soon be as
contemptible as ever we were formidable, and they will cut off our name
from the earth," [Jos 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#009). Thus even
good men, when things go against them a little, are too apt to fear the
worst, and make harder conclusions than there is reason for. But his
comes in here as a plea: "Lord, let not Israel's name, which has been so
dear to thee and so great in the world, be cut off." 4. He pleads the
reproach that would be cast on God, and that if Israel were ruined his
glory would suffer by it. They will cut off our name, says he, yet, as
if he had corrected himself for insisting upon that, it is no great
matter (thinks he) what becomes of our little name (the cutting off of
that will be a small loss), but what wilt thou do for thy great name?
this he looks upon and laments as the great aggravation of the calamity.
He feared it would reflect on God, his wisdom and power, his goodness
and faithfulness; what would the Egyptians say? Note, Nothing is more
grievous to a gracious soul than dishonour done to God's name. This also
he insists upon as a plea for the preventing of his fears and for a
return of God's favour; it is the only word in all his address that has
any encouragement in it, and he concludes with it, leaving it to this
issue, Father, glorify thy name. The name of God is a great name, above
every name; and, whatever happens, we ought to believe that he will, and
pray that he would, work for his own name, that this may not be
polluted. This should be our concern more than any thing else. On this
we must fix our eye as the end of all our desires, and from this we must
fetch our encouragement as the foundation of all our hopes. We cannot
urge a better plea than this, Lord, What wilt thou do for thy great
name? Let God in all be glorified, and then welcome his whole will.

[Joshua 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 7:10</span></span>

We have here God's answer to Joshua's address, which, we may suppose,
came from the oracle over the ark, before which Joshua had prostrated
himself, v. 6. Those that desire to know the will of God must attend
with their desires upon the lively oracles, and wait at wisdom's gates
for wisdom's dictates, [Pro 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#034). And
let those that find themselves under the tokens of God's displeasure
never complain of him, but complain to him, and they shall receive an
answer of peace. The answer came immediately, while he was yet speaking
([Isa 65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024)), as that to Daniel, [Dan
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#020), etc.

I. God encourages Joshua against his present despondencies, and the
black and melancholy apprehensions he had of the present posture of
Israel's affairs ([Jos 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#010)): "Get
thee up, suffer not thy spirits to droop and sink thus; wherefore liest
thou thus upon thy face?" No doubt Joshua did well to humble himself
before God, and mourn as he did, under the tokens of his displeasure;
but now God told him it was enough, he would not have him continue any
longer in that melancholy posture, for God delights not in the grief of
penitents when they afflict their souls further than as it qualifies
them for pardon and peace; the days even of that mourning must be ended.
Arise, shake thyself from the dust, [Isa
53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002). Joshua continued his mourning
till eventide ([Jos 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#006)), so late that
they could do nothing that night towards the discovery of the criminal,
but were forced to put it off till next morning. Daniel ([Dan
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021)), and Ezra ([Ezr
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#005), [Ezr
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#006)), continued their mourning only
till the time of the evening sacrifice; that revived them both: but
Joshua went past that time, and therefore is thus roused: "Get thee up,
do not lie all night there." Yet we find that Moses fell down before the
Lord forty days and forty nights, to make intercession for Israel, [Deu
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#018). Joshua must get up because he
has other work to do than to lie there; the accursed thing must be
discovered and cast out, and the sooner the better; Joshua is the man
that must do it, and therefore it is time for him to lay aside his
mourning weeds, and put on his judge's robes, and clothe himself with
zeal as a cloak. Weeping must not hinder sowing, nor one duty of
religion jostle out another. Every thing is beautiful in its season.
Shechaniah perhaps had an eye to this in what he said to Ezra upon a
like occasion. See [Ezr 10:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#002).

II\. He informs him of the true and only cause of this disaster, and
shows him wherefore he contended with them ([Jos
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#011)): Israel hath sinned. "Think not
that God's mind is changed, his arm shortened, or his promise about to
fail; no, it is sin, it is sin, that great mischief-maker, that has
stopped the current of divine favours and has made this breach upon
you." The sinner is not named, though the sin is described, but it is
spoken of as the act of Israel in general, till they have fastened it
upon the particular person, and their godly sorrow have so wrought a
clearing of themselves, as theirs did, [Co2
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011). Observe how the sin is here made
to appear exceedingly sinful. 1. They have transgressed my covenant, an
express precept with a penalty annexed to it. It was agreed that God
should have all the spoil of Jericho, and they should have the spoil of
the rest of the cities of Canaan; but, in robbing God of his part, they
transgressed this covenant. 2. They have even taken of the devoted
thing, in contempt of the curse which was so solemnly denounced against
him that should dare to break in upon God's property, as if that curse
had nothing in it formidable. 3. They have also stolen; they did it
clandestinely, as if they could conceal it from the divine omniscience,
and they were ready to say, The Lord shall not see, or will not miss so
small a matter out of so great a spoil. Thus thou thoughtest I was
altogether such a one as thyself. 4. They have dissembled also.
Probably, when the action was over, Joshua called all the tribes, and
asked them whether they had faithfully disposed of the spoil according
to the divine command, and charged them, if they knew of any
transgression, that they should discover it, but Achan joined with the
rest in a general protestation of innocency, and kept his countenance,
like the adulterous woman that eats and wipes her mouth, and says, I
have done no wickedness. Nay, 5. They have put the accursed thing among
their own goods, as if they had as good a title to that as to any thing
they have, never expecting to be called to an account, nor designing to
make restitution. All this Joshua, though a wise and vigilant ruler,
knew nothing of, till God told him, who knows all the secret wickedness
that is in the world, which men know nothing of God could at this time
have told him who the person was that had done this thing, but he does
not, (1.) To exercise the zeal of Joshua and Israel, in searching out
the criminal. (2.) To give the sinner himself space to repent and make
confession. Joshua no doubt proclaimed it immediately throughout the
camp that there was such a transgression committed, upon which, if Achan
had surrendered himself, and penitently owned his guilt, and prevented
the scrutiny, who knows but he might have had the benefit of that law
which accepted of a trespass-offering, with restitution, from those that
had sinned through ignorance in the holy things of the law? [Lev
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015), [Lev
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#016). But Achan never discovering
himself till the lot discovered him evidenced the hardness of his heart,
and therefore he found no mercy.

III\. He awakens him to enquire further into it, by telling him, 1. That
this was the only ground for the controversy God had with them, this,
and nothing else; so that when this accursed thing was put away he
needed not fear, all would be well, the stream of their successes, when
this one obstruction was removed, would run as strong as ever. 2. That
if this accursed thing were not destroyed they could not expect the
return of God's gracious presence; in plain terms, neither will I be
with you any more as I have been, except you destroy the accursed, that
is, the accursed person, who is made so by the accursed thing. That
which is accursed will be destroyed; and those whom God has entrusted to
bear the sword bear it in vain if they make it not a terror to that
wickedness which brings these judgments of God on a land. By personal
repentance and reformation, we destroy the accursed thing in our own
hearts, and, unless we do this, we must never expect the favour of the
blessed God. Let all men know that it is nothing but sin that separates
between them and God, and, if it be not sincerely repented of and
forsaken, it will separate eternally.

IV\. He directs him in what method to make this enquiry and prosecution.
1. He must sanctify the people, now over-night, that is, as it is
explained, he must command them to sanctify themselves, [Jos
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#013). And what can either magistrates
or ministers do more towards sanctification? They must put themselves
into a suitable frame to appear before God and submit to the divine
scrutiny, must examine themselves, now that God was coming to examine
them, must prepare to meet their God. They were called to sanctify
themselves when they were to receive the divine law (Ex. 19), and now
also when they were to come under the divine judgment; for in both God
is to be attended with the utmost reverence. "There is an accursed thing
in the midst of you, and therefore sanctify yourselves," that is, Let
all that are innocent be able to clear themselves, and be the more
careful to cleanse themselves. The sin of others may be improved by us
as furtherances of our sanctification, as the scandal of the incestuous
Corinthian occasioned a blessed reformation in that church, [Co2
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011). 2. He must bring them all under
the scrutiny of the lot ([Jos 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#014));
the tribe which the guilty person was of should first be discovered by
lot, then the family, then the household, and last of all the person.
The conviction came upon him thus gradually that he might have some
space given him to come in and surrender himself; for God is not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. Observe,
The Lord is said to take the tribe, and family, and household, on which
the lot fell, because the disposal of the lot is of the Lord, and,
however casual it seems, is under the direction of infinite wisdom and
justice; and to show that when the sin of sinners finds them out God is
to be acknowledged in it; it is he that seizes them, and the arrests are
in his name. God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants, [Gen
44:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#016). It is also intimated with what
a certain and unerring judgment the righteous God does and will
distinguish between the innocent and the guilty, so that though for a
time they seem involved in the same condemnation, as the whole tribe did
when it was first taken by the lot, yet he who has his fan in his hand
will effectually provide for the taking out of the precious from the
vile; so that though the righteous be of the same tribe, and family, and
household, with the wicked, yet they shall never be treated as the
wicked, [Gen 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#025). 3. When the
criminal was found out he must be put to death without mercy ([Heb
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#028)), and with all the expressions
of a holy detestation, [Jos 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#015). He
and all that he has must be burnt with fire, that there might be no
remainders of the accursed thing among them; and the reason given for
this severe sentence is because the criminal has, (1.) Given a great
affront to God: He has transgressed the covenant of the Lord, who is
jealous particularly for the honour of the holy covenant. (2.) He has
done a great injury to the church of God: He has wrought folly in
Israel, has shamed that nation which is looked upon by all its
neighbours to be a wise and understanding people, has infected that
nation which is sanctified to God, and troubled that nation of which he
is the protector. These being crimes so heinous in their nature, and of
such pernicious consequence and example, the execution, which otherwise
would have come under the imputation of cruelty, is to be applauded as a
piece of necessary justice. It was sacrilege; it was invading God's
rights, alienating his property, and converting to a private use that
which was devoted to his glory and appropriated to the service of his
sanctuary - this was the crime to be thus severely punished, for warning
to all people in all ages to take heed how they rob God.

[Joshua 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 7:16</span></span>

We have in these verses,

I. The discovery of Achan by the lot, which proved a perfect lot, though
it proceeded gradually. Though we may suppose that Joshua slept the
better, and with more ease and satisfaction, when he knew the worst of
the disease of that body of which, under God, he was the head, and was
put into a certain method of cure, yet he rose up early in the morning
([Jos 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#016)), so much was his heart
upon it, to put away the accursed thing. We have found Joshua upon other
occasions an early riser; here it shows his zeal and vehement desire to
see Israel restored to the divine favour. In the scrutiny observe, 1.
That the guilty tribe was that of Judah, which was, and was to be, of
all the tribes, the most honourable and illustrious; this was an alloy
to their dignity, and might serve as a check to their pride: many there
were who were its glories, but here was one that was its reproach. Let
not the best families think it strange if there be those found in them,
and descending from them, that prove their grief and shame. Judah was to
have the first and largest lot in Canaan; the more inexcusable is one of
that tribe it, not content to wait for his own share, he break in upon
God's property. The Jews' tradition is that when the tribe of Judah was
taken the valiant men of that tribe drew their swords, and professed
they would not sheathe them again till they saw the criminal punished
and themselves cleared who knew their own innocency. 2. That the guilty
person was at length fastened upon, and the language of the lot was,
Thou art the man, v. 18. It was strange that Achan, being conscious to
himself of guilt, when he saw the lot come nearer and nearer to him, had
not either the wit to make an escape or the grace to make a confession;
but his heart was hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, and it
proved to be to his own destruction. We may well imagine how his
countenance changed, and what horror and confusion seized him when he
was singled out as the delinquent, when the eyes of all Israel were
fastened upon him, and every one was ready to say, Have we found thee, O
our enemy? See here, (1.) The folly of those that promise themselves
secrecy in sin: the righteous God has many ways of bringing to light the
hidden works of darkness, and so bringing to shame and ruin those that
continue their fellowship with those unfruitful works. A bird of the
air, when God pleases, shall carry the voice, [Ecc
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#020). See [Psa
94:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#007), etc. (2.) How much it is our
concern, when God is contending with us, to find out what the cause of
action is, what the particular sin is, that, like Achan, troubles our
camp. We must thus examine ourselves and carefully review the records of
conscience, that we may find out the accursed thing, and pray earnestly
with holy Job, Lord, show me wherefore thou contendest with me. Discover
the traitor and he shall be no longer harboured.

II\. His arraignment and examination, [Jos
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019). Joshua sits judge, and, though
abundantly satisfied of his guilt by the determination of the lot, yet
urges him to make a penitent confession, that his soul might be saved by
it in the other world, though he could not give him any encouragement to
hope that he should save his life by it. Observe, 1. How He accosts him
with the greatest mildness and tenderness that could be, like a true
disciple of Moses. He might justly have called him "thief," and "rebel,"
"Raca," and "thou fool," but he call him "son;" he might have adjured
him to confess, as the high priest did our blessed Saviour, or
threatened him with the torture to extort a confession, but for love's
sake he rather beseeches him: I pray thee make confession. This is an
example to all not to insult over those that are in misery, though they
have brought themselves into it by their own wickedness, but to treat
even offenders with the spirit of meekness, not knowing, what we
ourselves should have been and done if God had put us into the hands of
our own counsels. It is likewise an example to magistrates, in executing
justice, to govern their own passions with a strict and prudent hand,
and never suffer themselves to be transported by them into any
indecencies of behaviour or language, no, not towards those that have
given the greatest provocations. The wrath of man worketh not the
righteousness of God. Let them remember the judgment is God's, who is
Lord of his anger. This is the likeliest method of bringing offenders to
repentance. 2. What he wishes him to do, to confess the fact, to confess
it to God, the party offended by the crime; Joshua was to him in god's
stead, so that in confessing to him he confessed to God. Hereby he would
satisfy Joshua and the congregation concerning that which was laid to
his charge; his confession would also be an evidence of his repentance,
and a warning to others to take heed of sinning after the similitude of
his transgression: but that which Joshua aims at herein is that God
might be honoured by it, as the Lord, the God of infinite knowledge and
power, from whom no secrets are hid; and as the God of Israel, who, as
he does particularly resent affronts given to his Israel, so he does the
affronts given him by Israel. Note, In confessing sin, as we take shame
to ourselves, so we give glory to God as righteous God, owning him
justly displeased with us, and as a good God, who will not improve our
confessions as evidences against us, but is faithful and just to forgive
when we are brought to own that he would be faithful and just if he
should punish. By sin we have injured God in his honour. Christ by his
death has made satisfaction for the injury; but it is required that we
by repentance show our good will to his honour, and, as far as in us
lies, give glory to him. Bishop Patrick quotes the Samaritan chronicle,
making Joshua to say here to Achan, Lift up thy eyes to the king of
heaven and earth, and acknowledge that nothing can be hidden from him
who knoweth the greatest secrets.

III\. His confession, which now at last, when he saw it was to no
purpose to conceal his crime, was free and ingenuous enough, [Jos
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#020), [Jos
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#021). Here is, 1. A penitent
acknowledgment of fault. "Indeed I have sinned; what I am charged with
is too true to be denied and too bad to be excused. I own it, I lament
it; the Lord is righteous in bringing it to light, for indeed I have
sinned." This is the language of a penitent that is sick of his, and
whose conscience is loaded with it. "I have nothing to accuse any one
else of, but a great deal to say against myself; it is with me that the
accursed thing is found; I am the man who has perverted that which was
right and it profited me not." And that wherewith he aggravates the sin
is that it was committed against the Lord God of Israel. He was himself
an Israelite, a sharer with the rest of that exalted nation in their
privileges, so that, in offending the God of Israel, he offended his own
God, which laid him under the guilt of the basest treachery and
ingratitude imaginable. 2. A particular narrative of the fact: Thus and
thus have I done. God had told Joshua in general that a part of the
devoted things was alienated, but is to him to draw from Achan an
account of the particulars; for, one way or other, God will make
sinners' own tongues to fall upon them ([Psa
64:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#008)); if ever he bring them to
repentance, they will be their own accusers, and their awakened
consciences will be instead of a thousand witnesses. Note, It becomes
penitents, in the confession of their sins to God, to be very
particular; not only, "I have sinned," but, "In this and that instance I
have sinned," reflecting with regret upon all the steps that led to the
sin and all the circumstances that aggravated it and made it exceedingly
sinful: thus and thus have I done. He confesses, (1.) To the things
taken. In plundering a house in Jericho he found a goodly Babylonish
garment; the word signifies a robe, such as princes wore when they
appeared in state, probably it belonged to the King of Jericho; it was
far fetched, as we translate it, from Babylon. A garment of divers
colours, so some render it. Whatever it was, in his eyes it made a very
glorious show. "A thousand pities" (thinks Achan) "that it should be
burnt; then it will do nobody any good; if I take it for myself, it will
serve me many a year for my best garment." Under these pretences, he
makes bold with this first, and things it no harm to save it from the
fire; but, his hand being thus in, he proceeds to take a bag of money,
two hundred shekels, that is one hundred ounces of silver, and a wwedge
of gold which weighed fifty shekels, that is twenty-five ounces. He
could not plead that, in taking these, he saved them from the fire (for
the silver and gold were to be laid up in the treasury); but those that
make a slight excuse to serve in daring to commit one sin will have
their hearts so hardened by it that they will venture upon the next
without such an excuse; for the way of sin is downhill. See what a peer
prize it was for which Achan ran this desperate hazard, and what an
unspeakable loser he was by the bargain. See [Mat
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026). (2.) He confesses the manner of
taking them. \[1.\] the sin began in the eye. he saw these fine things,
as Eve saw the forbidden fruit, and was strangely charmed with the
sight. See what comes of suffering the heart to walk after the eyes, and
what need we have to make this covenant with our eyes, that if they
wander they shall be sure to weep for it. Look not thou upon the wine
that is red, upon the woman that is fair; close the right eye that thus
offense thee, to prevent the necessity of plucking it out, and casting
it from thee, [Mat 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028), [Mat
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029). \[2.\] It proceeded out of the
heart. He owns, I coveted them. thus lust conceived and brought forth
this sin. Those that would be kept from sinful actions must mortify and
check in themselves sinful desires, particularly the desire of worldly
wealth, which we more particularly call covetousness. O what a world of
evil is the love money the root of! Had Achan looked upon these things
with an eye of faith, he would have seen them accursed things, and would
have dreaded them, but, looking upon them with an eye of sense only, he
saw them goodly things, and coveted them. It was not the looking, but
the lusting that ruined him. \[3.\] When he had committed it he was very
industrious to conceal it. Having taken of the forbidden treasures,
fearing lest any search should be made for prohibited goods, he hid them
in the earth, as one that resolved to keep what he had gotten, and never
to make restitution. Thus does Achan confess the whole matter, that God
might be justified in the sentence passed upon him. See the
deceitfulness of sin; that which is pleasing in the commission is bitter
in the reflection; at the last it bites like a serpent. Particularly,
see what comes of ill-gotten goods, and how those will be cheated that
rob God. [Job 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#015), He hath swallowed
down riches, and he shall vomit them up again.

IV\. His conviction. God had convicted him by the lot; he had convicted
himself by his own confession; but, that no room might be left for the
most discontented Israelite to object against the process, Joshua has
him further convicted by the searching of his tent, in which the goods
were found which he confessed to. Particular notice is taken of the
haste which the messengers made that were sent to search: They ran to
the tent ([Jos 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#022)), not only to show
their readiness to obey Joshua's orders, but to show how uneasy they
were till the camp was cleared of the accursed thing, that they might
regain the divine favour. Those that feel themselves under wrath find
themselves concerned not to defer the putting away of sin. Delays are
dangerous, and it is not time to trifle. When the stolen goods were
brought they were laid out before the Lord ([Jos
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#023)), that all Israel might see how
plain the evidence was against Achan, and might adore the strictness of
God's judgments in punishing so severely the stealing of such small
things, and yet the justice of his judgments in maintaining his right to
devoted things, and might be afraid of ever offending in the like kind.
In laying them out before the Lord they acknowledged his title to them,
and waited to receive his directions concerning them. Note, Those that
think to put a cheat upon God do but deceive themselves; what is taken
from him he will recover ([Hos 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#009))
and he will be a loser by no man at last.

V. His condemnation. Joshua passes sentence upon him ([Jos
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#025)): Why hast thou troubled us?
There is the ground of the sentence. O, how much hast thou troubled us!
so some read it. He refers to what was said when the warning was given
not to meddle with the accursed thing ([Jos
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#018)), lest you make the camp of
Israel a curse and trouble it. Note, Sin is a very troublesome thing,
not only to the sinner himself, but to all about him. He that is greedy
of gain, as Achan was, troubles his own house ([Pro
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#027)) and all the communities he
belongs to. Now (says Joshua) God shall trouble thee. See why Achan was
so severely dealt with, not only because he had robbed God, but because
he had troubled Israel; over his head he had (as it were) this
accusation written, "Achan, the troubler of Israel," as Ahab, [Kg1
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#018). This therefore is his doom: God
shall trouble thee. Note, the righteous God will certainly recompense
tribulation to those that trouble his people, [Th2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006). Those that are troublesome shall
be troubled. Some of the Jewish doctors, from that word which determines
the troubling of him to this day, infer that therefore he should not be
troubled in the world to come; the flesh was destroyed that spirit might
be saved, and, if so, the dispensation was really less severe than it
seemed. In the description both of his sin and of his punishment, by the
trouble that was in both, there is a plain allusion to his name Achan,
or, as he is called, [Ch1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#007), Achar,
which signifies trouble. He did too much answer his name.

VI\. His execution. No reprieve could be obtained; a gangrened member
must be cut off immediately. When he is proved to be an anathema, and
the troubler of the camp, we may suppose all the people cry out against
him, Away with him, away with him! Stone him, stone him! Here is,

1\. The place of execution. They brought him out of the camp, in token
of their putting far from them that wicked person, [Co1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#013). When our Lord Jesus was made a
curse for us, that by his trouble we might have peace, he suffered as an
accursed thing without the gate, bearing our reproach, [Heb
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#012), [Heb
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#013). The execution was at a
distance, that the camp which was disturbed by Achan's sin might not be
defiled by his death.

2\. The persons employed in his execution. It was the act of all Israel,
[Jos 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#024), [Jos
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#025). They were all spectators of it,
that they might see and fear. Public executions are public examples.
Nay, they were all consenting to his death, and as many as could were
active in it, in token of the universal detestation in which they held
his sacrilegious attempt, and their dread of God's displeasure against
them.

3\. The partakers with him in the punishment; for he perished not alone
in his iniquity, [Jos 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#020). (1.) The
stolen goods were destroyed with him, the garment burnt, as it should
have been with the rest of the combustible things in Jericho, and the
silver and gold defaced, melted, lost, and buried, in the ashes of the
rest of his goods under the heap of stones, so as never to be put to any
other use. (2.) All his other goods were destroyed likewise, not only
his tent, and the furniture of that, but his oxen, asses, and sheep, to
show that goods gotten unjustly, especially if they be gotten by
sacrilege, will not only turn to no account, but will blast and waste
the rest of the possessions to which they are added. The eagle in the
fable, that stole flesh from the altar, brought a coal of fire with it,
which burnt her nest, [Hab 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#009), [Hab
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#010); [Zac
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#003), [Zac
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#004). Those lose their own that grasp
at more than their own. (3.) His sons and daughters were put to death
with him. Some indeed think that they were brought out ([Jos
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#024)) only to be the spectators of
their father's punishment, but most conclude that they died with him,
and that they must be meant [Jos 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#025),
where it is said they burned them with fire, after they had stoned them
with stones. God had expressly provided that magistrates should not put
the children to death for the fathers'; but he did not intend to bind
himself by that law, and in this case he had expressly ordered ([Jos
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#015)) that the criminal, and all that
he had, should be burnt. Perhaps his sons and daughters were aiders and
abettors in the villany, had helped to carry off the accursed thing. It
is very probable that they assisted in the concealment, and that he
could not hide them in the midst of his tent but they must know and keep
his counsel, and so they became accessaries ex post facto - after the
fact; and, if they were ever so little partakers in the crime, it was
son heinous that they were justly sharers in the punishment. However God
was hereby glorified, and the judgment executed was thus made the more
tremendous.

4\. The punishment itself that was inflicted on him. He was stoned (some
think as a sabbath breaker, supposing that the sacrilege was committed
on the sabbath day), and then his dead body was burnt, as an accursed
thing, of which there should be no remainder left. The concurrence of
all the people in this execution teaches us how much it is the interest
of a nation that all in it should contribute what they can, in their
places, to the suppression of vice and profaneness, and the reformation
of manners; sin is a reproach to any people, and therefore every
Israelite indeed will have a stone to throw at it.

5\. The pacifying of God's wrath hereby ([Jos
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#026)): The Lord turned from the
fierceness of his anger. The putting away of sin by true repentance and
reformation, as it is the only way, so it is a sure and most effectual
way, to recover the divine favour. Take away the cause, and the effect
will cease.

VII\. The record of his conviction and execution. Care was taken to
preserve the remembrance of it, for warning and instruction to
posterity. 1. A heap of stones was raised on the place where Achan was
executed, every one perhaps of the congregation throwing a stone to the
heap, in token of his detestation of the crime. 2. A new name was given
to the place; it was called theValley of Achor, or trouble. This was a
perpetual brand of infamy upon Achan's name, and a perpetual warning to
all people not to invade God's property. By this severity against Achan,
the honour of Joshua's government, now in the infancy of it, was
maintained, and Israel, at their entrance upon the promised Canaan, were
reminded to observe, at their peril, the provisos and limitations of the
grant by which they held it. The Valley of Achor is said to be given for
a door of hope, because when we put away the accursed thing then there
begins to be hope in Israel, [Hos
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#015); [Ezr
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#002).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 8](jos008)

</div>
