<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](jos021)  [Next](jos023.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001.md)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 22:0</span></span>

Many particular things we have read concerning the two tribes and a
half, though nothing separated them from the rest of the tribes except
the river Jordan, and this chapter is wholly concerning them. I.
Joshua's dismission of the militia of those tribes from the camp of
Israel, in which the had served as auxiliaries, during all the wars of
Canaan, and their return thereupon to their own country ([Jos
22:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001).md). II. The altar they built on
the borders of Jordan, in token of their communion with the land of
Israel ([Jos 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#010).md). III. The offence
which the rest of the tribes took at this altar, and the message they
sent thereupon ([Jos 22:11-20](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#011).md). IV.
The apology which the two tribes and a half made for what they had done
([Jos 22:21-29](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#021).md). V. The satisfaction
which their apology gave to the rest of the tribes ([Jos
22:30-34](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#030)). And (which is strange.md),
whereas in most differences that happen there is a fault on both sides,
on this there was fault on no side; none (for aught that appears) were
to be blamed, but all to be praised.

[Joshua 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 22:1</span></span>

The war being ended, and ended gloriously, Joshua, as a prudent general,
disbands his army, who never designed to make war their trade, and sends
them home, to enjoy what they had conquered, and to beat their swords
into plough-shares and their spears into pruning-hooks; and particularly
the forces of these separate tribes, who had received their inheritance
on the other side Jordan from Moses upon this condition, that their men
of war should assist the other tribes in the conquest of Canaan, which
they promised to do ([Num 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#032).md), and
renewed the promise to Joshua at the opening of the campaign, [Jos
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#016.md). And, now that they had performed
their bargain, Joshua publicly and solemnly in Shiloh gives them their
discharge. Whether this was done, as it was placed, not till after the
land was divided, as some think, or whether after the war was ended, and
before the division was made, as others think (because there was no need
of their assistance in dividing the land, but only in conquering it, nor
were there any of their tribes employed as commissioners in that affair,
but only of the other ten, [Num 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#018.md),
etc.), this is certain, it was not done till after Shiloh was made the
head-quarters (v. 2), and the land was begun to be divided before they
removed from Gilgal, [Jos 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#006.md).

It is probable that this army of Reubenites and Gadites, which had led
the van in all the wars of Canaan, had sometimes, in the intervals of
action, and when the rest of the army retired into winter-quarters, some
of them at least, made a step over Jordan, for it was not far, to visit
their families, and to look after their private affairs, and perhaps
tarried at home, and sent others in their room more serviceable; but
still these two tribes and a half had their quota of troops ready,
40,000 in all, which, whenever there was occasion, presented themselves
at their respective posts, and now attended in a body to receive their
discharge. Though their affection to their families, and concern for
their affairs, could not but make them, after so long an absence, very
desirous to return, yet, like good soldiers, they would not move till
they had orders from their general. So, though our heavenly Father's
house above be ever so desirable (it is bishop Hall's allusion), yet
must we stay on earth till our warfare be accomplished, wait for a due
discharge, and not anticipate the time of our removal.

I. Joshua dismisses them to the land of their possession, [Jos
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#004.md). Those that were first in the
assignment of their lot were last in the enjoyment of it; they got the
start of their brethren in title, but their brethren were before them in
full possession; so the last shall be first, and the first last, that
there may be something of equality.

II\. He dismisses them with their pay; for who goes a warfare at his own
charge? Return with much riches unto your tents, [Jos
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#008.md). Though all the land they had
helped to conquer was to go to the other tribes, yet they should have
their share of the plunder, and had so, and this was all the pay that
any of the soldiers expected; for the wars of Canaan bore their own
charges. "Go," says Joshua, "go home to your tents," that is, "your
houses," which he calls tents, because they had been so much used to
tents in the wilderness; and indeed the strongest and stateliest houses
in this world are to be looked upon but as tents, mean and movable in
comparison with our house above. "Go home with much riches, not only
cattle, the spoil of the country, but silver and gold, the plunder of
the cities, and," 1. "Let your brethren whom you leave behind have your
good word, who have allowed you your share in full, though the land is
entirely theirs, and have not offered to make any drawback. Do not say
that you are losers by us." 2. "Let your brethren whom you go to, who
abode by the stuff, have some share of the spoil: Divide the spoil with
your brethren, as that was divided which was taken in the war with
Midian, [Num 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#027.md). Let your brethren
that have wanted you all this while be the better for you when you come
home."

III\. He dismisses them with a very honourable character. Though their
service was a due debt, and the performance of a promise, and they had
done no more than was their duty to do, yet he highly commends them; not
only gives them up their bonds, as it were, now that they had fulfilled
the condition, but applauds their good services. Though it was by the
favour of God and his power that Israel got possession of this land, and
he must have all the glory, yet Joshua thought there was a thankful
acknowledgment due to their brethren who assisted them, and whose sword
and bow were employed for them. God must be chiefly eyed in our praises,
yet instruments must not be altogether overlooked. He here commends
them, 1. For the readiness of their obedience to their commanders, [Jos
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#002.md). When Moses was gone, they
remembered and observed the charge he had given them; and all the orders
which Joshua, as general of the forces, had issued out, they had
carefully obeyed, went, and came, and did, as he appointed, [Mat
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#009.md). It is as much as any thing the
soldier's praise to observe the word of command. 2. For the constancy of
their affection and adherence to their brethren: You have not left them
these many days. How many days he does not say, nor can we gather it
with certainty from any other place. Calvisius and others of the best
chronologers compute that the conquering and dividing of the land was
the work of about six or seven years, and so long these separate tribes
attended their camp, and did them the best service they could. Note, It
will be the honour of those that have espoused the cause of God's
Israel, and twisted interests with them, to adhere to them, and never to
leave them till God has given them rest, and then they shall rest with
them. 3. For the faithfulness of their obedience to the divine law. They
had not only done their duty to Joshua and Israel, but, which was best
of all, they had made conscience of their duty to God: You have kept the
charge, or, as the word is, You have kept the keeping, that is, "You
have carefully and circumspectly kept the commandment of the Lord your
God, not only in this particular instance of continuing in the service
of Israel to the end of the war, but, in general, you have kept up
religion in your part of the camp, a rare and excellent thing among
soldiers, and where it is worthy to be praised."

IV\. He dismisses them with good counsel, not to cultivate their ground,
fortify their cities, and, now that their hands were inured to war and
victory, to invade their neighbours, and so enlarge their own
territories, but to keep up serious godliness among them in the power of
it. They were not political but pious instructions that he gave them,
[Jos 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#005.md). 1. In general, to take
diligent heed to do the commandment and the law. Those that have the
commandment have it in vain unless they do the commandment; and it will
not be done aright (so apt are we to turn aside, and so industrious are
our spiritual enemies to turn us aside) unless we take heed, diligent
heed. 2. In particular, to love the Lord our God, as the best of beings,
and the best of friends; and as far as this principle rules in the
heart, and is the spring of its pulses, there will be a constant care
and sincere endeavour to walk in his ways, in all his ways, even those
that are narrow and up-hill, in every particular instance, in all manner
of conversation to keep his commandments, at all times and in all
conditions with purpose of heart to cleave unto him, and to serve him
and his honour, and the interest of his kingdom among men, with all our
heart and with all our soul. What good counsel was here given to them is
given to us all. God give us grace to take it!

V. He dismisses them with a blessing ([Jos
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#006).md), particularly the half tribe of
Manasseh, to which Joshua, as an Ephraimite, was somewhat nearer akin
than to the other two, and who perhaps were the more loth to depart
because they left one half of their own tribe behind them, and
therefore, bidding often farewell, and lingering behind, had a second
dismission and blessing, [Jos 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#007.md).
Joshua not only prayed for them as a friend, but blessed them as a
father in the name of the Lord, recommending them, their families, and
affairs, to the grace of God. Some by the blessing Joshua gave them
understand the presents he made them, in recompence of their services;
but Joshua being a prophet, and having given them one part of a
prophet's reward in the instructions he gave them ([Jos
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#005).md), no doubt we must understand
this of the other, even the prayers he made for them, as one having
authority, and as God's viceregent.

VI\. Being thus dismissed, they returned to the land of their possession
in a body ([Jos 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#009).md), ferry-boats
being, it is likely, provided for their repassing Jordan. Though masters
of families may sometimes have occasion to be absent, long absent, from
their families, yet, when their business abroad is finished, they must
remember home is their place, from which they ought not to wander as a
bird from her nest.

[Joshua 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 22:10</span></span>

Here is, I. The pious care of the separated tribes to keep their hold of
Canaan's religion, even when they were leaving Canaan's land, that they
might not be as the sons of the stranger, utterly separated from God's
people, [Isa 56:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003.md). In order to this,
they built a great altar on the borders of Jordan, to be a witness for
them that they were Israelites, and as such partakers of the altar of
the Lord, [Co1 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#018.md). When they came
to Jordan ([Jos 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#010).md) they did not
consult how to preserve the remembrance of their own exploits in the
wars of Canaan, and the services they had done their brethren, by
erecting a monument to the immortal honour of the two tribes and a half;
but their relation to the church of God, together with their interest in
the communion of saints, is that which they are solicitous to preserve
and perpetuate the proofs and evidences of; and therefore without delay,
when the thing was first proposed by some among them, who, though glad
to think that they were going towards home, were sorry to think that
they were going from the altar of God, immediately they erected this
altar, which served as a bridge to keep up their fellowship with the
other tribes in the things of God. Some think they built this altar on
the Canaan-side of Jordan, in the lot of Benjamin, that, looking over
the river, they might see the figure of the altar at Shiloh, when they
could not conveniently go to it; but it is more likely that they built
it on their own side of the water, for what had they to do to build on
another man's land without his consent? And it is said to be
over-against the land of Canaan; nor would there have been any cause of
suspecting it designed for sacrifice if they had not built it among
themselves. This altar was very innocently and honestly designed, but it
would have been well if, since it had in it an appearance of evil, and
might be an occasion of offence to their brethren, they had consulted
the oracle of God about it before they did it, or at least acquainted
their brethren with their purpose, and given them the same explication
of their altar before, to prevent their jealousy, which they did
afterwards, to remove it. Their zeal was commendable, but it ought to
have been guided with discretion. There was no need to hasten the
building of an altar for the purpose for which they intended this, but
they might have taken time to consider and take advice; yet, when their
sincerity was made to appear, we do not find that they were blamed for
their rashness. God does, and men should, overlook the weakness of an
honest zeal.

II\. The holy jealousy of the other tribes for the honour of God and his
altar at Shiloh. Notice was immediately brought to the princes of Israel
of the setting up of this altar, [Jos
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#011.md). And they, knowing how strict
and severe that law was which required them to offer all their
sacrifices in the place which God should choose, and not elsewhere ([Deu
12:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005).md), were soon apprehensive that
the setting up of another altar was an affront to the choice which God
had lately made of a place to put his name in, and had a direct tendency
to the worship of some other God. Now,

1\. Their suspicion was very excusable, for it must be confessed the
thing, prima facie - at first sight, looked ill, and seemed to imply a
design to set up and maintain a competitor with the altar at Shiloh. It
was no strained innuendo from the building of an altar to infer an
intention to offer sacrifice upon it, and that might introduce idolatry
and end in a total apostasy from the faith and worship of the God of
Israel. So great a matter might this fire kindle. God is jealous for his
own institutions, and therefore we should be so too, and afraid of every
thing that looks like, or leads to, idolatry.

2\. Their zeal, upon this suspicion, was very commendable, [Jos
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#012.md). When they apprehended that
these tribes, which by the river Jordan were separated from them, were
separating themselves from God, they took it as the greatest injury that
could be done to themselves, and showed a readiness, if it were
necessary, to put their lives in their hands in defence of the altar of
God, and to take up arms for the chastising and reducing of these
rebels, and to prevent the spreading of the infection, if no gentler
methods would serve, by cutting off from their body the gangrened
member. They all gathered together, and Shiloh was the place of their
rendezvous, because it was in defence of the divine charter lately
granted to that place that they now appeared; their resolution was as
became a kingdom of priests, who, being devoted to God and his service,
did not acknowledge their brethren nor know their own children, [Deu
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#009.md). They would immediately go up to
war against them if it appeared they had revolted from God, and were in
rebellion against him. Though they were bone of their bone, had been
companions with them in tribulation in the wilderness, and serviceable
to them in the wars of Canaan, yet, if they turn to serve other gods,
they will treat them as enemies, not as sons of Israel, but as children
of whoredoms, for so God had appointed, [Deu
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#012.md), etc. They had but lately
sheathed their swords, and retired from the perils and fatigues of war
to the rest God had given them, and yet they are willing to begin a new
war rather than be any way wanting in their duty to restrain, repress,
and revenge, idolatry, and every step towards it - a brave resolution,
and which shows them hearty for their religion, and, we hope, careful
and diligent in the practice of it themselves. Corruptions in religion
are best dealt with at first, before they get head and plead
prescription.

3\. Their prudence in the prosecution of this zealous resolution is no
less commendable. God had appointed them, in cases of this nature, to
enquire and make search ([Deu 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#014).md),
that they might not wrong their brethren under pretence of righting
their religion; accordingly they resolve here not to send forth their
armies, to wage war, till they had first sent their ambassadors to
enquire into the merits of the cause, and these men of the first rank,
one out of each tribe, and Phinehas at the head of them to be their
spokesman, [Jos 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#013.md), [Jos
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#014.md). Thus was their zeal for God
tempered, guided, and governed by the meekness of wisdom. He that knows
all things, and hates all evil things, would not punish the worst of
criminals but he would first go down and see, [Gen
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021.md). Many an unhappy strife would be
prevented, or soon healed by an impartial and favourable enquiry into
that which is the matter of the offence. The rectifying of mistakes and
misunderstandings, and the setting of misconstrued words and actions in
a true light, would be the most effectual way to accommodate both
private and public quarrels, and bring them to a happy period.

4\. The ambassadors' management of this matter came fully up to the
sense and spirit of the congregation concerning it, and bespeaks much
both of zeal and prudence.

(1.) The charge they draw up against their brethren is indeed very high,
and admits no other excuse than that it was in their zeal for the honour
of God, and was now intended to justify the resentments of the
congregation at Shiloh and to awaken the supposed delinquents to clear
themselves, otherwise they might have suspended their judgment, or
mollified it at least, and not have taken it for granted, as they do
here ([Jos 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#016).md), that the building
of this altar was a trespass against the God of Israel, and a trespass
no less heinous than the revolt of soldiers from their captain (you turn
from following the Lord), and the rebellion of subjects against their
sovereign: that you might rebel this day against the Lord. Hard words.
It is well they were not able to make good their charge. Let not
innocency think it strange to be thus misrepresented and accused. They
laid to my charge things that I knew not.

(2.) The aggravation of the crime charged upon their brethren is
somewhat far-fetched: Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us? [Jos
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#017.md). Probably that is mentioned
because Phinehas, the first commissioner in this treaty, had signalized
himself in that matter ([Num 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#007).md),
and because we may suppose they were not about the very place in which
that iniquity was committed on the other side Jordan. It is good to
recollect and improve those instances of the wrath of God, revealed from
heaven against the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, which have
fallen out in our own time, and which we ourselves have been
eye-witnesses of. He reminds them of the iniquity of Peor, \[1.\] As a
very great sin, and very provoking to God. The building of this altar
seemed but a small matter, but it might lead to an iniquity as bad as
that of Peor, and therefore must be crushed in its first rise. Note, The
remembrance of great sins committed formerly should engage us to stand
upon our guard against the least occasions and beginnings of sin; for
the way of sin is down-hill. \[2.\] As a sin that the whole congregation
had smarted for: "There was a plague in the congregation of the Lord, of
which, in one day, there died no fewer than 24,000; was not that enough
for ever to warn you against idolatry? What! will you bring upon
yourselves another plague? Are you so mad upon an idolatrous altar that
you will run yourselves thus upon the sword's point of God's judgments?
Does not our camp still feel from that sin and the punishment of it? We
are not cleansed from it unto this day; there are remaining sparks,"
First, "Of the infection of that sin; some among us so inclined to
idolatry that if you set up another altar they will soon take occasion
from that, whether you intend it or no, to worship another God."
Secondly, "Of the wrath of God against us for that sin. We have reason
to fear that, if we provoke God by another sin to visit, he will
remember against us the iniquity of Peor, as he threatened to do that of
the golden calf, [Exo 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034.md). And dare
you wake the sleeping lion of divine vengeance?" Note, It is a foolish
and dangerous thing for people to think their former sins little, too
little for them, as those do who add sin to sin, and so treasure up
wrath against the day of wrath. Let therefore the time past suffice,
[Pe1 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#003.md).

(3.) The reason they give for their concerning themselves so warmly in
this matter is very sufficient. They were obliged to it, in their own
necessary defence, by the law of self-preservation: "For, if you revolt
from God today, who knows but tomorrow his judgments may break in upon
the whole congregation ([Jos 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#018).md),
as in the case of Achan? [Jos 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#020.md).
He sinned, and we all smarted for it, by which we should receive
instruction, and from what God did then infer what he may do, and fear
what he will do, if we do not witness against your sin, who are so many,
and punish it." Note, The conservators of the public peace are obliged,
in justice to the common safety, to use their power for the restraining
and suppressing of vice and profaneness, lest, if it be connived at, the
sin thereby become national, and bring God's judgments upon the
community. Nay, we are all concerned to reprove our neighbour when he
does amiss, lest we bear sin for him, [Lev
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#017.md).

(4.) The offer they make is very fair and kind ([Jos
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#019).md), that if they thought the land
of their possession unclean, for want of an altar, and therefore could
not be easy without one, rather than they should set up another in
competition with that at Shiloh they should be welcome to come back to
the land where the Lord's tabernacle was, and settle there, and they
would very willingly straiten themselves to make room for them. By this
they showed a sincere and truly pious zeal against schism, that rather
than their brethren should have any occasion to set up a separate altar,
though their pretence for it, as here supposed, was very weak and
grounded upon a great mistake, yet they were willing to part with a
considerable share of the land which God himself had by the lot assigned
them, to comprehend them and take them in among them. This was the
spirit of Israelites indeed.

[Joshua 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 22:21</span></span>

We may suppose there was a general convention called of the princes and
great men of the separate tribes, to give audience to these ambassadors;
or perhaps the army, as it came home, was still encamped in a body, and
not yet dispersed; however it was, there were enough to represent the
two tribes and a half, and to give their sense. Their reply to the warm
remonstrance of the ten tribes is very fair and ingenuous. They do not
retort their charge, upbraid them with the injustice and unkindness of
their threatenings, nor reproach them for their rash and hasty censures,
but give them a soft answer which turns away wrath, avoiding all those
grievous words which stir up anger; they demur not to their
jurisdiction, nor plead that they were not accountable to them for what
they had done, nor bid them mind their own business, but, by a free and
open declaration of their sincere intention in what they did, free
themselves from the imputation they were under, and set themselves right
in the opinion of their brethren, to do which they only needed to state
the case and put the matter in a true light.

I. They solemnly protest against any design to use this altar for
sacrifice or offering, and therefore were far from setting it up in
competition with the altar at Shiloh, or from entertaining the least
thought of deserting that. They had indeed set up that which had the
shape and fashion of an altar, but they had not dedicated it to a
religious use, had had no solemnity of its consecration, and therefore
ought not to be charged with a design to put it to any such use. To gain
credit to this protestation here is,

1\. A solemn appeal to God concerning it, with which they begin their
defence, intending thereby to give glory to God first, and then to give
satisfaction to their brethren, [Jos
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#022). (1..md) A profound awe and
reverence of God are expressed in the form of their appeal: The Lord God
of gods, the Lord God of gods, he knows. Or, as it might be read
somewhat closer to the original, The God of gods, Jehovah, the God of
gods, Jehovah, he knows, which bespeaks his self-existence and
self-sufficiency; he is Jehovah, and has sovereignty and supremacy over
all beings and powers whatsoever, even those that are called gods, or
that are worshipped. This brief confession of their faith would help to
obviate and remove their brethren's suspicion of them, as if they
intended to desert the God of Israel, and worship other gods: how could
those entertain such a thought who believed him to be God over all? Let
us learn hence always to speak of God with reverence and seriousness,
and to mention his name with a solemn pause. Those who make their
appeals to heaven with a slight, careless, "God knows," have reason to
fear lest they take his name in vain, for it is very unlike this appeal.
(2.) It is a great confidence of their own integrity which they express
in the matter of their appeal. They refer the controversy to the God of
gods, whose judgment, we are sure, is according to truth, such as the
guilty have reason to dread and the upright to rejoice in. "If it be in
rebellion or transgression that we have built this altar, to confront
the altar of the Lord at Shiloh, to make a party, or to set up any new
gods or worships," \[1.\] "He knows it ([Jos
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#022).md), for he is perfectly acquainted
with the thoughts and intents of the heart, and particularly with all
inclinations to idolatry ([Psa 44:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#020.md),
[Psa 44:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#021).md); this is in a particular
manner before him. We believe he knows it, and we cannot by any arts
conceal it from him." \[2.\] "Let him require it, as we know he will,
for he is a jealous God." Nothing but a clear conscience would have thus
imprecated divine justice to avenge the rebellion if there had been any.
Note, First, In every thing we do in religion, it highly concerns us to
approve ourselves to God in our integrity therein, remembering that he
knows the heart. Secondly, When we fall under the censures of men, it is
very comfortable to be able with a humble confidence to appeal to God
concerning our sincerity. See [Co1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003.md), [Co1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004.md).

2\. A sober apology presented to their brethren: Israel, he shall know.
Though the record on high, and the witness in our bosoms, are
principally to be made sure for us, yet there is a satisfaction besides
which we owe to our brethren who doubt concerning our integrity, and
which we should be ready to give with meekness and fear. if our
sincerity be known to God, we should study likewise to let others know
it by its fruits, especially those who, though they mistake us, yet show
a zeal for the glory of God, as the ten tribes here did.

3\. A serious abjuration or renunciation of the design which they were
suspected to be guilty of. With this they conclude their defence ([Jos
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#029).md): "God forbid that we should
rebel against the Lord, as we own we should if we had set up this altar
for burnt-offerings; no, we abhor the thought of it. We have as great a
value and veneration for the altar of the Lord at Shiloh as any of the
tribes of Israel have, and are as firmly resolved to adhere to it and
constantly to attend it; we have the same concern that you have for the
purity of God's worship and the unity of his church; far be it, far be
it from us, to think of turning away from following God."

II\. They fully explain their true intent and meaning in building this
altar; and we have all the reason in the world to believe that it is a
true representation of their design, and not advanced now to palliate it
afterwards, as we have reason to think that these same persons meant
very honestly when they petitioned to have their lot on that side
Jordan, though then also is was their unhappiness to be misunderstood
even by Moses himself. In their vindication, they make it out that the
building of this altar was so far from being a step towards a separation
from their brethren, and from the altar of the Lord at Shiloh, that, on
the contrary, it was really designed for a pledge and preservative of
their communion with their brethren and with the altar of God, and a
token of their resolution to do the service of the Lord before him ([Jos
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#027).md), and to continue to do so.

1\. They gave an account of the fears they had lest, in process of time,
their posterity, being seated at such a distance from the tabernacle,
should be looked upon and treated as strangers to the commonwealth of
Israel ([Jos 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#024).md); it was for fear
of this thing, and the word signifies a great perplexity and solicitude
of mind which they were in, until they eased themselves by this
expedient. As they were returning home (and we may suppose it was not
thought of before, else they would have made Joshua acquainted with
their purpose), some of them in discourse started this matter, and the
rest took the hint, and represented to themselves and one another a very
melancholy prospect of what might probably happen in after-ages, that
their children would be looked upon by the other tribes as having no
interest in the altar of God and the sacrifices there offered. Now
indeed they were owned as brethren, and were as welcome at the
tabernacle as any other of the tribes; but what if their children after
them should be disowned? They, by reason of their distance, and the
interposition of Jordan, which it was not easy at all times to pass and
repass, could not be so numerous and constant in their attendance on the
three yearly feasts as the other tribes, to make a continual claim to
the privileges of Israelites, and would therefore be looked upon as
inconsiderable members of their church, and by degrees would be rejected
as not members of it at all: So shall your children (who in their pride
will be apt to monopolize the privileges of the altar) make our children
(who perhaps will not be so careful as they ought to be to keep hold of
those privileges) cease from fearing the Lord. Note, (1.) Those that are
cut off from public ordinances are likely to lose all religion, and will
by degrees cease from fearing the Lord. Though the form and profession
of godliness are kept up by many without the life and power of it, yet
the life and power of it will not long be kept up without the form and
profession. You take away grace if you take away the means of grace.
(2.) Those who have themselves found the comfort and benefit of God's
ordinances cannot but desire to preserve and perpetuate the entail of
them upon their seed, and use all possible precautions that their
children after them may not be made to cease from following the Lord, or
be looked upon as having no part in him.

2\. The project they had to prevent this, [Jos
22:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#026.md). "Therefore, to secure an
interest in the altar of God to those who shall come after us, and to
prove their title to it, we said, Let us build an altar, to be a witness
between us and you," that, having this copy of the altar in their
custody, it might be produced as an evidence of their right to the
privilege of the original. Every one that saw this altar, and observed
that it was never used for sacrifice and offering, would enquire what
was the meaning of it, and this answer would be given to that enquiry,
that it was built by those separate tribes, in token of their communion
with their brethren and their joint-interest with them in the altar of
the Lord. Christ is the great altar that sanctifies every gift; the best
evidence of our interest in him will be the pattern of his Spirit in our
hearts, and our conformity to him. If we can produce this it will be a
testimony for us that we have a part in the Lord, and an earnest of our
perseverance in following him.

[Joshua 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jos 22:30</span></span>

We have here the good issue of this controversy, which, if there had not
been on both sides a disposition to peace, as there was on both sides a
zeal for God, might have been of ill consequence; for quarrels about
religion, for want of wisdom and love, often prove the most fierce and
most difficult to be accommodated. But these contending parties, when
the matter was fairly stated and argued, were so happy as to understand
one another very well, and so the difference was presently compromised.

I. The ambassadors were exceedingly pleased when the separate tribes had
given in a protestation of the innocency of their intentions in building
this altar. 1. The ambassadors did not call in question their sincerity
in that protestation, did not say, "You tell us you design it not for
sacrifice and offering, but who can believe you? What security will you
give us that it shall never be so used?" No. Charity believes all
things, hopes all things, believes and hopes the best, and is very loth
to give the lie to any. 2. They did not upbraid them with the rashness
and unadvisedness of this action, did not tell them, "If you would do
such a thing, and with this good intention, yet you might have had so
much respect for Joshua and Eleazar as to have advised with them, or at
least have made them acquainted with it, and so have saved the trouble
and expense of this embassy." But a little want of consideration and
good manners should be excused and overlooked in those who, we have
reason to think, mean honestly. 3. Much less did they go about to fish
for evidence to make out their charge, because they had once exhibited
it, but were glad to have their mistake rectified, and were not at all
ashamed to own it. Proud and peevish spirits, when they have passed an
unjust censure upon their brethren, though ever so much convincing
evidence be brought of the injustice of it, will stand to it, and can by
no means be persuaded to retract it. These ambassadors were not so
prejudiced; their brethren's vindication pleased them, [Jos
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#030.md). They looked upon their
innocency as a token of God's presence ([Jos
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#031).md), especially when they found
that what was done was so far from being an indication of their growing
cool to the altar of God that, one the contrary, it was a fruit of their
zealous affection to it: You have delivered the children of Israel out
of the hand of the Lord, that is, "You have not, as we feared, delivered
them into the hand of the Lord, or exposed them to his judgments by the
trespass we were jealous of."

II\. The congregation was abundantly satisfied when their ambassadors
reported to them their brethren's apology for what they had done. It
should seem they staid together, at least by their representatives,
until they heard the issue ([Jos
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#032).md); and when they understood the
truth of the matter it pleased them ([Jos
22:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#033).md), and they blessed God. Note,
Our brethren's constancy in religion, their zeal for the power of
godliness, and their keeping the unity of the Spirit in faith and love,
notwithstanding the jealousies conceived of them as breaking the unity
of the church, are things which we should be very glad to be satisfied
of, and should make the matter both of our rejoicing and of our
thanksgiving; let God have the glory of it, and let us take the comfort
of it. Being thus satisfied, they laid down their arms immediately, and
were so far from any thoughts of prosecuting the war they had been
meditating against their brethren that we may suppose them wishing for
the next feast, when they should meet them at Shiloh.

III\. The separate tribes were gratified, and, since they had a mind to
preserve among them this pattern of the altar of God, though there was
not likely to be that occasion for it which they fancied, yet Joshua and
the princes let them have their humour, and did not give orders for the
demolishing of it, though there was as much reason to fear that it might
in process of time be an occasion of idolatry as there was to hope that
ever it might be a preservation from idolatry. Thus did the strong bear
the infirmities of the weak. Only care was taken that they having
explained the meaning of their altar, that it was intended for no more
than a testimony of their communion with the altar at Shiloh, this
explanation should be recorded, which was done according to the usage of
those times by giving a name to it signifying so much ([Jos
22:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#034).md); they called it Ed, a witness
to that, and no more, a witness of the relation they stood in to God and
Israel, and of their concurrence with the rest of the tribes in the same
common faith, that Jehovah he is God, he and no other. It was a witness
to posterity of their care to transmit their religion pure and entire to
them, and would be a witness against them if ever they should forsake
God and turn from following after him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 23](jos023.md)

</div>
