<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1016)  [Next](kg1018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 17:0</span></span>

So sad was the character both of the princes and people of Israel, as
described in the foregoing chapter, that one might have expected God
would cast off a people that had so cast him off; but, as an evidence to
the contrary, never was Israel so blessed with a good prophet as when it
was so plagued with a bad king. Never was king so bold to sin as Ahab;
never was prophet so bold to reprove and threaten as Elijah, whose story
begins in this chapter and is full of wonders. Scarcely any part of the
Old Testament history shines brighter than this history of the spirit
and power of Elias; he only, of all the prophets, had the honour of
Enoch, the first prophet, to be translated, that he should not see
death, and the honour of Moses, the great prophet, to attend our Saviour
in his transfiguration. Other prophets prophesied and wrote, he
prophesied and acted, but wrote nothing; but his actions cast more
lustre on his name than their writings did on theirs. In this chapter we
have, I. His prediction of a famine in Israel, through the want of rain
([Kg1 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001)). II. The provision made
for him in that famine, 1. By the ravens at the brook Cherith ([Kg1
17:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#002)). 2. When that failed, by the
widow at Zarephath, who received him in the name of a prophet and had a
prophet's reward; for (1.) He multiplied her meal and her oil ([Kg1
17:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#008)). (2.) He raised her dead son
to life ([Kg1 17:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#017)). Thus his
story begins with judgments and miracles, designed to awaken that stupid
generation that had to deeply corrupted themselves.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 17:1</span></span>

The history of Elijah begins somewhat abruptly. Usually, when a prophet
enters, we have some account of his parentage, are told whose son he was
and of what tribe; but Elijah drops (so to speak) out of the clouds, as
if, like Melchisedek, he were without father, without mother, and
without descent, which made some of the Jews fancy that he was an angel
sent from heaven; but the apostle has assured us that he was a man
subject to like passions as we are ([Jam
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017)), which perhaps intimates, not
only that he was liable to the common infirmities of human nature, but
that, by his natural temper, he was a man of strong passions, more hot
and eager than most men, and therefore the more fit to deal with the
daring sinners of the age he lived in: so wonderfully does God suit men
to the work he designs them for. Rough spirits are called to rough
services. The reformation needed such a man as Luther to break the ice.
Observe, 1. The prophet's name: Elijahu - "My God Jehovah is he" (so it
signifies), "is he who sends me and will own me and bear me out, is he
to whom I would bring Israel back and who alone can effect that great
work." 2. His country: He was of the inhabitants of Gilead, on the other
side Jordan, either of the tribe of Gad or the half of Manasseh, for
Gilead was divided between them; but whether a native of either of those
tribes is uncertain. The obscurity of his parentage was no prejudice to
his eminency afterwards. We need not enquire whence men are, but what
they are: if it be a good thing, no matter though it come out of
Nazareth. Israel was sorely wounded when God sent them this balm from
Gilead and this physician thence. He is called a Tishbite from Thisbe, a
town in that country. Two things we have an account of here in the
beginning of his story: -

I. How he foretold a famine, a long and grievous famine, with which
Israel should be punished for their sins. That fruitful land, for want
of rain, should be turned into barrenness, for the iniquity of those
that dwelt therein. He went and told Ahab this; did not whisper it to
the people, to make them disaffected to the government, but proclaimed
it to the king, in whose power it was to reform the land, and so to
prevent the judgment. It is probable that he reproved Ahab for his
idolatry and other wickedness, and told him that unless he repented and
reformed this judgment would be brought upon his land. There should be
neither dew nor rain for some years, none but according to my word, that
is, "Expect none till you hear from me again." The apostle teaches us to
understand this, not only of the word of prophecy, but the word of
prayer, which turned the key of the clouds, [Jam
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017), [Jam
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#018). He prayed earnestly (in a holy
indignation at Israel's apostasy, and a holy zeal for the glory of God,
whose judgments were defied) that it might not rain; and, according to
his prayers, the heavens became as brass, till he prayed again that it
might rain. In allusion to this story it is said of God's witnesses
([Rev 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#006)), These have power to shut
heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy. Elijah lets Ahab
know, 1. That the Lord Jehovah is the God of Israel, whom he had
forsaken. 2. That he is a living God, and not like the gods he
worshipped, which were dead dumb idols. 3. That he himself was God's
servant in office, and a messenger sent from him: "It is he before whom
I stand, to minister to him," or "whom IO now represent, in whose stead
I stand, and in whose name I speak, in defiance of the prophets of Baal
and the groves." 4. That, notwithstanding the present peace and
prosperity of the kingdom of Israel, God was displeased with them for
their idolatry and would chastise them for it by the want of rain
(which, when he withheld it, it was not in the power of the gods they
served to bestow; for are there any of the vanities of the heathen that
can give rain? [Jer 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#022)), which
would effectually prove their impotency, and the folly of those who left
the living God, to make their court to such as could do neither good nor
evil; and this he confirms with a solemn oath - As the Lord God of
Israel liveth, that Ahab might stand the more in awe of the threatening,
the divine life being engaged for the accomplishment of it. 5. He lets
Ahab know what interest he had in heaven: It shall be according to my
word. With what dignity does he speak when he speaks in God's name, as
one who well understood that commission of a prophet ([Jer
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)), I have set thee over the
nations and over the kingdoms. See the power of prayer and the truth of
God's word; for he performeth the counsel of his messengers.

II\. How he was himself taken care of in that famine. 1. How he was
hidden. God bade him go and hide himself by the brook Cherith, [Kg1
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#003). This was intended, not so much
for his preservation, for it does not appear that Ahab immediately
sought his life, but as a judgment to the people, to whom, if he had
publicly appeared, he might have been a blessing both by his
instructions and his intercession, and so have shortened the days of
their calamity; but God had determined it should last three years and a
half, and therefore, so long, appointed Elijah to abscond, that he might
not be solicited to revoke the sentence, the execution of which he had
said should be according to his word. When God speaks concerning a
nation, to pluck up and destroy, he finds some way or other to remove
those that would stand in the gap to turn away his wrath. It bodes ill
to a people when good men and good ministers are ordered to hide
themselves. When God intended to send rain upon the earth then he bade
Elijah go and show himself to Ahab, [Kg1
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001). For the present, in obedience to
the divine command, he went and dwelt all alone in some obscure
unfrequented place, where he was not discovered, probably among the
reeds of the brook. If Providence calls us to solitude and retirement,
it becomes us to acquiesce; when we cannot be useful we must be patient,
and when we cannot work for God we must sit still quietly for him. 2.
How he was fed. Though he could not work there, having nothing to do but
to meditate and pray (which would help to prepare him for his usefulness
afterwards), yet he shall eat, for he is in the way of his duty, and
verily he shall be fed, in the day of famine he shall be satisfied. When
the woman, the church, is driven into the wilderness, care it taken that
she be fed and nourished there, time, times, and half a time, that is,
three years and a half, which was just the time of Elijah's concealment.
See [Rev 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006), [Rev
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014). Elijah must drink of the brook,
and the ravens were appointed to bring him meat ([Kg1
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#004)) and did so, [Kg1
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#006). Here, (1.) The provision was
plentiful, and good, and constant, bread and flesh twice a day, daily
bread and food convenient. We may suppose that he fared not so
sumptuously as the prophets of the groves, who did eat at Jezebel's
table ([Kg1 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019)), and yet better
than the rest of the Lord's prophets, whom Obadiah fed with bread and
water, [Kg1 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#004). It ill becomes God's
servants, especially his servants the prophets, to be nice and curious
about their food and to affect dainties and varieties; if nature be
sustained, no matter though the palate be not pleased; instead of
envying those who have daintier fare, we should think how many there
are, better than we, who live comfortably upon coarser fare and would be
glad of our leavings. Elijah had but one meal brought him at a time,
every morning and every evening, to teach him not to take thought for
the morrow. Let those who have but from hand to mouth learn to live upon
Providence, and trust it for the bread of the day in the day; thank God
for bread this day, and let tomorrow bring bread with it. (2.) The
caterers were very unlikely; the ravens brought it to him. Obadiah, and
others in Israel that had not bowed the knee to Baal, would gladly have
entertained Elijah; but he was a man by himself, and must be red in an
extraordinary way. He was a figure of John the baptist, whose meat was
locusts and wild honey. God could have sent angels to minister to him,
as he did afterwards ([Oba 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019) :5)
and as he did to our Saviour ([Mat
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#011)), but he chose to send by winged
messengers of another nature, to show that when he pleases he can serve
his own purposes by the meanest creatures as effectually as by the
mightiest. If it be asked whence the ravens had this provision, how and
where it was cooked, and whether they came honestly by it, we must
answer, as Jacob did ([Gen 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#020)), The
Lord our God brought it to them, whose the earth is and the fulness
thereof, the world and those that dwell therein. But why ravens? \[1.\]
They are birds of prey, ravenous devouring creatures, more likely to
have taken his meat from him, or to have picked out his eyes ([Pro
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#017)); but thus Samson's riddle is
again unriddled, Out of the eater comes forth meat. \[2.\] They are
unclean creatures.Every raven after his kind was, by the law, forbidden
to be eaten ([Lev 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#015)), yet Elijah
did not think the meat they brought ever the worse for that, but ate and
gave thanks, asking no question for conscience' sake. Noah's dove was to
him a more faithful messenger than his raven; yet here the ravens are
faithful and constant to Elijah. \[3.\] Ravens feed on insects and
carrion themselves, yet they brought the prophet man's meat and
wholesome food. It is a pity that those who bring the bread of life to
others should themselves take up with that which is not bread. \[4.\]
Ravens could bring but a little, and broken meat, yet Elijah was content
with such things as he had, and thankful that the was fed, though not
feasted. \[5.\] Ravens neglect their own young ones, and do not feed
them; yet when God pleases they shall feed his prophet. Young lions and
young ravens may lack, and suffer hunger, but not those that fear the
Lord, [Psa 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#010). \[6.\] Ravens are
themselves fed by special providence ([Job
38:41](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#041); [Psa
147:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#009)), and now they fed the prophet.
Have we experienced God's special goodness to us and ours? Let us reckon
ourselves obliged thereby to be kind to those that are his, for his
sake. Let us learn hence, First, To acknowledge the sovereignty and
power of God over all the creatures; he can make what use he pleases of
them, either for judgment or mercy. Secondly, To encourage ourselves in
God in the greatest straits, and never to distrust him. He that could
furnish a table in the wilderness, and make ravens purveyors, cooks, and
servitors to his prophet, is able to supply all our need according to
his riches in glory.

Thus does Elijah, for a great while, eat his morsels alone, and his
provision of water, which he has in an ordinary way from the brook,
fails him before that which he has by miracle. The powers of nature are
limited, but not the powers of the God of nature. Elijah's brook dried
up ([Kg1 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#007)) because there was no
rain. If the heavens fail, earth fails of course; such are all our
creature-comforts; we lose them when we most need them, like the brooks
in summer, [Job 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#015). But there is a
river which makes glad the city of God and which never runs dry ([Psa
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)), a well of water that springs up
to eternal life. Lord, give us that living water!

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 17:8</span></span>

We have here an account of the further protection Elijah was taken
under, and the further provision made for him in his retirement. At
destruction and famine he shall laugh that has God for his friend to
guard and maintain him. The brook Cherith is dried up, but God's care of
his people, and kindness to them, never slacken, never fail, but are
still the same, are still continued and drawn out to those that know
him, [Psa 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#010). When the brook was
dried up Jordan was not; why did not God send him thither? Surely
because he would show that he has a variety of ways to provide for his
people and is not tied to any one. God will now provide for him where he
shall have some company and opportunity of usefulness, and not be, as he
had been, buried alive. Observe,

I. The place he is sent to, to Zarephath, or Sarepta, a city of Sidon,
out of the borders of the land of Israel, [Kg1
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#009). Our Saviour takes notice of this
as an early and ancient indication of the favour of God designed for the
poor Gentiles, in the fulness of time, [Luk
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025), [Luk
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#026). Many widows were in Israel in
the days of Elias, and some, it is likely, that would have bidden him
welcome to their houses; yet he is sent to honour and bless with his
presence a city of Sidon, a Gentile city, and so becomes (says Dr.
Lightfoot) the first prophet of the Gentiles. Israel had corrupted
themselves with the idolatries of the nations and become worse than
they; justly therefore is the casting off of them the riches of the
world. Elijah was hated and driven out by his countrymen; therefore, lo,
he turns to the Gentiles, as the apostles were afterwards ordered to do,
[Act 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#006). But why to a city of Sidon?
Perhaps because the worship of Baal, which was now the crying sin of
Israel, came lately thence with Jezebel, who was a Sidonian ([Kg1
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#031)); therefore thither he shall go,
that thence may be fetched the destroyer of that idolatry, "Even out of
Sidon have I called my prophet, my reformer." Jezebel was Elijah's
greatest enemy; yet, to show her the impotency of her malice, God will
find a hiding-place for him even in her country. Christ never went among
the Gentiles except once into the coast of Sidon, [Mat
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#021).

II\. The person that is appointed to entertain him, not one of the rich
merchants or great men, of Sidon, not such a one as Obadiah, that was
governor of Ahab's house and fed the prophets; but a poor widow woman,
destitute and desolate, is commanded (that is, is made both able and
willing) to sustain him. It is God's way, and it is his glory, to make
use of the weak and foolish things of the world and put honour upon
them. He is, in a special manner, the widows' God, and feeds them, and
therefore they must study what they shall render to him.

III\. The provision made for him there. Providence brought the widow
woman to meet him very opportunely at the gate of the city ([Kg1
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#010)), and, by what is here related
of what passed between Elijah and her, we find,

1\. Her case and character; and it appears, (1.) That she was very poor
and necessitous. She had nothing to live upon but a handful of meal and
a little oil, needy at the best, and now, by the general scarcity,
reduced to the last extremity. When she has eaten the little she has,
for aught she yet sees, she must die for want, she and her son, [Kg1
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#012). She had no fuel but the sticks
she gathered in the streets, and, having no servant, she must gather
them herself ([Kg1 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#010)), being thus
more in a condition to receive alms than give entertainment. To her
Elijah was sent, that he might still live upon Providence as much as he
did when the ravens fed him. It was in compassion to the low estate of
his handmaiden that God sent the prophet to her, not to beg of her, but
to board with her, and he would pay well for his table. (2.) That she
was very humble and industrious. He found her gathering sticks, and
preparing to bake her own bread, [Kg1
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#010), [Kg1
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#012). Her mind was brought to her
condition, and she complained not of the hardship she was brought to,
nor quarrelled with the divine Providence for withholding rain, but
accommodated herself to it as well as she could. Such as are of this
temper in a day of trouble are best prepared for honour and relief from
God. (3.) That she was very charitable and generous. When this stranger
desired her to go and fetch him some water to drink, she readily went,
at the first word, [Kg1 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#010), [Kg1
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#011). She objected not to the present
scarcity of it, nor asked him what he would give her for a draught of
water (for now it was worth money), nor hinted that he was a stranger,
an Israelite, with whom perhaps the Sidonians cared not for having any
dealings, any more than the Samaritans, [Joh
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#009). She did not excuse herself on
account of her weakness through famine, or the urgency of her own
affairs, did not tell him she had something else to do than to go on his
errands, but left off gathering the sticks for herself to fetch water
for him, which perhaps she did the more willingly, being moved with the
gravity of his aspect. We should be ready to do any office of kindness
even to strangers; if we have not wherewith to give to the distressed,
we must be the more ready to work for them. A cup of cold water, though
it cost us no more than the labour of fetching, shall in no wise lose
its reward. (4.) That she had a great confidence in the word of God. It
was a great trial for her faith and obedience when, having gold the
prophet how low her stock of meal and oil was and that she had but just
enough for herself and her son, he bade her make a cake for him, and
make his first, and then prepare for herself and her son. If we
consider, it will appear as great a trial as could be in so small a
matter. "Let the children first be served" (might she have said);
"charity begins at home. I cannot be expected to give, having but
little, and not knowing, when that is gone, where to obtain more." She
had much more reason than Nabal to ask, "Shall I take my meat and my oil
and give it to one that I know not whence he is?" Elijah, it is true,
made mention of the God of Israel ([Kg1
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#014)), but what was that to a
Sidonian? Or if she had a veneration for the name Jehovah, and valued
the God of Israel as the true God, yet what assurance had she that this
stranger was his prophet or had any warrant to speak in his name? It was
easy for a hungry vagrant to impose upon her. But she gets over all
these objections, and obeys the precept in dependence upon the promise:
She went and did according to the saying of Elijah, [Kg1
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#015). O woman! great was thy faith;
one has not found the like, no, not in Israel: all things considered, it
exceeded that of the widow who, when she had but two mites, cast them
into the treasury. She took the prophet's word, that she should not lose
by it, but it should be repaid with interest. Those that can venture
upon the promise of God will make no difficulty of exposing and emptying
themselves in his service, by giving him his dues out of a little and
giving him his part first. Those that deal with God must deal upon
trust; seek first his kingdom, and then other things shall be added. By
the law, the first-fruits were God's, the tithe was taken out first, and
the heave-offering of their dough was first offered, [Num
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#020), [Num
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#021). But surely the increase of this
widow's faith, to such a degree as to enable her thus to deny herself
and to depend upon the divine promise, was as great a miracle in the
kingdom of grace as the increase of her oil was in the kingdom of
providence. Happy are those who can thus, against hope, believe and obey
in hope.

2\. The care God took of her guest: The barrel of meal wasted not, nor
did the cruse of oil fail, but still as they took from them more was
added to them by the divine power, [Kg1
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#016). Never did corn or olive so
increase in the growing (says bishop Hall) as these did in the using;
but the multiplying of the seed sown ([Co2
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#010)) in the common course of
providence is an instance of the power and goodness of God not to be
overlooked because common. The meal and the oil multiplied, not in the
hoarding, but in the spending; for there is that scattereth and yet
increaseth. When God blesses a little, it will go a great way, even
beyond expectation; as, on the contrary, though there be abundance, if
he blow upon it, it comes to little, [Hag
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#009); [Hag
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#016). (1.) This was a maintenance for
the prophet. Still miracles shall be his daily bread. Hitherto he had
been fed with bread and flesh, now he was fed with bread and oil, which
they used as we do butter. Manna was both, for the taste of it was as
the taste of fresh oil, [Num 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#008).
This Elijah was thankful for, though he had been used to flesh twice a
day and now had none at all. Those that cannot live without flesh, once
a day at least, because they have been used to it, could not have
boarded contentedly with Elijah, no, not to live upon a miracle. (2.) It
was a maintenance for the poor widow and her son, and a recompence to
her for entertaining the prophet. There is nothing lost by being kind to
God's people and ministers; she that received a prophet had a prophet's
reward; she gave him house-room, and he repaid her with food for her
household. Christ has promised to those who open their doors to him that
he will come in to them, and sup with them, and they with him, [Rev
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020). Like Elijah here, he brings to
those who bid him welcome, not only his own entertainment, but theirs
too. See how the reward answered the service. She generously made one
cake for the prophet, and was repaid with many for herself and her son.
When Abraham offers his only son to God he is told he shall be the
father of multitudes. What is laid out in piety or charity is let out to
the best interest, upon the best securities. One poor meal's meat this
poor widow gave the prophet, and, in recompence of it, she and her son
did eat many days ([Kg1 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#015)), above
two years, in a time of general scarcity; and to have their food from
God's special favour, and to eat it in such good company as Elijah's,
made it more than doubly sweet. It is promised to those that trust in
God that they shall not be ashamed in the evil time, but in the days of
famine they shall be satisfied, [Psa
37:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#019).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 17:17</span></span>

We have here a further recompence made to the widow for her kindness to
the prophet; as if it were a small thing to be kept alive, her son, when
dead, is restored to life, and so restored to her. Observe,

I. The sickness and death of the child. For aught that appears he was
her only son, the comfort of her widowed estate. He was fed
miraculously, and yet that did not secure him from sickness and death.
Your fathers did eat manna, and are dead, but there is bread of which a
man may eat and not die, which was given for the life of the world, [Joh
6:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#049), [Joh
6:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#050). The affliction was to this widow
as a thorn in the flesh, lest she should be lifted up above measure with
the favours that were done her and the honours that were put upon her.
1. She was nurse to a great prophet, was employed to sustain him, and
had strong reason to think the Lord would do her good; yet now she loses
her child. Note, We must not think it strange if we meet with very sharp
afflictions, even when we are in the way of duty, and of eminent service
to God. 2. She was herself nursed by miracle, and kept a good house
without charge or care, by a distinguishing blessing from heaven; and in
the midst of all this satisfaction she was thus afflicted. Note, When we
have the clearest manifestations of God's favour and good-will towards
us, even then we must prepare for the rebukes of Providence. Our
mountain never stands so strong but it may be moved, and therefore, in
this world, we must always rejoice with trembling.

II\. Her pathetic complaint to the prophet of this affliction. It should
seem, the child died suddenly, else she would have applied to Elijah,
while he was sick, for the cure of him; but being dead, dead in her
bosom, she expostulates with the prophet upon it, rather to give vent to
her sorrow than in any hope of relief, [Kg1
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#018). 1. She expresses herself
passionately: What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? How calmly
had she spoken of her own and her child's death when she expected to die
for want ([Kg1 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#012)) - that we may
eat, and die! Yet now that her child dies, and not so miserably as by
famine, she is extremely disturbed at it. We may speak lightly of an
affliction at a distance, but when it toucheth us we are troubled, [Job
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#005). Then she spoke deliberately, now
in haste; the death of her child was now a surprise to her, and it is
hard to keep our spirits composed when troubles come upon us suddenly
and unexpectedly, and in the midst of our peace and prosperity. She
calls him a man of God, and yet quarrels with him as if he had
occasioned the death of her child, and is ready to which she had never
seen him, forgetting past mercies and miracles: "What have I done
against thee?" (so some understand it), "Wherein have I offended thee,
or been wanting in my duty? Show me wherefore thou contendest with me."
2. Yet she expresses herself penitently: "Hast thou come to call my sin
to thy remembrance, as the cause of the affliction, and so to call it to
my remembrance, as the effect of the affliction?" Perhaps she knew of
Elijah's intercession against Israel, and, being conscious to herself of
sin, perhaps her former worshipping of Baal the god of the Sidonians,
she apprehends he had made intercession against her. Note, (1.) When God
removes our comforts from use he remembers our sins against us, perhaps
the iniquities of our youth, though long since past, [Job
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#026). Our sins are the death of our
children. (2.) When God thus remembers our sins against us he designs
thereby to make us remember them against ourselves and repent of them.

III\. The prophet's address to God upon this occasion. He gave no answer
to her expostulation, but brought it to God, and laid the case before
him, not knowing what to say to it himself. He took the dead child from
the mother's bosom to his own bed, [Kg1
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#019). Probably he had taken a
particular kindness to the child, and found the affliction his own more
than by sympathy. He retired to his chamber, and, 1. He humbly reasons
with God concerning the death of the child, [Kg1
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#020). He sees death striking by
commission from God: Thou hast brought this evil for is there any evil
of this kind in the city, in the family, and the Lord has not done it?
He pleads the greatness of the affliction to the poor mother: "It is
evil upon the widow; thou art the widow's God, and dost not usually
bring evil upon widows; it is affliction added to the afflicted." He
pleads his own concern: "It is the widow with whom I sojourn; wilt thou,
that art my God, bring evil upon one of the best of my benefactors? I
shall be reflected upon, and others will be afraid of entertaining me,
if I bring death into the house where I come." 2. He earnestly begs of
God to restore the child to life again, [Kg1
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#021). We do not read before this of
any that were raised to life; yet Elijah, by a divine impulse, prays for
the resurrection of this child, which yet will not warrant us to do the
like. David expected not, by fasting and prayer, to bring his child back
to life ([Sa2 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#023)), but Elijah had a
power to work miracles, which David had not. He stretched himself upon
the child, to affect himself with the case and to show how much he was
affected with it and how desirous he was of the restoration of the child
- he would if he could put life into him by his own breath and warmth;
also to give a sign of what God would do by his power, and what he does
by his grace, in raising dead souls to a spiritual life; the Holy Ghost
comes upon them, overshadows them, and puts life into them. He is very
particular in his prayer: I pray thee let this child's soul come into
him again, which plainly supposes the existence of the soul in a state
of separation from the body, and consequently its immortality, which
Grotius thinks God designed by this miracle to give intimation and
evidence of, for the encouragement of his suffering people.

IV\. The resurrection of the child, and the great satisfaction it gave
to the mother: the child revived, [Kg1
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#022). See the power of prayer and the
power of him that hears prayer, who kills and makes alive. Elijah
brought him to his mother, who, we may suppose, could scarcely believe
her own eyes, and therefore Elijah assures her it is her own: "It is thy
son that liveth; see it is thy own, and not another," [Kg1
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#023). The good woman hereupon cries
out, Now I know that thou art a man of God; though she knew it before,
by the increase of her meal, yet the death of her child she took so
unkindly that she began to question it (a good man surely would not
serve her so); but now she was abundantly satisfied that he had both the
power and goodness of a man of God, and will never doubt of it again,
but give up herself to the direction of his word and the worship of the
God of Israel. Thus the death of the child (like that of Lazarus, [Joh
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#004)) was for the glory of God and the
honour of his prophet.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 18](kg1018)

</div>
