<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1000)  [Next](kg1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

In this chapter we have, I. David declining in his health ([Kg1
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)). II. Adonijah aspiring to the
kingdom, and treating his party, in order to it ([Kg1
1:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#005)). III. Nathan and Bathsheba
contriving to secure the succession to Solomon, and prevailing for an
order from David for the purpose (v. 11-31). IV. The anointing of
Solomon accordingly, and the people's joy therein ([Kg1
1:32-40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#032)). V. The effectual stop this
put to Adonijah's usurpation, and the dispersion of his party thereupon
([Kg1 1:41-49](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#041)). VI. Solomon's
dismission of Adonijah upon his good behaviour ([Kg1
1:50-53](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#050)).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 1:1</span></span>

David, as recorded in the foregoing chapter, had, by the great mercy of
God, escaped the sword of the destroying angel. But our deliverances
from or through diseases and dangers are but reprieves; if the candle be
not blown out, it will burn out of itself. We have David here sinking
under the infirmities of old age, and brought by them to the gates of
the grave. He that cometh up out of the pit shall fall into the snare;
and, one way or other, we must needs die. 1. It would have troubled one
to see David so infirm. He as old, and his natural heat so wasted that
no clothes could keep him warm, [Kg1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001). David had been a valiant active
man and a man of business, and very vehement had the flame always been
in his breast; and yet now his blood is chilled and stagnated, he is
confined to his bed, and there can get no heat. He was now seventy years
old. Many, at that age, are as lively and fit for business as ever; but
David was now chastised for his former sins, especially that in the
matter of Uriah, and felt from his former toils and the hardships he had
gone through in his youth, which then he made nothing of, but was now
the worse for. Let not the strong man glory in his strength, which may
soon be weakened by sickness, or at last will be weakened by old age.
Let young people remember their Creator in the days of their youth,
before these evil days come. What our hand finds to do for God, and our
souls, and our generation, let us do with all our might, because the
night comes, the night of old age, in which no man can work; and, when
our strength has gone, it will be a comfort to remember that we used it
well. 2. It would have troubled one to see his physicians so weak and
unskilful that they knew no other way of relieving him than by outward
applications. No cordials, no spirits, but, (1.) They covered him with
clothes, which, where there is any inward heat, will keep it in, and so
increase it; but, where it is not, they have none to communicate, no,
not royal clothing. Elihu makes it a difficulty to understand how our
garments are warm upon us ([Job
37:17](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#017)); but, if God deny his blessing,
men clothe themselves, and there is none warm ([Hag
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006)), David here was not. (2.) They
foolishly prescribed nuptials to one that should rather have been
preparing for his funeral ([Kg1
1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#002)); but they knew what would
gratify their own corruptions, and perhaps were too willing to gratify
his, under colour of consulting his health. His prophets should have
been consulted as well as his physicians in an affair of this nature.
However, this might be excused then, when even good men ignorantly
allowed themselves to have many wives. We now have not so learned of
Christ, but are taught that one man must have but one wife ([Mat
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#005)), and further that it is good for
a man not to touch a woman, [Co1 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001).
That Abishag was married to David before she lay with him, and was his
secondary wife, appears from its being imputed as a great crime to
Adonijah that he desired to marry her ([Kg1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#022)) after his father's death.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 1:5</span></span>

David had much affliction in his children. Amnon and Absalom had both
been his grief; the one his first-born, the other his third, [Sa2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#002), [Sa2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#003). His second, whom he had by
Abigail, we will suppose he had comfort in; his fourth was Adonijah
([Sa2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#004)); he was one of those that
were born in Hebron; we have heard nothing of him till now, and here we
are told that he was a comely person, and that he was next in age, and
(as it proved) next in temper to Absalom, [Kg1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#006). And, further, that in his
father's eyes he had been a jewel, but was now a thorn.

I. His father had made a fondling of him, [Kg1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#006). He had not displeased him at any
time. It is not said that he never displeased his father; it is probably
that he had done so frequently, and his father was secretly troubled at
his misconduct and lamented it before God. But his father had not
displeased him, by crossing him in his humours, denying him any thing he
had a mind to, or by calling him to an account as to what he had done
and where he had been, or by keeping him to his book or his business, or
reproving him for what he saw or heard of that he did amiss; he never
said to him, Why hast thou done so? because he saw it was uneasy to him,
and he could not bear it without fretting. It was the son's fault that
he was displeased at reproof and took it for affront, whereby he lost
the benefit of it; and it was the father's fault that, because he saw it
displeased him, he did not reprove him; and now he justly smarted for
indulging him. Those who honour their sons more than God, as those do
who keep them not under good discipline, thereby forfeit the honour they
might expect from their sons.

II\. He, in return, made a fool of his father. Because he was old, and
confined to his bed, he thought no notice was to be taken of him, and
therefore exalted himself, and said, I will be king, [Kg1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#005). Children that are indulged learn
to be proud and ambitious, which is the ruin of a great many young
people. The way to keep them humble is to keep them under. Observe
Adonijah's insolence. 1. He looked upon the days of mourning for his
father to be at hand, and therefore he prepared to succeed him, though
he knew that by the designation both of God and David Solomon was to be
the man; for public notice had been given of it by David himself, and
the succession settled, as it were by act of parliament, in pursuance of
God's appointment, [Ch1 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#009); [Ch1
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#001). This entail Adonijah attempted
by force to cut off, in contempt both of God and his father. Thus is the
kingdom of Christ opposed, and there are those that say, "We will not
have him to reign over us." 2. He looked upon his father as
superannuated and good for nothing, and therefore he entered immediately
upon the possession of the throne. He cannot wait till his father's head
be laid low, but it must now be said, Adonijah reigns ([Kg1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#018)), and, God save king Adonijah,
[Kg1 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#025). His father is not fit to
govern, for he is old and past ruling, nor Solomon, for he is young, and
not yet able to rule; and therefore Adonijah will take the government
upon him. It argues a very base and wicked mind for children to insult
over their parents because of the infirmities of their age. 3. In
pursuance of this ambitious project, (1.) He got a great retinue ([Kg1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#005)), chariots and horsemen, both for
state and strength, to wait on him, and to fight for him. (2.) He made
great interest with no less than Joab, the general of the army, and
Abiathar the high priest, [Kg1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#007).
That he should make his court to those who by their influence in church
and camp were capable of doing him great service is not strange; but we
may well wonder by what arts they could be drawn to follow him and help
him. They were old men, who had been faithful to David in the most
difficult and troublesome of his times, men of sense and experience,
who, one would think, would not easily be wheedled. They could not
propose any advantage to themselves by supporting Adonijah, for they
were both at the top of their preferment and stood fast in it. They
could not be ignorant of the entail of the crown upon Solomon, which it
was not in their power to cut off, and therefore it was their interest
to oblige him. But God, in this matter, left them to themselves, perhaps
to correct them for some former misconduct with a scourge of their own
making. We are told ([Kg1 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#008)) who
those were that were of such approved fidelity to David that Adonijah
had not the confidence so much as to propose his project to them -
Zadok, Benaiah, and Nathan. A man that has given proofs of his resolute
adherence to that which is good shall not be asked to do a bad thing.
(3.) He prepared a great entertainment ([Kg1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#009)) at En-rogel, not far from
Jerusalem; his guests were the king's sons, and the king's servants,
whom he feasted and caressed to bring them over to his party; but
Solomon was not invited, either because he despised him or because he
despaired of him, [Kg1 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#010). Such as
serve their own belly, and will be in the interest of those that will
feast them what side soever they are of, are an easy prey to seducers,
[Rom 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018). Some think that Adonijah
slew these sheep and oxen, even fat ones, for sacrifice, and that it was
a religious feast he made, beginning his usurpation with a show of
devotion, as Absalom under the colour of a vow ([Sa2
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#007)), which he might do the more
plausibly when he had the high priest himself on his side. It is a pity
that any occasion should ever be given to say, In nomine Domini incipit
omne malam - In the name of the Lord begins all evil, and that all
religious exercises should be made to patronise all religious practices.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 1:11</span></span>

We have here the effectual endeavours that were used by Nathan and
Bathsheba to obtain from David a ratification of Solomon's succession,
for the crushing of Adonijah's usurpation. 1. David himself knew not
what was doing. Disobedient children think that they are well enough off
if they can but keep their good old parents ignorant of their bad
courses; but a bird of the air will carry the voice. 2. Bathsheba lived
retired, and knew nothing of it either, till Nathan informed her. Many
get very comfortably through this world that know little how the world
goes. 3. Solomon, it is likely, knew of it, but was as a deaf man that
heard not. Though he had years, and wisdom above his years, yet we do
not find that he stirred to oppose Adonijah, but quietly composed
himself and left it to God and his friends to order the matter. Hence
David, in his Psalm for Solomon, observes that while men, in pursuit of
the world, in vain rise early and sit up late, God giveth his beloved
(his Jedidiahs) sleep, in giving them to be easy, and to gain their
point without agitation, [Psa 127:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001),
[Psa 127:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002). How then is the design
brought about?

I. Nathan the prophet alarms Bathsheba by acquainting her with the case,
and puts her in a way to get an order from the king for the confirming
of Solomon's title. He was concerned, because he knew God's mind, and
David's and Israel's interest; it was by him that God had named Solomon
Jedidiah ([Sa2 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#025)), and therefore
he could not sit still and see the throne usurped, which he knew was
Solomon's right by the will of him from whom promotion cometh. When
crowns were disposed of by immediate direction from heaven, no marvel
that prophets were so much interested and employed in that matter; but
now that common providence rules the affairs of the kingdom of men ([Dan
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#032)) the subordinate agency must be
left to common persons, and let not prophets intermeddle in them, but
keep to the affairs of the kingdom of God among men. Nathan applied to
Bathsheba, as one that had the greatest concern for Solomon, and could
have the freest access to David. He informed her of Adonijah's attempt
([Kg1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#011)), and that it was not with
David's consent or knowledge. He suggested to her that not only Solomon
was in danger of losing the crown, but that he and she too were in
danger of losing their lives if Adonijah prevailed. A humble spirit may
be indifferent to a crown, and may be content, notwithstanding the
prospect of it, to sit down short of the possession of it. But the law
of self-preservation, and the sixth commandment, obliges us to use all
possible endeavours to secure our own life and the life of others. Now,
says Nathan, let me give thee counsel how to save thy own life and the
life of thy son, [Kg1 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#012). Such as
this is the counsel that Christ's ministers give us in his name, to give
all diligence, not only that no man take our crown ([Rev
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#011)), but that we save our lives,
even the lives of our souls. He directs her ([Kg1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#013)) to go to the king, to remind him
of his word and oath, that Solomon should be his successor; and to ask
him in the most humble manner, Why doth Adonijah reign? He thought David
was not so cold but this would warm him. Conscience, as well as a sense
of honour, would put life into him upon such an occasion as this; and he
promised ([Kg1 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#024)) that, while she
was reasoning with the king in this matter, he would come in and second
her, as if he came accidentally, which perhaps the king might look upon
as a special providence (and he was one that took notice of such
evidences, [Sa1 25:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#032), [Sa1
25:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#033)), or, at least, it would help to
awaken him so much the more.

II\. Bathsheba, according to Nathan's advice and direction, loses no
time, but immediately makes her application to the king, on the same
errand on which Esther came to king Ahasuerus, to intercede for her
life. She needed not wait for a call as Esther did, she knew she should
be welcome at any time; but it is remarked that when she visited the
king Abishag was ministering to him ([Kg1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#015)), and Bathsheba took no
displeasure either at him or her for it, also that she bowed and did
obeisance to the king ([Kg1 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#016)), in
token of her respect to him both as her prince and as her husband; such
a genuine daughter was she of Sarah, who obeyed Abraham, calling him
lord. Those that would find favour with superiors mush show them
reverence, and be dutiful to those whom they expect to be kind to them.
Her address to the king, on this occasion, is very discreet. 1. She
reminded him of his promise made to her and confirmed with a solemn
oath, that Solomon should succeed him, [Kg1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#017). She knew how fast this would
hold such a conscientious man as David was. 2. She informed him of
Adonijah's attempt, which he was ignorant of ([Kg1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#018)): "Adonijah reigns, in
competition with thee for the present and in contradiction to thy
promise for the future. The fault is not thine, for thou knewest it not;
but now that thou knowest it thou wilt, in pursuance of thy promise,
take care to suppress this usurpation." She told him who were Adonijah's
guests, and who were in his interest, and added, but "Solomon thy
servant has he not called, which plainly shows he looks upon him as his
rival, and aims to undermine him, [Kg1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#019). It is not an oversight, but a
contempt of the act of settlement, that Solomon is neglected." 3. She
pleads that it is very much in his power to obviate this mischief ([Kg1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#020)): The eyes of all Israel are upon
thee, not only as a king, for we cannot suppose it the prerogative of
any prince to bequeath his subjects by will (as if they were his goods
and chattels) to whom he pleases, but as a prophet. All Israel knew that
David was not only himself the anointed of the God of Jacob, but that
the Spirit of the Lord spoke by him ([Sa2
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001), [Sa2
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#002)), and therefore waiting for and
depending upon a divine designation, in a matter of such importance,
David's word would be an oracle and a law to them; this therefore (says
Bathsheba) they expect, and it will end the controversy and effectually
quash all Adonijah's pretensions. A divine sentence is in the lips of
the king. Note, Whatever power, interest or influence, men have, they
ought to improve it to the utmost for the preserving and advancing of
the kingdom of the Messiah, of which Solomon's kingdom was a type. 4.
She suggested the imminent peril which she and her son would be in if
this matter was not settled in David's life-time, [Kg1
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#021). "If Adonijah prevail, as he is
likely to do (having Joab the general and Abiathar the priest on his
side) unless speedily suppressed, Solomon and all his friends will be
looked upon as traitors and dealt with accordingly." Usurpers are most
cruel. If Adonijah had got into the throne, he would not have dealt so
fairly with Solomon as Solomon did with him. Those hazard everything who
stand in the way of such as against right force their entrance.

III\. Nathan the prophet, according to his promise, seasonably stepped
in, and seconded her, while she was speaking, before the king had given
his answer, lest. if he had heard Bathsheba's representation only, his
answer should be dilatory and only that he would consider of it: but out
of the mouth of two witnesses, two such witnesses, the word would be
established, and he would immediately give positive orders. The king is
told that Nathan the prophet has come, and he is sure to be always
welcome to the king, especially when either he is not well or has any
great affair upon his thoughts; for, in either case, a prophet will be,
in a particular manner, serviceable to him. Nathan knows he must render
honour to whom honour is due, and therefore pays the king the same
respect now that he finds him sick in bed as he would have done if he
had found him in his throne: He bowed himself with his face to the
ground, [Kg1 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#023). He deals a little
more plainly with the king than Bathsheba had done. In this his
character would support him, and the present languor of the king's
spirits made it necessary that they should be roused. 1. He makes the
same representation of Adonijah's attempt as Bathsheba had made ([Kg1
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#025), [Kg1
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#026)), adding that his party had
already got to such a height of assurance as to shout, God save king
Adonijah, as if king David were already dead, taking notice also that
they had not invited him to their feast (Me thy servant has he not
called), thereby intimating that they resolved not to consult either God
or David in the matter, for Nathan was secretioribus consiliis -
intimately acquainted with the mind of both. 2. He makes David sensible
how much he was concerned to clear himself from having a hand in it:
Hast thou said, Adonijah shall reign after me? ([Kg1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#024)), and again ([Kg1
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#027)), "Is this thing done by my lord
the king? If it be, he is not so faithful either to God's word or to his
own as we all took him to be; if it be not, it is high time that we
witness against the usurpation, and declare Solomon his successor. If it
be, why is not Nathan made acquainted with it, who is not only in
general, the king's confidant, but is particularly concerned in this
matter, having been employed to notify to David the mind of God
concerning the succession; but, if my lord the king knows nothing of the
matter (as certainly he does not), what daring insolence are Adonijah
and his party guilty of!" Thus he endeavoured to incense David against
them, that he might act the more vigorously for the support of Solomon's
interest. Note, Good men would do their duty if they were reminded of
it, and put upon it, and told what occasion there is for them to appear;
and those who thus are their remembrancers do them a real kindness, as
Nathan here did to David.

IV\. David, hereupon, made a solemn declaration of his firm adherence to
his former resolution, that Solomon should be his successor. Bathsheba
is called in ([Kg1 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#028)), and to her,
as acting for and on behalf of her son, the king gives these fresh
assurances. 1. He repeats his former promise and oath, owns that he had
sworn unto her by the Lord God of Israel that Solomon would reign after
him, [Kg1 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#030). Though he is old, and
his memory begins to fail him, yet he remembers this. Note, An oath is
so sacred a thing that the obligations of it cannot be broken, and so
solemn a thing that the impressions of it, one would think, cannot be
forgotten. 2. He ratifies it with another, because the occasion called
for it: As the Lord liveth, that hath redeemed my soul out of all
distress, even so will I certainly do this day, without dispute, without
delay. His form of swearing seems to be what he commonly used on solemn
occasions, for we find it, [Sa2 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#009).
And it carries in it a grateful acknowledgment of the goodness of God to
him, in bringing him safely through the many difficulties and hardships
which had lain in his way, and which he now makes mention of to the
glory of God (as Jacob, when he lay a dying, [Gen
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016)), thus setting to his seal, from
his own experience, that that was true which the Spirit of the Lord
spoke by him. [Psa 34:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#022), The Lord
redeemeth the soul of his servants. Dying saints ought to be witnesses
for God, and speak of him as they have found. Perhaps he speaks thus, on
this occasion, for the encouragement of his son and successor to trust
in God in the distresses he also might meet with.

V. Bathsheba receives these assurances ([Kg1
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#031)), 1. With great complaisance to
the king's person; she did reverence to him; while Adonijah and his
party affronted him. 2. With hearty good wishes for the king's health;
Let him live. So far was she from thinking that he lived too long that
she prayed he might live for ever, if it were possible, to adorn the
crown he wore and to be a blessing to his people. We should earnestly
desire the prolonging of useful lives, however it may be the postponing
of any advantages of our own.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg1 1:32</span></span>

We have here the effectual care David took both to secure Solomon's
right and to preserve the public peace, by crushing Adonijah's project
in the bud. Observe,

I. The express orders he gave for the proclaiming of Solomon. The
persons he entrusted with this great affair were Zadok, Nathan, and
Benaiah, men of power and interest whom David had always reposed a
confidence in and found faithful to him, and whom Adonijah had passed by
in his invitation, [Kg1 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#010). David
orders them forthwith, with all possible solemnity, to proclaim Solomon.
They must take with them the servants of their lord, the lifeguards, and
all the servants of the household. They must set Solomon on the mule the
king used to ride, for he kept not such stables of horses as his son
afterwards did. He appoints them whither to go ([Kg1
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#033) and [Kg1
1:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#034), [Kg1
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#035)), and what to do. 1. Zadok and
Nathan, the two ecclesiastical persons, must, in God's name, anoint him
king; for though he was not the first of his family, as Saul and David
were, yet he was a younger son, was made king by divine appointment, and
his title was contested, which made it necessary that hereby it should
be settled. This unction was typical of the designation and
qualification of the Messiah, or Christ, the anointed one, on whom the
Spirit, that oil of gladness, was poured without measure, [Heb
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#009), [Psa
89:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020). And all Christians, being heirs
of the kingdom ([Jam 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005)), do from him
receive the anointing, [Jo1 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027). 2.
The great officers, civil and military, are ordered to give public
notice of this, and to express the public joy upon this occasion by
sound of trumpet, by which the law of Moses directed the gracing of
great solemnities; to this must be added the acclamations of the people:
"Let king Solomon live, let him prosper, let his kingdom be established
and perpetuated, and let him long continue in the enjoyment of it;" so
it had been promised concerning him. [Psa
72:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#015), He shall live. 3. They must
then bring him in state to the city of David, and he must sit upon the
throne of his father, as his substitute now, or viceroy, to despatch
public business during his weakness and be his successor after his
death: He shall be king in my stead. It would be a great satisfaction to
David himself, and to all parties concerned, to have this done
immediately, that upon the demise of the king there might be no dispute,
or agitation, in the public affairs. David was far from grudging his
successor the honour of appearing such in his life-time, and yet perhaps
was so taken up with his devotions on his sick-bed that, if he had not
been put in mind of it by others, this great good work, which was so
necessary to the public repose, would have been left undone.

II\. The great satisfaction which Benaiah, in the name of the rest,
professed in these orders. The king said, "Solomon shall reign for me,
and reign after me." "Amen" (says Benaiah heartily); "as the king says,
so say we; we are entirely satisfied in the nomination, and concur in
the choice, we give our vote for Solomon, nemine contradicente -
unanimously, and since we can bring nothing to pass, much less establish
it, without the concurrence of a propitious providence, The Lord God of
my lord the king say so too!" [Kg1
1:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#036). This is the language of his
faith in that promise of God on which Solomon's government was founded.
If we say as God says in his word, we may hope that he will say as we
say by his providence. To this he adds a prayer for Solomon ([Kg1
1:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#037)), that God would be with him as
he had been with David, and make his throne greater. He knew David was
not one of those that envy their children's greatness, and that
therefore he would not be disquieted at this prayer, nor take it as an
affront, but would heartily say Amen to it. The wisest and best man in
the world desires his children may be wiser and better than he, for he
himself desires to be wiser and better than he is; and wisdom and
goodness are true greatness.

III\. The immediate execution of these orders, [Kg1
1:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#038). No time was lost, but Solomon
was brought in state to the place appointed, and there Zadok (who,
though he was not as yet high priest, was, we may suppose, the
suffragan, the Jews called him the sagan, or second priest) anointed him
by the direction of Nathan the prophet and David the king, [Kg1
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#039). In the tabernacle, where the ark
was now lodged, was kept among other sacred things, the holy oil for
many religious services thence Zadok took a horn of oil, which denotes
both power and plenty, and therewith anointed Solomon. We do not find
that Abiathar pretended to anoint Adonijah: he was made king by a feast,
not by an unction. Whom God calls, he will qualify, which was signified
by the anointing; usurpers had it not. Christ signifies anointed, and he
is the king whom God hath set upon his holy hill of Sion, according to
decree, [Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006), [Psa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007). Christians also are made to our
God (and by him) kings, and they have an unction from the Holy One, [Jo1
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020). The people, hereupon, express
their great joy and satisfaction in the elevation of Solomon, surround
him with their Hosannas - God save king Solomon, and attend him with
their music and shouts of joy, [Kg1
1:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#040). Hereby they declared their
concurrence in the choice, and that he was not forced upon them, but
cheerfully accepted by them. The power of a prince can be little
satisfaction to himself, unless he knows it to be a satisfaction to his
people. Every Israelite indeed rejoices in the exaltation of the Son of
David.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 1:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">kg1 1:41</span></span>

We have here,

I. The tidings of Solomon's inauguration brought to Adonijah and his
party, in the midst of their jollity: They had made an end of eating,
and, it should seem, it was a great while before they made an end, for
all the affair of Solomon's anointing was ordered and finished while
they were at dinner, glutting themselves. Thus those who serve not our
Lord Christ, but oppose him, are commonly such as serve their own belly
([Rom 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018)) and made a god of it,
[Phi 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019). Their long feast intimates
likewise that they were very secure and confident of their interest,
else they would not have lost so much time. The old world and Sodom were
eating and drinking, secure and sensual, when their destruction came,
[Luk 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026), etc. When they made an end
of eating, and were preparing themselves to proclaim their king, and
bring him in triumph into the city, they heard the sound of the trumpet
([Kg1 1:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#041)), and a dreadful sound it
was in their ears, [Job 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#021). Joab
was an old man, and was alarmed at it, apprehending the city to be in an
uproar; but Adonijah was very confident that the messenger, being a
worthy man, brought good tidings, [Kg1
1:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#042). Usurpers flatter themselves with
the hopes of success, and those are commonly least timorous whose
condition is most dangerous. But how can those who do evil deeds expect
to have good tidings? No, the worthiest man will bring them the worst
news, as the priest's son did here to Adonijah, [Kg1
1:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#043). "Verily, the best tidings I have
to bring you is that Solomon is made king, so that your pretensions are
all quashed." He relates to them very particularly, 1. With what great
solemnity Solomon was made king ([Kg1
1:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#044), [Kg1
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#045)), and that he was now sitting on
the throne of the kingdom, [Kg1 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#046).
Adonijah thought to have stepped into the throne before him, but Solomon
was too quick for him. 2. With what general satisfaction Solomon was
made king, so that that which was done was not likely to be undone
again. (1.) The people were pleased, witness their joyful acclamations,
[Kg1 1:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#045). (2.) The courtiers were
pleased: The kings servants attended him with an address of
congratulation upon this occasion, [Kg1
1:47](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#047). We have here the heads of their
address: They blessed king David, applauded his prudent care for the
public welfare, acknowledged their happiness under his government, and
prayed heartily for his recovery. They also prayed for Solomon, that God
would make his name better than his father's, which it might well be
when he had his father's foundation to build upon. A child, on a giant's
shoulders, is higher than the giant himself. (3.) The king himself was
pleased: He bowed himself upon the bed, not only to signify his
acceptance of his servants' address, but to offer up his own address to
God ([Kg1 1:48](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#048)): "Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel, who, as Israel's God, for Israel's good, has brought this
matter to such a happy issue, my eyes even seeing it." Note, It is a
great satisfaction to good men, when they are going out of the world, to
see the affairs of their families in a good posture, their children
rising up in their stead to serve God and their generation, and
especially to see peace upon Israel and the establishment of it.

II\. The effectual crush which this gave to Adonijah's attempt. It
spoiled the sport of his party, dispersed the company, and obliged every
man to shift for his own safety. The triumphing of the wicked is short.
They were building a castle in the air, which, having no foundation,
would soon fall and crush them. They were afraid of being taken in the
fact, while they were together hatching their treason, and therefore
each one made the best of his way.

III\. The terror Adonijah himself was in, and the course he took to
secure himself. he was now as much depressed as he had been elevated,
[Kg1 1:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#042), [Kg1
1:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#050). He had despised Solomon as not
worthy to be his guest ([Kg1 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#010)),
but now he dreads him as his judge: He feared because of Solomon. Thus
those who oppose Christ and his kingdom will shortly be made to tremble
before him, and call in vain to rocks and mountains to shelter them from
his wrath. He took hold on the horns of the altar, which was always
looked upon as a sanctuary, or place of refuge ([Exo
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#014)), intimating hereby that he
durst not stand a trial, but threw himself upon the mercy of his prince,
in suing for which he relied upon no other plea than the mercy of God,
which was manifested in the institution and acceptance of the sacrifices
that were offered on that altar and the remission of sin thereupon.
Perhaps Adonijah had formerly slighted the service of the altar, yet now
he courts the protection of it. Many who in the day of their security
neglect the great salvation, under the arrests of the terrors of the
Lord would gladly be beholden to Christ and his merit, and, when it is
too late, will catch hold of the horns of the altar.

IV\. His humble address to Solomon for mercy. By those who brought
Solomon tidings where he was, he sent a request for his life ([Kg1
1:51](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#051)): Let king Solomon swear to me
that he will not slay his servant. He owns Solomon for his prince, and
himself his servant, dares not justify himself, but makes supplication
to his judge. It was a great change with him. He that in the morning was
grasping at a crown is before night begging for his life. Then Adonijah
reigned, now Adonijah trembles, and cannot think himself safe unless
Solomon promise, with an oath, not to put him to death.

V. The orders Solomon gave concerning him. He discharges him upon his
good behaviour, [Kg1 1:52](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#052), [Kg1
1:53](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#053). He considered that Adonijah was
his brother, and that it was the first offence. Perhaps, being so soon
made sensible of his error and then not persisting in his rebellion, he
might prove not only a peaceable, but a serviceable subject, and
therefore, if he will conduct himself well for the future, what is past
shall be pardoned: but if he be fond disaffected, turbulent, and
aspiring, this offence shall be remembered against him, he shall be
called up upon his former conviction (as our law speaks), and execution
shall be awarded against him. Thus the Son of David receives those to
mercy that have been rebellious: if they will return to their
allegiance, and be faithful to their Sovereign, their former crimes
shall not be mentioned against them; but, if still they continue in the
interests of the world and the flesh, this will be their ruin. Adonijah
is sent for, and told upon what terms he stands, which he signifies his
grateful submission to, and then is told to go to his house and live
retired there. Solomon not only gave him his life, but his estate, thus
establishing his throne by mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 2](kg1002)

</div>
