<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](sa2024)  [Next](kg1001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001.md)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The First Book of Kings

Many histories are books of kings and their reigns, to which the affairs
of their kingdoms are reduced; this is a piece of honour that has
commonly been paid to crowned heads. The holy Scripture is the history
of the kingdom of God among men, under the several administrations of
it; but there the King is one and his name one. The particular history
now before us accounts for the affairs of the kingdoms of Judah and
Israel, yet with special regard to the kingdom of God among them; for
still it is a sacred history, much more instructive and not less
entertaining than any of the histories of the kings of the earth, to
which (those of them that are of any certainty) it is prior in time; for
though there were kings in Edom before there was any king in Israel,
[Gen 36:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#031.md) (foreigners, in that point
of state, got the precedency), yet the history of the kings of Israel
lives, and will live, in holy Writ, to the end of the world, whereas
that of the kings of Edom is long since buried in oblivion; for the
honour that comes from God is durable, while the honour of the world is
like a mushroom, which comes up in a night and perishes in a night. -
The Bible began with the story of patriarchs, and prophets, and judges,
men whose converse with heaven was more immediate, the record of which
strengthens our faith, but is not so easily accommodated to our case,
now that we expect not visions, as the subsequent history of affairs
like ours under the direction of common providence; and here also we
find, though not many types and figures of the Messiah, yet great
expectations of him; for not only prophets, but kings, desired to see
the great mysteries of the gospel, [Luk
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#024.md) - The two books of Samuel are
introductions to the books of the Kings, as they relate the origin of
the royal government in Saul and of the royal family in David. These two
books give us an account of David's successor, Solomon, the division of
his kingdom, and the succession of the several kings both of Judah and
Israel, with an abstract of their history down to the captivity. And as
from the book of Genesis we may collect excellent rules of economics,
for the good governing of families, so from these books we may collect
rules of politics, for the directing of public affairs. There is in
these books special regard had to the house and lineage of David, from
which Christ came. Some of his sons trod in his steps, and others did
not. The characters of the kings of Judah may be thus briefly given: -
David the devout, Solomon the wise, Rehoboam the simple, Abijah the
valiant, Asa the upright, Jehoshaphat the religious, Jehoram the wicked,
Ahaziah the profane, Joash the backslider, Amaziah the rash, Uzziah the
mighty, Jotham the peaceable, Ahaz the idolater, Hezekiah the reformer,
Manasseh the penitent, Amon the obscure, Josiah the tender-hearted,
Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah, all wicked, and such as
brought ruin quickly on themselves and their kingdom. The number of the
good and bad is nearly equal, but the reigns of the good were generally
long and those of the bad short, the consideration of which will make
the state of Israel not altogether so bad in this period as at first it
seems. In this first book we have, I. The death of David, ch. 1 and 2.
II. The glorious reign of Solomon, and his building the temple (ch.
3-10), but the cloud his sun set under, ch. 11. III. The division of the
kingdoms in Rehoboam, and his reign and Jeroboam's, ch. 12-14. IV. The
reigns of Abijah and Asa over Judah, Baasha and Omri over Israel, ch. 15
and 16. V. Elijah's miracles, ch. 17-19. VI. Ahab's success against
Benhadad, his wickedness and fall, ch. 20-22. And in all this history it
appears that kings, though gods to us, are men to God, mortal and
accountable.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 1](kg1001.md)

</div>
