<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2020)  [Next](kg2022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 21:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have a short but sad account of the reigns of two of
the kings of Judah, Manasseh and Amon. I. Concerning Manasseh, all the
account we have of him here is, 1. That he devoted himself to sin, to
all manner of wickedness, idolatry, and murder ([Kg2
21:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#001) and [Kg2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#016)). 2. That therefore God devoted
him, and Jerusalem for his sake, to ruin ([Kg2
21:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#010)). In the book of Chronicles
we have an account of his troubles, and his repentance. II. Concerning
Amon we are only told that he lived in sin ([Kg2
21:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#019)), died quickly by the sword,
and left good Josiah his successor ([Kg2
21:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#023)). By these two reigns
Jerusalem was much debauched and much weakened, and so hastened apace
towards its destruction, which slumbered not.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 21:1</span></span>

How delightful were our meditations on the last reign! How many pleasing
views had we of Sion in its glory (that is, in its purity and in its
triumphs), of the king in his beauty! (for [Isa
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#017) refers to Hezekiah), and (as it
follows there, [Kg2 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#020)) Jerusalem
was a quiet habitation because a city of righteousness, [Isa
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026). But now we have melancholy work
upon our hands, unpleasant ground to travel, and cannot but drive
heavily. How has the gold become dim and the most fine gold changed! The
beauty of Jerusalem is stained, and all her glory, all her joy, sunk and
gone. These verses give such an account of this reign as make it, in all
respects, the reverse of the last, and, in a manner, the ruin of it.

I. Manasseh began young. He was but twelve years old when he began to
reign ([Kg2 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#001)), born when his
father was about forty-two years old, three years after his sickness. If
he had sons before, either they were dead, or set by as unpromising. As
yet they knew of nothing bad in him, and they hoped he would prove good;
but he proved very bad, and perhaps his coming to the crown so young
might help to make it so, which yet will by no means excuse him, for his
grandson Josiah came to it younger than he and yet acted well. But being
young, 1. He was puffed up with his honour and proud of it; and thinking
himself very wise, because he was very great, valued himself upon his
undoing what his father had done. It is too common for novices to be
lifted up with pride, and so to fall into the condemnation of the devil.
2. He was easily wrought upon and drawn aside by seducers, that lay in
wait to deceive. Those that were enemies to Hezekiah's reformation, and
retained an affection for the old idolatries, flattered him, and so
gained his ear, and used his power at their pleasure. Many have been
undone by coming too soon to their honours and estates.

II\. He reigned long, longest of any of the kings of Judah, fifty-five
years. This was the only very bad reign that was a long one; Joram's was
but eight years, and Ahaz's sixteen; as for Manasseh's, we hope that in
the beginning of his reign for some time affairs continued to move in
the course that his father left them in, and that in the latter end of
his reign, after his repentance, religion got head again; and, no doubt,
when things were at the worst God had his remnant that kept their
integrity. Though he reigned long, yet some of this time he was a
prisoner in Babylon, which may well be looked upon as a drawback from
these years, though they are reckoned in the number because then he
repented and began to reform.

III\. He reigned very ill.

1\. In general, (1.) He did that which was evil in the sight of the
Lord, and which, having been well educated, he could not but know was so
([Kg2 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#002)): He wrought much
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, as if on purpose to provoke him to
anger, [Kg2 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#006). (2.) He did after
the abominations of the heathen ([Kg2
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#002)) and as did Ahab ([Kg2
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003)), not taking warning by the
destruction both of the nations of Canaan and the house of Ahab for
their idolatry; nay ([Kg2 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#009)), he
did more evil than did the nations whom the Lord destroyed. When the
holy seed degenerate, they are commonly worse than the worst of the
profane.

2\. More particularly, (1.) He rebuilt the high places which his father
had destroyed, [Kg2 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003). Thus did he
trample upon the dust, and affront the memory, of his worthy father,
though he knew how much he was favoured of God and honoured of men. He
concurred, it is probable, with Rabshakeh's sentiments ([Kg2
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#022)), that Hezekiah had done ill in
destroying those high places, and pretended the honour of God, and the
edification and convenience of the people, in rebuilding them. This he
began with, but proceeded to that which was much worse; for, (2.) He set
up other gods, Baal and Ashtaroth (which we translate a grove), and all
the host of heaven, the sun and moon, the other planets, and the
constellations; these he worshipped and served ([Kg2
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003)), gave their names to the images
he made, and then did homage to them and prayed for help from them. To
these he built altars ([Kg2 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#005)), and
offered sacrifices, no doubt, on these altars. (3.) He made his son pass
through the fire, by which he dedicated him a votary to Moloch, in
contempt of the seal of circumcision by which he had been dedicated to
God. (4.) He made the devil his oracle, and, in contempt both of urim
and prophecy, he used enchantments and dealt with familiar spirits ([Kg2
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#006)) like Saul. Conjurers and
fortune-tellers (who pretended, by the stars or the clouds, lucky and
unlucky days, good and bad omens, the flight of birds, or the entrails
of beasts, to foretel things to come) were great men with him, his
intimates, his confidants; their arts pleased his fancy, and gained his
belief, and his counsels were under their direction. (5.) We find
afterwards ([Kg2 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#016)) that he shed
innocent blood very much in gratification of his own passion and
revenge; some perhaps were secretly murdered, others taken off by colour
of law. Probably much of the blood he shed was theirs that opposed
idolatry and witnessed against it, that would not bow the knee to Baal.
The blood of the prophets is, in a particular manner, charged upon
Jerusalem, and it is probable that he put to death many of them. The
tradition of the Jews is that he caused the prophet Isaiah to be sawn
asunder; and many think the apostle refers to this in [Heb
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037), where he speaks of those that
had so suffered.

3\. Three things are here mentioned as aggravations of Manasseh's
idolatry: - (1.) That he set up his images and altars in the house of
the Lord ([Kg2 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#004)), in the two
courts of the temple ([Kg2 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#005)), in
the very house of which God had said to Solomon, Here will I put my
name, [Kg2 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#007). Thus he defied God to
his face, and impudently affronted him with his rivals immediately under
his eye, as one that was neither afraid of God's wrath nor ashamed of
his own folly and wickedness. Thus he desecrated what had been
consecrated to God, and did, in effect, turn God out of his own house
and put the rebels in possession of it. Thus, when the faithful
worshippers of God came to the place he had appointed for the
performance of their duty to him, they found, to their great grief and
terror, other gods ready to receive their offerings. God had said that
here he would record his name, here he would put it for ever, and here
it was accordingly preserved, while the idolatrous altars were kept at a
distance; but Manasseh, by bringing them into God's house, did what he
could to alter the property, and to make the name of the God of Israel
to be no more in remembrance. (2.) That hereby he put a great slight
upon the word of God, and his covenant with Israel. Observe the favour
he had shown to that people in putting his name among them, - the
kindness he intended them, never to make them move out of that good
land, - and the reasonableness of his expectations from them, only if
they will observe to do according to all that I have commanded them,
[Kg2 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#007), [Kg2
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#008). Upon these good terms did Israel
stand with God, and had as fair a prospect of being happy as any people
could have; but they hearkened not, [Kg2
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#009). They would not be kept close to
God either by his precepts or by his promises; both were cast behind
their back. (3.) That hereby he seduced the people of God, debauched
them, and drew them into idolatry, [Kg2
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#009). He caused Judah to sin ([Kg2
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#011)), as Jeroboam had caused Israel
to sin. His very example was enough to corrupt the generality of
unthinking people, who would do as their king did, right or wrong. All
that aimed at preferment would do as the court did; and others thought
it safest to comply, for fear of making their king their enemy. Thus,
one way or other, the holy city became a harlot, and Manasseh made her
so. Those will have a great deal to answer for that not only are wicked
themselves, but help to make others so.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 21:10</span></span>

Here is the doom of Judah and Jerusalem read, and it is heavy doom. The
prophets were sent, in the first place, to teach them the knowledge of
God, to remind them of their duty and direct them in it. If they
succeeded not in that, their next work was to reprove them for their
sins, and to set them in view before them, that they might repent and
reform, and return to their duty. If in this they prevailed not, but
sinners went on frowardly, their next work was to foretel the judgments
of God, that the terror of them might awaken those to repentance who
would not be made sensible of the obligations of his love, or else that
the execution of them, in their season, might be a demonstration of the
divine mission of the prophets that foretold them. The prophets were
deputed judges to those that would not hear and receive them as
teachers. We have here,

I. A recital of the crime. The indictment is read upon which the
judgment is grounded, [Kg2 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#011).
Manasseh had done wickedly himself, though he knew better things, had
even justified the Amorites, whose copy he wrote after, by outdoing them
in impieties, and debauched the people of God, whom he had taught to sin
and forced to sin; and besides that (though that was bad enough) he had
filled Jerusalem with innocent blood ([Kg2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#016)), had multiplied his murders in
every corner of the city, and filled the measure of Jerusalem's
blood-guiltiness ([Mat 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#032)) up to
the brim, and all this against the crown and dignity of the King of
kings, the peace of his kingdom, and the statutes in these cases made
and provided.

II\. A prediction of the judgment God would bring upon them for this:
They have done that which was evil, and therefore I am bringing evil
upon them ([Kg2 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#012)); it will come
and it is not far off. The judgment should be, 1. Very terrible and
amazing; the very report of it should make men's ears to tingle ([Kg2
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#012)), that is, their hearts to
tremble. It should make a great noise in the world and occasion many
speculations. 2. It should be copied out (as the sins of Jerusalem had
been) from Samaria and the house of Ahab, [Kg2
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#013). When God lays righteousness to
the line it shall be the line of Samaria, measuring out to Jerusalem
that which had been the lot of Samaria; when he lays judgment to the
plummet it shall be the plummet of the house of Ahab, marking out for
the same ruin to which that wretched family was devoted. See [Isa
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#017). Note, Those who resemble and
imitate others in their sins must expect to fare as they fared. 3. That
it should be an utter destruction: I will wipe it as a man wipes a dish.
This intimates, (1.) That every thing should be put into disorder, and
their state subverted; they should be turned upside down, and all their
foundations put out of course. (2.) That the city should be emptied of
its inhabitants, which had been the filth of it, as a dish is emptied
when it is wiped: "They shall all be carried captive, the land shall
enjoy her sabbaths, and be laid by as a dish when it is wiped." See the
comparison of the boiled pot, not much unlike this, [Eze
24:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#001). (3.) That yet this should be
in order to the purifying, not the destroying, of Jerusalem. The dish
shall not be dropped, not broken to pieces, or melted down, but only
wiped. This shall be the fruit, the taking away of the sinners first,
and then of the sin. 4. That therefore they should be destroyed, because
they should be deserted ([Kg2 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#014)):
I will forsake the remnant of my inheritance. Justly are those that
forsake God forsaken of him; nor does he ever leave any till they have
first left him: but, when God has forsaken a people, their defence has
departed, and they become a prey, an easy prey, to all their enemies.
Sin is spoken of here as the alpha and omega of their miseries. (1.) Old
guilt came in remembrance, as that which began to fill the measure ([Kg2
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#015)): "They have provoked me to
anger from their conception and birth as a people, since the day their
fathers came out of Egypt." The men of this generation, treading in
their fathers' steps, are justly reckoned with for their fathers' sins.
(2.) The guilt of blood was that which filled the measure, [Kg2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#016). Nothing has a louder cry, nor
brings a sorer vengeance, than that.

This is all we have here of Manasseh; he stands convicted and condemned;
but we hope in the book of Chronicles to hear of his repentance, and
acceptance with God. Meantime, we must be content, in this place, to
have only one intimation of his repentance (for so we are willing to
take it), that he was buried, it is likely by his own order, in the
garden of his own house ([Kg2 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#018));
for, being truly humbled for his sins, he judged himself no more worthy
to be called a son, a son of David, and therefore not worthy to have
even his dead body buried in the sepulchres of his fathers. True
penitents take shame to themselves, not honour; yet, having lost the
credit of an innocent, the credit of a penitent was the next best he was
capable of. And better it is, and more honourable, for a sinner to die
repenting, and be buried in a garden, than to die impenitent, and be
buried in the abbey.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 21:19</span></span>

Here is a short account of the short and inglorious reign of Amon, the
son of Manasseh. Whether Manasseh, in his blind and brutish zeal for his
idols, had sacrificed his other sons - or whether, having been dedicated
to his idols, they were refused by the people - so it was that his
successor was a son not born till he was forty-five years old. And of
him we are here told, 1. That his reign was very wicked: He forsook the
God of his fathers ([Kg2 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#022)),
disobeyed the commands given to his fathers, and disclaimed the covenant
made with his fathers, and walked not in the way of the Lord, but in all
the way which his father walked in, [Kg2
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#020), [Kg2
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#021). He trod in the steps of his
father's idolatry, and revived that which he, in the latter end of his
days, had put down. Note, Those who set bad examples, though they may
repent themselves, yet cannot be sure that those whom they have drawn
into sin by their example will repent; it is often otherwise. 2. That
his end was very tragical. He having rebelled against God, his own
servants conspired against him and slew him, probably upon some personal
disgust, when he had reigned but two years, [Kg2
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#023). His servants, who should have
guarded him, murdered him; his own house, that should have been his
castle of defence, was the place of his execution. He had profaned God's
house with his idols, and now God suffered his own house to be polluted
with his blood. How unrighteous soever those were that did it, God was
righteous who suffered it to be done. Two things the people of the land
did, by their representatives, hereupon: - (1.) They did justice on the
traitors that had slain the king, and put them to death; for, though he
was a bad king, he was their king, and it was a part of their allegiance
to him to avenge his death. Thus they cleared themselves from having any
hand in the crime, and did what was incumbent on them to deter others
from the like villainous practices. (2.) They did a kindness to
themselves in making Josiah his son king in his stead, whom probably the
conspirators had a design to put by, but the people stood by him and
settled him in the throne, encouraged, it may be, by the indications he
gave, even in his early days, of a good disposition. Now they made a
happy change from one of the worst to one of the best of all the kings
of Judah. "Once more," says God, "they shall be tried with a
reformation; and, if that succeed, well; if not, then after that I will
cut them down." Amon was buried in the same garden where his father was,
[Kg2 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#026). If his father put himself
under that humiliation, the people will put him under it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 22](kg2022)

</div>
