<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2008)  [Next](kg2010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 9:0</span></span>

Hazael and Jehu were the men that were designed to be the instruments of
God's justice in punishing and destroying the house of Ahab. Elijah was
told to appoint them to this service; but, upon Ahab's humiliation, a
reprieve was granted, and so it was left to Elisha to appoint them.
Hazael's elevation to the throne of Syria we read of in the foregoing
chapter; and we must now attend Jehu to the throne of Israel; for him
that escapeth the sword of Hazael, as Joram and Ahaziah did, Jehu must
slay, of which this chapter gives us an account. I. A commission is sent
to Jehu by the hand of one of the prophets, to take upon him the
government, and destroy the house of Ahab ([Kg2
9:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#001)). II. Here is his speedy
execution of this commission. 1. He communicates it to his captains
([Kg2 9:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#011)). 2. He marches directly
to Jezreel ([Kg2 9:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#016)), and there
dispatches (1.) Joram king of Israel ([Kg2
9:21-26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#021)). (2.) Ahaziah king of Judah
([Kg2 9:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#027)). (3.) Jezebel ([Kg2
9:30-37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#030)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 9:1</span></span>

We have here the anointing of Jehu to be king, who was, at this time, a
commander (probably commander-in-chief) of the forces employed at
Ramoth-Gilead, [Kg2 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#014). There he was
fighting for the king his master, but received orders from a higher king
to fight against him. It does not appear that Jehu aimed at the
government, or that he ever thought of it, but the commission given him
was a perfect surprise to him. Some think that he had been anointed
before by Elijah, whom God ordered to do it, but privately, and with an
intimation that he must not act till further orders, as Samuel anointed
David long before he was to come to the throne: but that it not at all
probable, for then we must suppose Elijah had anointed Hazael too. No,
when God bade him do these things he bade him anoint Elisha to be
prophet in his room, to do them when he was gone, as God should direct
him. Here is,

I. The commission sent.

1\. Elisha did not go himself to anoint Jehu, because he was old and
unfit for such a journey and so well known that he could not do it
privately, could not go and come without observation; therefore he sends
one of the sons of the prophets to do it, [Kg2
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#001). They not only reverences him as
their father ([Kg2 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#015)), but observed
and obeyed him as their father. This service of anointing Jehu, (1.) Had
danger in it ([Sa1 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#002)), and
therefore it was not fit that Elisha should expose himself, but one of
the sons of the prophets, whose life was of less value, and who could do
it with less danger. (2.) It required labour and was therefore fitter
for a young man in his full strength. Let youth work and age direct.
(3.) Yet it was an honourable piece of service, to anoint a king, and he
that did it might hope to be preferred for it afterwards, and therefore,
for the encouragement of the young prophets, Elisha employed one of
them: he would not engross all the honours to himself, nor grudge the
young prophets a share in them.

2\. When he sent him, (1.) He put the oil into his hand with which he
must anoint Jehu: Take this box of oil Solomon was anointed with oil out
of the tabernacle, [Kg1 1:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#039). That
could not now be had, but oil from a prophet's hand was equivalent to
oil out of God's house. Probably it was not the constant practice to
anoint kings, but upon the disturbance of the succession, as in the case
of Solomon, or the interruption of it, as in the case of Joash ([Kg1
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#012)), or the translation of the
government to a new family, as here and in the case of David; yet it
might be used generally, though the scripture does not mention it. (2.)
He put the words into his mouth which he must say ([Kg2
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#003)) - I have anointed thee king, and,
no doubt, told him all the rest that he said, [Kg2
9:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#007). Those whom God sends on his
errands shall not go without full instructions. (3.) He also ordered
him, \[1.\] To do it privately, to single out Jehu from the rest of the
captains and anoint him in an inner chamber ([Kg2
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#002)), that Jehu's confidence in his
commission might be tried, when he had no witness to attest it. His
being suddenly animated for the service would be proof sufficient of his
being anointed to it. There needed no other proof. The thing signified
was the best evidence of the sign. \[2.\] To do it expeditiously. When
he went about it he must gird up his loins; when he had done it he must
flee and not tarry for a fee, or a treat, or to see what Jehu would do.
It becomes the sons of the prophets to be quick and lively at their
work, to go about it and go through it as men that hate sauntering and
trifling. They should be as angels that fly swiftly.

II\. The commission delivered. The young prophet did his business with
despatch, was at Ramoth-Gilead presently, [Kg2
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#004). There he found the general
officers sitting together, either at dinner or in a council of war, [Kg2
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#005). With the assurance that became a
messenger from God, notwithstanding the meanness of his appearance, he
called Jehu out from the rest, not waiting his leisure, or begging his
pardon for disturbing him, but as one having authority: I have an errand
to thee, O captain. Perhaps Jehu had some intimation of his business;
and therefore, that he might not seem too forward to catch at the
honour, he asked, To which of all us? that it might not be said
afterwards he got it by speaking first, but they might all be satisfied
he was indeed the person designed. When the prophet had him alone he
anointed him, [Kg2 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#006). The anointing
of the Spirit is a hidden thing, that new name which none knows but
those that have it. Herewith,

1\. He invests him with the royal dignity: Thus saith the Lord God of
Israel, whose messenger I am, in his name I have anointed thee king over
the people of the Lord. He gives him an incontestable title, but reminds
him that he was made king, (1.) By the God of Israel; from him he must
see his power derived (for by him kings reign), for he must use it, and
to him he must be accountable. Magistrates are the ministers of God, and
must therefore act in dependence upon him and with an entire devotedness
to him and to his glory. (2.) Over the Israel of God. Though the people
of Israel were wretchedly corrupted, and had forfeited all the honour of
relationship to God, yet they are here called the people of the Lord,
for he had a right to them and had not yet given them a bill of divorce.
Jehu must look upon the people he was made king of as the people of the
Lord, not as his vassals, but God's freemen, his sons, his first-born,
not to be abused or tyrannized over, God's people, and therefore to be
ruled for him, and according to his laws.

2\. He instructs him in his present service, which was to destroy all
the house of Ahab ([Kg2 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#007)), not that
he might clear his own way to the throne, and secure to himself the
possession of it, but that he might execute the judgments of God upon
that guilty and obnoxious family. He calls Ahab his master, that the
relation might be no objection. "He was thy master, and to lift up thy
hand against his son and successor would be not only base ingratitude,
but treason, rebellion, and all that is bad, if thou hadst not an
immediate command from God to do it. But thou art under higher
obligations to thy Master in heaven than to thy master Ahab. He has
determined that the whole house of Ahab shall perish, and by thy hand;
fear not: has not he commanded thee? Fear not sin; his command will
justify thee and bear thee out: fear not danger; his command will secure
and prosper thee." That he might intelligently, and in a right manner,
do this great execution on the house of Ahab, he tells him, (1.) What
was their crime, what the ground of the controversy, and wherefore God
had quarrel with them, that he might have an eye to that which God had
an eye to, and that was the blood of God's servants, the prophets and
others, faithful worshippers, which they had shed, and which must now be
required at the hand of Jezebel. That they were idolaters was bad
enough, and merited all that was brought upon them; yet that is not
mentioned here, but the controversy God has with them is for their being
persecutors, not so much their throwing down God's altars as their
slaying his prophets with the sword. Nothing fills the measure of the
iniquity of any prince or people as this does nor brings a surer or a
sorer ruin. This was the sin that brought on Jerusalem its first
destruction ([Ch2 36:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#016)) and its final
one, [Mat 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037), [Mat
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038). Jezebel's whoredoms and
witchcrafts were not so provoking as her persecuting the prophets,
killing some and driving the rest into corners and caves, [Kg1
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#004). (2.) What was their doom. They
were sentenced to utter destruction; not to be corrected, but to be cut
off and rooted out. This Jehu must know, that his eye might not spare
for pity, favour, or affection. All that belonged to Ahab must be slain,
[Kg2 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#008). A pattern is given him of
the destruction intended, in the destruction of the families of Jeroboam
and Baasha ([Kg2 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#009)), and he is
particularly directed to throw Jezebel to the dogs, [Kg2
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#010). The whole stock of royal blood
was little enough, and too little, to atone for the blood of the
prophets, the saints and martyrs, which, in God's account, is of great
price.

The prophet, having done this errand, made the best of his way home
again, and left Jehu alone to consider what he had to do and beg
direction from God.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 9:11</span></span>

Jehu, after some pause, returned to his place at the board, taking no
notice of what had passed, but, as it should seem, designing, for the
present, to keep it to himself, if they had not urged him to disclose
it. Let us therefore see what passed between him and the captains.

I. With what contempt the captains speak of the young prophet ([Kg2
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#011)): "Wherefore came this mad fellow
to thee? What business had he with thee? And why wouldst thou humour him
so far as to retire for conversation with him? Are prophets company for
captains?" They are called him a mad fellow, because he was one of those
that would not run with them to an excess of riot ([Pe1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#004)), but lived a life of self-denial,
mortification, and contempt of the world, and spent their time in
devotion; for these things they thought the prophets were fools and the
spiritual men were mad, [Hos 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#007).
Note, Those that have no religion commonly speak with disdain of those
that are religious, and look upon them as mad. They said of our Saviour,
He is beside himself, of John Baptist, He has a devil (is a poor
melancholy man), of St. Paul, Much learning has made him mad. The
highest wisdom is thus represented as folly, and those that best
understand themselves are looked upon as beside themselves. Perhaps Jehu
intended it for a rebuke to his friends when he said, "You know the man
to be a prophet, why then do you call him a mad fellow? You know the way
of his communication to be not from madness, but inspiration." Or,
"Being a prophet, you may guess what his business is, to tell me of my
faults, and to teach me my duty; I need not inform you concerning it."
Thus he thought to put them off, but they urged him to tell them. "It is
false," say they, "we cannot conjecture what was his errand, and
therefore tell us." Being thus pressed to it, he told them that the
prophet had anointed him king, and it is probable showed them the oil
upon his head, [Kg2 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#012). He knew not
but some of them either out of loyalty to Joram or envy of him, might
oppose him, and go near to crush his interest in its infancy; but he
relied on the divine appointment, and was not afraid to own it, knowing
whom he had trusted: he that raised him would stand by him.

II\. With what respect they compliment the new king upon the first
notice of his advancement, [Kg2 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#013).
How meanly soever they thought of the prophet that anointed him, and of
his office, they expressed a grat veneration for the royal dignity of
him that was anointed, and were very forward to proclaim him and sound
of trumpet. In token of their subjection and allegiance to him, their
affection to his person and government, and their desire to see him high
and easy in it, they put their garments under him, that he might stand
or sit upon them on the top of the stairs, in sight of the soldiers,
who, upon the first intimation, came together to grace the solemnity.
God put it into their hearts thus readily to own him, for he turns the
hearts of people as well as kings, like the rivers of water, into what
channel he pleases. Perhaps they were disquieted at Joram's government
or had a particular affection for Jehu; or, however this might be,
things it seems were ripe for the revolution, and they all came into
Jehu's interest and conspired against Joram, [Kg2
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#014).

III\. With what caution Jehu proceeded. He had advantages against Joram,
and he knew how to improve them. He had the army with him. Joram had
left it, and had gone home badly wounded. Jehu's good conduct appears in
two things: - 1. That he complimented the captains, and would do nothing
without their advice and consent ("If it be your minds, we will do so
and so, else not"), thereby intimating the deference he paid to their
judgment and the confidence he had in their fidelity, both which tended
to please and fix them. It is the wisdom of those that would rise fast,
and stand firm, to take their friends along with them. 2. That he
contrived to surprise Joram; and, in order thereto, to come upon him
with speed, and to prevent his having notice of what was now done: "Let
none go forth to tell it in Jezereel, that, as a snare, the ruin may
come on him and his house." The suddenness of an attack sometimes turns
to as good an account as the force of it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 9:16</span></span>

From Ramoth-Gilead to Jezreel was more than one day's march; about the
mid-way between them the river Jordan must be crossed. We may suppose
Jehu to have marched with all possible expedition, and to have taken the
utmost precaution to prevent the tidings from getting to Jezreel before
him; and, at length, we have him within sight first, and then within
reach, of the devoted king.

I. Joram's watchman discovers him first at a distance, him and his
retinue, and gives notice to the king of the approach of a company,
whether of friends or foes he cannot tell. But the king (impatient to
know what is the matter, and perhaps jealous that the Syrians, who had
wounded him, had traced him by the blood to his own palace, and were
coming to seize him) sent first one messenger, and then another, to
bring him intelligence, [Kg2 9:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#017).
He had scarcely recovered from the fright he was put into in the battle,
and his guilty conscience put him into a continual terror. Each
messenger asked the same question: "Is it peace? are you for us or for
our adversaries? Do you bring good tidings or bad?" Each had the same
answer: What hast thou to do with peace? Turn thee behind me, [Kg2
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#018). 19. As if he had said, "It is
not to thee, but to him that sent thee, that I will give answer; for thy
part, if thou consult thy own safety, turn thee behind me, and enlist
thyself among my followers." The watchman gave notice that the
messengers were taken prisoners, and at length observed that the leader
of this troop drove like Jehu, who it seems was noted for driving
furiously, thereby discovering himself to be a man of a hot eager
spirit, intent upon his business, and pushing forward with all his
might. A man of such a violent temper was fittest for the service to
which Jehu was designated. The wisdom of God is seen in the choice of
proper instruments to be employed in his work. But it is not much for
any man's reputation to be known by his fury. He that has rule over his
own spirit is better than the mighty. The Chaldee paraphrase gives this
a contrary sense: The leading is like that of Jehu, for he leads
quietly. And, it should seem, he did not come up very fast, for then
there would not have been time for all this that passed. And some think
he chose to march slowly, that he might give Joram time to come out to
him, and so dispatch him before he entered the city.

II\. Joram himself goes out to meet him, and takes Ahaziah king of Judah
along with him, neither of them equipped for war, as not expecting an
enemy, but in haste to have their curiosity satisfied. How strangely has
Providence sometimes ordered it, that men have been in haste to meet
their ruin when their day has come to fall.

1\. The place where Joram met Jehu was ominous: In the portion of Naboth
the Jezreelite, [Kg2 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#021). The very
sight of that ground was enough to make Joram tremble and Jehu triumph;
for Joram had the guilt of Naboth's blood fighting against him and Jehu
had the force of Elijah's curse fighting for him. The circumstances of
events are sometimes so ordered by divine Providence as to make the
punishment answer to the sin as face answers to face in a glass.

2\. Joram's demand was still the same: "Is it peace, Jehu? Is all well?
Dost thou come home thus flying from the Syrians or more than a
conqueror over them?" It seems, he looked for peace, and could not
entertain any other thought. Note, It is very common for great sinners,
even when they are upon the brink of ruin, to flatter themselves with an
opinion that all is well with them, and to cry peace to themselves.

3\. Jehu's reply was very startling. He answered him with a question:
What peace canst thou expect, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother
Jezebel (who, though queen dowager, was in effect queen regent) and her
witchcrafts are so many? See how plainly Jehu deals with him. Formerly
he durst not do so, but now he had another spirit. Note, Sinners will
not always be flattered; one time or other, they will have their own
given them, [Psa 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#002). Observe, (1.)
He charges upon him his mother's wickedness, because he had at first
learned it and then with his kingly power protected it. She stands
impeached for whoredom, corporal and spiritual (serving idols and
serving them with the very acts of lewdness), for witchcraft likewise,
enchantments and divinations, used in honour of her idols; and these
multiplied, the whoredoms and the witchcrafts many; for those that
abandon themselves to wicked courses know not where they will stop. One
sin begets another. (2.) Upon that account he throws him off from all
pretensions to peace: "What peace can come to that house in which there
is so much wickedness unrepented of?" Note, The way of sin can never be
the way of peace, [Isa 57:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#021). What
peace can sinners have with God, what peace with their own consciences,
what good, what comfort, can they expect in life, in death, or after
death, who go on still in their trespasses? No peace so long as sin is
persisted in; but, as soon as it is repented of and forsaken, there is
peace.

4\. The execution was done immediately. When Joram heard of his mother's
crimes his heart failed him; he presently concluded the long-threatened
day of reckoning had now come, and cried out, "There is treachery, O
Ahaziah! Jehu is our enemy, and it is time for us to shift for our
safety." Both fled, and, (1.) Joram king of Israel was slain presently,
[Kg2 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#024). Jehu dispatched him with
his own hands. The bow was not drawn at a venture, as that which sent
the fatal arrow through the joints of his father's harness, but Jehu
directed the arrow between his shoulders as he fled (it was one of God's
arrows which he has ordained against the persecutor, [Psa
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#013)), and it reached to his heart, so
that he died upon the spot. He was now the top branch of Ahab's house,
and therefore was first cut off. He died a criminal, under the sentence
of the law, which Jehu, the executioner, pursues in the disposal of the
dead body. Naboth's vineyard was hard by, which put him in mind of that
circumstance of the doom Elijah passed upon Ahab, "I will requite thee
in this plat, said the Lord ([Kg2
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#025), [Kg2
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#026)), for the blood of Naboth
himself, and for the blood of his sons," who were either put to death
with him as partners in his crime, or secretly murdered afterwards, lest
they should bring an appeal, or find some way to avenge their father's
death, or break their hearts for the loss of him, or (his whole estate
being confiscated, as well as his vineyard) lose their livelihoods,
which was in effect to lose their lives. For this the house of Ahab must
be reckoned with; and that very piece of ground which he, with so much
pride and pleasure, had made himself master of at the expense of the
guilt of innocent blood, now became the theatre on which his son's dead
body lay exposed a spectacle to the world. Thus the Lord is known by the
judgment which he executeth. Higgaion. Selah. (2.) Ahaziah king of Judah
was pursued, and slain in a little time, and not far off, [Kg2
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#027), [Kg2
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#028). \[1.\] Though he was now in
Joram's company, he would not have been slain but that he was joined
with the house of Ahab both in affinity and in iniquity. He was one of
them (so he had made himself by his sins) and therefore he must fare as
they fared. Jehu justly construed his commission as extending to them.
Yet, \[2.\] Perhaps he would not at this time have fallen with them if
he had not been found in company with them. It is a dangerous thing to
associate with evil-doers; we may be entangled both in guilt and misery
by it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg2 9:30</span></span>

The greatest delinquent in the house of Ahab was Jezebel: it was she
that introduced Baal, slew the Lord's prophets, contrived the murder of
Naboth, stirred up her husband first, and then her sons, to do wickedly;
a cursed woman she is here called ([Kg2
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#034)), a curse to the country, and
whom all that wished well to their country had a curse for. Three reigns
her reign had lasted, but now, at length, her day had come to fall. We
read of a false prophetess in the church of Thyatira that is compared to
Jezebel, and called by her name ([Rev
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020)), her wickedness the same,
seducing God's servants to idolatry, a long space given her to repent
([Kg2 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#021)) as to Jezebel, and a
fearful ruin brought upon her at last ([Kg2
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#022), [Kg2
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#023)), as here upon Jezebel. So that
Jezebel's destruction may be looked upon as typical of the destruction
of idolaters and persecutors, especially that great whore, that mother
of harlots, that hath made herself drunk with the blood of saints and
the nations drunk with the wine of her fornications, when God shall put
it into the heart of the kings of the earth to hate her, [Rev
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#005), [Rev
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#006). 16. Now here we have,

I. Jezebel daring the judgment. She heard that Jehu had slain her son,
and slain him for her whoredoms and witchcrafts, and thrown his dead
body into the portion of Naboth, according to the word of the Lord, and
that he was now coming to Jezreel, where she could not but expect
herself to fall next a sacrifice to his revenging sword. Now see how she
meets her fate; she posted herself in a window at the entering of the
gate, to affront Jehu and set him at defiance. 1. Instead of hiding
herself, as one afraid of divine vengeance, she exposed herself to it
and scorned to flee, mocked at fear and was not affrighted. See how a
heart hardened against God will brave it out to the last, run upon him,
even upon his neck, [Job 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#026). But
never did any thus harden their hearts against him and prosper. 2.
Instead of humbling herself, and putting herself into close mourning for
her son, she painted her face, and tired her head, that she might appear
like herself, that is (as she thought), great and majestic, hoping
thereby to daunt Jehu, to put him out of countenance, and to stop his
career. The Lord God called to baldness and girding with sackcloth, but
behold painting and dressing, walking contrary to God, [Isa
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#012), [Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013). There is not a surer presage of
ruin than an unhumbled heart under humbling providences. Let painted
faces look in Jezebel's glass, and see how they like themselves. 3.
Instead of trembling before Jehu, the instrument of God's vengeance, she
thought to make him tremble with that threatening question, Had Zimri
peace, who slew his master? Observe, (1.) She took no notice of the hand
of God gone out against her family, but flew in the face of him that was
only the sword in his hand. We are very apt, when we are in trouble, to
break out into a passion against the instruments of our trouble, when we
ought to be submissive to God and angry at ourselves only. (2.) She
pleased herself with the thought that what Jehu was now doing would
certainly end in his own ruin, and that he would not have peace in it.
He had cut her off from all pretensions to peace ([Kg2
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#022)), and now she thought to cut him
off likewise. Note, It is no new thing for those that are doing God's
work to be looked upon as out of the way of peace. Active reformers,
faithful reprovers, are threatened with trouble; but let them be in
nothing terrified, [Phi 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#028). (3.) She
quoted a precedent, to deter him from the prosecution of this
enterprise: "Had Zimri peace? No, he had not; he came to the throne by
blood and treachery, and within seven days was constrained to burn the
palace over his head and himself in it: and canst thou expect to fare
any better?" Had the case been parallel, it would have been proper
enough to give him this memorandum; for the judgments of God upon those
that have gone before us in any sinful way should be warnings to us to
take heed of treading in their steps. But the instance of Zimri was
misapplied to Jehu. Zimri had no warrant for what he did, but was
incited to it merely by his own ambition and cruelty; whereas Jehu was
anointed by one of the sons of the prophets, and did this by order from
heaven, which would bear him out. In comparing persons and things we
must carefully distinguish between the precious and the vile, and take
heed lest from the fate of sinful men we read the doom of useful men.

II\. Jehu demanding aid against her. He looked up to the window, not
daunted at the menaces of her impudent but impotent rage, and cried, Who
is on my side? Who? [Kg2 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#032). He was
called out to do God's work, in reforming the land and punishing those
that had debauched it; and here he calls out for assistance in the doing
of it, looked as if there were any to help, any to uphold, [Isa
63:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#005). He lifts up a standard, and
makes proclamation, as Moses ([Exo
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#026)), Who is on the Lord's side? And
the Psalmist ([Psa 94:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#016)), Who will
rise up for me against the evil-doers? Note, When reformation-work is
set on foot, it is time to ask, "Who sides with it?"

III\. Her own attendants delivering her up to his just revenge. Two or
three chamberlains looked out to Jehu with such a countenance as
encouraged him to believe they were on his side, and to them he called
not to seize or secure her till further orders, but immediately to throw
her down, which was one way of stoning malefactors, casting them
headlong from some steep place. Thus was vengeance taken on her for the
stoning of Naboth. They threw her down, [Kg2
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#033). If God's command would justify
Jehu, his command would justify them. Perhaps they had a secret dislike
of Jezebel's wickedness, and hated her, though they served her; or, it
may be, she was barbarous and injurious to those about her, and they
were pleased with this opportunity of being avenged on her; or,
observing Jehu's success, they hoped thus to ingratiate themselves with
him, and keep their places in his court. However it was, thus she was
most shamefully put to death, dashed against the wall and the pavement,
and then trodden on by the horses, which were all besmeared with her
blood and brains. See the end of pride and cruelty, and say, The Lord is
righteous.

IV\. The very dogs completing her shame and ruin, according to the
prophecy. When Jehu had taken some refreshment in the palace, he
bethought himself of showing so much respect to Jezebel's sex and
quality as to bury her. As bad as she was, she was a daughter, a king's
daughter, a king's wife, a king's mother: Go and bury her, [Kg2
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#034). But, though he had forgotten
what the prophet said ([Kg2 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#010), Dogs
shall eat Jezebel), God had not forgotten it. While he was eating and
drinking, the dogs had devoured her dead body, the dogs that went about
the city ([Psa 59:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006)) and fed upon the
carrion, so that there was nothing left but her bare skull (the painted
face gone) and her feet and hands. The hungry dogs had no respect to the
dignity of her extraction; a king's daughter was no more to them than a
common person. When we pamper our bodies, and use them deliciously, let
us think how vile they are, and that shortly they will be either a feast
for worms under ground or beasts above ground. When notice was brought
of this to Jehu, he remembered the threatening ([Kg1
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#023)), The dogs shall eat Jezebel by
the wall of Jezreel. Nothing should remain of her but the monuments of
her infamy. She had been used to appear on public days in great state,
and the cry was, "This is Jezebel. What a majestic port and figure! How
great she looks!" But now it shall be said no more. We have often seen
the wicked buried ([Ecc 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#010)), yet
sometimes, as here, they have no burial, [Ecc
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#003). Jezebel's name nowhere remained,
but as stigmatized in sacred writ: they could not so much as say, "This
is Jezebel's dust, This is Jezebel's grave," or "This is Jezebel's
seed." Thus the name of the wicked shall rot - rot above ground.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 10](kg2010)

</div>
