<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2017)  [Next](kg2019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 18:0</span></span>

When the prophet had condemned Ephriam for lies and deceit he comforted
himself with this, that Judah yet "ruled with God, and was faithful with
the Most Holy," [Hos 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#012). It was a
very melancholy view which the last chapter gave us of the desolations
of Israel; but this chapter shows us the affairs of Judah in a good
posture at the same time, that it may appear God has not quite cast off
the seed of Abraham, [Rom 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001).
Hezekiah is here upon the throne, I. Reforming his kingdom ([Kg2
18:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#001)). II. Prospering in all his
undertakings ([Kg2 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#007), [Kg2
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#008)), and this at the same time when
the ten tribes were led captive ([Kg2
18:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#009)). III. Yet invaded by
Sennacherib, the king of Assyria ([Kg2
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013)). 1. His country put under
contribution ([Kg2 18:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#014)). 2.
Jerusalem besieged ([Kg2 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017)). 3.
God blasphemed, himself reviled, and his people solicited to revolt, in
a virulent speech made by Rabshakeh (v. 18-37). But how well it ended,
and how much to the honour and comfort of our great reformer, we shall
find in the next chapter.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 18:1</span></span>

We have here a general account of the reign of Hezekiah. It appears, by
comparing his age with his father's, that he was born when his father
was about eleven or twelve years old, divine Providence so ordering that
he might be of full age, and fit for business, when the measure of his
father's iniquity should be full. Here is,

I. His great piety, which was the more wonderful because his father was
very wicked and vile, one of the worst of the kings, yet he was one of
the best, which may intimate to us that what good there is in any is not
of nature, but of grace, free grace, sovereign grace, which, contrary to
nature, grafts into the good olive that which was wild by nature ([Rom
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024)), and also that grace gets over
the greatest difficulties and disadvantages: Ahaz, it is likely, gave
his son a bad education as well as a bad example; Urijah his priest
perhaps had the tuition of him; his attendants and companions, we may
suppose, were such as were addicted to idolatry; and yet Hezekiah became
eminently good. When God's grace will work what can hinder it?

1\. He was a genuine son of David, who had a great many degenerate ones
([Kg2 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#003)): He did that which was
right, according to all that David his father did, with whom the
covenant was made, and therefore he was entitled to the benefit of it.
We have read of some of them who did that which was right, but not like
David, [Kg2 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#003). They did not love
God's ordinances, nor cleave to them, as he did; but Hezekiah was a
second David, had such a love for God's word, and God's house, as he
had. Let us not be frightened with an apprehension of the continual
decay of virtue, as if, when times and men are bad, they must needs, of
course, grow worse and worse; that does not follow, for, after many bad
kings, God raised up one that was like David himself.

2\. He was a zealous reformer of his kingdom, and as we find ([Ch2
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003)) he began betimes to be so, fell
to work as soon as ever he came to the crown, and lost no time. He found
his kingdom very corrupt, the people in all things too superstitious.
They had always been so, but in the last reign worse than ever. By the
influence of his wicked father, a deluge of idolatry had overspread the
land; his spirit was stirred against this idolatry, we may suppose (as
Paul's at Athens), while his father lived, and therefore, as soon as
ever he had power in his hands, he set himself to abolish it ([Kg2
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004)), though, considering how the
people were wedded to it, he might think it could not be done without
opposition. (1.) The images and the groves were downright idolatrous and
of heathenish original. These he broke and destroyed. Though his own
father had set them up, and shown an affection for them, yet he would
not protect them. We must never dishonour God in honour to our earthly
parents. (2.) The high places, though they had sometimes been used by
the prophets upon special occasions and had been hitherto connived at by
the good kings, were nevertheless an affront to the temple and a breach
of the law which required them to worship there only, and, being from
under the inspection of the priests, gave opportunity for the
introducing of idolatrous usages. Hezekiah therefore, who made God's
word his rule, not the example of his predecessors, removed them, made a
law for the removal of them, the demolishing of the chapels,
tabernacles, and altars there erected, and the suppressing of the use of
them, which law was put in execution with vigour; and, it is probable,
the terrible judgments which the kingdom of Israel was now under for
their idolatry made Hezekiah the more zealous and the people the more
willing to comply with him. It is well when our neighbours' harms are
our warnings. (3.) The brazen serpent was originally of divine
institution, and yet, because it had been abused to idolatry, he broke
it to pieces. The children of Israel had brought that with them to
Canaan; where they set it up we are not told, but, it seems, it had been
carefully preserved, as a memorial of God's goodness to their fathers in
the wilderness and a traditional evidence of the truth of that story,
[Num 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#009), for the encouragement of
the sick to apply to God for a cure and of penitent sinners to apply to
him for mercy. But in process of time, when they began to worship the
creature more than the Creator, those that would not worship images
borrowed from the heathen, as some of their neighbours did, were drawn
in by the tempter to burn incense to the brazen serpent, because that
was made by order from God himself and had been an instrument of good to
them. But Hezekiah, in his pious zeal for God's honour, not only forbade
the people to worship it, but, that it might never be so abused any
more, he showed the people that it was Nehushtan, nothing else but a
piece of brass, and that therefore it was an idle wicked thing to burn
incense to it; he then broke it to pieces, that is, as bishop Patrick
expounds it, ground it to powder, which he scattered in the air, that no
fragment of it might remain. If any think that the just honour of the
brazen serpent was hereby diminished they will find it abundantly made
up again, [Joh 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014), where our Saviour
makes it a type of himself. Good things, when idolized, are better
parted with than kept.

3\. Herein he was a nonesuch, [Kg2
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#005). None of all the kings of Judah
were like him, either before or after him. Two things he was eminent for
in his reformation: - (1.) Courage and confidence in God. In abolishing
idolatry, there was danger of disobliging his subjects, and provoking
them to rebel; but he trusted in the Lord God of Israel to bear him out
in what he did and save him from harm. A firm belief of God's
all-sufficiency to protect and reward us will conduce much to make us
sincere, bold, and vigorous, in the way of our duty, like Hezekiah. When
he came to the crown he found his kingdom compassed with enemies, but he
did not seek for succour to foreign aids, as his father did, but trusted
in the God of Israel to be the keeper of Israel. (2.) Constancy and
perseverance in his duty. For this there was none like him, that he
clave to the Lord with a fixed resolution and never departed from
following him, [Kg2 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#006). Some of his
predecessors that began well fell off: but he, like Caleb, followed the
Lord fully. He not only abolished all idolatrous usages, but kept God's
commandments, and in every thing made conscience of his duty.

II\. His great prosperity, [Kg2 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#007),
[Kg2 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#008). He was with God, and then
God was with him, and, having the special presence of God with him, he
prospered whithersoever he went, had wonderful success in all his
enterprises, in his wars, his buildings, and especially his reformation,
for that good work was carried on with less difficulty than he could
have expected. Those that do God's work with an eye to his glory, and
with confidence in his strength, may expect to prosper in it. Great is
the truth and will prevail. Finding himself successful, 1. He threw off
the yoke of the king of Assyria, which his father had basely submitted
to. This is called rebelling against him, because so the king of Assyria
called it; but it was really an asserting of the just rights of his
crown, which it was not in the power of Ahaz to alienate. If it was
imprudent to make this bold struggle so soon, yet I see not that it was,
as some think, unjust; when he had thrown out the idolatry of the
nations he might well throw off the yoke of their oppression. The surest
way to liberty is to serve God. 2. He made a vigorous attack upon the
Philistines, and smote them even unto Gaza, both the country villages
and the fortified town, the tower of the watchmen and the fenced cities,
reducing those places which they had made themselves masters of in his
father's time, [Ch2 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018). When he had
purged out the corruptions his father had brought in he might expect to
recover the possessions his father had lost. Of his victories over the
Philistines Isaiah prophesied, [Isa
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#028), etc.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 18:9</span></span>

The kingdom of Assyria had now grown considerable, though we never read
of it till the last reign. Such changes there are in the affairs of
nations and families: those that have been despicable become formidable,
and those, on the contrary, are brought low that have made a great noise
and figure. We have here an account,

I. Of the success of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, against Israel, his
besieging Samaria ([Kg2 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#009)), taking
it ([Kg2 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#010)), and carrying the
people into captivity ([Kg2 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#011)),
with the reason why God brought this judgment upon them ([Kg2
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#012)): Because they obeyed not the
voice of the Lord their God. This was related more largely in the
foregoing chapter, but it is here repeated, 1. As that which stirred up
Hezekiah and his people to purge out idolatry with so much zeal, because
they saw the ruin which it brought upon Israel. When their neighbour's
house was on fire, and their own in danger, it was time to cast away the
accursed thing. 2. As that which Hezekiah much lamented, but had not
strength to prevent. Though the ten tribes had revolted from, and often
been vexatious to, the house of David, no longer ago than in his
father's reign, yet being of the seed of Israel he could not be glad at
their calamities. 3. As that which laid Hezekiah and his kingdom open to
the king of Assyria, and made it much more easy for him to invade the
land. It is said of the ten tribes here that they would neither hear
God's commandments nor do them, [Kg2
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#012). Many will be content to give
God the hearing that will give him no more ([Eze
33:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#031)), but these, being resolved not
to do their duty, did not care to hear of it.

II\. Of the attempt of Sennacherib, the succeeding king of Assyria,
against Judah, in which he was encouraged by his predecessor's success
against Israel, whose honours he would vie with and whose victories he
would push forward. The descent he made upon Judah was a great calamity
to that kingdom, by which God would try the faith of Hezekiah and
chastise the people, who are called a hypocritical nation ([Isa
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006)), because they did not comply
with Hezekiah's reformation, nor willingly part with their idols, but
kept them up in their hearts, and perhaps in their houses, though their
high places were removed. Even times of reformation may prove
troublesome times, made so by those that oppose it, and then the blame
is laid upon the reformers. This calamity will appear great upon
Hezekiah if we consider, 1. How much he lost of his country, [Kg2
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013). The king of Assyria took all or
most of the fenced cities of Judah, the frontier-towns and the
garrisons, and then all the rest fell into his hands of course. The
confusion which the country was put into by this invasion is described
by the prophet, [Isa 10:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#028). 2. How
dearly he paid for his peace. He saw Jerusalem itself in danger of
falling into the enemies' hand, as Samaria had done, and was willing to
purchase its safety at the expense, (1.) Of a mean submission: "I have
offended in denying the usual tribute, and am ready to make satisfaction
as shall be demanded," [Kg2 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#014).
Where was Hezekiah's courage? Where his confidence in God? Why did he
not advise with Isaiah before he sent this crouching message? (2.) Of a
vast sum of money - 300 talents of silver and thirty of gold (above
200,000l.), not to be paid annually, but as a present ransom. To raise
this sum, he was forced not only to empty the public treasures ([Kg2
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#015)), but to take the golden plates
off from the doors of the temple, and from the pillars, [Kg2
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#016). Though the temple sanctified
the gold which he had dedicated, yet, the necessity being urgent, he
thought he might make as bold with that as his father David (whom he
took for his pattern) did with the show-bread, and that it was neither
impious nor imprudent to give a part for the preservation of the whole.
His father Ahaz had plundered the temple in contempt of it, [Ch2
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#024). He had repaid with interest
what his father took; and now, with all due reverence, he only begged
leave to borrow it again in an exigency and for a greater good, with a
resolution to restore it in full as soon as he should be in a capacity
to do so.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 18:17</span></span>

Here is, I. Jerusalem besieged by Sennacherib's army, [Kg2
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017). He sent three of his great
generals with a great host against Jerusalem. Is this the great king,
the king of Assyria? No, never call him so; he is a base, false,
perfidious man, and worthy to be made infamous to all ages; let him
never be named with honour that could do such a dishonourable thing as
this, to take Hezekiah's money, which he gave him upon condition he
should withdraw his army, and then, instead of quitting his country
according to the agreement, to advance against his capital city, and not
send him his money again either. Those are wicked men indeed, and, let
them be ever so great, we will call them so, whose principle it is not
to make their promises binding any further than is for their interest.
Now Hezekiah had too much reason to repent his treaty with Sennacherib,
which made him much the poorer and never the safer.

II\. Hezekiah, and his princes and people, railed upon by Rabshakeh, the
chief speaker of the three generals, and one that had the most satirical
genius. He was no doubt instructed what to say by Sennacherib, who
intended hereby to pick a new quarrel with Hezekiah. He had promised,
upon the receipt of Hezekiah's money, to withdraw his army, and
therefore could not for shame make a forcible attack upon Jerusalem
immediately; but he sent Rabshakeh to persuade Hezekiah to surrender it,
and, if he should refuse, the refusal would serve him for a pretence
(and a very poor one) to besiege it, and, if it hold out, to take it by
storm. Rabshakeh had the impudence to desire audience of the king
himself at the conduit of the upper pool, without the walls; but
Hezekiah had the prudence to decline a personal treaty, and sent three
commissioners (the prime ministers of state) to hear what he had to say,
but with a charge to them not to answer that fool according to his folly
([Kg2 18:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#036)), for they could not
convince him, but would certainly provoke him, and Hezekiah had learned
of his father David to believe that God would hear when he, as a deaf
man, heard not, [Psa 38:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#013). One
interruption they gave him in his discourse, which was only to desire
that he would speak to them now in the Syrian language, and they would
consider what he said and report it to the king, and, if they did not
give him a satisfactory answer, then he might appeal to the people, by
speaking in the Jews' language, [Kg2
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#026). This was a reasonable request,
and agreeable to the custom of treaties, which is that the
plenipotentiaries should settle matters between themselves before any
thing be made public; but Hilkiah did not consider what an unreasonable
man he had to deal with, else he would not have made this request, for
it did but exasperate Rabshakeh, and make him the more rude and
boisterous, [Kg2 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#027). Against all
the rules of decency and honour, instead of treating with the
commissioners, he menaces the soldiery, persuades them to desert or
mutiny, threatens if they hold out to reduce the to the last extremities
of famine, and then goes on with his discourse, the scope of which is to
persuade Hezekiah, and his princes and people, to surrender the city.
Observe how, in order to do this,

1\. He magnifies his master the king of Assyria. Once and again he calls
him That great king, the king of Assyria, [Kg2
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#019), [Kg2
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#028). What an idol did he make of
that prince whose creature he was! God is the great King, but
Sennacherib was in his eye a little god, and he would possess them with
the same veneration for him that he had, and thereby frighten them into
a submission to him. But to those who by faith see the King of kings in
his power and glory even the king of Assyria looks mean and little. What
are the greatest of men when either they come to compare with God or God
comes to contend with them? [Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006),
[Psa 82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007).

2\. He endeavours to make them believe that it will be much for their
advantage to surrender. If they held out, they must expect no other than
to eat their own dung, by reason of the want of provisions, which would
be entirely cut off from them by the besiegers; but if they would
capitulate, seek his favour with a present and cast themselves upon his
mercy, he would give them very good treatment, [Kg2
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#031). I wonder with what face
Rabshakeh could speak of making an agreement with a present when his
master had so lately broken the agreement Hezekiah made with him with
that great present, [Kg2 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#014). Can
those expect to be trusted that have been so grossly perfidious? But, Ad
populum phaleras - Gild the chain and the vulgar will let you bind them.
He thought to soothe up all with a promise that if they would surrender
upon discretion, though they must expect to be prisoners and captives,
yet it would really be happy for them to be so. One would wonder he
should ever think to prevail by such gross suggestions as these, but
that the devil does thus impose upon sinners every day by his
temptations. He will needs persuade them, (1.) That their imprisonment
would be to their advantage, for they should eat every man of his own
vine ([Kg2 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#031)); though the property
of their estates would be vested in the conquerors, yet they should have
the free use of them. But he does not explain it now to them as he would
afterwards, that it must be understood just as much, and just as long,
as the conqueror pleases. (2.) That their captivity would be much more
to their advantage: I will take you away to a land like your own land;
and what the better would they be for that, when they must have nothing
in it to call their own?

3\. That which he aims at especially is to convince them that it is to
no purpose for them to stand it out: What confidence is this wherein
thou trustest? So he insults over Hezekiah, [Kg2
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#019). To the people he says ([Kg2
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#029)), "Let not Hezekiah deceive you
into your own ruin, for he shall not be able to deliver you; you must
either bend or break." It were well if sinners would submit to the force
of this argument, in making their peace with God - That it is therefore
our wisdom to yield to him, because it is in vain to contend with him:
what confidence is that which those trust in who stand it out against
him? Are we stronger than he? Or what shall we get by setting briars and
thorns before a consuming fire? But Hezekiah was not so helpless and
defenceless as Rabshakeh would here represent him. Three things he
supposes Hezekiah might trust to, and he endeavours to make out the
insufficiency of these: - (1.) His own military preparations: Thou
sayest, I have counsel and strength for the war; and we find that so he
had, [Ch2 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#003). But this Rabshakeh
turns off with a slight: "They are but vain words; thou art an unequal
match for us," [Kg2 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#020). With the
greatest haughtiness and disdain imaginable, he challenges him to
produce 2000 men of all his people that know how to manage a horse, and
will venture to give him 2000 horses if he can. He falsely insinuates
that Hezekiah has no men, or none fit to be soldiers, [Kg2
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#023). Thus he thinks to run him down
with confidence and banter, and will lay him any wager that one captain
of the least of his master's servants is able to baffle him and all his
forces. (2.) His alliance with Egypt. He supposes that Hezekiah trusts
to Egypt for chariots and horsemen ([Kg2
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#024)), because the king of Israel had
done so, and of this confidence he truly says, It is a broken reed ([Kg2
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#021)), it will not only fail a man
when he leans on it and expects it to bear his weight, but it will run
into his hand and pierce it, and rend his shoulder, as the prophet
further illustrates this similitude, with application to Egypt, [Eze
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#006), [Eze
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#007). So is the king of Egypt, says
he; and truly so had the king of Assyria been to Ahaz, who trusted in
him, but he distressed him, and strengthened him not, [Ch2
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#020). Those that trust to any arm of
flesh will find it no better than a broken reed; but God is the rock of
ages. (3.) His interest in God and relation to him. This was indeed the
confidence in which Hezekiah trusts, [Kg2
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#022). He supported himself by
depending on the power and promise of God; with this he encouraged
himself and his people ([Kg2 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#030)):
The Lord will surely deliver us, and again [Kg2
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#032). This Rabshakeh was sensible was
their great stay, and therefore he was most large in his endeavours to
shake this, as David's enemies, who used all the arts they had to drive
him from his confidence in God ([Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002); [Psa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001)), and thus did Christ's enemies,
[Mat 27:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#043). Three things Rabshakeh
suggested to discourage their confidence in God, and they were all
false: - \[1.\] That Hezekiah had forfeited God's protection, and thrown
himself out of it, by destroying the high places and the altars, [Kg2
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#022). Here he measures the God of
Israel by the gods of the heathen, who delighted in the multitude of
altars and temples, and concludes that Hezekiah has given a great
offence to the God of Israel, in confining his people to one altar: thus
is one of the best deeds he ever did in his life misconstrued as impious
and profane, by one that did not, or would not, know the law of the God
of Israel. If that be represented by ignorant and malicious men as evil
and a provocation to God which is really good and pleasing to him, we
must not think it strange. If this was to be sacrilegious, Hezekiah
would ever be so. \[2.\] That God had given orders for the destruction
of Jerusalem at this time ([Kg2
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#025)): Have I now come up without the
Lord? This is all banter and rhodomontade. He did not himself think he
had any commission from God to do what he did (by whom should he have
it?) but he made this pretence to amuse and terrify the people that were
on the wall. If he had any colour at all for what he said, it might be
taken from the notice which perhaps he had had, by the writings of the
prophets, of the hand of God in the destruction of the ten tribes, and
he thought he had as good a warrant for the seizing of Jerusalem as of
Samaria. Many that have fought against God have pretended commissions
from him. \[3.\] That if Jehovah, the God of Israel, should undertake to
protect them from the king of Assyria, yet he was notable to do it. With
this blasphemy he concluded his speech ([Kg2
18:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#033)), comparing the God of Israel
with the gods of the nations whom he had conquered and putting him upon
the level with them, and concluding that because they could not defend
and deliver their worshippers the God of Israel could not defend and
deliver his. See here, First, His pride. When he conquered a city he
reckoned himself to have conquered its gods, and valued himself mightily
upon it. His high opinion of the idols made him have a high opinion of
himself as too hard for them. Secondly, His profaneness. The God of
Israel was not a local deity, but the God of the whole earth, the only
living and true God, the ancient of days, and had often proved himself
to be above all gods; yet he makes no more of him than of the upstart
fictitious gods of Hamath and Arpad, unfairly arguing that the gods (as
some now say the priests) of all religions are the same, and himself
above them all. The tradition of the Jews is that Rabshakeh was an
apostate Jew, which made him so ready in the Jews' language; if so, his
ignorance of the God of Israel was the less excusable and his enmity the
less strange, for apostates are commonly the most bitter and spiteful
enemies, witness Julian. A great deal of art and management, it must be
owned, there were in this speech of Rabshakeh, but, withal, a great deal
of pride, malice, falsehood, and blasphemy. One grain of sincerity would
have been worth all this wit and rhetoric.

Lastly, We are told what the commissioners on Hezekiah's part did. 1.
They held their peace, not for want of something to say both on God's
behalf and Hezekiah's: they might easily and justly have upbraided him
with his master's treachery and breach of faith, and have asked him,
What religion encourages you to hope that such conduct will prosper? At
least they might have given that grave hint which Ahab gave to
Benhadad's like insolent demands - Let not him that girdeth on the
harness boast as though he had put it off. But the king had commanded
them not to answer him, and they observed their instructions. There is a
time to keep silence, as well as a time to speak, and there are those to
whom to offer any thing religious or rational is to cast pearls before
swine. What can be said to a madman? It is probable that their silence
made Rabshakeh yet more proud and secure, and so his heart was lifted up
and hardened to his destruction. 2. They rent their clothes in
detestation of his blasphemy and in grief for the despised afflicted
condition of Jerusalem, the reproach of which was a burden to them. 3.
They faithfully reported the matter to the king, their master, and told
him the words of Rabshakeh, that he might consider what was to be done,
what course they should take and what answer they should return to
Rabshakeh's summons.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 19](kg2019)

</div>
