<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2014)  [Next](kg2016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 15:0</span></span>

In this chapter, I. The history of two of the kings of Judah is briefly
recorded: - 1. Of Azariah, or Uzziah ([Kg2
15:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001)). 2. Of Jotham his son ([Kg2
15:32-38](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#032)). II. The history of many of
the kings of Israel that reigned at the same time is given us in short,
five in succession, all of whom, except one, went down slain to the pit,
and their murders were their successors. 1. Zachariah, the last of the
house of Jehu, reigned six months, and then was slain and succeeded by
Shallum ([Kg2 15:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008)). 2. Shallum
reigned one month, and then was slain and succeeded by Menahem ([Kg2
15:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#013)). 3. Menahem reigned ten
years, or tyrannised rather, such were his barbarous cruelties ([Kg2
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#016)) and unreasonable exactions
([Kg2 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#020)), and then died in his
bed, and left his son to succeed him first, and then suffer for him
([Kg2 15:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#016)). 4. Pekahiah reigned
two years, and then was slain and succeeded by Pekah ([Kg2
15:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#023)). 5. Pekah reigned twenty
years, and then was slain and succeeded by Hoshea, the last of all the
kings of Israel ([Kg2 15:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#027)) for
things were now working and hastening apace towards the final
destruction of that kingdom.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 15:1</span></span>

This is a short account of the reign of Azariah. 1. Most of it is
general, and the same that has been given of others; he began young and
reigned long ([Kg2 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#002)), did, for the
most part, that which was right, [Kg2
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#003) (it was happy for the kingdom
that a good reign was a long one), only he had not zeal and courage
enough to take away the high places, [Kg2
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#004). 2. That which is peculiar, [Kg2
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#005) (that God smote him with a
leprosy) is more largely related, with the occasion of it, [Ch2
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#016), etc., where we have also a
fuller account of the glories of the former part of his reign, as well
as of the disgraces of the latter part of it. He did that which was
right, as Amaziah had done; like him, he began well, but failed before
he finished. Here we are told, (1.) That he was a leper. The greatest of
men are not only subject to the common calamities, but also to the
common infirmities, of human nature; and, if they be guilty of any
heinous sin, they lie as open as the meanest to the most grievous
strokes of divine vengeance. (2.) God smote him with this leprosy, to
chastise him for his presumptuous invasion of the priests' office. If
great men be proud men, some way or other God will humble them, and make
them know he is both above them and against them, for he resisteth the
proud. (3.) That he was a leper to the day of his death. Though we have
reason to think he repented and the sin was pardoned, yet, for warning
to others, he was continued under this mark of God's displeasure as long
as he lived, and perhaps it was for the good of his soul that he was so.
(4.) That he dwelt in a separate house, as being made ceremonially
unclean by the law, to the discipline of which, though a king, he must
submit. He that presumptuously intruded into God's temple, and pretended
to be a priest, was justly shut out from his own palace, and shut up as
a prisoner or recluse, ever after. We suppose that his separate house
was made as convenient and agreeable as might be. Some translate it a
free house, where he had liberty to take his pleasure. However, it was a
great mortification to one that had been so much a man of honour, and a
man of business, as he had been, to be cut off from society and dwell
always in a separate house: it would almost make life itself a burden,
even to kings, though they have never any to converse with but their
inferiors; the most contemplative men would soon be weary of it. (5.)
That his son was his viceroy in the affairs both of his court (for he
was over the house) and of his kingdom (for he was judging the people of
the land); and it was both a comfort to him and a blessing to his
kingdom that he had such a son to fill up his room.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 15:8</span></span>

The best days of the kingdom of Israel were while the government was in
Jehu's family. In his reign, and the next three reigns, though there
were many abominable corruptions and miserable grievances in Israel, yet
the crown went in succession, the kings died in their beds, and some
care was taken of public affairs; but, now that those days are at an
end, the history which we have in these verses of about thirty-three
years represents the affairs of that kingdom in the utmost confusion
imaginable. Woe to those that were with child ([Kg2
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#016)) and to those that gave suck in
those days, for then must needs be great tribulations, when, for the
transgression of the land, many were the princes thereof.

I. Let us observe something, in general, concerning these unhappy
revolutions and the calamities which must needs attend them - these bad
times, as they may truly be called. 1. God had tried the people of
Israel both with judgments and mercies, explained and enforced by his
servants the prophets, and yet they continued impenitent and unreformed,
and therefore God justly brought these miseries upon them, as Moses had
warned them. If you will yet walk contrary to me, I will punish you yet
seven times more, [Lev 26:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#021), etc. 2.
God made good his promise to Jehu, that his sons to the fourth
generation after him should sit upon the throne of Israel, which was a
greater favour than was shown to any of the royal families either before
or after his. God had said it should be so ([Kg2
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#030)) and we are told in this chapter
([Kg2 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#012)) that so it came to pass.
See how punctual God is to his promises. These calamities God long
designed for Israel, and they deserved them, yet they were not inflicted
till that word had taken effect to the full. Thus God rewarded Jehu for
his zeal in destroying the worship of Baal and the house of Ahab; and
yet, when the measure of the sins of the house of Jehu was full, God
avenged upon it the blood then shed, called the blood of Jezreel, [Hos
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#004). 3. All these kings did that which
was evil in the sight of the Lord, for they walked in the sins of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat. Though at variance with one another, yet in
this they agreed, to keep up idolatry, and the people loved to have it
so; though they were emptied from vessel to vessel, that taste remained
in them, and that scent was not changed. It was sad indeed when their
government was so often altered, yet never for the better - that among
all those contending interests none of them should think it as much
their interest to destroy the calves as others had done to support them.
4. Each of these (except one) conspired against his predecessor, and
slew him - Shallum, Menahem, Pekah, and Hoshea, all traitors and
murderers, and yet all kings awhile, one of them ten, another twenty,
and another nine years; for God may suffer wickedness to prosper and to
carry away the wealth and honours awhile, but, sooner or later, blood
shall have blood, and he that dealt treacherously shalt be dealt
treacherously with. One wicked man is often made a scourge to another,
and every wicked man, at length, a ruin to himself. 5. The ambition of
the great men made the nation miserable. Here is Tiphsah, a city of
Israel, barbarously destroyed, with all the coasts thereof, by one of
these pretenders ([Kg2 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#016)), and no
doubt it was through blood that each of them waded to the throne, nor
could any of these kings perish alone. No land can have greater pests,
nor Israel worse troubles, than such men as care not how much the
welfare and repose of their country are sacrificed to their revenge and
affectation of dominion. 6. While the nation was thus shattered by
divisions at home the kings of Assyria, first one ([Kg2
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019)) and then another ([Kg2
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029)), came against it and did what
they pleased. Nothing does more towards the making of a nation an easy
prey to a common enemy than intestine broils and contests for the
sovereignty. Happy the land where that is settled. 7. This was the
condition of Israel just before they were quite ruined and carried away
captive, for that was in the ninth year of Hoshea, the last of these
usurpers. If they had, in these days of confusion and perplexity,
humbled themselves before God and sought his face, that final
destruction might have been prevented; but when God judgeth he will
overcome. These factions, the fruit of an evil spirit sent among them,
hastened that captivity, for a kingdom thus divided against itself will
soon come to desolation.

II\. Let us take a short view of the particular reigns.

1\. Zachariah, the son of Jeroboam, began to reign in the thirty-eighth
year of Azariah, or Uzziah, king of Judah, [Kg2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008). Some of the most critical
chronologers reckon that between Jeroboam and his son Zachariah the
throne was vacant twenty-two years, others eleven years, through the
disturbances and dissensions that were in the kingdom; and then it was
not strange that Zachariah was deposed before he was well seated on the
throne: he reigned but six months, and then Shallum slew him before the
people, perhaps as Caesar was slain in the senate, or he put him to
death publicly as a criminal, with the approbation of the people, to
whom he had, some way or other, made himself odious; so ended the line
of Jehu.

2\. But had Shallum peace, who slew his master? No, he had not ([Kg2
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#013)), one month of days measured his
reign and then he was cut off; perhaps to this the prophet, who then
lived, refers ([Hos 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#007)), Now shall a
month devour them with their portions. That dominion seldom lasts long
which is founded in blood and falsehood. Menahem, either provoked by his
crime or animated by his example, soon served him as he had served his
master - slew him and reigned in his stead, [Kg2
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#014). Probably he was general in the
army, which then lay encamped at Tirzah, and, hearing of Shallum's
treason and usurpation, hastened to punish it, as Omri did that of Zimri
in a like case, [Kg1 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#017).

3\. Menahem held the kingdom ten years, [Kg2
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#017). But, whereas we have heard that
the kings of the house of Israel were merciful kings ([Kg1
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#031)), this Menahem (the scandal of
his country) was so prodigiously cruel to those of his own nation who
hesitated a little at submitting to him that he not only ruined a city,
and the coasts thereof, but, forgetting that he himself was born of a
woman, ripped up all the women with child, [Kg2
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#016). We may well wonder that ever it
should enter into the heart of any man to be so barbarous, and to be so
perfectly lost to humanity itself. By these cruel methods he hoped to
strengthen himself and to frighten all others into his interests; but it
seems he did not gain his point, for when the king of Assyria came
against him, (1.) So little confidence had he in his people that he
durst not meet him as an enemy, but was obliged, at a vast expense, to
purchase a peace with him. (2.) Such need had he of help to confirm the
kingdom in his hand that he made it part of his bargain with him (a
bargain which, no doubt, the king of Assyria knew how to make a good
hand of another time) that he should assist him against his own subjects
that were disaffected to him. The money wherewith he purchased his
friendship was a vast sum, no less than 1000 talents of silver ([Kg2
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019)), which Menahem exacted, it is
probable, by military execution, of all the mighty men of wealth, very
considerately sparing the poor, and laying the burden (as was fit) on
those that were best able to bear it; being raised, it was given to the
king of Assyria, as pay for his army, fifty shekels of silver for each
man in it. Thus he got clear of the king of Assyria for this time; he
staid not to quarter in the land ([Kg2
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#020)), but his army now got so rich a
booty with so little trouble that it encouraged them to come again, not
long after, when they laid all waste. Thus was he the betrayer of his
country that should have been the protector of it.

4\. Pekahiah, the son of Menahem, succeeded his father, but reigned only
two years, and then was treacherously slain by Pekah, falling under the
load both of his own and of his father's wickedness. It is repeated
concerning him as before that he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam.
Still this is mentioned, to show that God was righteous in bringing that
destruction upon them which came not long after, because they hated to
be reformed, [Kg2 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#024). Pekah, it
seems, had some persons of figure in his interest, two of whom are here
named ([Kg2 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#025)), and with their
help he compassed his design.

5\. Pekah, though he got the kingdom by treason, kept it twenty years
([Kg2 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#027)), so long it was before
his violent dealing returned upon his own head, but it returned at last.
This Pekah, son of Remaliah, (1.) Made himself more considerable abroad
than any of these usurpers, for he was, even in the latter end of his
time (in the reign of Ahaz, which began in his seventeenth year), a
great terror to the kingdom of Judah, as we find, [Isa
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001), etc. (2.) He lost a great part of
his kingdom to the king of Assyria. Several cities are here named ([Kg2
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029)) which were taken from him, all
the land of Gilead on the other side Jordan, and Galilee in the north
containing the tribes of Naphtali and Zebulon, were seized, and the
inhabitants carried captive into Assyria. By this judgment God punished
him for his attempt upon Judah and Jerusalem. It was then foretold that
within two or three years after he made that attempt, before a child,
then born, should be able to cry My father and my mother, the riches of
Samaria should be taken away before the king of Assyria ([Isa
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#004)), and here we have the
accomplishment of that prediction. (3.) Soon after this he forfeited his
life to the resentments of his countrymen, who, it is probable, were
disgusted at him for leaving them exposed to a foreign enemy, while he
was invading Judah, of which Hoshea took advantage and, to gain his
crown, seized his life, slew him, and reigned in his stead. Surely he
was fond of a crown indeed who, at this time, would run such a hazard as
a traitor did; for the crown of Israel, now that it had lost the
choicest of its flowers and jewels, was lined more than ever with
thorns, had of late been fatal to all the heads that had worn it, was
forfeited to divine justice, and now ready to be laid in the dust - a
crown which a wise man would not have taken up in the street, yet Hoshea
not only ventured upon it but ventured for it, and it cost him dear.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg2 15:32</span></span>

We have here a short account of the reign of Jotham king of Judah, of
whom we are told, 1. That he reigned very well, did that which was right
in the sight of the Lord, [Kg2 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#034).
Josephus gives him a very high character, stating that he was pious
towards God, just towards men, and laid out himself for the public good,
- that, whatever was amiss, he took care to have it rectified, - and, in
short, wanted no virtue that became a good prince. Though the high
places were not taken away, yet to draw people from them, and keep them
close to God's holy place, he showed great respect to the temple, and
built the higher gate which he went through to the temple. If
magistrates cannot do all they would for the suppressing of vice and
profaneness, let them do so much the more for the support and
advancement of piety and virtue, and the bringing of them into
reputation. If they cannot pull down the high places of sin, yet let
them build and beautify the high gate of God's house. 2. That he died in
the midst of his days, [Kg2 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#033). Of
most of the kings of Judah we are told how old they were when they began
their reign, and by that may compute how old they were when they died;
but no account is kept of the age of any of the kings of Israel that I
remember, only of the years of their reigns. This honour God would put
upon the kings of the house of David above those of other families. And
by these accounts it appears that there was none of all the kings of
Judah that reached David's age, seventy, the common age of man. Asa's
age I do not find. Uzziah lived to be sixty-eight, Manasseh sixty-seven,
and Jehoshaphat sixty; and these were the three oldest; many of those
that were of note did not reach fifty. This Jotham died at forty-one. He
was too great a blessing to be continued long to such an unworthy
people. His death was a judgment, especially considering the character
of his son and successor. 3. That in his days the confederacy was formed
against Judah by Rezin and Remaliah's son, the king of Syria and the
king of Israel, which appeared so very formidable in the beginning of
the reign of Ahaz that, upon notice of it, the heart of that prince was
moved and the heart of the people, as the trees of the wood are moved
with the wind, [Isa 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002). The
confederates were unjust in the attempt, yet it is here said ([Kg2
15:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#037)), The Lord began to send them
against Judah, as he bade Shimei curse David, and took away from Job
what the Sabeans robbed him of. Men are God's hand - the sword, the rod
in his hand - which he makes use of as he pleases to serve his own
righteous counsels, though men be unrighteous in their intentions. This
storm gathered in the reign of pious Jotham, but he came to his grave in
peace and it fell upon his degenerate son.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 16](kg2016)

</div>
