<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Lamentations Index](lam)  
  [Previous](lam002)  [Next](lam004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Lamentations Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001)

[Lamentations](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lam 3:0</span></span>

The scope of this chapter is the same with that of the two foregoing
chapters, but the composition is somewhat different; that was in long
verse, this is in short, another kind of metre; that was in single
alphabets, this is in a treble one. Here is, I. A sad complaint of God's
displeasure and the fruits of it (v. 1-20). II. Words of comfort to
God's people when they are in trouble and distress (v. 21-36). III. Duty
prescribed in this afflicted state ([Lam
3:37-41](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#037)). IV. The complaint renewed
([Lam 3:42-54](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#042)). V. Encouragement taken
to hope in God, and continue waiting for his salvation, with an appeal
to his justice against the persecutors of the church ([Lam
3:55-66](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055)). Some make all this to be
spoken by the prophet himself when he was imprisoned and persecuted; but
it seems rather to be spoken in the person of the church now in
captivity and in a manner desolate, and in the desolations of which the
prophet did in a particular manner interest himself. But the complaints
here are somewhat more general than those in the foregoing chapter,
being accommodated to the case as well of particular persons as of the
public, and intended for the use of the closet rather than of the solemn
assembly. Some think Jeremiah makes these complaints, not only as an
intercessor for Israel, but as a type of Christ, who was thought by some
to be Jeremiah the weeping prophet, because he was much in tears ([Mat
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#014)) and to him many of the passages
here may be applied.

[Lamentations 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lam 3:1</span></span>

The title of the 102nd Psalm might very fitly be prefixed to this
chapter - The prayer of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and pours
out his complaint before the Lord; for it is very feelingly and fluently
that the complaint is here poured out. Let us observe the particulars of
it. The prophet complains, 1. That God is angry. This gives both birth
and bitterness to the affliction ([Lam
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001)): I am the man, the remarkable
man, that has seen affliction, and has felt it sensibly, by the rod of
his wrath. Note, God is sometimes angry with his own people; yet it is
to be complained of, not as a sword to cut off, by only as a rod to
correct; it is to them the rod of his wrath, a chastening which, though
grievous for the present, will in the issue be advantageous. By this rod
we must expect to see affliction, and, if we be made to see more than
ordinary affliction by that rod, we must not quarrel, for we are sure
that the anger is just and affliction mild and mixed with mercy. 2. That
he is at a loss and altogether in the dark. Darkness is put for great
trouble and perplexity, the want both of comfort and of direction; this
was the case of the complainant ([Lam
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#002)): "He has led me by his
providence, and an unaccountable chain of events, into darkness and not
into light, the darkness I feared and not into the light I hoped for."
And ([Lam 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#006)), He has set me in dark
places, dark as the grave, like those that are dead of old, that are
quite forgotten, nobody knows who or what they were. Note, The Israel of
God, though children of light, sometimes walk in darkness. 3. That God
appears against him as an enemy, as a professed enemy. God had been for
him, but no "Surely against me is he turned ([Lam
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#003)), as far as I can discern; for his
hand is turned against me all the day. I am chastened every morning,"
[Psa 73:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#014). And, when God's hand is
continually turned against us, we are tempted to think that his heart is
turned against us too. God had said once ([Hos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#014)), I will be as a lion to the
house of Judah, and now he has made his word good ([Lam
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#010)): "He was unto me as a bear lying
in wait, surprising me with his judgments, and as a lion in secret
places; so that which way soever I went I was in continual fear of being
set upon and could never think myself safe." Do men shoot at those thy
are enemies to? He has bent his bow, the bow that was ordained against
the church's prosecutors, that is bent against her sons, [Lam
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#012). He has set me as a mark for his
arrow, which he aims at, and will be sure to hit, and then the arrows of
his quiver enter into my reins, give me a mortal wound, an inward wound,
[Lam 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#013). Note, God has many arrows
in his quiver, and they fly swiftly and pierce deeply. 4. That he is as
one sorely afflicted both in body and mind. The Jewish state may now be
fitly compared to a man wrinkled with age, for which there is no remedy
([Lam 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#004)): "My flesh and my skin has
he made old; they are wasted and withered, and I look like one that is
ready to drop into the grave; nay, he has broken my bones, and so
disabled me to help myself, [Lam 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#015).
He has filled me with bitterness, a bitter sense of his calamities." God
has access to the spirit, and can so embitter that as thereby to
embitter all the enjoyments; as, when the stomach is foul, whatever is
eaten sours in it: "He has made me drunk with wormwood, so intoxicated
me with the sense of my afflictions that I know not what to say or do.
He has mingled gravel with my bread, so that my teeth are broken with it
([Lam 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#016)) and what I eat is neither
pleasant nor nourishing. He has covered me with ashes, as mourners used
to be, or (as some read it) he has fed me with ashes. I have eaten ashes
like bread," [Psa 102:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#009). 5. That he is
not able to discern any way of escape or deliverance ([Lam
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#005)): "He has built against me, as
forts and batteries are built against a besieged city. Where there was a
way open it is now quite made up: He has compassed me on ever side with
gall and travel; I vex, and fret, and tire myself, to find a way of
escape, but can find none, [Lam 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#007).
He has hedged me about, that I cannot get out." When Jerusalem was
besieged it was said to be compassed in on every side, [Luk
19:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#043). "I am chained; and as some
notorious malefactors are double-fettered, and loaded with irons, so he
has made my chain heavy. He has also ([Lam
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#009)) enclosed my ways with hewn stone,
not only hedged up my way with thorns ([Hos
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#006)), but stopped it up with a stone
wall, which cannot be broken through, so that my paths are made crooked;
I traverse to and fro, to the right hand, to the left, to try to get
forward, but am still turned back." It is just with God to make those
who walk in the crooked paths of sin, crossing God's laws, walk in the
crooked paths of affliction, crossing their designs and breaking their
measures. So ([Lam 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#011)), "He has
turned aside my ways; he has blasted all my counsels, ruined my
projects, so that I am necessitated to yield to my own ruin. He has
pulled me in pieces; he has torn and is gone away ([Hos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#014)), and has made me desolate, has
deprived me of all society and all comfort in my own soul." 6. That God
turns a deaf ear to his prayers ([Lam
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#008)): "When I cry and shout, as one in
earnest, as one that would make him hear, yet he shuts out my prayer and
will not suffer it to have access to him." God's ear is wont to be open
to the prayers of his people, and his door of mercy to those that knock
at it; but now both are shut, even to one that cries and shouts. Thus
sometimes God seems to be angry even against the prayers of his people
([Psa 80:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#004)), and their case is
deplorable indeed when they are denied not only the benefit of an
answer, but the comfort of acceptance. 7. That his neighbours make a
laughing matter of his troubles ([Lam
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#014)): I was a derision to all my
people, to all the wicked among them, who made themselves an one another
merry with the public judgments, and particularly the prophet Jeremiah's
griefs. I am their song, their neginath, or hand-instrument of music,
their tabret ([Job 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006)), that they
play upon, as Nero on his harp when Rome was on fire. 8. That he was
ready to despair of relief and deliverance: "Thou hast not only taken
peace from me, but hast removed my soul far off from peace (v. 17), so
that it is not only not within reach, but no within view. I forget
prosperity; it is so long since I had it, and so unlikely that I should
ever recover it, that I have lost the idea of it. I have been so inured
to sorrow and servitude that I know not what joy and liberty mean. I
have even given up all for gone, concluding, My strength and my hope
have perished from the Lord ([Lam
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#018)); I can no longer stay myself
upon God as my support, for I do not find that he gives me encouragement
to do so; nor can I look for his appearing in my behalf, so as to put an
end to my troubles, for the case seems remediless, and even my God
inexorable." Without doubt it was his infirmity to say this ([Psa
77:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#010)), for with God there is
everlasting strength, and he is his people's never-failing hope,
whatever they may think. 9. That grief returned upon every remembrance
of his troubles, and his reflections were as melancholy as his
prospects, [Lam 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#019), [Lam
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#020). Did he endeavour as Job did
([Job 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#027)), to forget his complaint?
Alas! it was to no purpose; he remembers, upon all occasions, the
affliction and the misery, the wormwood and the gall. Thus emphatically
does he speak of his affliction, for thus did he think of it, thus
heavily did it lie when he reviewed it! It was an affliction that was
misery itself. My affliction and my transgression (so some read it), my
trouble and my sin that brought it upon me; this was the wormwood and
the gall in the affliction and the misery. It is sin that makes the cup
of affliction a bitter cup. My soul has them still in remembrance. The
captives in Babylon had all the miseries of the siege in their mind
continually and the flames and ruins of Jerusalem still before their
eyes, and wept when they remembered Zion; nay, they could never forget
Jerusalem, [Psa 137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001), [Psa
137:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#005). My soul, having them in
remembrance, is humbled in me, not only oppressed with a sense of the
trouble, but in bitterness for sin. Note, It becomes us to have humble
hearts under humbling providences, and to renew our penitent
humiliations for sin upon every remembrance of our afflictions and
miseries. Thus we may get good by former corrections and prevent
further.

[Lamentations 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lam 3:21</span></span>

Here the clouds begin to disperse and the sky to clear up; the complaint
was very melancholy in the former part of the chapter, and yet here the
tune is altered and the mourners in Zion begin to look a little
pleasant. But for hope, the heart would break. To save the heart from
being quite broken, here is something called to mind, which gives ground
for hope ([Lam 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#021)), which refers to
what comes after, not to what goes before. I make to return to my heart
(so the margin words it); what we have had in our hearts, and have laid
to our hearts, is sometimes as if it were quite lost and forgotten, till
God by his grace make it return to our hearts, that it may be ready to
us when we have occasion to use it. "I recall it to mind; therefore have
I hope, and am kept from downright despair." Let us see what these
things are which he calls to mind.

I. That, bad as things are, it is owing to the mercy of God that they
are not worse. We are afflicted by the rod of his wrath, but it is of
the lord's mercies that we are not consumed, [Lam
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#022). When we are in distress we
should, for the encouragement of our faith and hope, observe what makes
for us as well as what makes against us. Things are bad but they might
have been worse, and therefore there is hope that they may be better.
Observe here, 1. The streams of mercy acknowledged: We are not consumed.
Note, The church of God is like Moses's bush, burning, yet not consumed;
whatever hardships it has met with, or may meet with, it shall have a
being in the world to the end of time. It is persecuted of men, but not
forsaken of God, and therefore, though it is cast down, it is not
destroyed ([Co2 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#009)), corrected, yet
not consumed, refined in the furnace as silver, but not consumed as
dross. 2. These streams followed up to the fountain: It is of the Lord's
mercies. here are mercies in the plural number, denoting the abundance
and variety of those mercies. God is an inexhaustible fountain of mercy,
the Father of mercies. Note, We all owe it to the sparing mercy of God
that we are not consumed. Others have been consumed round about us, and
we ourselves have been in the consuming, and yet we are not consumed; we
are out of the grave; we are out of hell. Had we been dealt with
according to our sins, we should have been consumed long ago; but we
have been dealt with according to God's mercies, and we are bound to
acknowledge it to his praise.

II\. That even in the depth of their affliction they still have
experience of the tenderness of the divine pity and the truth of the
divine promise. They had several times complained that God had not
pitied ([Lam 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#017), [Lam
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#021)), but here they correct
themselves, and own, 1. That God's compassions fail not; they do not
really fail, no, not even when in anger he seems to have shut up his
tender mercies. These rivers of mercy run fully and constantly, but
never run dry. No; they are new every morning; every morning we have
fresh instances of God's compassion towards us; he visits us with them
every morning ([Job 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#018)); every
morning does he bring his judgment to light, [Zep
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#005). When our comforts fail, yet God's
compassions do not. 2. That great is his faithfulness. Though the
covenant seemed to be broken, they owned that it still continued in full
force; and, though Jerusalem be in ruins, the truth of the Lord endures
for ever. Note, Whatever hard things we suffer, we must never entertain
any hard thoughts of God, but must still be ready to own that he is both
kind and faithful.

III\. That God is, and ever will be, the all-sufficient happiness of his
people, and they have chosen him and depend upon him to be such ([Lam
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#024)): The Lord is my portion, saith
my soul; that is, 1. "When I have lost all I have in the world, liberty,
and livelihood, and almost life itself, yet I have not lost my interest
in God." Portions on earth are perishing things, but God is portion for
ever. 2. "While I have an interest in God, therein I have enough; I have
that which is sufficient to counterbalance all my troubles and make up
all my losses." Whatever we are robbed of our portion is safe. 3. "This
is that which I depend upon and rest satisfied with: Therefore will I
hope in him. I will stay myself upon him, and encourage myself in him,
when all other supports and encouragements fail me." Note, It is our
duty to make God the portion of our souls, and then to make use of him
as our portion and to take the comfort of it in the midst of our
lamentations.

IV\. That those who deal with God will find it is not in vain to trust
in him; for, 1. He is good to those who do so, [Lam
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#025). He is good to all; his tender
mercies are over all his works; all his creatures taste of his goodness.
But he is in a particular manner good to those that wait for him, to the
soul that seeks him. Note, While trouble is prolonged, and deliverance
is deferred, we must patiently wait for God and his gracious returns to
us. While we wait for him by faith, we must seek him by prayer: our
souls must seek him, else we do not seek so as to find. Our seeking will
help to keep up our waiting. And to those who thus wait and seek God
will be gracious; he will show them his marvellous lovingkindness. 2.
Those that do so will find it good for them ([Lam
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#026)): It is good (it is our duty, and
will be our unspeakable comfort and satisfaction) to hope and quietly to
wait for the salvation of the Lord, to hope that it will come, thought
eh difficulties that lie in the way of it seem insupportable, to wait
till it does come, though it be long delayed, and while we wait to be
quiet and silent, not quarrelling with God nor making ourselves uneasy,
but acquiescing in the divine disposals. Father, thy will be done. If we
call this to mind, we may have hope that all will end well at last.

V. That afflictions are really good for us, and, if we bear them aright,
will work very much for our good. it is not only good to hope and wait
for the salvation, but it is good to be under the trouble in the mean
time ([Lam 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#027)): It is good for a man
that he bear the yoke in his youth. Many of the young men were carried
into captivity. To make them easy in it, he tells them that it was good
for them to bear the yoke of that captivity, and they would find it so
if they would but accommodate themselves to their condition, and labour
to answer God's ends in laying that heavy yoke upon them. It is very
applicable to the yoke of God's commands. it is good for young people to
take that yoke upon them in their youth; we cannot begin too soon to be
religious. it will make our duty the more acceptable to God, and easy to
ourselves, if we engage in it when we are young. But here it seems to be
meant of the yoke of affliction. Many have found it good to bear this in
youth; it has made those humble and serious, and has weaned them from
the world, who otherwise would have been proud and unruly, and as a
bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. But when do we bear the yoke so that
it is really good for us to bear it in our youth? He answers in the
following verses, 1. When we are sedate and quiet under our afflictions,
when we sit alone and keep silence, do not run to and fro into all
companies with our complaints, aggravating our calamities, and
quarrelling with the disposals of Providence concerning us, but retire
into privacy, that we may in a day of adversity consider, sit alone,
that we may converse with God and commune with our own hearts, silencing
all discontented distrustful thoughts, and laying our hand upon our
mouth, as Aaron, who, under a very severe trial, held his peace. We must
keep silence under the yoke as those that have borne it upon us, not
wilfully pulled it upon our own necks, but patiently submitted to it
when God laid it upon us. When those who are afflicted in their youth
accommodate themselves to their afflictions, fit their necks to the yoke
and study to answer God's end in afflicting them, then they will find it
good for them to bear it, for it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness to those who are thus exercised thereby. 2. When we are
humble and patient under our affliction. He gets good by the yoke who
puts his mouth in the dust, not only lays his hand upon his mouth, in
token of submission to the will of God in the affliction, but puts it in
the dust, in token of sorrow, and shame, and self-loathing, at the
remembrance of sin, and as one perfectly reduced and reclaimed, and
brought as those that are vanquished to lick the dust, [Psa
72:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#009). And we must thus humble
ourselves, if so be there may be hope, or (as it is in the original)
peradventure there is hope. If there be any way to acquire and secure a
good hope under our afflictions, it is this way, and yet we must be very
modest in our expectations of it, must look for it with an it may be, as
those who own ourselves utterly unworthy of it. Note, Those who are
truly humbled for sin will be glad to obtain a good hope, through grace,
upon any terms, though they put their mouth in the dust for it; and
those who would have hope must do so, and ascribe it to free grace if
they have any encouragements, which may keep their hearts from sinking
into the dust when they put their mouth there. 3. When we are meek and
mild towards those who are the instruments of our trouble, and are of a
forgiving spirit, [Lam 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#030). He gets
good by the yoke who gives his cheek to him that smites him, and rather
turns the other cheek ([Mat 5:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)) than
returns the second blow. Our Lord Jesus has left us an example of this,
for he gave his back to the smiter, [Isa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006). he who can bear contempt and
reproach, and not render railing for railing, and bitterness for
bitterness, who, when he is filled full with reproach, keeps it to
himself, and does not retort it and empty it again upon those who filled
him with it, but pours it out before the Lord (as those did, [Psa
123:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#004), whose souls were exceedingly
filled with the contempt of the proud), he shall find that it is good to
bear the yoke, that it shall turn to his spiritual advantage. The sum
is, If tribulation work patience, that patience will work experience,
and that experience a hope that makes not ashamed.

VI\. That God will graciously return to his people with seasonable
comforts according to the time that he has afflicted them, [Lam
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#031), [Lam
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#032). Therefore the sufferer is thus
penitent, thus patient, because he believes that God is gracious and
merciful, which is the great inducement both to evangelical repentance
and to Christian patience. We may bear ourselves up with this, 1. That,
when we are cast down, yet we are not cast off; the father's correcting
his son is not a disinheriting of him. 2. That though we may seem to be
cast off for a time, while sensible comforts are suspended and desired
salvations deferred, yet we are not really cast off, because not cast
off for ever; the controversy with us shall not be perpetual. 3. That,
whatever sorrow we are in, it is what God has allotted us, and his hand
is in it. It is he that causes grief, and therefore we may be assured it
is ordered wisely and graciously; and it is but for a season, and when
need is, that we are in heaviness, [Pe1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#006). 4. That God has compassions and
comforts in store even for those whom he has himself grieved. We must be
far from thinking that, though God cause grief, the world will relieve
and help us. No; the very same that caused the grief must bring in the
favour, or we are undone. Una eademque manus vulnus opemque tulit - The
same hand inflicted the wound and healed it. he has torn, and he will
heal us, [Hos 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001). 5. That, when God
returns to deal graciously with us, it will not be according to our
merits, but according to his mercies, according to the multitude, the
abundance, of his mercies. So unworthy we are that nothing but an
abundant mercy will relieve us; and from that what may we not expect?
And God's causing our grief ought to be no discouragement at all to
those expectations.

VII\. That, when God does cause grief, it is for wise and holy ends, and
he takes not delight in our calamities, [Lam
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#033). he does indeed afflict, and
grieve the children of men; all their grievances and afflictions are
from him. But he does not do it willingly, not from the heart; so the
word is. 1. He never afflicts us but when we give him cause to do it. He
does not dispense his frowns as he does his favours, ex mero motu - from
his mere good pleasure. If he show us kindness, it is because so it
seems good unto him; but, if he write bitter things against us, it is
because we both deserve them and need them. 2. He does not afflict with
pleasure. he delights not in the death of sinners, or the disquiet of
saints, but punishes with a kind of reluctance. He comes out of his
place to punish, for his place is the mercy-seat. He delights not in the
misery of any of his creatures, but, as it respects his own people, he
is so far from it that in all their afflictions he is afflicted and his
soul is grieved for the misery of Israel. 3. He retains his kindness for
his people even when he afflicts them. If he does not willingly grieve
the children of men, much less his own children. However it be, yet God
is good to them ([Psa 73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)), and they
may by faith see love in his heart even when they see frowns in his face
and a rod in his hand.

VIII\. That though he makes use of men as his hand, or rather
instruments in his hand, for the correcting of his people, yet he is far
from being pleased with the injustice of their proceedings and the wrong
they do them, [Lam 3:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#034). Though God
serves his own purposes by the violence of wicked and unreasonable men,
yet it does no therefore follow that he countenances that violence, as
his oppressed people are sometimes tempted to think. [Hab
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013), Wherefore lookest thou upon
those that deal treacherously? Two ways the people of God are injured
and oppressed by their enemies, and the prophet here assures us that God
does not approve of either of them: - 1. If men injure them by force of
arms, God does not approve of that. he does not himself crush under his
feet the prisoners of the earth, but he regards the cry of the
prisoners; nor does he approve of men's doing it; nay, he is much
displeased with it. It is barbarous to trample on those that are down,
and to crush those that are bound and cannot help themselves. 2. If men
injure them under colour of law, and in the pretended administration of
justice, - if they turn aside the right of a man, so that he cannot
discover what his rights are or cannot come at them, they are out of his
reach, - if they subvert a man in his cause, and bring in a wrong
verdict, or give a false judgment, let them know, (1.) That God sees
them. It is before the face of the Most High ([Lam
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#035)); it is in his sight, under his
eye, and is very displeasing to him. They cannot but know it is so, and
therefore it is in defiance of him that they do it. he is the Most High,
whose authority over them they contemn by abusing their authority over
their subjects, not considering that he that is higher than the highest
regardeth, [Ecc 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#008). (2.) That God
does not approve of them. More is implied than is expressed. The
perverting of justice, and the subverting of the just, are a great
affront to God; and, though he may make use of them for the correction
of his people, yet he will sooner or later severely reckon with those
that do thus. Note, However God may for a time suffer evil-doers to
prosper, and serve his own purposes by them, yet he does not therefore
approve of their evil doings. Far be it from God that he should do
iniquity, or countenance those that do it.

[Lamentations 3:37](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">lam 3:37</span></span>

That we may be entitled to the comforts administered to the afflicted in
the foregoing verses, and may taste the sweetness of them, we have here
the duties of an afflicted state prescribed to us, in the performance of
which we may expect those comforts.

I. We must see and acknowledge the hand of God in all the calamities
that befal us at any time, whether personal or public, [Lam
3:37](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#037), [Lam
3:38](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#038). This is here laid down as a
great truth, which will help to quiet our spirits under our afflictions
and to sanctify them to us. 1. That, whatever men's actions are, it is
God that overrules them: Who is he that saith, and it cometh to pass
(that designs a thing and bring his designs to effect), if the Lord
commandeth it not? Men can do nothing but according to the counsel of
God, nor have any power or success but what is given them from above. A
man's heart devises his way; he projects and purposes; he says that he
will do so and so ([Jam 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013)); but the
Lord directs his steps far otherwise than he designed them, and what he
contrived and expected does not come to pass, unless it be what God's
hand and his counsel had determined before to be done, [Pro
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#009); [Jer
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023). The Chaldeans said that they
would destroy Jerusalem, and it came to pass, not because they said it,
but because God commanded it and commissioned them to do it. Note, Men
are but tools which the great God makes use of, and manages as he
pleases, in the government of this lower world; and they cannot
accomplish any of their designs without him. 2. That, whatever men's lot
is, it is God that orders it: Out of the mouth of the Most High do not
evil and good proceed? Yes, certainly they do; and it is more
emphatically expressed in the original: Do not this evil, and this good,
proceed out of the mouth of the Most High? Is it not what he has
ordained and appointed for us? Yes, certainly it is; and for the
reconciling of us to our own afflictions, whatever they be, this general
truth must thus be particularly applied. This comfort I receive from the
hand of God, and shall I not receive that evil also? so Job argues, [Lam
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#010). Are we healthful or sickly, rich
or poor? Do we succeed in our designs, or are we crossed in them? It is
all what God orders; every man's judgment proceeds from him. The Lord
gave, and the Lord has taken away; he forms the light and creates the
darkness, as he did at first. Note, All the events of divine Providence
are the products of a divine counsel; whatever is done God has the
directing of it, and the works of his hands agree with the words of his
mouth; he speaks, and it is done, so easily, so effectually are all his
purposes fulfilled.

II\. We must not quarrel with God for any affliction that he lays upon
us at any time ([Lam 3:39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#039)): Wherefore
does a living man complain? The prophet here seems to check himself for
the complaint he had made in the former part of the chapter, wherein he
seemed to reflect upon God as unkind and severe. "Do I well to be angry?
Why do I fret thus?" Those who in their haste have chidden with God
must, in the reflection, chide themselves for it. From the doctrine of
God's sovereign and universal providence, which he had asserted in the
verses before, he draws this inference, Wherefore does a living man
complain? What God does we must not open our mouths against, [Psa
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009). Those that blame their lot
reproach him that allotted it to them. The sufferers in the captivity
must submit to the will of God in all their sufferings. Note, Though we
may pour out our complaints before God, we must never exhibit any
complaints against God. What! Shall a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sins? The reasons here urged are very cogent. 1. We
are men; let us herein show ourselves men. Shall a man complain? And
again, a man! We are men, and not brutes, reasonable creatures, who
should act with reason, who should look upward and look forward, and
both ways may fetch considerations enough to silence our complaints. We
are men, and not children that cry for every thing that hurts them. We
are men, and not gods, subjects, not lords; we are not our own masters,
not our own carvers; we are bound and must obey, must submit. We are
men, and not angels, and therefore cannot expect to be free from
troubles as they are; we are not inhabitants of that world where there
is no sorrow, but this where there is nothing but sorrow. We are men,
and not devils, are not in that deplorable, helpless, hopeless, state
that they are in, but have something to comfort ourselves with which
they have not. 2. We are living men. Through the good hand of our God
upon us we are alive yet, though dying daily; and shall a living man
complain? No; he has more reason to be thankful for life than to
complain of any of the burdens and calamities of life. Our lives are
frail and forfeited, and yet we are alive; now the living, the living,
they should praise, and not complain ([Isa
38:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#019)); while there is life there is
hope, and therefore, instead of complaining that things are bad, we
should encourage ourselves with the hope that they will be better. 3. We
are sinful men, and that which we complain of is the just punishment of
our sins; nay, it is far less than our iniquities have deserved. We have
little reason to complain of our trouble, for it is our own doing; we
may thank ourselves. Our own wickedness corrects us, [Pro
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#003). We have no reason to quarrel
with God, for he is righteous in it; he is the governor of the world,
and it is necessary that he should maintain the honour of his government
by chastising the disobedient. Are we suffering for our sins? Then let
us not complain; for we have other work to do; instead of repining, we
must be repenting; and, as an evidence that God is reconciled to us, we
must be endeavouring to reconcile ourselves to his holy will. Are we
punished for our sins? It is our wisdom then to submit, and to kiss the
rod; for, if we still walk contrary to God, he will punish us yet seven
times more; for when he judges he will overcome. But, if we accommodate
ourselves to him, though we be chastened of the Lord we shall not be
condemned with the world.

III\. We must set ourselves to answer God's intention in afflicting us,
which is to bring sin to our remembrance, and to bring us home to
himself, [Lam 3:40](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#040). These are the two
things which our afflictions should put us upon. 1. A serious
consideration of ourselves and a reflection upon our past lives. Let us
search and try our ways, search what they have been, and then try
whether they have been right and good or no; search as for a malefactor
in disguise, that flees and hides himself, and then try whether guilty
or not guilty. Let conscience be employed both to search and to try, and
let it have leave to deal faithfully, to accomplish a diligent search
and to make an impartial trial. Let us try our ways, that by them we may
try ourselves, for we are to judge of our state not by our faint wishes,
but by our steps, not by one particular step, but by our ways, the ends
we aim at, the rules we go by, and the agreeableness of the temper of
our minds and the tenour of our lives to those ends and those rules.
When we are in affliction it is seasonable to consider our ways ([Hag
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#005)), that what is amiss may be
repented of and amended for the future, and so we may answer the
intention of the affliction. We are apt, in times of public calamity, to
reflect upon other people's ways, and lay blame upon them; whereas our
business is to search and try our own ways. We have work enough to do at
home; we must each of us say, "What have I done? What have I contributed
to the public flames?" that we may each of us mend one, and then we
should all be mended. 2. A sincere conversion to God: "Let us turn again
to the Lord, to him who is turned against us and whom we have turned
from; to him let us turn by repentance and reformation, as to our owner
and ruler. We have been with him, and it has never been well with us
since we forsook him; let us therefore now turn again to him." This must
accompany the former and be the fruit of it; therefore we must search
and try our ways, that we may turn from the evil of them to God. This
was the method David took. [Psa
119:59](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#059), I thought on my ways, and
turned my feet unto thy testimonies.

IV\. We must offer up ourselves to God, and our best affections and
services, in the flames of devotion, [Lam
3:41](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#041). When we are in affliction, 1. We
must look up to God as a God in the heavens, infinitely above us, and
who has an incontestable dominion over us; for the heavens do rule, and
are therefore not to be quarrelled with, but submitted to. 2. We must
pray to him, with a believing expectation to receive mercy from him; for
that is implied in our lifting up our hands to him (a gesture commonly
used in prayer and sometimes put for it, as [Psa
141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002), Let the lifting up of my hands
be as the evening sacrifice); it signifies our requesting mercy from him
and our readiness to receive that mercy. (3.) Our hearts must go along
with our prayers. We must lift up our hearts with our hands, as we must
pour out our souls with our words. it is the heart that God looks at in
that and every other service; for what will a sacrifice without a heart
avail? If inward impressions be not in some measure answerable to
outward expressions, we do but mock God and deceive ourselves. Praying
is lifting up the soul to God ([Psa
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001)) as to our Father in heaven; and
the soul that hopes to be with God in heaven for ever will thus, by
frequent acts of devotion, be still learning the way thither and
pressing forward in that way.

[Lamentations 3:42](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">lam 3:42</span></span>

It is easier to chide ourselves for complaining than to chide ourselves
out of it. The prophet had owned that a living man should not complain,
as if he checked himself for his complaints in the former part of the
chapter; and yet here the clouds return after the rain and the wound
bleeds afresh; for great pains must be taken with a troubled spirit to
bring it into temper.

I. They confess the righteousness of God in afflicting them ([Lam
3:42](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#042)): We have transgressed and have
rebelled. Note, It becomes us, when we are in trouble, to justify God,
by owning our sins, and laying the load upon ourselves for them. Call
sin a transgression, call it a rebellion, and you do not miscall it.
This is the result of their searching and trying their ways; the more
they enquired into them the worse they found them. Yet,

II\. They complain of the afflictions they are under, not without some
reflections upon God, which we are not to imitate, but, under the
sharpest trials, must always think and speak highly and kindly of him.

1\. They complain of his frowns and the tokens of his displeasure
against them. Their sins were repented of, and yet ([Lam
3:42](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#042)), Thou hast not pardoned. They
had not the assurance and comfort of the pardon; the judgments brought
upon them for their sins were not removed, and therefore they thought
they could not say the sin was pardoned, which was a mistake, but a
common mistake with the people of God when their souls are cast down and
disquieted within them. Their case was really pitiable, yet they
complain, Thou hast not pitied, [Lam
3:43](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#043). Their enemies persecuted and
slew them, but that was not the worst of it; they were but the
instruments in God's hand: "Thou hast persecuted us, and thou hast slain
us, though we expected thou wouldst protect and deliver us." They
complain that there was a wall of partition between them and God, and,
(1.) This hindered God's favours from coming down upon them. The
reflected beams of God's kindness to them used to be the beauty of
Israel; but now "thou hast covered us with anger, so that our glory is
concealed and gone; now God is angry with us, and we do not appear that
illustrious people that we have formerly been thought to be." Or, "Thou
hast covered us up as men that are buried are covered up and forgotten."
(2.) It hindered their prayers from coming up unto God ([Lam
3:44](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#044)): "Thou hast covered thyself with
a cloud," not like that bright cloud in which he took possession of the
temple, which enabled the worshippers to draw near to him, but like that
in which he came down upon Mount Sinai, which obliged the people to
stand at a distance. "This cloud is so thick that our prayers seem as if
they were lost in it; they cannot pass through; we cannot obtain an
audience." Note, The prolonging of troubles is sometimes a temptation,
even to praying people, to question whether God be what they have always
believed him to be, a prayer-hearing God.

2\. They complain of the contempt of their neighbours and the reproach
and ignominy they were under ([Lam
3:45](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#045)): "Thou hast made us as the
off-scouring, or scrapings, of the first floor, which are thrown to the
dunghill." This St. Paul refers to in his account of the sufferings of
the apostles. [Co1 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013), We are made
as the filth of the world and are the off-scouring of all things. "We
are the refuse, or dross, in the midst of the people, trodden upon by
every body, and looked upon as the vilest of the nations, and good for
nothing but to be cast out as salt which has lost its savour. Our
enemies have opened their mouths against us ([Lam
3:46](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#046)), have gaped upon us as roaring
lions, to swallow us up, or made mouths at us, or have taken liberty to
say what they please of us." These complaints we had before, [Lam
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#015), [Lam
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#016). Note, It is common for base and
ill-natured men to run upon, and run down, those that have fallen into
the depths of distress from the height of honour. But this they brought
upon themselves by sin. If they had not made themselves vile, their
enemies could not have made them so: but therefore men call them
reprobate silver, because the Lord has rejected them for rejecting him.

3\. They complain of the lamentable destruction that their enemies made
of them ([Lam 3:47](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#047)): Fear and a snare
have come upon us; the enemies have not only terrified us with those
alarms, but prevailed against us by their stratagems, and surprised us
with the ambushes they laid for us; and then follows nothing but
desolation and destruction, the destruction of the daughter of my people
([Lam 3:48](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#048)), of all the daughters of
my city, [Lam 3:51](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#051). The enemies,
having taken some of them like a bird in a snare, chased others as a
harmless bird is chased by a bird of prey ([Lam
3:52](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#052)): My enemies chased me sorely
like a bird which is beaten from bush to bush, as Saul hunted David like
a partridge. Thus restless was the enmity of their persecutors, and yet
causeless. They have done it without cause, without any provocation
given them. Though God was righteous, they were unrighteous. David often
complains of those that hated him without cause; and such are the
enemies of Christ and his church, [Joh
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#025). Their enemies chased them till
they had quite prevailed over them ([Lam
3:53](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#053)): They have cut off my life in
the dungeon. They have shut up their captives in close and dark prisons,
where they are as it were cut off from the land of the living (as [Lam
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#006)), or the state and kingdom are
sunk and ruined, the life and being of them are gone, and they are as it
were thrown into the dungeon or grave and a stone cast upon them, such
as used to be rolled to the door of the sepulchres. They look upon the
Jewish nation as dead and buried, and imagine that there is not
possibility of its resurrection. Thus Ezekiel saw it, in vision, a
valley full of dead and dry bones. Their destruction is compared not
only to the burying of a dead man, but to the sinking of a living man
into the water, who cannot long be a living man there, [Lam
3:54](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#054). Waters of affliction flowed over
my head. The deluge prevailed and quite overwhelmed them. The Chaldean
forces broke in upon them as the breaking forth of waters, which rose so
high as to flow over their heads; they could not wade, they could not
swim, and therefore must unavoidably sink. Note, The distresses of God's
people sometimes prevail to such a degree that they cannot find any
footing for their faith, nor keep their head above water, with any
comfortable expectation.

4\. They complain of their own excessive grief and fear upon this
account. (1.) The afflicted church is drowned in tears, and the prophet
for her ([Lam 3:48](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#048), [Lam
3:49](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#049)): My eye runs down with rivers of
water, so abundant was their weeping; it trickles down and ceases not,
so constant was their weeping, without any intermission, there being no
relaxation of their miseries. The distemper was in continual extremity,
and they had no better day. It is added ([Lam
3:51](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#051)), "My eye affects my heart. My
seeing eye affects my heart. The more I look upon the desolation of the
city and country the more I am grieved. Which way soever I cast my eye,
I see that which renews my sorrow, even because of all the daughters of
my city," all the neighbouring towns, which were as daughters to
Jerusalem the mother-city. Or, My weeping eye affects my heart; the
venting of the grief, instead of easing it, did but increase and
exasperate it. Or, My eye melts my soul; I have quite wept away my
spirits; not only my eye is consumed with grief, but my soul and my life
are spent with it, [Psa 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009), [Psa
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#010). Great and long grief exhausts
the spirits, and brings not only many a gray head, but many a green head
too, to the grave. I weep, ways the prophet, more than all the daughters
of my city (so the margin reads it); he outdid even those of the tender
sex in the expressions of grief. And it is no diminution to any to be
much in tears for the sins of sinners and the sufferings of saints; our
Lord Jesus was so; for, when he came near, he beheld this same city and
wept over it, which the daughters of Jerusalem did not. (2.) She is
overwhelmed with fears, not only grieves for what is, but fears worse,
and gives up all for gone ([Lam 3:54](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#054)):
"Then I said, I am cut off, ruined, and see no hope of recovery; I am as
one dead." Note, Those that are cast down are commonly tempted to think
themselves cast off, [Psa 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022); [Jon
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004).

5\. In the midst of these sad complaints here is one word of comfort, by
which it appears that their case was not altogether so bas as they made
it, [Lam 3:50](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#050). We continue thus
weeping till the Lord look down and behold from heaven. This intimates,
(1.) That they were satisfied that God's gracious regard to them in
their miseries would be an effectual redress of all their grievances.
"If God, who now covers himself with a cloud, as if he took no notice of
our troubles ([Job 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#013)), would but
shine forth, all would be well; if he look upon us, we shall be saved,"
[Psa 80:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#019); [Dan
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#017). Bad as the case is, one
favourable look from heaven will set all to rights. (2.) That they had
hopes that he would at length look graciously upon them and relieve
them; nay, they take it for granted that he will: "Though he contend
long, he will not contend for ever, thou we deserve that he should."
(3.) That while they continued weeping they continued waiting, and
neither did nor would expect relief and succour from any hand but his;
nothing shall comfort them but his gracious returns, nor shall any thing
wipe tears from their eyes till he look down. Their eyes, which now run
down with water, shall still wait upon the Lord their God until he have
mercy upon them, [Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002).

[Lamentations 3:55](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">lam 3:55</span></span>

We may observe throughout this chapter a struggle in the prophet's
breast between sense and faith, fear and hope; he complains and then
comforts himself, yet drops his comforts and returns again to his
complaints, as [Psa 42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001). But, as
there, so here, faith gets the last word and comes off a conqueror; for
in these verses he concludes with some comfort. And here are two things
with which he comforts himself: -

I. His experience of God's goodness even in his affliction. This may
refer to the prophet's personal experience, with which he encourages
himself in reference to the public troubles. He that has seasonably
succoured particular saints will not fail the church in general. Or it
may include the remnant of good people that were among the Jews, who had
found that it was not in vain to wait upon God. In three things the
prophet and his pious friends had found God good to them: - 1. He had
heard their prayers; though they had been ready to fear that the cloud
of wrath was such as their prayers could not pass through ([Lam
3:44](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#044)), yet upon second thoughts, or at
least upon further trial, they find it otherwise, and that God had not
said unto them, Seek you me in vain. When they were in the low dungeon,
as free among the dead, they called upon God's name ([Lam
3:55](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055)); their weeping did not hinder
praying. Note, Though we are cast into ever so low a dungeon, we may
thence find a way of access to God in the highest heavens. Out of the
depths have I cried unto thee ([Psa
130:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#001)), as Jonah out of the whale's
belly. And could God hear them out of the low dungeon, and would he?
Yes, he did: Thou hast heard my voice; and some read the following words
as carrying on the same thankful acknowledgment: Thou didst not hide thy
ear at my breathing, at my cry; and the original will bear that reading.
We read it as a petition for further audience: Hide not thy ear. God's
having heard our voice when we cried to him, even out of the low
dungeon, is an encouragement for us to hope that he will not at any time
hide his ear. Observe how he calls prayer his breathing; for in prayer
we breathe towards God, we breathe after him. Though we be but weak in
prayer, cannot cry aloud, but only breathe in groanings that cannot be
uttered, yet we shall not be neglected if we be sincere. Prayer is the
breath of the new man, sucking in the air of mercy in petitions and
returning it in praises; it is both the evidence and the maintenance of
the spiritual life. Some read it, at my gasping. "When I lay gasping for
life, and ready to expire, and thought i was breathing my last, then
thou tookest cognizance of my distressed case." 2. He had silenced their
fears and quieted their spirits ([Lam
3:57](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#057)): "Thou drewest near in the day
that I called upon thee; thou didst graciously assure me of thy presence
with me, and give me to see thee nigh unto me, whereas I had thought
thee to be at a distance from me." Note, When we draw nigh to God in a
way of duty we may by faith see him drawing nigh to us in a way of
mercy. But this was not all: Thou saidst, Fear not. This was the
language of God's prophets preaching to them not to fear ([Isa
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010), [Isa
41:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#013), [Isa
41:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#014)), of his providence preventing
those things which they were afraid of, and of his grace quieting their
minds, and making them easy, by the witness of his Spirit with their
spirits that they were his people still, though in distress, and
therefore ought not to fear. 3. He had already begun to appear for them
([Lam 3:58](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#058)): "O Lord! thou hast
pleaded the causes of my soul" (that is, as it follows), "thou hast
redeemed my life, hast rescued that out of the hands of those who would
have taken it away, hast saved that when it was ready to be swallowed
up, hast given me that for a prey." And this is an encouragement to them
to hope that he would yet further appear for them: "Thou hast delivered
my soul from death, and therefore wilt deliver my feet from falling;
thou hast pleaded the causes of my life, and therefore wilt plead my
other causes."

II\. He comforts himself with an appeal to God's justice, and (in order
to the sentence of that) to his omniscience.

1\. He appeals to God's knowledge of the matter of fact, how very
spiteful and malicious his enemies were ([Lam
3:59](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#059)): "O Lord! thou hast seen my
wrong, that I have done no wrong at all, but suffer a great deal." He
that knows all things knew, (1.) The malice they had against him: "Thou
hast seen all their vengeance, how they desire to do me a mischief, as
if it were by way of reprisal for some great injury I had done them."
Note, We should consider, to our terror and caution, that God knows all
the revengeful thoughts we have in our minds against others, and
therefore we should not allow of those thoughts nor harbour them, and
that he knows all the revengeful thoughts others have causelessly in
their minds against us, and therefore we should not be afraid of them,
but leave it to him to protect us from them. (2.) The designs and
projects they had laid to do him a mischief: Thou hast seen all their
imaginations against me ([Lam 3:60](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#060)),
and again, "Thou hast heard all their imaginations against me ([Lam
3:61](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#061)), both the desire and the device
they have to ruin me; whether it show itself in word or deed, it is
known to thee; nay, though the products of it are not to be seen nor
heard, yet their device against me all the day is perceived and
understood by him to whom all things are naked and open." Note, The most
secret contrivances of the church's enemies are perfectly known to the
church's God, from whom they can hide nothing. (3.) The contempt and
calumny wherewith they loaded him, all that they spoke slightly of him,
and all that they spoke reproachfully: "Thou hast heard their reproach
([Lam 3:61](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#061)), all the bad characters
they give me, laying to my charge things that I know not, all the
methods they use to make me odious and contemptible, even the lips of
those that rose up against me ([Lam
3:62](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#062)), the contumelious language they
use whenever they speak of me, and that at their sitting down and rising
up, when they lie down at night and get up in the morning, when they sit
down to their meat and with their company, and when they rise from both,
still I am their music; they make themselves and one another merry with
my miseries, as the Philistines made sport with Samson." Jerusalem was
the tabret they played upon. Perhaps they had some tune or play, some
opera or interlude, that was called the destruction of Jerusalem, which,
though in the nature of a tragedy, was very entertaining to those who
wished ill to the holy city. Note, God will one day call sinners to
account for all the hard speeches which they have spoken against him and
his people, [Jde 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015).

2\. He appeals to God's judgment upon this fact: "Lord, thou hast seen
my wrong; there is no need of any evidence to prove it, nor any
prosecutor to enforce and aggravate it; thou seest it in its true
colours; and now I leave it with thee. Judge thou my cause, [Lam
3:59](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#059). Let them be dealt with," (1.)
"As they deserve ([Lam 3:64](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#064)): Render
to them a recompence according to the work of their hands. Let them be
dealt with as they have dealt with us; let thy hand be against them as
their hand has been against us. They have created us a great deal of
vexation; now, Lord, give them sorrow of heart ([Lam
3:65](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#065)), perplexity of heart" (so some
read it); "let them be surrounded with threatening mischiefs on all
sides, and not be able to see their way out. Give them despondence of
heart" (so others read it); "let them be driven to despair, and give
themselves up for gone." God can entangle the head that thinks itself
clearest, and sink the heart that thinks itself stoutest. (2.) "Let them
be dealt with according to the threatenings: Thy curse unto them; that
is, let thy curse come upon them, all the evils that are pronounced in
thy word against the enemies of thy people, [Lam
3:65](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#065). They have loaded us with curses;
as they loved cursing, so let it come unto them, thy curse which will
make them truly miserable. Theirs is causeless, and therefore fruitless,
it shall not come; but thine is just, and shall take effect. Those whom
thou cursest are cursed indeed. Let the curse be executed, [Lam
3:66](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#066). Persecute and destroy them in
anger, as they persecute and destroy us in their anger. Destroy them
from under the heavens of the Lord; let them have no benefit of the
light and influence of the heavens. Destroy them in such a manner that
all who see it may say, It is a destruction from the Almighty, who sits
in the heavens and laughs at them ([Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004)), and may own that the heavens do
rule," [Dan 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#026). What is said of the
idols is here said of their worshippers (who in this also shall be like
unto them), They shall perish from under these heavens, [Jer
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011). They shall be not only excluded
from the happiness of the invisible heavens, but cut off from the
comfort even of these visible ones, which are the heavens of the Lord
([Psa 115:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#016)) and which those
therefore are unworthy to be taken under the protection of who rebel
against him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations Chapter 4](lam004)

</div>
