<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev011)  [Next](lev013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#001.md)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 12:0</span></span>

After the laws concerning clean and unclean food come the laws
concerning clean and unclean persons; and the first is in this chapter
concerning the ceremonial uncleanness of women in child-birth ([Lev
12:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#001).md). And concerning their
purification from that uncleanness ([Lev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006), etc..md).

[Leviticus 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 12:1</span></span>

The law here pronounces women lying-in ceremonially unclean. The Jews
say, "The law extended even to an abortion, if the child was so formed
as that the sex was distinguishable." 1. There was some time of strict
separation immediately after the birth, which continued seven days for a
son and fourteen for a daughter, [Lev
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#002.md), [Lev
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#005.md). During these days she was
separated from her husband and friends, and those that necessarily
attended her were ceremonially unclean, which was one reason why the
males were not circumcised till the eighth day, because they
participated in the mother's pollution during the days of her
separation. 2. There was also a longer time appointed for their
purifying; thirty-three days more (forty in all) if the birth were a
male, and double that time if a female, [Lev
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#004.md), [Lev
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#005.md). During this time they were only
separated from the sanctuary and forbidden to eat of the passover, or
peace-offerings, or, if a priest's wife, to eat of any thing that was
holy to the Lord. Why the time of both those was double for a female to
what it was for a male I can assign no reason but the will of the
Law-maker; in Christ Jesus no difference is made of male and female,
[Gal 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028.md); [Col
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#011.md). But this ceremonial uncleanness
which the law laid women in child-bed under was to signify the pollution
of sin which we are all conceived and born in, [Psa
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005.md). For, if the root be impure, so
is the branch, Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? If sin had
not entered, nothing but purity and honour had attended all the
productions of that great blessing, Be fruitful and multiply; but now
that the nature of man is degenerated the propagation of that nature is
laid under these marks of disgrace, because of the sin and corruption
that are propagated with it, and in remembrance of the curse upon the
woman that was first in the transgression. That in sorrow (to which it
is here further added in shame) she should bring forth children. And the
exclusion of the woman for so many days from the sanctuary, and all
participation of the holy things, signified that our original corruption
(that sinning sin which we brought into the world with us) would have
excluded us for ever from the enjoyment of God and his favours if he had
not graciously provided for our purifying.

[Leviticus 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 12:6</span></span>

A woman that had lain in, when the time set for her return to the
sanctuary had come, was not to attend there empty, but must bring her
offerings, [Lev 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006.md). 1. A
burnt-offering; a lamb if she was able, if poor, a pigeon. This she was
to offer in thankfulness to God for his mercy to her, in bringing her
safely through the pains of child-bearing and all the perils of
child-bed, and in desire and hopes of God's further favour both to her
and to the child. When a child is born there is joy and there is hope,
and therefore it was proper to bring this offering, which was of a
general nature; for what we rejoice in we must give thanks for, and what
we are in hopes of we must pray for. But, besides this, 2. She must
offer a sin-offering, which must be the same for poor and rich, a
turtle-dove or a young pigeon; for, whatever difference there may be
between rich and poor in the sacrifices of acknowledgment, that of
atonement is the same for both. This sin-offering was intended either,
(1.) To complete her purification from that ceremonial uncleanness
which, though it was not in itself sinful, yet was typical of moral
pollution; or, (2.) To make atonement for that which was really sin,
either an inordinate desire of the blessing of children or discontent or
impatience under the pains of child-bearing. It is only by Christ, the
great sin-offering, that the corruption of our nature is done away, and
to that it is owing that we are not for ever excluded by it from the
sanctuary, and from eating of the holy things. According to this law, we
find that the mother of our blessed Lord, though he was not conceived in
sin as others, yet accomplished the days of purification, and then
presented her son to the Lord, being a first-born, and brought her own
offering, a pair of turtle-doves, [Luk
2:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#022.md). So poor were Christ's parents
that they were not able to bring a lamb for a burnt-offering; and so
early was Christ made under the law, to redeem those that were under it.
The morality of this law obliges those women that have received mercy
from God in child-bearing with all thankfulness to own God's goodness to
them, acknowledging themselves unworthy of it, and (which is the best
purification of women that have been saved in child-bearing, [Ti1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#015).md) to continue in faith, and
charity, and holiness, with sobriety; for this shall please the Lord
better than the turtle-doves or the young pigeons.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 13](lev013.md)

</div>
