<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev005)  [Next](lev007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 6:0</span></span>

The first seven verses of this chapter might fitly have been added to
the foregoing chapter, being a continuation of the law of the
trespass-offering, and the putting of other cases in which it was to be
offered; and with this end the instructions God gave concerning the
several kinds of sacrifices that should be offered: and then at [Lev
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#008) (which in the original begins a
new section of the law) he comes to appoint the several rites and
ceremonies concerning these sacrifices which had not been mentioned
before. I. The burnt-offering ([Lev
6:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#008)). II. The meat-offering ([Lev
6:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#011)), particularly that at the
consecration of the priest ([Lev
6:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#019)). III. The sin-offering ([Lev
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#024), etc.).

[Leviticus 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 6:1</span></span>

This is the latter part of the law of the trespass-offering: the former
part, which concerned trespasses about holy things, we had in the close
of the foregoing chapter; this concerns trespasses in common things.
Observe here,

I. The trespass supposed, [Lev 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#002),
[Lev 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003). Though all the instances
relate to our neighbour, yet it is called a trespass against the Lord,
because, though the injury be done immediately to our neighbour, yet an
affront is thereby given to his Maker and our Master. He that speaks
evil of his brother is said to speak evil of the law, and consequently
of the Law-maker, [Jam 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#011). Though
the person injured be ever so mean and despicable, and every way our
inferior, yet the injury reflects upon that God who has made the command
of loving our neighbour second to that of loving himself. The trespasses
specified are, 1. Denying a trust: If a man lie unto his neighbour in
that which was delivered him to keep, or, which is worse, which was lent
him for his use. If we claim that as our own which is only borrowed,
left in our custody, or committed to our care, this is a trespass
against the Lord, who, for the benefit of human society, will have
property and truth maintained. 2. Defrauding a partner: If a man lie in
fellowship, claiming a sole interest in that wherein he has but a
joint-interest. 3. Disowning a manifest wrong: If a man has the front to
lie in a thing taken away by violence, which ordinarily cannot be hid.
4. Deceiving in commerce, or, as some think, by false accusation; if a
man have deceitfully oppressed his neighbour, as some read it, either
withholding what is due or extorting what is not. 5. Detaining what is
found, and denying it ([Lev 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003)); if a
man have found that which was lost, he must not call it his own
presently, but endeavour to find out the owner, to whom it must be
returned; this is doing as we would be done by: but he that lies
concerning it, that falsely says he knows nothing of it, especially if
he back this lie with a false oath, trespasseth against the Lord, who to
every thing that is said is a witness, but in an oath he is the party
appealed to, and highly affronted when he is called to witness to a lie.

II\. The trespass-offering appointed. 1. In the day of his
trespass-offering he must make satisfaction to his brother. This must be
first done if thy brother hath aught against thee: Because he hath
sinned and is guilty, ([Lev 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#004), [Lev
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#005)), that is, is convicted of his
guilt by his own conscience, and is touched with remorse for it; seeing
himself guilty before God, let him faithfully restore all that he has
got by fraud or oppression, with a fifth part added, to make amends to
the owner for the loss and trouble he had sustained in the mean time;
let him account both for debt and damages. Note, Where wrong has been
done restitution must be made; and till it is made to the utmost of our
power, or an equivalent accepted by the person wronged, we cannot have
the comfort of the forgiveness of the sin; for the keeping of what is
unjustly got avows the taking, and both together make but one continued
act of unrighteousness. To repent is to undo what we have done amiss,
which (whatever we pretend) we cannot be said to do till we restore what
has been got by it, as Zaccheus ([Luk
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008)), and make satisfaction for the
wrong done. 2. He must then come and offer his gift, must bring his
trespass-offering to the Lord whom he had offended; and the priest must
make an atonement for him, [Lev 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#006),
[Lev 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#007). This trespass-offering could
not, of itself, make satisfaction for sin, nor reconciliation between
God and the sinner, but as it signified the atonement that was to be
made by our Lord Jesus, when he should make his soul an offering or sin,
a trespass-offering; it is the same word that is here used, [Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010). The trespasses here mentioned
are trespasses still against the law of Christ, which insists as much
upon justice and truth as ever the law of nature or the law of Moses
did; and though now we may have them pardoned without a
trespass-offering, yet not without true repentance, restitution,
reformation, and a humble faith in the righteousness of Christ: and, if
any make the more bold with these sins because they are not now put to
the expense of a trespass-offering for them, they turn the grace of God
into wantonness, and so bring upon themselves a swift destruction. The
Lord is the avenger of all such, [Th1
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#006).

[Leviticus 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 6:8</span></span>

Hitherto we have had the instructions which Moses was directed to give
to the people concerning the sacrifices; but here begin the instructions
he was to give to the priests; he must command Aaron and his sons, [Lev
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#009). The priests were rulers in the
house of God, but these rulers must be ruled; and those that had the
command of others must themselves be commanded. Let ministers remember
that not only commissions, but commands, were given to Aaron and his
sons, who must be in subjection to them.

In these verses we have the law of the burnt-offering, as far as it was
the peculiar care of the priests. The daily sacrifice of a lamb, which
was offered morning and evening for the whole congregation, is here
chiefly referred to.

I. The priest must take care of the ashes of the burnt-offering, that
they be decently disposed of, [Lev
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#010), [Lev
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#011). He must clear the altar of them
every morning, and put them on the east side of the altar, which was
furthest from the sanctuary; this he must do in his linen garment, which
he always wore when he did any service at the altar; and then he must
shift himself, and put on other garments, either such as were his common
wear, or (as some think) other priestly garments less honourable, and
must carry the ashes into a clean place without the camp. Now, 1. God
would have this done, for the honour of his altar and the sacrifices
that were burnt upon it. Even the ashes of the sacrifices must be
preserved, to testify the regard God had to it; by the burnt-offering he
was honoured, and therefore thus it was honoured, and therefore thus it
was honoured. And some think that this care which was taken of the ashes
of the sacrifice typified the burial of our Saviour; his dead body (the
ashes of his sacrifice) was carefully laid up in a garden, in a new
sepulchre, which was a clean place. It was also requisite that the altar
should be kept as clean as might be; the fire upon it would burn the
better, and it is decent in a house to have a clean fire-side. 2. God
would have the priests themselves to keep it so, to teach them and us to
stoop to the meanest services for the honour of God and of his altar.
The priest himself must not only kindle the fire, but clean the hearth,
and carry out the ashes. God's servants must think nothing below them
but sin.

II\. The priest must take care of the fire upon the altar, that it be
kept always burning. This is much insisted on here ([Lev
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#009), [Lev
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#012)), and this express law is given:
The fire shall ever be burning upon the altar, it shall never go out,
[Lev 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#013). We may suppose that no day
passed without some extraordinary sacrifices, which were always offered
between the morning and evening lamb; so that from morning to night the
fire on the altar was kept up of course. But to preserve it all night
unto the morning ([Lev 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#009)) required
some care. Those that keep good houses never let their kitchen fire go
out; therefore God would thus give an instance of his good
house-keeping. The first fire upon the altar came from heaven ([Lev
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024)), so that by keeping that up
continually with a constant supply of fuel all their sacrifices
throughout all their generations might be said to be consumed with that
fire from heaven, in token of God's acceptance. If, through
carelessness, they should ever let it go out, they could not expect to
have it so kindled again. Accordingly the Jews tell us that the fire
never did go out upon the altar, till the captivity in Babylon. This is
referred to [Isa 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#009), where God is
said to have his fire in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem. By this law
we are taught to keep up in our minds a constant disposition to all acts
of piety and devotion, an habitual affection to divine things, so as to
be always ready to every good word and work. We must not only not quench
the Spirit, but we must stir up the gift that is in us. Though we be not
always sacrificing, yet we must keep the fire of holy love always
burning; and thus we must pray always.

[Leviticus 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 6:14</span></span>

The meat-offering was either that which was offered by the people or
that by the priests at their consecration. Now,

I. As to the common meat-offering,

1\. Only a handful of it was to be burnt upon the altar; all the rest
was allowed to the priests for their food. The law of the
burnt-offerings was such as imposed upon the priests a great deal of
care and work, but allowed them little profit; for the flesh was wholly
burnt, and the priests had nothing but the skin. But to make them amends
the greatest part of the meat-offering was their own. The burning of a
handful of it upon the altar ([Lev
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#015)) was ordered before, [Lev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002), [Lev
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#009). Here the remainder of it is
consigned to the priests, the servants of God's house: I have given it
unto them for their portion of my offerings, [Lev
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#017). Note, (1.) It is the will of God
that his ministers should be well provided for with food convenient; and
what is given to them he accepts as offered to himself, if it be done
with a single eye. (2.) All Christians, being spiritual priests, do
themselves share in the spiritual sacrifices they offer. It is not God
that is the gainer by them; the handful burnt upon the altar was not
worth speaking of, in comparison with the priests' share; we ourselves
are the gainers by our religious services. Let God have all the
frankincense, and the priests shall have the flour and the oil; what we
give to God the praise and glory of we may take to ourselves the comfort
and benefit of.

2\. The laws concerning the eating of it were, (1.) That it must be
eaten unleavened, [Lev 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#016). What was
offered to God must have no leaven in it, and the priests must have it
as the altar had it, and no otherwise. Thus must we keep the feasts of
the Lord with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. (2.) It must
be eaten in the court of the tabernacle (here called the holy place), in
some room prepared by the side of the court for this purpose. It was a
great crime to carry any of it out of the court. The very eating of it
was a sacred rite, by which they were to honour God, and therefore it
must be done in a religious manner, and with a holy reverence, which was
preserved by confining it to the holy place. (3.) The males only must
eat of it, [Lev 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#018). Of the less holy
things, as the first-fruits and tithes, and the shoulder and breasts of
the peace-offerings, the daughters of the priests might eat, for they
might be carried out of the court; but this was of the most holy things,
which being to be eaten only in the tabernacle, the sons of Aaron only
might eat of it. (4.) The priests only that were clean might eat of it:
Every one that toucheth them shall be holy, [Lev
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#018). Holy things for holy persons.
Some read it, Every thing that toucheth it shall be holy: Al the
furniture of the table on which these holy things were eaten must be
appropriated to that use only, and never after used as common things.

II\. As to the consecration meat-offering, which was offered for the
priests themselves, it was to be wholly burnt, and none of it eaten,
[Lev 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#023). It comes in here as an
exception to the foregoing law. It should seem that this law concerning
the meat-offering of initiation did not only oblige the high priest to
offer it, and on that day only that he was anointed, and so for his
successors in the day they were anointed; but the Jewish writers say
that by this law every priest, on the day he first entered upon his
ministry, was bound to offer this meat-offering, - that the high priest
was bound to offer it every day of his life, from the day in which he
was anointed, - and that it was to be offered besides the meat-offering
that attended the morning and evening sacrifice, because it is said here
to be a meat-offering perpetual, [Lev
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#020). Josephus says, "The high priest
sacrificed twice every day at his own charges, and this was his
sacrifice." Note, Those whom God has advanced above others in dignity
and power ought to consider that he expects more from them than from
others, and should attend to every intimation of service to be done for
him. The meat-offering of the priest was to be baked as if it were to be
eaten, and yet it must be wholly burnt. Though the priest that
ministered was to be paid for serving the people, yet there was no
reason that he should be paid for serving the high priest, who was the
father of the family of the priests, and whom therefore any priest
should take a pleasure in serving gratis. Nor was it fit that the
priests should eat of the offerings of a priest; for as the sins of the
people were typically transferred to the priests, which was signified by
their eating of their offerings ([Hos
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#008)), so the sins of the priests must
be typically transferred to the altar, which therefore must eat up all
their offerings. We are all undone, both ministers and people, if we
must bear our own iniquity; nor could we have had any comfort or hope if
God had not laid on his dear Son the iniquity of us all, and he is both
the priest and the alter.

[Leviticus 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 6:24</span></span>

We have here so much of the law of the sin-offering as did peculiarly
concern the priests that offered it. As, 1. That it must be killed in
the place where the burnt-offering was killed ([Lev
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#025)), that is, on the north side of
the altar ([Lev 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011)), which, some
think typified the crucifying of Christ on mount Calvary, which was on
the north side of Jerusalem. 2. That the priest who offered it for the
sinner was (with his sons, or other priests, [Lev
6:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#029)) to eat the flesh of it, after
the blood and fat had been offered to God, in the court of the
tabernacle, [Lev 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#026). Hereby they
were to bear the iniquity of the congregation, as it is explained, [Lev
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#017). 3. The blood of the
sin-offering was with great reverence to be washed out of the clothes on
which it happened to light ([Lev
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#027)), which signified the awful
regard we ought to have to the blood of Christ, not counting it a common
thing; that blood must be sprinkled on the conscience, not on the
raiment. 4. The vessel in which the flesh of the sin-offering was boiled
must be broken if it were an earthen one, and, if a brazen one, well
washed, [Lev 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#028). This intimated that
the defilement was not wholly taken away by the offering, but did rather
cleave to it, such was the weakness and deficiency of those sacrifices;
but the blood of Christ thoroughly cleanses from all sin, and after it
there needs no cleansing. 5. That all this must be understood of the
common sin-offerings, not of those for the priest, or the body of the
congregation, either occasional, or stated upon the day of atonement;
for it had been before ordained, and was now ratified, that if the blood
of the offering was brought into the holy place, as it was in those
extraordinary cases, the flesh was not to be eaten, but burnt without
the camp, [Lev 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#030). Hence the apostle
infers the advantage we have under the gospel above what they had under
the law; for though the blood of Christ was brought into the tabernacle,
to reconcile within the holy place, yet we have a right by faith to eat
of the altar ([Heb 13:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#010)), and so
to take the comfort of the great propitiation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 7](lev007)

</div>
