<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev001)  [Next](lev003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 2:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have the law concerning the meat-offering. I. The
matter of it; whether of raw flour with oil and incense ([Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)), or baked in the oven ([Lev
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004)), or upon a plate ([Lev
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#005), [Lev
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#006)), or in a frying pan ([Lev
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#007)). II. The management of it, of the
flour ([Lev 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002), [Lev
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#003)), of the cakes ([Lev
2:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#008)). III. Some particular rules
concerning it, That leaven and honey must never be admitted ([Lev
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#011), [Lev
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#012)), and salt never omitted in the
meat-offering ([Lev 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#013)). IV. The law
concerning the offering of firstfruits in the ear ([Lev
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#014), etc.).

[Leviticus 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 2:1</span></span>

There were some meat-offerings that were only appendices to the
burnt-offerings, as that which was offered with the daily sacrifice
([Exo 29:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038), [Exo
29:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#039)) and with the peace-offerings;
these had drink-offerings joined with them (see [Num
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#004), [Num
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#007), [Num
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#009), [Num
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#010)), and in these the quantity was
appointed. But the law of this chapter concerns those meat-offerings
that were offered by themselves, whenever a man saw cause thus to
express his devotion. The first offering we read of in scripture was of
this kind ([Gen 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#003)): Cain brought of
the fruit of the ground an offering.

I. This sort of offerings was appointed, 1. In condescension to the
poor, and their ability, that those who themselves lived only upon bread
and cakes might offer an acceptable offering to God out of that which
was their own coarse and homely fare, and by making for God's altar, as
the widow of Sarepta for his prophet, a little cake first, might procure
such a blessing upon the handful of meal in the barrel, and the oil in
the cruse, as that it should not fail. 2. As a proper acknowledgment of
the mercy of God to them in their food. This was like a quit-rent, by
which they testified their dependence upon God, their thankfulness to
him, and their expectations from him as their owner and bountiful
benefactor, who giveth to all life, and breath, and food convenient.
Thus must they honour the Lord with their substance, and, in token of
their eating and drinking to his glory, must consecrate some of their
meat and drink to his immediate service. Those that now, with a grateful
charitable heart, deal out their bread to the hungry, and provide for
the necessities of those that are destitute of daily food, and when they
eat the fat and drink the sweet themselves send portions to those for
whom nothing is prepared, offer unto God an acceptable meat-offering.
The prophet laments it as one of the direful effects of famine that
thereby the meat-offering and drink-offering were cut off from the house
of the Lord ([Joe 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#009)), and reckoned
it the greatest blessing of plenty that it would be the revival of them,
[Joe 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#014).

II\. The laws of the meat-offerings were these: - 1. The ingredients
must always be fine flour and oil, two staple commodities of the land of
Canaan, [Deu 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008). Oil was to them then
in their food what butter is now to us. If it was undressed, the oil
must be poured upon the flour ([Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)); if cooked, it must be mingled
with the flour, [Lev 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004), etc. 2. If
it was flour unbaked, besides the oil it must have frankincense put upon
it, which was to be burnt with it ([Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001), [Lev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002)), for the perfuming of the altar;
in allusion to this, gospel ministers are said to be a sweet savour unto
God, [Co2 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015). 3. If it was prepared,
this might be done in various ways; the offerer might bake it, or fry
it, or mix the flour and oil upon a plate, for the doing of which
conveniences were provided about the tabernacle. The law was very exact
even about those offerings that were least costly, to intimate the
cognizance God takes of the religious services performed with a devout
mind, even by the poor of his people. 4. It was to be presented by the
offerer to the priest, which is called bringing it to the Lord ([Lev
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#008)), for the priests were God's
receivers, and were ordained to offer gifts. 5. Part of it was to be
burnt upon the altar, for a memorial, that is, in token of their
mindfulness of God's bounty to them, in giving them all things richly to
enjoy. It was an offering made by fire, [Lev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002), [Lev
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#009). The consuming of it by fire might
remind them that they deserved to have all the fruits of the earth thus
burnt up, and that it was of the Lord's mercies that they were not. They
might also learn that as meats are for the belly, and the belly for
meats, so God shall destroy both it and them ([Co1
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013)), and that man lives not by bread
alone. This offering made by fire is here said to be of a sweet savour
unto the Lord; and so are our spiritual offerings, which are made by the
fire of holy love, particularly that of almsgiving, which is said to be
an odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God
([Phi 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018)), and with such sacrifices
God is well pleased, [Heb 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016). 6.
The remainder of the meat-offering was to be given to the priests, [Lev
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#003), [Lev
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#010). It is a thing most holy, not to
be eaten by the offerers, as the peace-offerings (which, though holy,
were not most holy), but by the priests only, and their families. Thus
God provided that those who served at the altar should live upon the
altar, and live comfortably.

[Leviticus 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 2:11</span></span>

Here, I. Leaven and honey are forbidden to be put in any of their
meat-offerings: No leaven, nor any honey, in any offering made by fire,
[Lev 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#011). 1. The leaven was forbidden
in remembrance of the unleavened bread they ate when they came out of
Egypt. So much despatch was required in the offerings they made that it
was not convenient they should stay for the leavening of them. The New
Testament comparing pride and hypocrisy to leaven because they swell
like leaven, comparing also malice and wickedness to leaven because they
sour like leaven, we are to understand and improve this as a caution to
take heed of those sins which will certainly spoil the acceptableness of
our spiritual sacrifices. Pure hands must be lifted up without wrath,
and all our gospel feasts kept with the unleavened bread of sincerity
and truth. 2. Honey was forbidden, though Canaan flowed with it, because
to eat much honey is not good ([Pro
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#016), [Pro
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#027)); it turns to choler and
bitterness in the stomach, though luscious to the taste. Some think the
chief reason why those two things, leaven and honey, were forbidden, was
because the Gentiles used them very much in their sacrifices, and God's
people must not learn or use the way of the heathen, but his services
must be the reverse of their idolatrous services; see [Deu
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#030), [Deu
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#031). Some make this application of
this double prohibition: leaven signifies grief and sadness of spirit
([Psa 73:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#021)), My heart was leavened;
honey signifies sensual pleasure and mirth. In our service of God both
these must be avoided, and a mean observed between those extremes; for
the sorrow of the world worketh death, and a love to the delights of
sense is a great enemy to holy love.

II\. Salt is required in all their offerings, [Lev
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#013). The altar was the table of the
Lord; and therefore, salt being always set on our tables, God would have
it always used at his. It is called the salt of the covenant, because,
as men confirmed their covenants with each other by eating and drinking
together, at all which collations salt was used, so God, by accepting
his people's gifts and feasting them upon his sacrifices, supping with
them and they with him ([Rev 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020)),
did confirm his covenant with them. Among the ancients salt was a symbol
of friendship. The salt for the sacrifice was not brought by the
offerers, but was provided at the public charge, as the wood was, [Ezr
7:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#020). And there was a chamber in
the court of the temple called the chamber of salt, in which they laid
it up. Can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt? God would
hereby intimate to them that their sacrifices in themselves were
unsavoury. The saints, who are living sacrifices to God, must have salt
in themselves, for every sacrifice must be salted with salt ([Mar
9:49](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#049), [Mar
9:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#050)), and our speech must be always
with grace ([Col 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#006)), so must all our
religious performances be seasoned with that salt. Christianity is the
salt of the earth.

III\. Directions are given about the first-fruits. 1. The oblation of
their first-fruits at harvest, of which we read, [Deu
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#002). These were offered to the Lord,
not to be burnt upon the altar, but to be given to the priests as
perquisites of their office, [Lev
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#012). And you shall offer them (that
is, leaven and honey) in the oblation of the first-fruits, though they
were forbidden in other meat-offerings; for they were proper enough to
be eaten by the priests, though not to be burnt upon the altar. The
loaves of the first-fruits are particularly ordered to be baked with
leaven, [Lev 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#017). And we read of the
first-fruits of honey brought to the house of God, [Ch2
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#005). 2. A meat-offering of their
first-fruits. The former was required by the law; this was a free-will
offering, [Lev 2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#014). If a man, with
a thankful sense of God's goodness to him in giving him hopes of a
plentiful crop, was disposed to bring an offering in kind immediately
out of his field, and present it to God, owning thereby his dependence
upon God and obligations to him, (1.) Let him be sure to bring the first
ripe and full ears, not such as were small and half-withered. Whatever
was brought for an offering to God must be the best in its kind, though
it were but green ears of corn. We mock God, and deceive ourselves, if
we think to put him off with a corrupt thing while we have in our flock
a male, [Mal 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#014). (2.) These green
ears must be dried by the fire, that the corn, such as it was, might be
beaten out of them. That is not expected from green ears which one may
justly look for from those that have been left to grow fully ripe. If
those that are young do God's work as well as they can, they shall be
accepted, though they cannot do it so well as those that are aged and
experienced. God makes the best of green ears of corn, and so must we.
(3.) Oil and frankincense must be put upon it. Thus (as some allude to
this) wisdom and humility must soften and sweeten the spirits and
services of young people, and then their green ears of corn shall be
acceptable. God takes a particular delight in the first ripe fruits of
the Spirit and the expressions of early piety and devotion. Those that
can but think and speak as children, yet, if they think and speak well,
God will be well pleased with their buds and blossoms, and will never
forget the kindness of their youth. (4.) It must be used as other
meat-offerings, [Lev 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#016), compare
[Lev 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#009). He shall offer all the
frankincense; it is an offering made by fire. The fire and the
frankincense seem to have had a special significancy. \[1.\] The fire
denotes the fervency of spirit which ought to be in all our religious
services. In every good thing we must be zealously affected. Holy love
to God is the fire by which all our offerings must be made; else they
are not of a sweet savour to God. \[2.\] The frankincense denotes the
mediation and intercession of Christ, by which all our services are
perfumed and recommended to God's gracious acceptance. Blessed be God
that we have the substance of which all these observances were but
shadows, the fruit that was hid under these leaves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 3](lev003)

</div>
