<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev025)  [Next](lev027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 26:0</span></span>

This chapter is a solemn conclusion of the main body of the levitical
law. The precepts that follow in this and the following book either
relate to some particular matters or are repetitions and explications of
the foregoing institutions. Now this chapter contains a general
enforcement of all those laws by promises of reward in case of obedience
on the one hand, and threatenings of punishment for disobedience on the
other hand, the former to work upon hope, the latter on fear, those two
handles of the soul, by which it is taken hold of and managed. Here is,
I. A repetition of two or three of the principal of the commandments
([Lev 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001), [Lev
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#002)). II. An inviting promise of all
good things, if they would but keep God's commandments ([Lev
26:3-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#003)). III. A terrible threatening
of ruining judgments which would be brought upon them if they were
refractory and disobedient (v. 14-39). IV. A gracious promise of the
return of mercy to those of them that would repent and reform ([Lev
26:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#040), etc.). Deu. 28 is parallel to
this.

[Leviticus 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 26:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The inculcating of those precepts of the law which were of
the greatest consequence, and by which were of the greatest consequence,
and by which especially their obedience would be tried, [Lev
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001), [Lev
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#002). They are the abstract of the
second and fourth commandments, which, as they are by much the largest
in the decalogue, so they are most frequently insisted on in other parts
of the law. As, when a master has given many things in charge to his
servant, he concludes with the repetition of those things which were of
the greatest importance, and which the servant was most in danger of
neglecting, bidding him, whatever he did, be sure to remember those, so
here God by Moses, after many precepts, closes all with a special charge
to observe these two great commandments. 1. "Be sure you never worship
images, nor ever make any sort of images or pictures for a religious
use," [Lev 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001). No sin was more
provoking to God than this, and yet there was none that they were more
addicted to, and which afterwards proved of more pernicious consequence
to them. Next to God's being, unity, and universal influence, it is
necessary that we know and believe that he is an infinite Spirit; and
therefore to represent him by an image in the making of it, to confine
him to an image in the consecrating of it, and to worship him by an
image in bowing down to it, changes his truth into a lie and his glory
into shame, as much as any thing. 2. "Be sure you keep up a great
veneration for sabbaths and religious assemblies," [Lev
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#002). As nothing tends more to corrupt
religion than the use of images in devotion, so nothing contributes more
to the support of it than keeping the sabbaths and reverencing the
sanctuary. These make up very much of the instrumental part of religion,
by which the essentials of it are kept up. Therefore we find in the
prophets that, next to the sin of idolatry, there is no sin for which
the Jews are more frequently reproved and threatened than the
profanation of the sabbath day.

II\. Great encouragements given them to live in constant obedience to
all God's commandments, largely and strongly assuring them that if they
did so they should be a happy people, and should be blessed with all the
good things they could desire. Human governments enforce their laws with
penalties to be inflicted for the breach of them; but God will be known
as the rewarder of those that seek and serve him. Let us take a view of
these great and precious promises, which, though they relate chiefly to
the life which now is, and to the public national concerns of that
people, were typical of the spiritual blessings entailed by the covenant
of grace upon all believers through Christ. 1. Plenty and abundance of
the fruits of the earth. They should have seasonable rain, neither too
little nor too much, but what was requisite for their land, which was
watered with the dew of heaven ([Deu
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#010), [Deu
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#011)), that it might yield its
increase, [Lev 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#004). The dependence
which the fruitfulness of the earth beneath has upon the influences of
heaven above is a sensible intimation to us that every good and perfect
gift must be expected from above, from the Father of lights. It is
promised that the earth should produce its fruits in such great
abundance that they would be kept in full employment, during both the
harvest and the vintage, to gather it in, [Lev
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#005). Before they had reaped their
corn and threshed it, the vintage would be ready; and, before they had
finished their vintage, it would be high time to begin their sowing.
Long harvests are often with us the consequences of bad weather, but
with them they should be the effects of a great increase. This signified
the abundance of grace which should be poured out in gospel times, when
the ploughman should overtake the reaper ([Amo
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#013)), and a great harvest of souls
should be gathered in to Christ. The plenty should be so great that they
should bring forth the old to be given away to the poor because of the
new, to make room for it in their barns, which yet they would not pull
down to build greater, as that rich fool ([Luk
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#018)), for God gave them this
abundance to be laid out, not be hoarded up from one year to another. He
that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him, [Pro
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#026). That promise ([Mal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#010)), I will pour you out a blessing,
that there shall not be room enough to receive it, explains this, [Lev
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#010). And that which crowns this
blessing of plenty is ([Lev 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#005)), You
shall eat your bread to the full, which intimates that they should have,
not only abundance, but content and satisfaction in it. They should have
enough, and should know when they had enough. Thus the meek shall eat
and be satisfied, [Psa 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#026). 2. Peace
under the divine protection; "You shall dwell in your land safely ([Lev
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#005)); both really save, and safe in
your own apprehensions; you shall lie down to rest in the power and
promise of God, and not only none shall hurt you, but none shall so much
as make you afraid," [Lev 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#006). See
[Psa 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#008). They should not be infested
with wild beasts, these should be rid out of the land, or, as it is
promised ([Job 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#023)), should be at
peace with them. Nor should they be terrified with the alarms of war:
Neither shall the sword go through your land. This holy security is
promised to all the faithful, [Psa
91:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#001), etc. Those must needs dwell in
safety that dwell in God, [Job 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#018),
[Job 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#019). 3. Victory and success in
their wars abroad, while they had peace and tranquility at home, [Lev
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#007), [Lev
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#008). They are assured that the hand
of God should so signally appear with them in their conquests that no
disproportion of numbers should make against them: Five of you shall
have courage to attack, and strength to chase and defeat, a hundred, as
Jonathan did ([Sa1 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#012)),
experiencing the truth of his own maxim ([Lev
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#006)), that it is all one with the
Lord to save by many or by few. 4. The increase of their people: I will
make you fruitful and multiply you, [Lev
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#009). Thus the promise made to Abraham
must be fulfilled, that his seed should be as the dust of the earth; and
much more numerous they would have been if they had by their sin cut
themselves short. It is promised to the gospel church that it shall be
fruitful, [Joh 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016). 5. The favour of
God, which is the fountain of all good: I will have respect unto you,
[Lev 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#009). If the eye of our faith be
unto God, the eye of his favour will be unto us. More is implied than is
expressed in that promise, My soul shall not abhor you ([Lev
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#011)), as there is in that
threatening, My soul shall have no pleasure in him, [Heb
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#038). Though there was that among
them which might justly have alienated him from them, yet, if they would
closely adhere to his institutions, he would not abhor them. 6. Tokens
of his presence in and by his ordinances: I will set my tabernacle among
you, [Lev 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#011). It was their honour
and advantage that God's tabernacle was lately erected among them; but
here he lets them know that the continuance and establishment of it
depended upon their good behaviour. The tabernacle that was now set
should be settled if they would be obedient, else not. Note, The way to
have God's ordinances fixed among us, as a nail in a sure place, is to
cleave closely to the institution of them. It is added ([Lev
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#012)), "I will walk among you, with
delight and satisfaction, as a man in his garden; I will keep up
communion with you as a man walking with his friend." This seems to be
alluded to, [Rev 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001), where Christ is
said to walk in the midst of the golden candlesticks. 7. The grace of
the covenant, as the fountain and foundation, the sweetness and
security, of all these blessings: I will establish my covenant with you,
[Lev 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#009). Let them perform their part
of the covenant, and God would not fail to perform his. All
covenant-blessings are summed up in the covenant-relation ([Lev
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#012)): I will be your God, and you
shall be my people; and they are all grounded upon their redemption: I
am your God, because I brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, [Lev
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#013). Having purchased them, he would
own them, and never cast them off till they cast him off. He broke their
yoke, and made them go upright, that is, their deliverance out of Egypt
put them in a state both of ease and honour, that, being delivered out
of the hands of their enemies, they might serve God without fear, each
walking in his uprightness. When Israel rejected Christ, and was
therefore rejected by him, their back is said to be bowed down always
under the burden of their guilt, which was heavier than that of their
bondage in Egypt, [Rom 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#010).

[Leviticus 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 26:14</span></span>

After God had set the blessing before them (the life and good which
would make them a happy people if they would be obedient), he here sets
the curse before them, the death and evil which would make them as
miserable if they were disobedient. Let them not think themselves so
deeply rooted as that God's power could not ruin them, nor so highly
favoured as that his justice would not ruin them if they revolted from
him and rebelled against him; no You only have I known, therefore I will
punish you soonest and sorest. [Amo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002). Observe,

I. How their sin is described, which would bring all this misery upon
them. Not sins of ignorance and infirmity; God had provided sacrifices
for those. Not the sins they repented of and forsook; but the sins that
were presumptuously committed, and obstinately persisted in. Two things
would certainly bring this ruin upon them: -

1\. A contempt of God's commandments ([Lev
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#014)): "If you will not hearken to me
speaking to you by the law, nor do all these commandments, that is,
desire and endeavour to do them, and, wherein you miss it, make use of
the prescribed remedies." Thus their sin is supposed to begin in mere
carelessness, and neglect, and omission. These are bad enough, but they
make way for worse; for the people are brought in ([Lev
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#015)) as, (1.) Despising God's
statutes, both the duties enjoined and the authority enjoining them,
thinking meanly of the law and the Law-maker. Note, Those are hastening
apace to their own ruin who begin to think it below them to be
religious. (2.) Abhorring his judgments, their very souls abhorring
them. Note, Those that begin to despise religion will come by degrees to
loathe it; and mean thoughts of it will ripen into ill thoughts of it;
those that turn from it will turn against it, and their hearts will rise
at it. (3.) Breaking his covenant. Though every breach of the
commandment does not amount to a breach of the covenant (we were undone
if it did), yet, when men have come to such a pitch of impiety as to
despise and abhor the commandment, the next step will be to disown God,
and all relation to him. Those that reject the precept will come at last
to renounce the covenant. Observe, It is God's covenant which they
break: he made it, but they break it. Note, If a covenant be made and
kept between God and man, God must have all the honour; but, if ever it
be broken, man must bear all the blame: on him shall this breach be.

2\. A contempt of his corrections. Even their disobedience would not
have been their destruction if they had not been obstinate and
impenitent in it, notwithstanding the methods God took to reclaim them.
Their contempt of God's word would not have brought them to ruin, if
they had not added to that a contempt of his rod, which should have
brought them to repentance. Three ways this is expressed: - (1.) "If you
will not for all this hearken to me, [Lev
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#018), [Lev
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#021), [Lev
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#027). If you will not learn obedience
by the things which you suffer, but be as deaf to the loud alarms of
God's judgments as you have been to the close reasonings of his word and
the secret whispers of your own consciences, you are obstinate indeed."
(2.) "If you walk contrary to me, [Lev
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#021), [Lev
26:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#023), [Lev
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#027). All sinners walk contrary to
God, to his truths, laws, and counsels; but those especially that are
incorrigible under his judgments. The design of the rod is to humble
them, and soften them, and bring them to repentance; but, instead of
this, their hearts are more hardened and exasperated against God, and in
their distress they trespass yet more against him, [Ch2
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#022). This is walking contrary to
God. Some read it, "If you walk at all adventures with me, carelessly
and presumptuously, as if you heeded not either what you do, whether it
be right or wrong, or what God does with you, whether it be for you or
against you, blundering on in wilful ignorance." (3.) If you will not be
reformed by these things. God's design in punishing is to reform, by
giving men sensible convictions of the evil of sin, and obliging them to
seek unto him for relief: this is the primary intention; but those that
will not be reformed by the judgments of God must expect to be ruined by
them. Those have a great deal to answer for that have been long and
often under God's correcting hand, and yet go on frowardly in a sinful
way; sick and in pain, and yet not reformed; crossed and impoverished,
and yet not reformed; broken with breach upon breach, yet not returning
to the Lord, [Amo 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#006), etc.

II\. How the misery is described which their sin would bring upon them,
under two heads: -

1\. God himself would be against them; and this is the root and cause of
all their misery. (1.) I will set my face against you ([Lev
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#017)), that is, "I will set myself
against you, set myself to ruin you." These proud sinners God will
resist, and face those down that confront his authority. Or the face is
put for the anger: "I will show myself highly displeased at you." (2.) I
will walk contrary to you ([Lev 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#024),
[Lev 26:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#028)); with the forward he will
wrestle, [Psa 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026) \[margin\]. When
God in his providence thwarts the designs of a people, which they
thought well laid, crosses their purposes, breaks their measures, blasts
their endeavours, and disappoints their expectations, then he walks
contrary to them. Note, There is nothing got by striving with God
Almighty, for he will break either the heart or the neck of those that
contend with him, will bring them either to repentance or ruin. "I will
walk at all adventures with you," so some read; "all covenant
loving-kindness shall be forgotten, and I will leave you to common
providence." Note, Those that cast off God deserve that he should cast
them off. (3.) As they continued obstinate, the judgments should
increase yet more upon them. If the first sensible tokens of God's
displeasures do not attain their end, to humble and reform them, then
([Lev 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#018)), I will punish you seven
times more, and again ([Lev 26:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#021)), I
will bring seven times more plagues, and ([Lev
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#024)), I will punish you yet seven
times, and ([Lev 26:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#028)), I, even I,
will chastise you seven times for your sins. Note, If less judgments do
not do their work, God will send greater; for, when he judges, he will
overcome. If true repentance do not stay process, it will go on till
execution be taken out. Those that are obstinate and incorrigible, when
they have weathered one storm must expect another more violent; and, how
severely soever they are punished, till they are in hell they must still
say, "There is worse behind," unless they repent. If the founder have
hitherto melted in vain ([Jer 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#029)),
the furnace will be heated seven times hotter (a proverbial expression,
used [Dan 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#019)), and again and again
seven times hotter; and who among us can dwell with such devouring fire?
God does not begin with the sorest judgments, to show that he is
patient, and delights not in the death of sinners; but, if they repent
not, he will proceed to the sorest, to show that he is righteous, and
that he will not be mocked or set at defiance. (4.) Their misery is
completed in that threatening: My soul shall abhor you, [Lev
26:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#030). That man is as miserable as he
can be whom God abhors; for his resentments are just and effective. Thus
if any man draw back, as these are supposed to do, God's soul shall have
no pleasure in him ([Heb 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#038)), and
he will spue them out of his mouth, [Rev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016). It is spoken of as strange, and
yet too true, Hath thy soul loathed Zion? [Jer
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#019).

2\. The whole creation would be at war with them. All God's sore
judgments would be sent against them; for he hath many arrows in his
quiver. The threatenings here are very particular, because really they
were prophecies, and he that foresaw all their rebellions knew they
would prove so; see [Deu 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#016), [Deu
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#029). This long roll of threatening
shows that evil pursues sinners. We have here,

(1.) Temporal judgments threatened. \[1.\] Diseases of body, which
should be epidemical: I will appoint over you, as task-masters, to rule
you with rigour, terror, consumption, and the burning ague, [Lev
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#016). What we translate terror, some
think, signifies a particular disease, probably (says the learned bishop
Patrick) the falling sickness, which is terror indeed: all chronical
diseases are included in the consumption, and all acute diseases in the
burning ague or fever. These consume the eyes, and cause sorrow both to
those that are visited with them and to their friends and relations.
Note, All diseases are God's servants; they do what he appoints them,
and are often used as scourges wherewith he chastises a provoking
people. The pestilence is threatened ([Lev
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#025)) to meet them, when they are
gathered together in their cities for fear of the sword. The greater the
concourse of people is, the greater desolation does the pestilence make;
and, when it gets among the soldiers that should defend a place, it is
of most fatal consequence. \[2.\] Famine and scarcity of bread, which
should be brought upon them several ways; as, First, By plunder ([Lev
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#016)): Your enemies shall eat it up,
and carry it off as the Midianites did, [Jdg
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#005), [Jdg
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#006). Secondly, By unseasonable
weather, especially the want of rain ([Lev
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#019)): I will make your heaven as
iron, letting fall no rain, but reflecting heat, and then the earth
would of course be as dry and hard as brass, and their labour in
ploughing and sowing would be in vain ([Lev
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#020)); for the increase of the earth
depends upon God's good providence more than upon man's good husbandry.
This should be the breaking of the staff of bread ([Lev
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#026)), which life leans upon, and is
supported by, on which perhaps they had leaned more than upon God's
blessing. There should be so great a dearth of corn that, whereas every
family used to fill an oven of their own with household bread, now ten
families should have to fill but one over, which would bring themselves
and their children and servants to short allowance, so that they should
eat and not be satisfied. The less they had the more craving should
their appetites be. Thirdly, By the besieging of their cities, which
would reduce them to such an extremity that they should eat the flesh of
their sons and daughters, [Lev 26:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#029).
\[3.\] War, and the prevailing of their enemies over them: "You shall be
slain before your enemies, [Lev 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#017).
Your choice men shall die in battle, and those that hate you shall reign
over you, and justly, since you are not willing that the God that loved
you should reign over you;" [Ch2 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#008).
Miserable is that people whose enemies are their rulers and have got
dominion over them, or whose rulers have become their enemies and
under-hand seek the ruin of their interests. Thus God would break the
pride of their power, [Lev 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#019). God
had given them power over the nations; but when they, instead of being
thankful for that power, and improving it for the service of God's
kingdom, grew proud of it, and perverted the intentions of it, it was
just with God to break it. Thus God would bring a sword upon them to
avenge the quarrel of his covenant, [Lev
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#025). Note, God has a just quarrel
with those that break covenant with him, for he will not be mocked by
the treachery of perfidious men; and one way or other he will avenge
this quarrel upon those that play at fast and loose with him. \[4.\]
Wild beasts, lions, bears, and wolves, which should increase upon them,
and tear in pieces all that come in their way ([Lev
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#022)), as we read of two bears that
in an instant killed forty-two children, [Kg2
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#024). This is one of the four sore
judgments threatened [Eze 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021), which
plainly refers to this chapter. Man was made to have dominion over the
creatures, and, though many of them are stronger than he, yet none of
them could have hurt him, nay, all of them would have served him, if he
had not first shaken off God's dominion, and so lost his own; and now
the creatures are in rebellion against him that is in rebellion against
his Maker, and, when the Lord of those hosts pleases, they are the
executioners of his wrath and the ministers of his justice. \[5.\]
Captivity, or dispersion: I will scatter you among the heathen ([Lev
26:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#033)), in your enemies' land, [Lev
26:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#034). Never were any people so
incorporated and united among themselves as they were; but for their sin
God would scatter them, so that they should be lost among the heathen,
from whom God had graciously distinguished them, but with whom they had
wickedly mingled themselves. Yet, when they were scattered, divine
justice had not done with them, but would draw out a sword after them,
which would find them out, and follow them wherever they were. God's
judgments, as they cannot be outfaced, so they cannot be outrun. \[6.\]
The utter ruin and desolation of their land, which should be so
remarkable that their very enemies themselves, who ha helped it forward,
should in the review be astonished at it, [Lev
26:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#032). First, Their cities should be
waste, forsaken, uninhabited, and all the buildings destroyed; those
that escaped the desolations of war should fall to decay of themselves.
Secondly, Their sanctuaries should be a desolation, that is, their
synagogues where they met for religious worship every sabbath, as well
as their tabernacle where they met thrice a year. Thirdly, The country
itself should be desolate, not tilled or husbanded ([Lev
26:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#034), [Lev
26:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#035)); then the land should enjoy its
sabbaths, because they had not religiously observed the sabbatical years
which God appointed them. They tilled their ground when God would have
them let it rest; justly therefore were they driven out of it; and the
expression intimates that the ground itself was pleased and easy when it
was rid of the burden of such sinners, under which it had groaned, [Rom
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#020), etc. The captivity in Babylon
lasted seventy years, and so long the land enjoyed her sabbaths, as is
said ([Ch2 36:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#021)) with reference to
this. \[7.\] The destruction of their idols, though rather a mercy than
a judgment, yet, being a necessary piece of justice, is here mentioned,
to show what would be the sin that would bring all these miseries upon
them: I will destroy your high places, [Lev
26:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#030). Those that will not be parted
from their sins by the commands of God shall be parted from them by his
judgments; since they would not destroy their high places, God would.
And, to upbraid them with the unreasonable fondness they had shown for
their idols, it is foretold that their carcases should be cast upon the
carcases of their idols. Those that are wedded to their lusts will
sooner or later have enough of them. Their idols would not be able to
help either themselves or their worshippers; but, those that made them
being like them, they should both perish alike, and fall together as
blind into the ditch.

(2.) Spiritual judgments are here threatened. These should seize the
mind; for he that made the mind can, when he pleases, make his sword
approach to it. It is here threatened, \[1.\] That they should find no
acceptance with God: I will not smell the savour of your sweet odours,
[Lev 26:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#031). Though the judgments of
God upon them did not separate them and their sins, yet they extorted
incense from them; but in vain - even their incense was an abomination,
[Isa 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013). \[2.\] That they should
have no courage in their wars, but should be quite dispirited and
disheartened. They should not only fear and flee ([Lev
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#017)), but fear and fall, when none
pursued, [Lev 26:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#036). A guilty
conscience would be their continual terror, so that not only the sound
of a trumpet, but the very sound of a leaf, should chase them. Note,
Those that cast off the fear of God expose themselves to the fear of
every thing else, [Pro 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#001). Their
very fears should dash them one against another, [Lev
26:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#037), [Lev
26:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#038). And those that had increased
one another's guilt would now increase one another's fears. \[3.\] That
they should have no hope of the forgiveness of their sins ([Lev
26:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#039)): They shall pine away in their
iniquity, and how should they then live? [Eze
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#010). Note, It is a righteous thing
with God to leave those to despair of pardon that have presumed to sin;
and it is owing to free grace if we are not abandoned to pine away in
the iniquity we were born in and have lived in.

[Leviticus 26:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">lev 26:40</span></span>

Here the chapter concludes with gracious promises of the return of God's
favour to them upon their repentance, that they might not (unless it
were their own fault) pine away in their iniquity. Behold, with wonder,
the riches of God's mercy to a people that had obstinately stood it out
against the judgments of God, and would never think of surrendering till
they were reduced to the last extremity. Yet turn to strong-hold, you
prisoners of hope, [Zac 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012). As bad
as things are, they may be mended. Yet there is hope in Israel. Observe,

I. How the repentance which would qualify them for this mercy is
described, [Lev 26:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#040), [Lev
26:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#041). The instances of it are three:
- 1. Confession, by which they must give glory to God, and take shame to
themselves. There must be a confession of sin, their own and their
fathers', which they must lament the guilt of because they feel the
smart of it; that thus they may cut off the entail of wrath. They must
in their confession put sin under its worst character, as walking
contrary to God; this is the sinfulness of sin, the worst thing in it,
and which in our repentance we should especially bewail. There must also
be a confession of wrath; they must overlook the instruments of their
trouble and the second causes, and confess that God has walked contrary
to them, and so dealt with them according to their sins. Such a
confession as this we find made by Daniel just before the dawning of the
day of their deliverance (ch. 9), and the like, [Ezr
9:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001) and [Neh
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#002). Remorse and godly sorrow for sin:
If their uncircumcised heart be humbled. An impenitent, unbelieving,
unhumbled heart, is called an uncircumcised heart, the heart of a
Gentile that is a stranger to God, rather than the heart of an Israelite
in covenant with him. True circumcision is of the heart ([Rom
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029)), without which the circumcision
of the flesh avails nothing, [Jer
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#026). Now in repentance this
uncircumcised heart was humbled, that is, it was truly broken and
contrite for sin. Note, A humble heart under humbling providences
prepares for deliverance and true comfort. 3. Submission to the justice
of God in all his dealings; if they then accept of the punishment of
their iniquity ([Lev 26:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#041) and again
[Lev 26:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#043)), that is, if they justify
God and condemn themselves, patiently bear the punishment as that which
they have well deserved, and carefully answer the ends o it as that
which God has well designed, accept it as a kindness, take it as physic,
and improve it, then they are penitents indeed.

II\. How the mercy which they should obtain upon their repentance is
described. 1. They should not be abandoned: Though they have despised my
judgments, yet, for all that, I will not cast them away, [Lev
26:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#043), [Lev
26:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#044). He speaks as a tender Father
that cannot find in his heart to disinherit a son that has been very
provoking. How shall I do it? [Hos
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#008), [Hos
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#009). Till he had laid the foundations
of a church for himself in the Gentile world, the Jewish church was not
quite forsaken, nor cast away. 2. They should be remembered: I will
remember the land with favour, which is grounded upon the promise
before, I will remember my covenant ([Lev
26:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#042)), which is repeated, [Lev
26:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#045). God is said to remember the
covenant when he performs the promises of it, purely for his
faithfulness' sake; not because there is any thing in us to recommend us
to his favour, but because he will be as good as his word. This is the
church's plea. [Psa 74:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#020), Have
respect unto the covenant. He will remember the constitution of the
covenant, which is such as leaves room for repentance, and promises
pardon upon repentance; and the Mediator of the covenant, who was
promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and was sent, when the fulness of
time came, in remembrance of that holy covenant. The word covenant is
thrice repeated, to intimate that God is ever mindful of it and would
have us to be so. The persons also with whom the covenant was made are
mentioned in an unusual manner, per modum ascensus - in the ascending
line, beginning with Jacob, to lead them gradually to the most ancient
promise, which was made to the father of the faithful: thus ([Mic
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#020)) he is said to perform the truth
to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham. He will for their sakes ([Lev
26:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#045)), not their merit's sake, but
their benefit's sake, remember the covenant of their ancestors, and upon
that score show kindness to them, though most unworthy; they are
therefore said to be, as touching the election, beloved for the fathers'
sake, [Rom 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028). Note, When those
that have walked contrary to God in a way of sin return to him by
sincere repentance, though he has walked contrary to them in a way of
judgment he will return to them in a way of special mercy, pursuant to
the covenant of redemption and grace. None are so ready to repent as God
is to forgive upon repentance, through Christ, who is given for a
covenant.

Lastly, These are said to be the laws which the Lord made between him
and the children of Israel, [Lev
26:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#046). His communion with his church
is kept up by his law. He manifests not only his dominion over them, but
his favour to them, by giving them his law; and they manifest not only
their holy fear, but their holy love, by the observance of it; and thus
it is made between them, rather as a covenant than a law; for he draws
with the cords of a man.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 27](lev027)

</div>
