<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](exo040)  [Next](lev001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Third Book of Moses,
Called Leviticus

There is nothing historical in all this book of Leviticus except the
account which it gives us of the consecration of the priesthood (ch.
8-9), of the punishment of Nadab and Abihu, by the hand of God, for
offering strange fire (ch. 10), and of Shelomith's son, by the hand of
the magistrate, for blasphemy (ch. 24). All the rest of the book is
taken up with the laws, chiefly the ecclesiastical laws, which God gave
to Israel by Moses, concerning their sacrifices and offerings, their
meats and drinks, and divers washings, and the other peculiarities by
which God set that people apart for himself, and distinguished them from
other nations, all which were shadows of good things to come, which are
realized and superseded by the gospel of Christ. We call the book
Leviticus, from the Septuagint, because it contains the laws and
ordinances of the levitical priesthood (as it is called, [Heb
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011).md), and the ministrations of it.
The Levites were principally charged with these institutions, both to do
their part and to teach the people theirs. We read, in the close of the
foregoing book, of the setting up of the tabernacle, which was to be the
place of worship; and, as that was framed according to the pattern, so
must the ordinances of worship be, which were there to be administered.
In these the divine appointment was as particular as in the former, and
must be as punctually observed. The remaining record of these abrogated
laws is of use to us, for the strengthening of our faith in Jesus
Christ, as the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, and for the
increase of our thankfulness to God, that by him we are freed from the
yoke of the ceremonial law, and live in the times of reformation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 1](lev001.md)

</div>
