<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev015)  [Next](lev017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 16:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have the institution of the annual solemnity of the
day of atonement, or expiation, which had as much gospel in it as
perhaps any of the appointments of the ceremonial law, as appears by the
reference the apostle makes to it, [Heb
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007), etc. We had before divers laws
concerning sin-offerings for particular persons, and to be offered upon
particular occasions; but this is concerning the stated sacrifice, in
which the whole nation was interested. The whole service of the day is
committed to the high priest. I. He must never come into the most holy
place but upon this day ([Lev 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001),
[Lev 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002)). II. He must come dressed
in linen garments ([Lev 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#004)). III. He
must bring a sin-offering and a burnt-offering for himself ([Lev
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#003)), offer his sin-offering ([Lev
16:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#006)), then go within the veil with
some of the blood of his sin-offering, burn incense, and sprinkle the
blood before the mercy-seat ([Lev
16:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#012)). IV. Two goats must be
provided for the people, lots cast upon them, and, 1. One of them must
be a sin-offering for the people ([Lev
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#005), [Lev
16:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#007)), and the blood of it must be
sprinkled before the mercy-seat ([Lev
16:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#015)), and then some of the blood
of both the sin-offerings must be sprinkled upon the altar ([Lev
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#018), [Lev
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#019)). 2. The other must be a
scape-goat ([Lev 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#010)), the sins of
Israel must be confessed over him, and then he must be sent away into
the wilderness ([Lev 16:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#020)), and he
that brought him away must be ceremonially unclean ([Lev
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#026)). V. The burnt-offerings were
then to be offered, the fat of the sin-offerings burnt on the altar, and
their flesh burnt without the camp ([Lev
16:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#023), [Lev
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#027), [Lev
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#028)). VI. The people were to observe
the day religiously by a holy rest and holy mourning for sin; and this
was to be a statute for ever ([Lev
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029), etc.).

[Leviticus 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 16:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The date of this law concerning the day of atonement: it was
after the death of the two sons of Aaron ([Lev
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001)), which we read, [Lev
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001). 1. Lest Aaron should fear that
any remaining guilt of that sin should cleave to his family, or (seeing
the priests were so apt to offend) that some after-sin of his other sons
should be the ruin of his family, he is directed how to make atonement
for his house, that it might keep in with God; for the atonement for it
would be the establishment of it, and preserve the entail of the
blessing upon it. 2. The priests being warned by the death of Nadab and
Abihu to approach to God with reverence and godly fear (without which
they came at their peril), directions are here given how the nearest
approach might be made, not only without peril, but to unspeakable
advantage and comfort, if the directions were observed. When they were
cut off for an undue approach, the rest must not say, "Then we will not
draw near at all," but, "Then we will do it by rule." They died for
their sin, therefore God graciously provides for the rest, that they die
not. Thus God's judgments on some should be instructions to others.

II\. The design of this law. One intention of it was to preserve a
veneration for the most holy place, within the veil, where the
shechinah, or divine glory, was pleased to dwell between the cherubim:
Speak unto Aaron, that he come not at all times into the holy place,
[Lev 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002). Before the veil some of the
priests came every day to burn incense upon the golden altar, but within
the veil none must ever come but the high priest only, and he but on one
day in the year, and with great ceremony and caution. That place where
God manifested his special presence must not be made common. If none
must come into the presence-chamber of an earthly king uncalled, no, not
the queen herself, upon pain of death ([Est
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#011)), was it not requisite that the
same sacred respect should be paid to the Kings of kings? But see what a
blessed change is made by the gospel of Christ; all good Christians have
now boldness to enter into the holiest, through the veil, every day
([Heb 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019), [Heb
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020)); and we come boldly (not as
Aaron must, with fear and trembling) to the throne of grace, or
mercy-seat, [Heb 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016). While the
manifestations of God's presence and grace were sensible, it was
requisite that they should thus be confined and upon reserve, because
the objects of sense the more familiar they are made the less awful or
delightful they become; but now that they are purely spiritual it is
otherwise, for the objects of faith the more they are conversed with the
more do they manifest of their greatness and goodness: now therefore we
are welcome to come at all times into the holy place not made with
hands, for we are made to sit together with Christ in heavenly places by
faith, [Eph 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006). Then Aaron must not
come near at all times, lest he die; we now must come near at all times
that we may live: it is distance only that is our death. Then God
appeared in the cloud upon the mercy-seat, but now with open face we
behold, not in a dark cloud, but in a clear glass, the glory of the
Lord, [Co2 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018).

III\. The person to whom the work of this day was committed, and that
was the high priest only: Thus shall Aaron come into the holy place,
[Lev 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#003). He was to do all himself
upon the day of atonement: only there was a second provided to be his
substitute or supporter, in case any thing should befal him, either of
sickness or ceremonial uncleanness, that he could not perform the
service of the day. All Christians are spiritual priests, but Christ
only is the high priest, and he alone it is that makes atonement, nor
needed he either assistant or substitute.

IV\. The attire of the high priest in this service. He was not to be
dressed up in his rich garments that were peculiar to himself: he was
not to put on the ephod, with the precious stones in it, but only the
linen clothes which he wore in common with the inferior priests, [Lev
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#004). That meaner dress did best
become him on this day of humiliation; and, being thinner and lighter,
he would in it be more expedite for the work or service of the day,
which was all to go through his hands. Christ, our high priest, made
atonement for sin in our nature; not in the robes of his own peculiar
glory, but the linen garments of our mortality, clean indeed, but mean.

[Leviticus 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 16:5</span></span>

The Jewish writers say that for seven days before the day of expiation
the high priest was to retire from his own house, and to dwell in a
chamber of the temple, that he might prepare himself for the service of
this great day. During those seven days he himself did the work of the
inferior priests about the sacrifices, incense, etc., that he might have
his hand in for this day: he must have the institution read to him again
and again, that he might be fully apprised of the whole method. 1. He
was to begin the service of the day very early with the usual morning
sacrifice, after he had first washed his whole body before he dressed
himself, and his hands and feet again afterwards. He then burned the
daily incense, dressed the lamps, and offered the extraordinary
sacrifice appointed for this day (not here, but [Num
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#008)), a bullock, a ram, and seven
lambs, all for burnt-offerings. This he is supposed to have done in his
high priest's garments. 2. He must now put off his rich robes, bathe
himself, put on the linen garments, and present unto the Lord his own
bullock, which was to be a sin-offering for himself and his own house,
[Lev 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#006). The bullock was set between
the temple and the altar, and the offering of him mentioned in this
verse was the making of a solemn confession of his sins and the sins of
his house, earnestly praying for the forgiveness of them, and this with
his hands on the head of the bullock. 3. He must then cast lots upon the
two goats, which were to make (both together) one sin-offering for the
congregation. One of these goats must be slain, in token of a
satisfaction to be made to God's justice for sin, the other must be sent
away, in token of the remission or dismission of sin by the mercy of
God. Both must be presented together to God ([Lev
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#007)) before the lot was cast upon
them, and afterwards the scape-goat by itself, [Lev
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#010). Some think that goats were
chosen for the sin-offering because, by the disagreeableness of their
smell, the offensiveness of sin is represented: others think, because it
was said that the demons which the heathens then worshipped often
appeared to their worshippers in the form of goats, God therefore
obliged his people to sacrifice goats, that they might never be tempted
to sacrifice to goats. 4. The next thing to be done was to kill the
bullock for the sin-offering for himself and his house, [Lev
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#011). "Now," say the Jews, "he must
again put his hands on the head of the bullock, and repeat the
confession and supplication he had before made, and kill the bullock
with his own hands, to make atonement for himself first (for how could
he make reconciliation for the sins of the people till he was himself
first reconciled?) and for his house, not only his own family, but all
the priests, who are called the house of Aaron," [Psa
135:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#019). This charity must begin at
home, though it must not end there. The bullock being killed, he left
one of the priests to stir the blood, that it might not thicken, and
then, 5. He took a censer of burning coals (that would not smoke) in one
hand, and a dish full of the sweet incense in the other, and then went
into the holy of holies through the veil, and went up towards the ark,
set the coals down upon the floor, and scattered the incense upon them,
so that the room was immediately filled with smoke. The Jews say that he
was to go in side-ways, that he might not look directly upon the ark
where the divine glory was, till it was covered with smoke; then he must
come out backwards, out of reverence to the divine majesty; and, after a
short prayer, he was to hasten out of the sanctuary, to show himself to
the people, that they might not suspect that he had misbehaved himself
and died before the Lord. 6. He then fetched the blood of the bullock
from the priest whom he had left stirring it, and took that in with him
the second time into the holy of holies, which was now filled with the
smoke of the incense, and sprinkled with his finger of that blood upon,
or rather towards, the mercy-seat, once over against the top of it and
then seven times towards the lower part of it, [Lev
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#014). But the drops of blood (as the
Jews expound it) all fell upon the ground, and none touched the
mercy-seat. Having done this, he came out of the most holy place, set
the basin of blood down in the sanctuary, and went out.

[Leviticus 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 16:15</span></span>

When the priest had come out from the sprinkling the blood of the
bullock before the mercy-seat, 1. He must next kill the goat which was
the sin-offering for the people ([Lev
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#015)) and go the third time into the
holy of holies, to sprinkle the blood of the goat, as he had done that
of the bullock; and thus he was to make atonement for the holy place
([Lev 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#016)); that is, whereas the
people by their sins had provoked God to take away those tokens of his
favourable presence with them, and rendered even that holy place unfit
to be the habitation of the holy God, atonement was hereby made for sin,
that God, being reconciled to them, might continue with them. 2. He must
then do the same for the outward part of the tabernacle that he had done
for the inner room, by sprinkling the blood of the bullock first, and
then that of the goat, without the veil, where the table and
incense-altar stood, eight times each as before. The reason intimated is
because the tabernacle remained among them in the midst of their
uncleanness, [Lev 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#016). God would
hereby show them how much their hearts needed to be purified, when even
the tabernacle, only by standing in the midst of such an impure and
sinful people, needed this expiation; and also that even their devotions
and religious performances had much amiss in them, for which it was
necessary that atonement should be made. During this solemnity, none of
the inferior priests must come into the tabernacle ([Lev
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#017)), but, by standing without, must
own themselves unworthy and unfit to minister there, because their
follies, and defects, and manifold impurities in their ministry, had
made this expiation of the tabernacle necessary. 3. He must then put
some of the blood, both of the bullock and of the goat mixed together,
upon the horns of the altar that is before the Lord, [Lev
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#018), [Lev
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#019). It is certain that the altar of
incense had this blood put upon it, for so it is expressly ordered ([Exo
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#010)); but some think that this
directs the high priest to the altar of burnt-offerings, for that also
is here called the altar before the Lord ([Lev
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#012)), because he is said to go out
to it, and because it may be presumed that that also had need of an
expiation; for to that the gifts and offerings of the children of Israel
were all brought, from whose uncleanness the altar is here said to be
hallowed.

[Leviticus 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 16:20</span></span>

The high priest having presented unto the Lord the expiatory sacrifices,
by the sprinkling of their blood, the remainder of which, it is
probable, he poured out at the foot of the brazen altar, 1. He is next
to confess the sins of Israel, with both his hands upon the head of the
scape-goat ([Lev 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#020), [Lev
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#021)); and whenever hands were
imposed upon the head of any sacrifice it was always done with
confession, according as the nature of the sacrifice was; and, this
being a sin-offering, it must be a confession of sin. In the latter and
more degenerate ages of the Jewish church they had a set form of
confession prepared for the high priest, but God here prescribed none;
for it might be supposed that the high priest was so well acquainted
with the state of the people, and had such a tender concern for them,
that he needed not any form. The confession must be as particular as he
could make it, not only of all the iniquities of the children of Israel,
but all their transgressions in all their sins. In one sin there may be
many transgressions, from the several aggravating circumstances of it;
and in our confessions we should take notice of them, and not only say,
I have sinned, but, with Achan, "Thus and thus have I done." By this
confession he must put the sins of Israel upon the head of the goat;
that is, exercising faith upon the divine appointment which constituted
such a translation, he must transfer the punishment incurred from the
sinners to the sacrifice, which would have been but a jest, nay, an
affront to God, if he himself had not ordained it. 2. The goat was then
to be sent away immediately by the hand of a fit person pitched upon for
the purpose, into a wilderness, a land not inhabited; and God allowed
them to make this construction of it, that the sending away of the goat
was the sending away of their sins, by a free and full remission: He
shall bear upon him all their iniquities, [Lev
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#022). The losing of the goat was a
sign to them that the sins of Israel should be sought for, and not
found, [Jer 50:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#020). The later Jews had
a custom to tie one shred of scarlet cloth to the horns of the goat and
another to the gate of the temple, or to the top of the rock where the
goat was lost, and they concluded that if it turned white, as they say
it usually did, the sins of Israel were forgiven, as it is written,
Though your sins have been as scarlet, they shall be as wool: and they
add that for forty years before the destruction of Jerusalem by the
Romans the scarlet cloth never changed colour at all, which is a fair
confession that, having rejected the substance, the shadow stood them in
no stead. 3. The high priest must then put off his linen garments in the
tabernacle, and leave them there, the Jews say never to be worn again by
himself or any other, for they made new ones every year; and he must
bathe himself in water, put on his rich clothes, and then offer both his
own and the people's burnt-offerings, [Lev
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#023), [Lev
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#024). When we have the comfort of our
pardon God must have the glory of it. If we have the benefit of the
sacrifice of atonement, we must not grudge the sacrifices of
acknowledgment. And, it should seem, the burning of the fat of the
sin-offering was deferred till now ([Lev
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#025)), that it might be consumed with
the burnt-offerings. 4. The flesh of both those sin-offerings whose
blood was taken within the veil was to be all burnt, not upon the altar,
but at a distance without the camp, to signify both our putting away sin
by true repentance, and the spirit of burning, and God's putting it away
by a full remission, so that it shall never rise up in judgment against
us. 5. He that took the scape-goat into the wilderness, and those that
burned the sin-offering, were to be looked upon as ceremonially unclean,
and must not come into the camp till they had washed their clothes and
bathed their flesh in water, which signified the defiling nature of sin;
even the sacrifice which was but made sin was defiling: also the
imperfection of the legal sacrifices; they were so far from taking away
sin that even they left some stain upon those that touched them. 6. When
all this was done, the high priest went again into the most holy place
to fetch his censer, and so returned to his own house with joy, because
he had done his duty, and died not.

[Leviticus 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 16:29</span></span>

I. We have here some additional directions in reference to this great
solemnity, particularly,

1\. The day appointed for this solemnity. It must be observed yearly on
the tenth day of the seventh month, [Lev
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029). The seventh had been reckoned
the first month, till God appointed that the month in which the children
of Israel came out of Egypt should thenceforward be accounted and called
the first month. Some have fancied that this tenth day of the seventh
month was the day of the year on which our first parents fell, and that
it was kept as a fast in remembrance of their fall. Dr. Lightfoot
computes that this was the day on which Moses came the last time down
from the mount, when he brought with him the renewed tables, and the
assurances of God's being reconciled to Israel, and his face shone: that
day must be a day of atonement throughout their generations; for the
remembrance of God's forgiving them their sin about the golden calf
might encourage them to hope that, upon their repentance, he would
forgive them all trespasses.

2\. The duty of the people on this day. (1.) They must rest from all
their labours: It shall be a sabbath of rest, [Lev
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#031). The work of the day was itself
enough, and a good day's work if it was done well; therefore they must
do no other work at all. The work of humiliation for sin requires such a
close application of mind, and such a fixed engagement of the whole man,
as will not allow us to turn aside to any other work. The day of
atonement seems to be that sabbath spoken of by the prophet ([Isa
58:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013)), for it is the same with the
fast spoken of in the verses before. (2.) They must afflict their souls.
They must refrain from all bodily refreshments and delights, in token of
inward humiliation and contrition of soul for their sins. They all
fasted on this day from food (except the sick and children), and laid
aside their ornaments, and did not anoint themselves, as Daniel, [Dan
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#003), [Dan
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012). David chastened his soul with
fasting, [Psa 35:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013). And it signified
the mortifying of sin and turning from it, loosing the bands of
wickedness, [Isa 58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006), [Isa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007). The Jewish doctors advised that
they should not on that day read those portions of scripture which were
proper to affect them with delight and joy, because it was a day to
afflict their souls.

3\. The perpetuity of this institution: It shall be a statute for ever,
[Lev 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029), [Lev
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#034). It must not be intermitted any
year, nor ever let fall till that constitution should be dissolved, and
the type should be superseded by the antitype. As long as we are
continually sinning, we must be continually repenting, and receiving the
atonement. The law of afflicting our souls for sin is a statute for
ever, which will continue in force till we arrive where all tears, even
those of repentance, will be wiped from our eyes. The apostle observes
it as an evidence of the insufficiency of the legal sacrifices to take
away sin, and purge the conscience from it, that in them there was a
remembrance made of sin every year, upon the day of atonement, [Heb
10:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001). The annual repetition of the
sacrifices showed that there was in them only a faint and feeble effort
towards making atonement; it could be done effectually only by the
offering up of the body of Christ once for all, and that once was
sufficient; that sacrifice needed not to be repeated.

II\. Let us see what there was of gospel in all this.

1\. Here are typified the two great gospel privileges of the remission
of sin and access to God, both which we owe to the mediation of our Lord
Jesus. Here then let us see,

(1.) The expiation of guilt which Christ made for us. He is himself both
the maker and the matter of the atonement; for he is, \[1.\] The priest,
the high priest, that makes reconciliation for the sins of the people,
[Heb 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#017). He, and he only, is par
negotio - fit for the work and worthy of the honour: he is appointed by
the Father to do it, who sanctified him, and sent him into the world for
this purpose, that God might in him reconcile the world to himself. He
undertook it, and for our sakes sanctified himself, and set himself
apart for it, [Joh 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019). The high
priest's frequently bathing himself on this day, and performing the
service of it in fine linen clean and white, signified the holiness of
the Lord Jesus, his perfect freedom from all sin, and his being
beautified and adorned with all grace. No man was to be with the high
priest when he made atonement ([Lev
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#017)); for our Lord Jesus was to
tread the wine-press alone, and of the people there must be none with
him ([Isa 63:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#003)); therefore, when he
entered upon his sufferings, all his disciples forsook him and fled, for
it any of them had been taken and put to death with him it would have
looked as if they had assisted in making the atonement; none but
thieves, concerning whom there could be no such suspicion, must suffer
with him. And observe what the extent of the atonement was which the
high priest made: it was for the holy sanctuary, for the tabernacle, for
the altar, for the priests, and for all the people, [Lev
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#033). Christ's satisfaction is that
which atones for the sins both of ministers and people, the iniquities
of our holy (and our unholy) things; the title we have to the privileges
of ordinances, our comfort in them, and benefit by them, are all owing
to the atonement Christ made. But, whereas the atonement which the high
priest made pertained only to the congregation of Israel, Christ is the
propitiation, not for their sins only, that are Jews, but for the sins
of the whole Gentile world. And in this also Christ infinitely excelled
Aaron, that Aaron needed to offer sacrifice for his own sin first, of
which he was to make confession upon the head of his sin-offering; but
our Lord Jesus had no sin of his own to answer for. Such a high priest
became us, [Heb 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026). And therefore,
when he was baptized in Jordan, whereas others stood in the water
confessing their sins ([Mat 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#006)), he
went up straightway out of the water ([Heb
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#016)), having no sins to confess.
\[2.\] As he is the high priest, so he is the sacrifice with which
atonement is made; for he is all in all in our reconciliation to God.
Thus he was prefigured by the two goats, which both made one offering:
the slain goat was a type of Christ dying for our sins, the scape-goat a
type of Christ rising again for our justification. It was directed by
lot, the disposal whereof was of the Lord, which goat should be slain;
for Christ was delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of
God. First, The atonement is said to be completed by putting the sins of
Israel upon the head of the goat. They deserved to have been abandoned
and sent into a land of forgetfulness, but that punishment was here
transferred to the goat that bore their sins, with reference to which
God is said to have laid upon our Lord Jesus (the substance of all these
shadows) the iniquity of us all ([Isa
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006)), and he is said to have borne
our sins, even the punishment of them, in his own body upon the tree,
[Pe1 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024). Thus was he made sin for
us, that is, a sacrifice for sin, [Co2
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021). He suffered and died, not only
for our good, but in our stead, and was forsaken, and seemed to be
forgotten for a time, that we might not be forsaken and forgotten for
ever. Some learned men have computed that our Lord Jesus was baptized of
John in Jordan upon the tenth day of the seventh month, which was the
very day of atonement. Then he entered upon his office as Mediator, and
was immediately driven of the Spirit into the wilderness, a land not
inhabited. Secondly, The consequence of this was that all the iniquities
of Israel were carried into a land of forgetfulness. Thus Christ, the
Lamb of God, takes away the sin the of world, by taking it upon himself,
[Joh 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029). And, when God forgives sin,
he is said to remember it no more ([Heb
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#012)), to cast it behind his back
([Isa 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#017)), into the depths of the
sea ([Mic 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#019)), and to separate it as
far as the east is from the west, [Psa
103:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#012).

(2.) The entrance into heaven which Christ made for us is here typified
by the high priest's entrance into the most holy place. This the apostle
has expounded ([Heb 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007), etc.), and he
shows, \[1.\] That heaven is the holiest of all, but not of that
building, and that the way into it by faith, hope, and prayer, through a
Mediator, was not then so clearly manifested as it is to us now by the
gospel. \[2.\] That Christ our high priest entered into heaven at his
ascension once for all, and as a public person, in the name of all his
spiritual Israel, and through the veil of his flesh, which was rent for
that purpose, [Heb 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020). \[3.\] That
he entered by his own blood ([Heb
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012)), taking with him to heaven the
virtues of the sacrifice he offered on earth, and so sprinkling his
blood, as it were, before the mercy-seat, where it speaks better things
than the blood of bulls and goats could do. Hence he is said to appear
in the midst of the throne as a lamb that had been slain, [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006). And, though he had no sin of his
own to expiate, yet it was by his own merit that he obtained for himself
a restoration to his own ancient glory ([Joh
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004), [Joh
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)), as well as an eternal
redemption for us, [Heb 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012). \[4.\]
The high priest in the holy place burned incense, which typified the
intercession that Christ ever lives to make for us within the veil, in
virtue of his satisfaction. And we could not expect to live, no, not
before the mercy-seat, if it were not covered with the cloud of this
incense. Mere mercy itself will not save us, without the interposition
of a Mediator. The intercession of Christ is there set forth before God
as incense, as this incense. And as the high priest interceded for
himself first, then for his household, and then for all Israel, so our
Lord Jesus, in the [Joh 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001) (which
was a specimen of the intercession he makes in heaven), recommended
himself first to his Father, then his disciples who were his household,
and then all that should believe on him through their word, as all
Israel; and, having thus adverted to the uses and intentions of his
offering, he was immediately seized and crucified, pursuant to these
intentions. \[5.\] Herein the entry Christ made far exceeded Aaron's,
that Aaron could not gain admission, no, not for his own sons, into the
most holy place; but our Lord Jesus has consecrated for us also a new
and living way into the holiest, so that we also have boldness to enter,
[Heb 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019), [Heb
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020). \[6.\] The high priest was to
come out again, but our Lord Jesus ever lives, making intercession, and
always appears in the presence of God for us, whither as the forerunner
he has for us entered, and where as agent he continues for us to reside.

2\. Here are likewise typified the two great gospel duties of faith and
repentance, by which we are qualified for the atonement, and come to be
entitled to the benefit of it. (1.) By faith we must put our hands upon
the head of the offering, relying on Christ as the Lord our
Righteousness, pleading his satisfaction as that which was alone able to
atone for our sins and procure us a pardon. "Thou shalt answer, Lord,
for me. This is all I have to say for myself, Christ has died, yea,
rather has risen again; to his grace and government I entirely submit
myself, and in him I receive the atonement," [Rom
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011). (2.) By repentance we must
afflict our souls; not only fasting for a time from the delights of the
body, but inwardly sorrowing for our sins, and living a life of
self-denial and mortification. We must also make a penitent confession
of sin, and this with an eye to Christ, whom we have pierced, and
mourning because of him; and with a hand of faith upon the atonement,
assuring ourselves that, if we confess our sins, God is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Lastly, In the year of jubilee, the trumpet which proclaimed the liberty
was ordered to be sounded in the close of the day of atonement, [Lev
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#009). For the remission of our debt,
release from our bondage, and our return to our inheritance, are all
owing to the mediation and intercession of Jesus Christ. By the
atonement we obtain rest for our souls, and all the glorious liberties
of the children of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 17](lev017)

</div>
