<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev007)  [Next](lev009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 8:0</span></span>

This chapter gives us an account of the solemn consecration of Aaron and
his sons to the priest's office. I. It was done publicly, and the
congregation was called together to be witnesses of it ([Lev
8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#001)). II. It was done exactly
according to God's appointment ([Lev
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#005)). 1. They were washed and dressed
([Lev 8:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#006), [Lev
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#013)). 2. The tabernacle and the
utensils of it were anointed, and then the priests ([Lev
8:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#010)). 3. A sin-offering was
offered for them ([Lev 8:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#014)). 4. A
burnt-offering ([Lev 8:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#018)). 5. The
ram of consecration ([Lev 8:22-30](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#022)). 6.
The continuance of this solemnity for seven days ([Lev
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#031), etc.).

[Leviticus 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 8:1</span></span>

God had given Moses orders to consecrate Aaron and his sons to the
priests' office, when he was with him the first time upon mount Sinai,
Ex. 28 and [Exo 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001), where we have
also the particular instructions he had how to do it. Now here we have,

I. The orders repeated. What was there commanded to be done is here
commanded to be done now, [Lev 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#002),
[Lev 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#003). The tabernacle was newly set
up, which, without the priests, would be as a candlestick without a
candle; the law concerning sacrifices was newly given, but could not be
observed without priests; for, though Aaron and his sons had been
nominated to the office, they could not officiate, till they were
consecrated, which yet must not be done till the place of their
ministration was prepared, and the ordinances were instituted, that they
might apply themselves to work as soon as ever they were consecrated,
and might know that they were ordained, not only to the honour and
profit, but to the business of the priesthood. Aaron and his sons were
near relations to Moses, and therefore he would not consecrate them till
he had further orders, lest he should seem too forward to bring honour
into his family.

II\. The congregation called together, at the door, that is, in the
court of the tabernacle, [Lev 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#004). The
elders and principal men of the congregation, who represented the body
of the people, were summoned to attend; for the court would hold but a
few of the many thousands of Israel. It was done thus publicly, 1.
Because it was a solemn transaction between God and Israel; the priests
were to be ordained for men in things pertaining to God, for the
maintaining of a settled correspondence, and the negotiating of all
affairs between the people and God; and therefore it was fit that both
sides should appear, to own the appointment, at the door of the
tabernacle of meeting. 2. The spectators of the solemnity could not but
be possessed, by the sight of it, with a great veneration for the
priests and their office, which was necessary among a people so
wretchedly prone as these were to envy and discontent. It was strange
that any of those who were witnesses of what was here done should
afterwards say, as some of them did, You take too much upon you, you
sons of Levi; but what would they have said if it had been done
clandestinely? Note, It is very fit, and of good use, that ministers
should be ordained publicly, plebe praesente - in the presence of the
common people, according to the usage of the primitive church.

III\. The commission read, [Lev 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#005).
Moses, who was God's representative in this solemnity, produced his
orders before the congregation: This is the thing which the Lord
commanded to be done. Though God had crowned him king in Jeshurun, when
he made his face to shine in the sight of all Israel, yet he did not
institute or appoint any thing in God's worship but what God himself had
commanded. The priesthood he delivered to them was that which he had
received from the Lord. Note, All that minister about holy things must
have an eye to God's command as their rule and warrant; for it is only
in the observance of this that they can expect to be owned and accepted
of God. Thus we must be able to say, in all acts of religious worship,
This is the thing which the Lord commanded to be done.

IV\. The ceremony performed according to the divine ritual. 1. Aaron and
his sons were washed with water ([Lev
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#006)), to signify that they ought now
to purify themselves from all sinful dispositions and inclinations, and
ever after to keep themselves pure. Christ washes those from their sins
in his own blood whom he makes to our God kings and priests ([Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005), [Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006)); and those that draw near to God
must be washed in pure water, [Heb
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022). Though they were ever so clean
before and no filth was to be seen upon them, yet they must be washed,
to signify their purification from sin, with which their souls were
polluted, how clean soever their bodies were. 2. They were clothed with
the holy garments, Aaron with his ([Lev
8:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#007)), which typified the dignity of
Christ our great high priest, and his sons with theirs ([Lev
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#013)), which typified the decency of
Christians, who are spiritual priests. Christ wears the breast-plate of
judgment and the holy crown; for the church's high priest is her prophet
and king. All believers are clothed with the robe of righteousness, and
girt with the girdle of truth, resolution, and close application; and
their heads are bound, as the word here is, with the bonnet or diadem of
beauty, the beauty of holiness. 3. The high priest was anointed, and, it
should seem, the holy things were anointed at the same time; some think
that they were anointed before, but that the anointing of them is
mentioned here because Aaron was anointed with the same oil with which
they were anointed; but the manner of relating it here makes it more
than probable that it was done at the same time, and that the seven days
employed in consecrating the altar were coincident with the seven days
of the priests' consecration. The tabernacle, and all its utensils, had
some of the anointing oil put upon them with Moses's finger ([Lev
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#010)), so had the altar ([Lev
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#011)); these were to sanctify the gold
and the gift ([Mat 23:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#017)), and
therefore must themselves be thus sanctified; but he poured it out more
plentifully upon the head of Aaron ([Lev
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#012)), so that it ran down to the
skirts of his garments, because his unction was to typify the anointing
of Christ with the Spirit, which was not given by measure to him. Yet
all believers also have received the anointing, which puts an indelible
character upon them, [Jo1 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027).

[Leviticus 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 8:14</span></span>

The covenant of priesthood must be made by sacrifice, as well as other
covenants, [Psa 50:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#005). And thus Christ
was consecrated by the sacrifice of himself, once for all. Sacrifices of
each kind must be offered for the priests, that they might with the more
tenderness and concern offer the gifts and sacrifices of the people,
with compassion on the ignorant, and on those that were out of the way,
not insulting over those for whom sacrifices were offered, remembering
that they themselves had had sacrifices offered for them, being
compassed with infirmity. 1. A bullock, the largest sacrifice, was
offered for a sin-offering ([Lev
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#014)), that hereby atonement might be
made, and they might not bring any of the guilt of the sins of their
former state into the new character they were now to put on. When Isaiah
was sent to be a prophet, he was told to his comfort, Thy iniquity is
taken away, [Isa 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007). Ministers, that
are to declare the remission of sins to others, should give diligence to
get it made sure to themselves in the first place that their own sins
are pardoned. Those to whom is committed the ministry of reconciliation
must first be reconciled to God themselves, that they may deal for the
souls of others as for their own. 2. A ram was offered for a
burnt-offering, [Lev 8:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#018). By this
they gave to God the glory of this great honour which was now put upon
them, and returned him praise for it, as Paul thanked Christ Jesus for
putting him into the ministry, [Ti1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#012). They also signified the devoting
of themselves and all their services to the honour of God. 3. Another
ram, called the ram of consecration, was offered for a peace-offering,
[Lev 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#022), etc. The blood of it was
part put on the priests, on their ears, thumbs, and toes, and part
sprinkled upon the altar; and thus he did (as it were) marry them to the
altar, upon which they must all their days give attendance. All the
ceremonies about this offering, as those before, were appointed by the
express command of God; and, if we compare this chapter with Ex. 29, we
shall find that the performance of the solemnity exactly agrees with the
precept there, and in nothing varies. Here, therefore, as in the account
we had of the tabernacle and its vessels, it is again and again
repeated, As the Lord commanded Moses. And thus Christ, when he
sanctified himself with his own blood, had an eye to his Father's will
in it. As the Father gave me commandment so I do, [Joh
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#031); [Joh
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018); [Joh
6:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038).

[Leviticus 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">lev 8:31</span></span>

Moses, having done his part of the ceremony, now leaves Aaron and his
sons to do theirs.

I. They must boil the flesh of their peace-offering, and eat it in the
court of the tabernacle, and what remained they must burn with fire,
[Lev 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#031), [Lev
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#032). This signified their thankful
consent to the consecration: when God gave Ezekiel his commission, he
told him to eat the roll, [Eze 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#001),
[Eze 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#002).

II\. They must not stir out of the court of the tabernacle for seven
days, [Lev 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#033). The priesthood being
a good warfare, they must thus learn to endure hardness, and to
disentangle themselves from the affairs of this life, [Ti2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#003), [Ti2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#004). Being consecrated to their
service, they must give themselves wholly to it, and attend continually
to this very thing. Thus Christ's apostles were appointed to wait for
the promise of the Father, [Act 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004).
During this time appointed for their consecration, they were daily to
repeat the same sacrifices which were offered the first day, [Lev
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#034). This shows the imperfection of
the legal sacrifices, which, because they could not take away sin, were
often repeated ([Heb 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001), [Heb
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#002)), but were here repeated seven
times (a number of perfection), because they typified that one offering,
which perfected for ever those that were sanctified. The work lasted
seven days; for it was a kind of creation: and this time was appointed
in honour of the sabbath, which, probably, was the last day of the
seven, for which they were to prepare during the six days. Thus the time
of our life, like the six days, must be our preparation for the
perfection of our consecration to God in the everlasting sabbath: they
attended day and night ([Lev 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#035)),
and so constant should we be in our meditation on God's law, [Psa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002). They attended to keep the charge
of the Lord: we have every one of us a charge to keep, an eternal God to
glorify, an immortal soul to provide for, needful duty to be done, our
generation to serve; and it must be our daily care to keep this charge,
for it is the charge of the Lord our Master, who will shortly call us to
an account about it, and it is at our utmost peril if we neglect it.
Keep it that you die not; it is death, eternal death, to betray the
trust we are charged with; by the consideration of this we must be kept
in awe. Lastly, We are told ([Lev
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#036)) that Aaron and his sons did all
that was commanded. Thus their consecration was completed; and thus they
set an example before the people of an exact obedience to the laws of
sacrifices now newly given, and then they could with the better grace
teach them. Thus the covenant of peace ([Num
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#012)), of life and peace ([Mal
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005)), was made with Aaron and his
sons; but after all the ceremonies that were used in their consecration
there was one point of ratification which was reserved to be the honour
and establishment of Christ's priesthood, which was this, that they were
made priests without an oath, but Christ with an oath ([Heb
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#021)), for neither such priests nor
their priesthood could continue, but Christ's is a perpetual and
unchangeable priesthood.

Gospel ministers are compared to those who served at the altar, for they
minister about holy things ([Co1
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#013)), they are God's mouth to the
people and the people's to God, the pastors and teachers Christ has
appointed to continue in the church to the end of the world: they seem
to be meant in that promise which points at gospel times ([Isa
66:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021)), I will take of them for
priests and for Levites. No man may take this honour to himself, but he
who upon trial is found to be clothed and anointed by the Spirit of God
with gifts and graces to qualify him for it, and who with purpose of
heart devotes himself entirely to the service, and is then by the word
and prayer (for so every thing is sanctified), and the imposition of the
hands of those that give themselves to the word and prayer, set apart to
the office, and recommended to Christ as a servant and to the church as
a steward and guide. And those that are thus solemnly dedicated to God
ought not to depart from his service, but faithfully to abide in it all
their days; and those that do so, and continue labouring in the word and
doctrine, are to be accounted worthy of double honour, double to that of
the Old Testament priests.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 9](lev009)

</div>
