<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev000)  [Next](lev002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

This book begins with the laws concerning sacrifices, of which the most
ancient were the burnt-offerings, about which God gives Moses
instructions in this chapter. Orders are here given how that sort of
sacrifice must be managed. I. If it was a bullock out of the herd ([Lev
1:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003)). II. If it was a sheep or goat,
a lamb or kid, out of the flock ([Lev
1:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010)). III. If it was a turtle-dove
or a young pigeon ([Lev 1:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#014)). And
whether the offering was more or less valuable in itself, if it was
offered with an upright heart, according to these laws, it was accepted
of God.

[Leviticus 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 1:1</span></span>

Observe here, 1. It is taken for granted that people would be inclined
to bring offerings to the Lord. The very light of nature directs man,
some way or other, to do honour to his Maker, and pay him homage as his
Lord. Revealed religion supposes natural religion to be an ancient and
early institution, since the fall had directed men to glorify God by
sacrifice, which was an implicit acknowledgment of their having received
all from God as creatures, and their having forfeited all to him as
sinners. A conscience thoroughly convinced of dependence and guilt would
be willing to come before God with thousands of rams, [Mic
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006), [Mic
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#007). 2. Provision is made that men
should not indulge their own fancies, nor become vain in their
imaginations and inventions about their sacrifices, lest, while they
pretended to honour God, they should really dishonour him, and do that
which was unworthy of him. Every thing therefore is directed to be done
with due decorum, by a certain rule, and so as that the sacrifices might
be most significant both of the great sacrifice of atonement which
Christ was to offer in the fulness of time and of the spiritual
sacrifices of acknowledgment which believers should offer daily. 3. God
gave those laws to Israel by Moses; nothing is more frequently repeated
than this, The Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of
Israel. God could have spoken it to the children of Israel himself, as
he did the ten commandments; but he chose to deliver it to them by
Moses, because they had desired he would no more speak to them himself,
and he had designed that Moses should, above all the prophets, be a type
of Christ, by whom God would in these last days speak to us, [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002). By other prophets God sent
messages to his people, but by Moses he gave them laws; and therefore he
was fit to typify him to whom the Father has given all judgment. And,
besides, the treasure of divine revelation was always to be put into
earthen vessels, that our faith might be tried, and that the excellency
of the power might be of God. 4. God spoke to him out of the tabernacle.
As soon as ever the shechinah had taken possession of its new
habitation, in token of the acceptance of what was done, God talked with
Moses from the mercy-seat, while he attended without the veil, or rather
at the door, hearing a voice only; and it is probable that he wrote what
he heard at that time, to prevent any mistake, or a slip of memory, in
the rehearsal of it. The tabernacle was set up to be a place of
communion between God and Israel; there, where they performed their
services to God, God revealed his will to them. Thus, by the word and by
prayer, we now have fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ, [Act 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#004). When we speak to God
we must desire to hear from him, and reckon it a great favour that he is
pleased to speak to us. The Lord called to Moses, not to come near
(under that dispensation, even Moses must keep his distance), but to
attend and hearken to what should be said. A letter less than ordinary
in the Hebrew word for called, the Jewish critics tell us, intimates
that God spoke in a still small voice. The moral law was given with
terror from a burning mountain in thunder and lightning; but the
remedial law of sacrifice was given more gently from a mercy-seat,
because that was typical of the grace of the gospel, which is the
ministration of life and peace.

[Leviticus 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 1:3</span></span>

If a man were rich and could afford it, it is supposed that he would
bring his burnt-sacrifice, with which he designed to honour God, out of
his herd of larger cattle. He that considers that God is the best that
is will resolve to give him the best he has, else he gives him not the
glory due unto his name. Now if a man determined to kill a bullock, not
for an entertainment for his family and friends, but for a sacrifice to
his God, these rules must be religiously observed: - 1. The beast to be
offered must be a male, and without blemish, and the best he had in his
pasture. Being designed purely for the honour of him that is infinitely
perfect, it ought to be the most perfect in its kind. This signified the
complete strength and purity that were in Christ the dying sacrifice,
and the sincerity of heart and unblamableness of life that should be in
Christians, who are presented to God as living sacrifices. But,
literally, in Christ Jesus there is neither male nor female; nor is any
natural blemish in the body a bar to our acceptance with God, but only
the moral defects and deformities introduced by sin into the soul. 2.
The owner must offer it voluntarily. What is done in religion, so as to
please God, must be done by no other constraint than that of love. God
accepts the willing people and the cheerful giver. Ainsworth and others
read it, not as the principle, but as the end of offering: "Let him
offer it for his favourable acceptation before the Lord. Let him propose
this to himself as his end in bringing his sacrifice, and let his eye be
fixed steadily upon that end - that he may be accepted of the Lord."
Those only shall find acceptance who sincerely desire and design it in
all their religious services, [Co2
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#009). 3. It must be offered at the door
of the tabernacle, where the brazen altar of burnt-offerings stood,
which sanctified the gift, and not elsewhere. He must offer it at the
door, as one unworthy to enter, and acknowledging that there is no
admission for a sinner into covenant and communion with God, but by
sacrifice; but he must offer it at the tabernacle of the congregation,
in token of his communion with the whole church of Israel even in this
personal service. 4. The offerer must put his hand upon the head of his
offering, [Lev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004). "He must put both
his hands," say the Jewish doctors, "with all his might, between the
horns of the beast," signifying thereby, (1.) The transfer of all his
right to, and interest in, the beast, to God, actually, and by a manual
delivery, resigning it to his service. (2.) An acknowledgment that he
deserved to die, and would have been willing to die if God had required
it, for the serving of his honour, and the obtaining of his favour. (3.)
A dependence upon the sacrifice, as an instituted type of the great
sacrifice on which the iniquity of us all was to be laid. The mystical
signification of the sacrifices, and especially this rite, some think
the apostle means by the doctrine of laying on of hands ([Heb
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#002)), which typified evangelical
faith. The offerer's putting his hand on the head of the offering was to
signify his desire and hope that it might be accepted from him to make
atonement for him. Though the burnt-offerings had not respect to any
particular sin, as the sin-offering had, yet they were to make atonement
for sin in general; and he that laid his hand on the head of a
burnt-offering was to confess that he had left undone what he ought to
have done and had done that which he ought not to have done, and to pray
that, though he deserved to die himself, the death of his sacrifice
might be accepted for the expiating of his guilt. 5. The sacrifice was
to be killed by the priests of Levites, before the Lord, that is, in a
devout religious manner, and with an eye to God and his honour. This
signified that our Lord Jesus was to make his soul, or life, an offering
for sin. Messiah the prince must be cut off as a sacrifice, but not for
himself, [Dan 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026). It signified also
that in Christians, who are living sacrifices, the brutal part must be
mortified or killed, the flesh crucified with its corrupt affections and
lusts and all the appetites of the mere animal life. 6. The priests were
to sprinkle the blood upon the altar ([Lev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005)); for, the blood being the life,
it was this that made atonement for the soul. This signified the direct
and actual regard which our Lord Jesus had to the satisfaction of his
Father's justice, and the securing of his injured honour, in the
shedding of his blood; he offered himself without spot to God. It also
signified the pacifying and purifying of our consciences by the
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ upon them by faith, [Pe1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002); [Heb
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022). 7. The beast was to be flayed
and decently cut up, and divided into its several joints or pieces,
according to the art of the butcher; and then all the pieces, with the
head and the fat (the legs and inwards being first washed), were to be
burnt together upon the altar, [Lev
1:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#006). "But to what purpose," would
some say, "was this waste? Why should all this good meat, which might
have been given to the poor, and have served their hungry families for
food a great while, be burnt together to ashes?" So was the will of God;
and it is not for us to object or to find fault with it. When it was
burnt for the honour of God, in obedience to his command, and to signify
spiritual blessings, it was really better bestowed, and better answered
the end of its creation, than when it was used as food for man. We must
never reckon that lost which is laid out for God. The burning of the
sacrifice signified the sharp sufferings of Christ, and the devout
affections with which, as a holy fire, Christians must offer up
themselves their whole spirit, soul, and body, unto God. 8. This is said
to be an offering of a sweet savour, or savour of rest, unto the Lord.
The burning of flesh is unsavoury in itself; but this, as an act of
obedience to a divine command, and a type of Christ, was well pleasing
to God: he was reconciled to the offerer, and did himself take a
complacency in that reconciliation. He rested, and was refreshed with
these institutions of his grace, as, at first, with his works of
creation ([Exo 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#017)), rejoicing
therein, [Psa 104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031). Christ's
offering of himself to God is said to be of a sweet-smelling savour
([Eph 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002)), and the spiritual
sacrifices of Christians are said to be acceptable to God, through
Christ, [Pe1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005).

[Leviticus 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 1:10</span></span>

Here we have the laws concerning the burnt-offerings, which were of the
flock or of the fowls. Those of the middle rank, that could not well
afford to offer a bullock, would bring a sheep or a goat; and those that
were not able to do that should be accepted of God if they brought a
turtle-dove or a pigeon. For God, in his law and in his gospel, as well
as in his providence, considers the poor. It is observable that those
creatures were chosen for sacrifice which were most mild and gentle,
harmless and inoffensive, to typify the innocence and meekness that were
in Christ, and to teach the innocence and meekness that should be in
Christians. Directions are here given, 1. Concerning the burnt-offerings
of the flock, [Lev 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010). The method of
managing these is much the same with that of the bullocks; only it is
ordered here that the sacrifice should be killed on the side of the
altar northward, which, though mentioned here only, was probably to be
observed concerning the former, and other sacrifices. Perhaps on that
side of the altar there was the largest vacant space, and room for the
priests to turn them in. It was of old observed that fair weather comes
out of the north, and that the north wind drives away rain; and by these
sacrifices the storms of God's wrath are scattered, and the light of
God's countenance is obtained, which is more pleasant than the brightest
fairest weather. 2. Concerning those of the fowls. They must be either
turtle-doves (and, if so, "they must be old turtles," say the Jews), or
pigeons, and, if so, they must be young pigeons. What was most
acceptable at men's tables must be brought to God's altar. In the
offering of these fowls, (1.) The head must be wrung off, "quite off,"
say some; others think only pinched, so as to kill the bird, and yet
leave the head hanging to the body. But it seems more likely that it was
to be quite separated, for it was to be burnt first. (2.) The blood was
to be wrung out at the side of the altar. (3.) The garbages with the
feathers were to be thrown by upon the dunghill. (4.) The body was to be
opened, sprinkled with salt, and then burnt upon the altar. "This
sacrifice of birds," the Jews say, "was one of the most difficult
services the priests had to do," to teach those that minister in holy
things to be as solicitous for the salvation of the poor as for that of
the rich, and that the services of the poor are as acceptable to God, if
they come from an upright heart, as the services of the rich, for he
accepts according to what a man hath, and not according to what he hath
not, [Co2 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#012). The poor man's
turtle-doves, or young pigeons, are here said to be an offering of a
sweet-smelling savour, as much as that of an ox or bullock that hath
horns or hoofs. Yet, after all, to love God with all our heart, and to
love our neighbour as ourselves, is better than all burnt-offerings and
sacrifices, [Mar 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#033).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 2](lev002)

</div>
