<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](mar016)  [Next](luk001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Gospel According to
St. Luke

We are now entering into the labours of another evangelist; his name
Luke, which some take to be a contraction of Lucilius; born at Antioch,
so St. Jerome. Some think that he was the only one of all the penmen of
the scripture that was not of the seed of Israel. He was a Jewish
proselyte, and, as some conjecture, converted to Christianity by the
ministry of St. Paul at Antioch; and after his coming into Macedonia
([Act 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#010)) he was his constant
companion. He had employed himself in the study and practice of physic;
hence, Paul calls him Luke the beloved Physician, [Col
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#014). Some of the pretended ancients
tell you that he was a painter, and drew a picture of the virgin Mary.
But Dr. Whitby thinks that there is nothing certain to the contrary, and
that therefore it is probable that he was one of the seventy disciples,
and a follower of Christ when he was here upon earth; and, if so, he was
a native Israelite. I see not what can be objected against this, except
some uncertain traditions of the ancients, which we can build nothing
upon, and against which may be opposed the testimonies of Origen and
Epiphanius, who both say that he was one of the seventy disciples. He is
supposed to have written this gospel when he was associated with St.
Paul in his travels, and by direction from him: and some think that this
is the brother whom Paul speaks of ([Co2
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#018)), whose praise is in the gospel
throughout all the churches of Christ; as if the meaning of it were,
that he was celebrated in all the churches for writing this gospel; and
that St. Paul means this when he speaks sometimes of his gospel, as [Rom
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016). But there is no ground at all
for this. Dr. Cave observes that his way and manner of writing are
accurate and exact, his style polite and elegant, sublime and lofty, yet
perspicuous; and that he expresses himself in a vein of purer Greek than
is to be found in the other writers of the holy story. Thus he relates
divers things more copiously than the other evangelists; and thus he
especially treats of those things which relate to the priestly office of
Christ. It is uncertain when, or about what time, this gospel was
written. Some think that it was written in Achaia, during his travels
with Paul, seventeen years (twenty-two years, say others) after Christ's
ascension; others, that it was written at Rome, a little before he wrote
his history of the Acts of the Apostles (which is a continuation of
this), when he was there with Paul, while he was a prisoner, and
preaching in his own hired house, with which the history of the Acts
concludes; and then Paul saith that only Luke was with him, [Ti2
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011). When he was under that voluntary
confinement with Paul, he had leisure to compile these two histories
(and many excellent writings the church has been indebted to a prison
for): if so, it was written about twenty-seven years after Christ's
ascension, and about the fourth year of Nero. Jerome says, He died when
he was eighty-four years of age, and was never married. Some write that
he suffered martyrdom; but, if he did, where and when is uncertain. Nor
indeed is there much more credit to be given to the Christian traditions
concerning the writers of the New Testament than to the Jewish
traditions concerning those of the Old Testament.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 1](luk001)

</div>
