<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk018)  [Next](luk020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 19:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. The conversion of Zaccheus the publican at
Jericho ([Luk 19:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001)). II. The
parable of the pounds which the king entrusted with his servants, and of
his rebellious citizens (v. 11-27). III. Christ's riding in triumph
(such triumph as it was) into Jerusalem; and his lamentation in prospect
of the ruin of that city (v. 28-44). IV. His teaching in the temple, and
casting the buyers and sellers out of it ([Luk
19:45-48](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#045)).

[Luke 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 19:1</span></span>

Many, no doubt, were converted to the faith of Christ of whom no account
is kept in the gospels; but the conversion of some, whose case had
something in it extraordinary, is recorded, as this of Zaccheus. Christ
passed through Jericho, [Luk 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001).
This city was build under a curse, yet Christ honoured it with his
presence, for the gospel takes away the curse. Though it ought not to
have been built, yet it was not therefore a sin to live in it when it
was built. Christ was now going from the other side Jordan to Bethany
near Jerusalem, to raise Lazarus to life; when he was going to do one
good work he contrived to do many by the way. He did good both to the
souls and to the bodies of people; we have here an instance of the
former. Observe,

I. Who, and what, this Zaccheus was. His name bespeaks him a Jew. Zaccai
was a common name among the Jews; they had a famous rabbi, much about
this time, of that name. Observe, 1. His calling, and the post he was
in: He was the chief among the publicans, receiver-general; other
publicans were officers under him; he was, as some think, farmer of the
customs. We often read of publicans coming to Christ; but here was one
that was chief of the publicans, was in authority, that enquired after
him. God has his remnant among all sorts. Christ came to save even the
chief of publicans. 2. His circumstances in the world were very
considerable: He was rich. The inferior publicans were commonly men of
broken fortunes, and low in the world; but he that was chief of the
publicans had raised a good estate. Christ had lately shown how hard it
is for rich people to enter into the kingdom of God, yet presently
produces an instance on one rich man that had been lost, and was found,
and that not as the prodigal by being reduced to want.

II\. How he came in Christ's way, and what was the occasion of his
acquaintance with him. 1. He had a great curiosity to see Jesus, what
kind of a man he was, having heard great talk of him, [Luk
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#003). It is natural to us to come in
sight, if we can, of those whose fame has filled our ears, as being apt
to imagine there is something extraordinary in their countenances; at
least, we shall be able to say hereafter that we have seen such and such
great men. But the eye is not satisfied with seeing. We should now seek
to see Jesus with an eye of faith, to see who he is; we should address
ourselves in holy ordinances with this in our eye, We would see Jesus.
2. He could not get his curiosity gratified in this matter because he
was little, and the crowd was great. Christ did not study to show
himself, was not carried on men's shoulders (as the pope is in
procession), that all men might see him; neither he nor his kingdom came
with observation. He did not ride in an open chariot, as princes do,
but, as one of us, he was lost in a crowd; for that was the day of his
humiliation. Zaccheus was low of stature, and over-topped by all about
him, so that he could not get a sight of Jesus. Many that are little of
stature have large souls, and are lively in spirit. Who would not rather
be a Zaccheus than a Saul, though he was higher by head and shoulders
than all about him? Let not those that are little of stature take
thought of adding cubits to it. 3. Because he would not disappoint his
curiosity he forgot his gravity, as chief of the publicans, and ran
before, like a boy, and climbed up into a sycamore-tree, to see him.
Note, Those that sincerely desire a sight of Christ will use the proper
means for gaining a sight of him, and will break through a deal of
difficulty and opposition, and be willing to take pains to see him.
Those that find themselves little must take all the advantages they can
get to raise themselves to a sight of Christ, and not be ashamed to own
that they need them, and all little enough. Let not dwarfs despair, with
good help, by aiming high to reach high.

III\. The notice Christ took of him, the call he gave him to a further
acquaintance ([Luk 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#005)), and the
efficacy of that call, [Luk 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#006). 1.
Christ invited himself to Zaccheus's house, not doubting of his hearty
welcome there; nay, wherever Christ comes, as he brings his own
entertainment along with him, so he brings his own welcome; he opens the
heart, and inclines it to receive him. Christ looked up into the tree,
and saw Zaccheus. He came to look upon Christ, and resolved to take
particular notice of him, but little thought of being taken notice of by
Christ. That was an honour too great, and too far above his merit, for
him to have any thought of. See how Christ prevented him with the
blessings of his goodness, and outdid his expectations; and see how he
encouraged very weak beginnings, and helped them forward. He that had a
mind to know Christ shall be known of him; he that only courted to see
him shall be admitted to converse with him. Note, Those that are
faithful in a little shall be entrusted with more. And sometimes those
that come to hear the word of Christ, as Zaccheus did, only for
curiosity, beyond what they thought of, have their consciences awakened,
and their hearts changed. Christ called him by name, Zaccheus, for he
knows his chosen by name; are they not in his book? He might ask, as
Nathanael did ([Joh 1:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#048)), Whence
knowest thou me? But before he climbed the sycamore-tree Christ saw him,
and knew him. He bade him make haste, and come down. Those that Christ
calls must come down, must humble themselves, and not think to climb to
heaven by any righteousness of their own; and they must make haste and
come down, for delays are dangerous. Zaccheus must not hesitate, but
hasten; he knows it is not a matter that needs consideration whether he
should welcome such a guest to his house. He must come down, for Christ
intends this day to bait at his house, and stay an hour or two with him.
Behold, he stands at the door and knocks. 2. Zaccheus was overjoyed to
have such an honour put upon his house ([Luk
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#006)): He made haste, and came down,
and received him joyfully; and his receiving him into his house was an
indication and token of his receiving him into his heart. Note, When
Christ calls to us we must make haste to answer his calls; and when he
comes to us we must receive him joyfully. Lift up your heads, O ye
gates. We may well receive him joyfully who brings all good along with
him, and, when he takes possession of the soul, opens springs of joy
there which shall flow to eternity. How often has Christ said to us,
Open to me, when we have, with the spouse, made excuses! [Sol
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002), [Sol
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#003). Zaccheus's forwardness to receive
Christ will shame us. We have not now Christ to entertain in our houses,
but we have his disciples, and what is done to them he takes as done to
himself.

IV\. The offence which the people took at this kind greeting between
Christ and Zaccheus. Those narrow-souled censorious Jews murmured,
saying that he was gone to be a guest with a man that is a sinner, para
hamartōlō andri - with a sinful man; and were not they themselves sinful
men? Was it not Christ's errand into the world to seek and save men that
are sinners? But Zaccheus they think to be a sinner above all men that
dwelt in Jericho, such a sinner as was not fit to be conversed with. Now
this was very unjust to blame Christ for going to his house; for, 1.
Though he was a publican, and many of the publicans were bad men, it did
not therefore follow that they were all so. We must take heed of
condemning men in the lump, or by common fame, for at God's bar every
man will be judged as he is. 2. Though he had been a sinner, it did not
therefore follow that he was now as bad as he had been; though they knew
his past life to be bad, Christ might know his present frame to be good.
God allows room for repentance, and so must we. 3. Though he was now a
sinner, they ought not to blame Christ for going to him, because he was
in no danger of getting hurt by a sinner, but in great hopes of doing
good to a sinner; whither should the physician go but to the sick? Yet
see how that which is well done may be ill construed.

V. The proofs which Zaccheus gave publicly that, though he had been a
sinner, he was now a penitent, and a true convert, [Luk
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008). He does not expect to be
justified by his works as the Pharisee who boasted of what he had done,
but by his good works he will, through the grace of God, evidence the
sincerity of his faith and repentance; and here he declares what his
determination was. He made this declaration standing, that he might be
seen and heard by those who murmured at Christ for coming to his house;
with the mouth confession is made of repentance as well as faith. He
stood, which denotes his saying it deliberately and with solemnity, in
the nature of a vow to God. He addressed himself to Christ in it, not to
the people (they were not to be his judges), but to the Lord, and he
stood as it were at his bar. What we do that is good we must do as unto
him; we must appeal to him, and approve ourselves to him, in our
integrity, in all our good purposes and resolutions. He makes it appear
that there is a change in his heart (and that is repentance), for there
is a change in his way. His resolutions are of second-table duties; for
Christ, upon all occasions, laid great stress on them: and they are such
as are suited to his condition and character; for in them will best
appear the truth of our repentance.

1\. Zaccheus had a good estate, and, whereas he had been in it hitherto
laying up treasure for himself, and doing hurt to himself, now he
resolves that for the future he will be all towards God, and do good to
others with it: Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor.
Not, "I will give it by my will when I die," but, "I do give it now."
Probably he had heard of the command of trial which Christ gave to
another rich man to sell what he had, and give to the poor ([Mat
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)), and how he broke with Christ
upon it. "But so will not I," saith Zaccheus; "I agree to it at the
first word; though hitherto I have been uncharitable to the poor, now I
will relieve them, and give so much the more for having neglected the
duty so long, even the half of my goods." This is a very large
proportion to be set apart for works of piety and charity. The Jews used
to say that a fifth part of a man's income yearly was very fair to be
given to pious uses, and about that share the law directed; but Zaccheus
would go much further, and give one moiety to the poor, which would
oblige him to retrench all his extravagant expenses, as his retrenching
these would enable him to relieve many with his superfluities. If we
were but more temperate and self-denying, we should be more charitable;
and, were we content with less ourselves, we should have the more to
give to them that need. This he mentions here as a fruit of his
repentance. Note, It well becomes converts to God to be charitable to
the poor.

2\. Zaccheus was conscious to himself that he had not gotten all he had
honestly and fairly, but some by indirect and unlawful means, and of
what he had gotten by such means he promises to make restitution: "If I
have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, or if I have
wronged any man in the way of my business as a publican, exacting more
than was appointed, I promise to restore him four-fold." This was the
restitution that a thief was to make, [Exo
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001). (1.) He seems plainly to own
that he had done wrong; his office, as a publican, gave him opportunity
to do wrong, imposing upon the merchants to curry favour with the
government. True penitents will own themselves not only in general
guilty before God, but will particularly reflect upon that which has
been their own iniquity, and which, by reason of their business and
employment in the world, has most easily beset them. (2.) That he had
done wrong by false accusation; this was the temptation of the
publicans, which John Baptist had warned them of particularly, [Luk
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#014). They had the ear of the
government, and every thing would be stretched in favour of the revenue,
which gave them an opportunity of gratifying their revenge if they bore
a man an ill will. (3.) He promises to restore four-fold, as far as he
could recollect or find by his books that he had wronged any man. He
does not say, "If I be sued, and compelled to it, I will make
restitution" (some are honest when they cannot help it); but he will do
it voluntarily: It shall be my own act and deed. Note, Those who are
convinced of having done wrong cannot evidence the sincerity of their
repentance but by making restitution. Observe, He does not think that
his giving half his estate to the poor will atone for the wrong he has
done. God hates robbery for burnt-offerings, and we must first do justly
and then love mercy. It is no charity, but hypocrisy, to give that which
is none of our own; and we are not to reckon that our own which we have
not come honestly by, nor that our own which is not so when all our
debts are paid, and restitution made for wrong done.

VI\. Christ's approbation and acceptance of Zaccheus's conversion, by
which also he cleared himself from any imputation in going to be a guest
with him, [Luk 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#009), [Luk
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010).

1\. Zaccheus is declared to be now a happy man. Now he is turned from
sin to God; now he has bidden Christ welcome to his house, and is become
an honest, charitable, good man: This day is salvation come to this
house. Now that he is converted he is in effect saved, saved from his
sins, from the guilt of them, from the power of them; all the benefits
of salvation are his. Christ is come to his house, and, where Christ
comes, he brings salvation along with him. He is, and will be, the
Author of eternal salvation to all that own him as Zaccheus did. Yet
this is not all. Salvation this day comes to his house. (1.) When
Zaccheus becomes a convert, he will be, more than he had been, a
blessing to his house. He will bring the means of grace and salvation to
his house, for he is a son of Abraham indeed now, and therefore, like
Abraham, will teach his household to keep the way of the Lord. He that
is greedy of gain troubles his own house, and brings a curse upon it
([Hab 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#009)), but he that is charitable
to the poor does a kindness to his own house, and brings a blessing upon
it and salvation to it, temporal at least, [Psa
112:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#003). (2.) When Zaccheus is brought
to Christ himself his family also become related to Christ, and his
children are admitted members of his church, and so salvation comes to
his house, for that he is a son of Abraham, and therefore interested in
God's covenant with Abraham, that blessing of Abraham which comes upon
the publicans, upon the Gentiles, through faith, that God will be a God
to them and to their children; and therefore, when he believes,
salvation comes to his house, as the gaoler's to whom it was said,
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy
house, [Act 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#031). Zaccheus is by
birth a son of Abraham, but, being a publican, he was deemed a heathen;
they are put upon a level, [Mat 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#017).
And as such the Jews were shy of conversing with him, and expected
Christ should be so; but he shows that, being a true penitent, he is
become rectus in curia - upright in court, as good a son of Abraham as
if he had never been an publican, which therefore ought not to be
mentioned against him.

2\. What Christ had done to make him, in particular, a happy man, was
consonant to the great design and intention of his coming into the
world, [Luk 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010). With the same
argument he had before justified his conversing with publicans, [Mat
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013). There he pleaded that he came to
call sinners to repentance; now that he came to seek and save that which
was lost, to apolōlos - the lost thing. Observe, (1.) The deplorable
case of the sons of men: they were lost; and here the whole race of
mankind is spoken of as one body. Note, The whole world of mankind, by
the fall, is become a lost world: lost as a city is lost when it has
revolted to the rebels, as a traveller is lost when he has missed his
way in a wilderness, as a sick man is lost when his disease is
incurable, or as a prisoner is lost when sentence is passed upon him.
(2.) The gracious design of the Son of God: he came to seek and save, to
seek in order to saving. He came from heaven to earth (a long journey),
to seek that which was lost (which had wandered and gone astray), and to
bring it back ([Mat 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#011), [Mat
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#012)), and to save that which was
lost, which was perishing, and in a manner destroyed and cut off. Christ
undertook the cause when it was given up for lost: undertook to bring
those to themselves that were lost to God and all goodness. Observe,
Christ came into this lost world to seek and save it. His design was to
save, when there was not salvation in any other. In prosecution of that
design, he sought, took all probable means to effect that salvation. He
seeks those that were not worth seeking to; he seeks those that sought
him not, and asked not for him, as Zaccheus here.

[Luke 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 19:11</span></span>

Our Lord Jesus is now upon his way to Jerusalem, to his last passover,
when he was to suffer and die; now here we are told,

I. How the expectations of his friends were raised upon this occasion:
They thought that the kingdom of God would immediately appear, [Luk
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#011). The Pharisees expected it about
this time ([Luk 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#020)), and, it seems,
so did Christ's own disciples; but they both had a mistaken notion of
it. The Pharisees thought that it must be introduced by some other
temporal prince or potentate. The disciples thought that their Master
would introduce it, but with temporal pomp and power, which, with the
power he had to work miracles, they knew he could clothe himself with in
a short time, whenever he pleased. Jerusalem, they concluded, must be
the seat of his kingdom, and therefore, now that he is going directly
thither, they doubt not but in a little time to see him upon the throne
there. Note, Even good men are subject to mistakes concerning the
kingdom of Christ, and to form wrong notions of it, and are ready to
think that will immediately appear which is reserved for hereafter.

II\. How their expectations were checked, and the mistakes rectified
upon which they were founded; and this he does in three things: -

1\. They expected that he should appear in his glory now presently, but
he tells them that he must not be publicly installed in his kingdom for
a great while yet. He is like a certain nobleman anthrōpos tis eugenēs -
a certain man of high birth (so Dr. Hammond), for he is the Lord from
heaven, and is entitled by birth to the kingdom; but he goes into a far
country, to receive for himself a kingdom. Christ must go to heaven, to
sit down at the right hand of the Father there, and to receive from him
honour and glory, before the Spirit was poured out by which his kingdom
was to be set up on earth, and before a church was to be set up for him
in the Gentile world. He must receive the kingdom, and then return.
Christ returned when the Spirit was poured out, when Jerusalem was
destroyed, by which time that generation, both of friends and enemies,
which he had personally conversed with, was wholly worn off by death,
and gone to give up their account. But his chief return here meant is
that at the great day, of which we are yet in expectation. That which
they thought would immediately appear, Christ tells them will not appear
till this same Jesus who is taken into heaven shall in like manner come
again; see [Act 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011).

2\. They expected that his apostles and immediate attendants should be
advanced to dignity and honour, that they should all be made princes and
peers, privy-counsellors and judges, and have all the pomp and
preferments of the court and of the town. But Christ here tells them
that, instead of this, he designed them to be men of business; they must
expect no other preferment in this world than that of the trading end of
the town; he would set them up with a stock under their hands, that they
might employ it themselves, in serving him and the interest of his
kingdom among men. That is the true honour of a Christian and a minister
which, if we be as we ought to be truly ambitious of it, will enable us
to look upon all temporal honours with a holy contempt. The apostles had
dreamed of sitting on his right hand and on his left in his kingdom,
enjoying ease after their present toil and honour after the present
contempt put upon them, and were pleasing themselves with this dream;
but Christ tells them that which, if they understood it aright, would
fill them with care, and concern, and serious thoughts, instead of those
aspiring ones with which they filled their heads.

(1.) They have a great work to do now. Their Master leaves them, to
receive his kingdom, and, at parting, he gives each of them a pound,
which the margin of our common bibles tells us amounts in our money to
three pounds and half a crown; this signifies the same thing with the
talents in the parable that is parallel to this (Mt. 25), all the gifts
with which Christ's apostles were endued, and the advantages and
capacities which they had of serving the interests of Christ in the
world, and others, both ministers and Christians, like them in a lower
degree. But perhaps it is in the parable thus represented to make them
the more humble; their honour in this world is only that of traders, and
that not of first-rate merchants, who have vast stocks to begin upon,
but that of poor traders, who must take a great deal of care and pains
to make any thing of what they have. He gave these pounds to his
servants, not to buy rich liveries, much less robes, and a splendid
equipage, for themselves to appear in, as they expected, but with this
charge: Occupy till I come. Or, as it might much better be translated,
Trade till I come, Pragmateusasthe - Be busy. So the word properly
signifies. "You are sent forth to preach the gospel, to set up a church
for Christ in the world, to bring the nations to the obedience of faith,
and to build them up in it. You shall receive power to do this, for you
shall be filled with the Holy Ghost," [Act
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008). When Christ breathed on the
eleven disciples, saying, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, then he delivered
them ten pounds. "Now," saith he, "mind your business, and make a
business of it; set about it in good earnest, and stick to it. Lay out
yourselves to do all the good you can to the souls of men, and to gather
them in to Christ." Note, \[1.\] All Christians have business to do for
Christ in this world, and ministers especially; the former were not
baptized, nor the latter ordained, to be idle. \[2.\] Those that are
called to business for Christ he furnishes with gifts necessary for
their business; and, on the other hand, from those to whom he gives
power he expects service. He delivers the pounds with this charge, Go
work, go trade. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to
profit withal, [Co1 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#007). And as every
one has received the gift, so let him minister the same, [Pe1
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#010). \[3.\] We must continue to mind
our business till our Master comes, whatever difficulties or oppositions
we may meet with in it; those only that endure to the end shall be
saved.

(2.) They have a great account to make shortly. These servants are
called to him, to show what use they made of the gifts they were
dignified with, what service they had done for Christ, and what good to
the souls of men, that he might know what every man had gained by
trading. Note,

\[1.\] They that trade diligently and faithfully in the service of
Christ shall be gainers. We cannot say so of the business of the world;
many a labouring tradesman has been a loser; but those that trade for
Christ shall be gainers; though Israel be not gathered, yet they will be
glorious.

\[2.\] The conversion of souls is the winning of them; every true
convert is clear gain to Jesus Christ. Ministers are but factors for
him, and to him they must give account what fish they have enclosed in
the gospel-net, what guests they have prevailed with to come to the
wedding-supper; that is, what they have gained by trading. Now observe,

First, The good account which was given by some of the servants, and the
master's approbation of them. Two such are instanced, [Luk
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#016), [Luk
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#019). 1. They had both made
considerable improvements, but not both alike; one had gained ten pounds
by his trading, and another five. Those that are diligent and faithful
in serving Christ are commonly blessed in being made blessings to the
places where they live. They shall see the travail of their soul, and
not labour in vain. And yet all that are alike faithful are not alike
successful. And perhaps, though they were both faithful, it is intimated
that one of them took more pains, and applied himself more closely to
his business, than the other, and sped accordingly. Blessed Paul was
surely this servant that gained ten pounds, double to what any of the
rest did, for he laboured more abundantly than they all, and fully
preached the gospel of Christ. 2. They both acknowledged their
obligations to their Master for entrusting them with these abilities and
opportunities to do him service: Lord, it is not my industry, but thy
pound, that has gained ten pounds. Note, God must have all the glory of
all our gains; not unto us, but unto him, must be the praise, [Psa
115:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#001). Paul, who gained the ten
pounds, acknowledges, "I laboured, yet not I. By the grace of God, I am
what I am, and do what I do; and his grace was not in vain," [Co1
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010). He will not speak of what he
had done, but of what God had done by him, [Rom
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#018). 3. They were both commended for
their fidelity and industry: Well done, thou good servant, [Luk
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#017). And to the other he said
likewise, [Luk 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#019). Note, They who
do that which is good shall have praise of the same. Do well, and Christ
will say to thee, Well done: and, if he says Well done, the matter is
not great who says otherwise. See [Gen
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007). 4. They were preferred in
proportion to the improvement they had made: "Because thou hast been
faithful in a very little, and didst not say, 'As good sit still as go
to trade with one pound, what can one do with so small a stock?' but
didst humbly and honestly apply thyself to the improvement of that, have
thou authority over ten cities." Note, Those are in a fair way to rise
who are content to begin low. He that has used the office of a deacon
well purchaseth to himself a good degree, [Ti1
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#013). Two things are hereby promised
the apostles: - (1.) That when they have taken pains to plant many
churches they shall have the satisfaction and honour of presiding in
them, and governing among them; they shall have great respect paid them,
and have a great interest in the love and esteem of good Christians. He
that keepeth the fig-tree shall eat the fruit thereof; and he that
laboureth in the word and doctrine shall be counted worthy of double
honour. (2.) That, when they have served their generation, according to
the will of Christ, though they pass through this world despised and
trampled upon, and perhaps pass out of it under disgrace and persecution
as the apostles did, yet in the other world they shall reign as kings
with Christ, shall sit with him on his throne, shall have power over the
nations, [Rev 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#026). The happiness of
heaven will be a much greater advancement to a good minister or
Christian than it would be to a poor tradesman, that with much ado had
cleared ten pounds, to be made governor of ten cities. He that had
gained but five pounds had dominion over five cities. This intimates
that there are degrees of glory in heaven; every vessel will be alike
full, but not alike large. And the degrees of glory there will be
according to the degrees of usefulness here.

Secondly, The bad account that was given by one of them, and the
sentence passed upon him for his slothfulness and unfaithfulness, [Luk
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#020), etc. 1. He owned that he had
not traded with the pound with which he had been entrusted ([Luk
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#020)): "Lord, behold, here is thy
pound; it is true, I have not made it more, but withal I have not made
it less; I have kept it safely laid up in a napkin." This represents the
carelessness of those who have gifts, but never lay out themselves to do
good with them. It is all one to them whether the interests of Christ's
kingdom sink or swim, go backward or forward; for their parts, they will
take no care about it, no pains, be at no expenses, run no hazard. Those
are the servants that lay up their pound in a napkin who think it enough
to say that they have done no hurt in the world, but did no good. 2. He
justified himself in his omission, with a plea that made the matter
worse and not better ([Luk 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#021)): I
feared thee, because thou art an austere man, rigid and severe,
anthrōpos austēros ei. Austere is the Greed word itself: a sharp man:
Thou takest up that which thou laidst not down. He thought that his
master put a hardship upon his servants when he required and expected
the improvement of their pounds, and that it was reaping where he did
not sow; whereas really it was reaping where he had sown, and, as the
husbandman, expecting in proportion to what he had sown. He had no
reason to fear his master's austerity, nor blame his expectations, but
this was a mere sham, a frivolous groundless excuse for his idleness,
which there was no manner of colour for. Note, The pleas of slothful
professors, when they come to be examined, will be found more to their
shame than in their justification. 3. His excuse is turned upon him: Out
of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked servant, [Luk
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#022). He will be condemned by his
crime, but self-condemned by his plea. "If thou didst look upon it as
hard that I should expect the profit of thy trading, which would have
been the greater profit, yet, if thou hadst had any regard to my
interest, thou mightest have put my money into the bank, into some of
the funds, that I might have had, not only my own, but my own with
usury, which, though a less advantage, would have been some." If he
durst not trade for fear of losing the principal, and so being made
accountable to his lord for it though it was lost, which he pretends,
yet that would be no excuse for his not setting it out to interest,
where it would be sure. Note, Whatever may be the pretences of slothful
professors, in excuse of their slothfulness, the true reason of it is a
reigning indifference to the interests of Christ and his kingdom, and
their coldness therein. They care not whether religion gets around or
loses ground, so they can but live at ease. 4. His pound is taken from
him, [Luk 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#024). It is fit that those
should lose their gifts who will not use them, and that those who have
dealt falsely should be no longer trusted. Those who will not serve
their Master with what he bestows upon them, why should they be suffered
to serve themselves with it? Take from him the pound. 5. It is given to
him that had the ten pounds. When this was objected against by the
standers-by, because he had so much already (Lord, he has ten pounds,
[Luk 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#025)), it is answered ([Luk
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#026)), Unto every one that hath shall
be given. It is the rule of justice, (1.) That those should be most
encouraged who have been most industrious, and that those who have laid
out themselves most to do good should have their opportunities of doing
good enlarged, and be put into a higher and more extensive sphere of
usefulness. To him that hath gotten shall more be given, that he may be
in a capacity to get more. (2.) That those who have their gifts, as if
they had them not, who have them to no purpose, who do no good with
them, should be deprived of them. To those who endeavour to increase the
grace they have, God will impart more; those who neglect it, and suffer
it to decline, can expect no other than that God should do so too. This
needful warning Christ gives to his disciples, lest, while they were
gaping for honours on earth, they should neglect their business, and so
come short of their happiness in heaven.

3\. Another thing they expected was, that, when the kingdom of God
should appear, the body of the Jewish nation would immediately fall in
with it, and submit to it, and all their aversions to Christ and his
gospel would immediately vanish; but Christ tells them that, after his
departure, the generality of them would persist in their obstinacy and
rebellion, and it would be their ruin. This is shown here,

(1.) In the message which his citizens sent after him, [Luk
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#014). They not only opposed him,
while he was in obscurity; but, when he was gone into glory, to be
invested in his kingdom, then they continued their enmity to him,
protested against his dominion, and said, We will not have this man to
reign over us. \[1.\] This was fulfilled in the prevailing infidelity of
the Jews after the ascension of Christ, and the setting up of the gospel
kingdom. They would not submit their necks to his yoke, nor touch the
top of his golden sceptre. They said, Let us break his bands in sunder,
[Psa 2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001); [Act
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#026). \[2.\] It speaks the language of
all unbelievers; they could be content that Christ should save them, but
they will not have him to reign over them; whereas Christ is a Saviour
to those only to whom he is a prince, and who are willing to obey him.

(2.) In the sentence passed upon them at his return: Those mine enemies
bring hither, [Luk 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#027). When his
faithful subjects are preferred and rewarded, then he will take
vengeance on his enemies, and particularly on the Jewish nation, the
doom of which is here read. When Christ had set up his gospel kingdom,
and thereby put reputation upon the gospel ministry, then he comes to
reckon with the Jews; then it is remembered against them that they had
particularly disclaimed and protested against his kingly office, when
they said, We have no king but Caesar, nor would own him for their king.
They appealed to Caesar, and to Caesar they shall go; Caesar shall be
their ruin. Then the kingdom of God appeared when vengeance was taken on
those irreconcileable enemies to Christ and his government; they were
brought forth and slain before him. Never was so much slaughter made in
any war as in the wars of the Jews. That nation lived to see
Christianity victorious in the Gentile world, in spite of their enmity
and opposition to it, and then it was taken away as dross. The wrath of
Christ came upon them to the uttermost ([Th1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#015), [Th1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#016)), and their destruction redounded
very much to the honour of Christ and the peace of the church. But this
is applicable to all others who persist in their infidelity, and will
undoubtedly perish in it. Note, \[1.\] Utter ruin will certainly be the
portion of all Christ's enemies; in the day of vengeance they shall all
be brought forth, and slain before him. Bring them hither, to be made a
spectacle to saints and angels; see [Jos
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#022), [Jos
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#024). Bring them hither, that they
may see the glory and happiness of Christ and his followers, whom they
hated and persecuted. Bring them hither, to have their frivolous pleas
overruled, and to receive sentence according to their merits. Bring
them, and slay them before me, as Agag before Samuel. The Saviour whom
they have slighted will stand by and see them slain, and not interpose
on their behalf. \[2.\] Those that will not have Christ to reign over
them shall be reputed and dealt with as his enemies. We are ready to
think that none are Christ's enemies but persecutors of Christianity, or
scoffers at least; but you see that those will be accounted so that
dislike the terms of salvation, will not submit to Christ's yoke, but
will be their own masters. Note, Whoever will not be ruled by the grace
of Christ will inevitably be ruined by the wrath of Christ.

[Luke 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 19:28</span></span>

We have here the same account of Christ's riding in some sort of triumph
(such as it was) into Jerusalem which we had before in Matthew and Mark;
let us therefore here only observe,

I. Jesus Christ was forward and willing to suffer and die for us. He
went forward, bound in the spirit, to Jerusalem, knowing very well the
things that should befall him there, and yet he went before, ascending
up to Jerusalem, [Luk 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#028). He was
the foremost of the company, as if he longed to be upon the spot, longed
to engage, to take the field, and to enter upon action. Was he so
forward to suffer and die for us, and shall we draw back from any
service we are capable of doing for him?

II\. It was no ways inconsistent either with Christ's humility or with
his present state of humiliation to make a public entry into Jerusalem a
little before he died. Thus he made himself to be the more taken notice
of, that the ignominy of his death might appear the greater.

III\. Christ is entitled to a dominion over all the creatures, and may
use them when and as he pleases. No man has a property in his estate
against Christ, but that his title is prior and superior. Christ sent to
fetch an ass and her colt from their owner's and master's crib, when he
had occasion for their service, and might do so, for all the beasts of
the forest are his, and the tame beasts too.

IV\. Christ has all men's hearts both under his eye and in his hand. He
could influence those to whom the ass and the colt belonged to consent
to their taking them away, as soon as they were told that the Lord had
occasion for them.

V. Those that go on Christ's errands are sure to speed ([Luk
19:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#032)): They that were sent found what
he told them they should find, and the owners willing to part with them.
It is a comfort to Christ's messengers that they shall bring what they
are sent for, if indeed the Lord has occasion for it.

VI\. The disciples of Christ, who fetch that for him from others which
he has occasion for, and which they have not, should not think that
enough, but, whatever they have themselves wherewith he may be served
and honoured, they should be ready to serve him with it. Many can be
willing to attend Christ at other people's expense who care not to be at
any charge upon him themselves; but those disciples not only fetched the
ass's colt for him, but cast their own garments upon the colt, and were
willing that they should be used for his trappings.

VII\. Christ's triumphs are the matter of his disciples' praises. When
Christ came nigh to Jerusalem, God put it of a sudden into the hearts of
the whole multitude of the disciples, not of the twelve only, but
abundance more, that were disciples at large, to rejoice and praise God
([Luk 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#037)), and the spreading of
their clothes in the way ([Luk 19:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#036))
was a common expression of joy, as at the feast of tabernacles. Observe,
1. What was the matter or occasion of their joy and praise. They praised
God for all the mighty works they had seen, all the miracles Christ had
wrought, especially the raising of Lazarus, which is particularly
mentioned, [Joh 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#017), [Joh
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#018). That brought others to mind,
for fresh miracles and mercies should revive the remembrance of the
former. 2. How they expressed their joy and praise ([Luk
19:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#038)): Blessed be the king that
cometh in the name of the Lord. Christ is the king; he comes in the name
of the Lord, clothed with a divine authority, commissioned from heaven
to give law and treat of peace. Blessed be he. Let us praise him, let
God prosper him. He is blessed for ever, and we will speak well of him.
Peace in heaven. Let the God of heaven send peace and success to his
undertaking, and then there will be glory in the highest. It will
redound to the glory of the most high God; and the angels, the glorious
inhabitants of the upper world, will give him the glory of it. Compare
this song of the saints on earth with that of the angels, [Luk
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014). They both agree to give glory to
God in the highest. There the praises of both centre; the angels say, On
earth peace, rejoicing in the benefit which men on earth have by Christ;
the saints say, Peace in heaven, rejoicing in the benefit which the
angels have by Christ. Such is the communion we have with the holy
angels that, as they rejoice in the peace on earth, so we rejoice in the
peace in heaven, the peace God makes in his high places ([Job
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#002)), and both in Christ, who hath
reconciled all things to himself, whether things on earth or things in
heaven.

VIII\. Christ's triumph's, and his disciples' joyful praises of them,
are the vexation of proud Pharisees, that are enemies to him and his
kingdom. There were some Pharisees among the multitude who were so far
from joining with them that they were enraged at them, and, Christ being
a famous example of humility, they thought that he would not admit such
acclamations as these, and therefore expected that he should rebuke his
disciples, [Luk 19:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#039). But it is the
honour of Christ that, as he despises the contempt of the proud, so he
accepts the praises of the humble.

IX\. Whether men praise Christ or no he will, and shall, and must be
praised ([Luk 19:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#040)): If these should
hold their peace, and not speak the praises of the Messiah's kingdom,
the stones would immediately cry out, rather than that Christ should not
be praised. This was, in effect, literally fulfilled, when, upon men's
reviling Christ upon the cross, instead of praising him, and his own
disciples' sinking into a profound silence, the earth did quake and the
rocks rent. Pharisees would silence the praises of Christ, but they
cannot gain their point; for as God can out of stones raise up children
unto Abraham, so he can out of the mouths of those children perfect
praise.

[Luke 19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 19:41</span></span>

The great Ambassador from heaven is here making his public entry into
Jerusalem, not to be respected there, but to be rejected; he knew what a
nest of vipers he was throwing himself into, and yet see here two
instances of his love to that place and his concern for it.

I. The tears he shed for the approaching ruin of the city ([Luk
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041)): When he was come near, he
beheld the city, and wept over it. Probably, it was when he was coming
down the descent of the hill from the mount of Olives, where he had a
full view of the city, the large extent of it, and the many stately
structures in it, and his eye affected his heart, and his heart his eye
again. See here,

1\. What a tender spirit Christ was of; we never read that he laughed,
but we often find him in tears. In this very place his father David
wept, and those that were with him, though he and they were men of war.
There are cases in which it is no disparagement to the stoutest of men
to melt into tears.

2\. That Jesus Christ wept in the midst of his triumphs, wept when all
about him were rejoicing, to show how little he was elevated with the
applause and acclamation of the people. Thus he would teach us to
rejoice with trembling, and as though we rejoiced not. If Providence do
not stain the beauty of our triumphs, we may ourselves see cause to
sully it with our sorrows.

3\. That he wept over Jerusalem. Note, There are cities to be wept over,
and none to be more lamented than Jerusalem, that had been the holy
city, and the joy of the whole earth, if it be degenerated. But why did
Christ weep at the sight of Jerusalem? Was it because "Yonder is the
city in which I must be betrayed and bound, scourged and spit upon,
condemned and crucified?" No, he himself gives us the reason of his
tears.

(1.) Jerusalem has not improved the day of her opportunities. He wept,
and said, If thou hadst known, even thou at least in this thy day, if
thou wouldst but yet know, while the gospel is preached to thee, and
salvation offered thee by it; if thou wouldest at length bethink
thyself, and understand the things that belong to thy peace, the making
of thy peace with God, and the securing of thine own spiritual and
eternal welfare - but thou dost not know the day of thy visitation, [Luk
19:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#044). The manner of speaking is
abrupt: If thou hadst known! O that thou hadst, so some take it; like
that O that my people had hearkened unto me, [Psa
81:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#013); [Isa
48:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#018). Or, If thou hadst known, well;
like that of the fig-tree, [Luk 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#009).
How happy had it been for thee! Or, "If thou hadst known, thou wouldest
have wept for thyself, and I should have no occasion to weep for thee,
but should have rejoiced rather." What he says lays all the blame of
Jerusalem's impending ruin upon herself. Note, \[1.\] There are things
which belong to our peace, which we are all concerned to know and
understand; the way how peace is made, the offers made of peace, the
terms on which we may have the benefit of peace. The things that belong
to our peace are those things that relate to our present and future
welfare; these we must know with application. \[2.\] There is a time of
visitation when those things which belong to our peace may be known by
us, and known to good purpose. When we enjoy the means of grace in great
plenty, and have the word of God powerfully preached to us - when the
Spirit strives with us, and our own consciences are startled and
awakened - then is the time of visitation, which we are concerned to
improve. \[3.\] With those that have long neglected the time of their
visitation, if at length, if at last, in this their day, their eyes be
opened, and they bethink themselves, all will be well yet. Those shall
not be refused that come into the vineyard at the eleventh hour. \[4.\]
It is the amazing folly of multitudes that enjoy the means of grace, and
it will be of fatal consequence to them, that they do not improve the
day of their opportunities. The things of their peace are revealed to
them, but are not minded or regarded by them; they hide their eyes from
them, as if they were not worth taking notice of. They are not aware of
the accepted time and the day of salvation, and to let it slip and
perish through mere carelessness. None are so blind as those that will
not see; nor have any the things of their peace more certainly hidden
from their eyes than those that turn their back upon them. \[5.\] The
sin and folly of those that persist in a contempt of gospel grace are a
great grief to the Lord Jesus, and should be so to us. He looks with
weeping eyes upon lost souls, that continue impenitent, and run headlong
upon their own ruin; he had rather that they would turn and live than go
on and die, for he is not willing that any should perish.

(2.) Jerusalem cannot escape the day of her desolation. The things of
her peace are now in a manner hidden from her eyes; they will be
shortly. Not but that after this the gospel was preached to them by the
apostles; all the house of Israel were called to know assuredly that
Christ was their peace ([Act 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036)),
and multitudes were convinced and converted. But as to the body of the
nation, and the leading part of it, they were sealed up under unbelief;
God had given them the spirit of slumber, [Rom
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#008). They were so prejudiced and
enraged against the gospel, and those few that did embrace it then, that
nothing less than a miracle of divine grace (like that which converted
Paul) would work upon them; and it could not be expected that such a
miracle should be wrought, and so they were justly given up to judicial
blindness and hardness. The peaceful things are not hidden from the eyes
of particular persons; but it is too late to think now of the nation of
the Jews, as such, becoming a Christian nation, by embracing Christ. And
therefore they are marked for ruin, which Christ here foresees and
foretels, as the certain consequence of their rejecting Christ. Note,
Neglecting the great salvation often brings temporal judgments upon a
people; it did so upon Jerusalem in less than forty years after this,
when all that Christ here foretold was exactly fulfilled. \[1.\] The
Romans besieged the city, cast a trench about it, compassed it round,
and kept their inhabitants in on every side. Josephus relates that Titus
ran up a wall in a very short time, which surrounded the city, and cut
off all hopes of escaping. \[2.\] They laid it even with the ground.
Titus commanded his soldiers to dig up the city, and the whole compass
of it was levelled, except three towers; see Josephus's history of the
wars of the Jews, 5.356-360; 7.1. Not only the city, but the citizens
were laid even with the ground (thy children within thee), by the cruel
slaughters that were made of them: and there was scarcely one stone left
upon another. This was for their crucifying Christ; this was because
they knew not the day of their visitation. Let other cities and nations
take warning.

II\. The zeal he showed for the present purification of the temple.
Though it must be destroyed ere long, it does not therefore follow that
no care must be taken of it in the mean time.

1\. Christ cleared it of those who profaned it. He went straight to the
temple, and began to cast out the buyers and sellers, [Luk
19:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#045). Hereby (though he was
represented as an enemy to the temple, and that was the crime laid to
his charge before the high priest) he made it to appear that he had a
truer love for the temple than they had who had such a veneration for
its corban, its treasury, as a sacred thing; for its purity was more its
glory than its wealth was. Christ gave reason for his dislodging the
temple-merchants, [Luk 19:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#046). The
temple is a house of prayer, set apart for communion with God: the
buyers and sellers made it a den of thieves by the fraudulent bargains
they made there, which was by no means to be suffered, for it would be a
distraction to those who came there to pray.

2\. He put it to the best use that ever it was put to, for he taught
daily in the temple, [Luk 19:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#047). Note,
It is not enough that the corruptions of a church be purged out, but the
preaching of the gospel must be encouraged. Now, when Christ preached in
the temple, observe here, (1.) How spiteful the church-rulers were
against him; how industrious to seek an opportunity, or pretence rather,
to do him a mischief ([Luk 19:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#047)): The
chief priests and scribes, and the chief of the people, the great
sanhedrim, that should have attended him, and summoned the people too to
attend him, sought to destroy him, and put him to death. (2.) How
respectful the common people were to him. They were very attentive to
hear him. He spent most of his time in the country, and did not then
preach in the temple, but, when he did, the people paid him great
respect, attended on his preaching with diligence, and let no
opportunity slip of hearing him, attended to it with care, and would not
lose a word. Some read it, All the people as they heard him, took his
part; and so it comes in very properly as a reason why his enemies could
not find what they might do against him; they saw the people ready to
fly in their faces if they offered him any violence. Till his hour was
come his interest in the common people protected him; but, when his hour
was come, the chief priests' influence upon the common people delivered
him up.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 20](luk020)

</div>
