<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Malachi Index](mal.md)  
  [Previous](zac014)  [Next](mal001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001.md)

[Malachi](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mal 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Prophecy of Malachi

God's prophets were his witnesses to his church, each in his day, for
several ages, witnesses for him and his authority, witnesses against sin
and sinners, attesting the true intents of God's providences in his
dealings with his people then and the kind intentions of his grace
concerning his church in the days of the Messiah, to whom all the
prophets bore witness, for they all agreed in their testimony; and now
we have only one witness more to call, and we have done with our
evidence; and though he be the last, and in him prophecy ceased, yet the
Spirit of prophecy shines as clearly, as strongly, as brightly in him as
in any that went before, and his testimony challenges an equal regard.
The Jews say, Prophecy continued forty years under the second temple,
and this prophet they call the seal of prophecy, because in him the
series or succession of prophets broke off and came to a period. God
wisely ordered it so that divine inspiration should cease for some ages
before the coming of the Messiah, that that great prophet might appear
the more conspicuous and distinguishable and be the more welcome. Let us
consider, I. The person of the prophet. We have only his name, Malachi,
and no account of his country or parentage. Malachi signifies my angel,
which has given occasion for a conjecture that this prophet was indeed
an angel from heaven and not a man, as that [Jdg
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001.md). But there is no just ground for
the conjecture. Prophets were messengers, God's messengers; this prophet
was so; his name is the very same with that which we find in the
original ([Mal 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001).md) for my messenger;
and perhaps from that word he might (though, probably, he had another
name) be called Malachi. The Chaldee paraphrase, and some of the Jews,
suggest that Malachi was the same with Ezra; but that also is
groundless. Ezra was a scribe, but we never read that he was a prophet.
Others, yet further from probability, make him to be Mordecai. But we
have reason to conclude he was a person whose proper name was that by
which he is here called; the tradition of some of the ancients is that
he was of the tribe of Zebulun, and that he died young. II. The scope of
the prophecy. Haggai and Zechariah were sent to reprove the people for
delaying to build the temple; Malachi was sent to reprove them for the
neglect of it when it was built, and for their profanation of the
temple-service (for from idolatry and superstition they ran into the
other extreme of impiety and irreligion), and the sins he witnesses
against are the same that we find complained of in Nehemiah's time, with
whom, it is probable, he was contemporary. And now that prophecy was to
cease he speaks more clearly of the Messiah, as nigh at hand, than any
other of the prophets had done, and concludes with a direction to the
people of God to keep in remembrance the law of Moses, while they were
in expectation of the gospel of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Chapter 1](mal001.md)

</div>
