<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat019)  [Next](mat021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 20:0</span></span>

We have four things in this chapter. I. The parable of the labourers in
the vineyard (v. 1-16). II. A prediction of Christ's approaching
sufferings ([Mat 20:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#017)). III. The
petition of two of the disciples, by their mother, reproved ([Mat
20:20-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020)). IV. The petition of the two
blind men granted, and their eyes opened ([Mat
20:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029)).

[Matthew 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 20:1</span></span>

This parable of the labourers in the vineyard is intended,

I. To represent to us the kingdom of heaven ([Mat
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001)), that is, the way and method of
the gospel dispensation. The laws of that kingdom are not wrapt up in
parables, but plainly set down, as in the sermon upon the mount; but the
mysteries of that kingdom are delivered in parables, in sacraments, as
here and ch. 13. The duties of Christianity are more necessary to be
known than the notions of it; and yet the notions of it are more
necessary to be illustrated than the duties of it; which is that which
parables are designed for.

II\. In particular, to represent to us that concerning the kingdom of
heaven, which he had said in the close of the foregoing chapter, that
many that are first shall be last, and the last, first; with which this
parable is connected; that truth, having in it a seeming contradiction,
needed further explication.

Nothing was more a mystery in the gospel dispensation than the rejection
of the Jews and the calling in of the Gentiles; so the apostle speaks of
it ([Eph 3:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#003)); that the Gentiles
should be fellow-heirs: nor was any thing more provoking to the Jews
than the intimation of it. Now this seems to be the principal scope of
this parable, to show that the Jews should be first called into the
vineyard, and many of them should come at the call; but, at length, the
gospel should be preached to the Gentiles, and they should receive it,
and be admitted to equal privileges and advantages with the Jews; should
be fellow-citizens with the saints, which the Jews, even those of them
that believed, would be very much disgusted at, but without reason.

But the parable may be applied more generally, and shows us, 1. That God
is debtor to no man; a great truth, which the contents in our Bible give
as the scope of this parable. 2. That many who begin last, and promise
little in religion, sometimes, by the blessing of God, arrive at greater
attainments in knowledge, grace, and usefulness, than others whose
entrance was more early, and who promised fairer. Though Cushi gets the
start of Ahimaaz, yet Ahimaaz, choosing the way of the plain, outruns
Cushi. John is swifter of foot, and comes first to the sepulchre: but
Peter has more courage, and goes first into it. Thus many that are last
shall be first. Some make it a caution to the disciples, who had boasted
of their timely and zealous embracing of Christ; they had left all, to
follow him; but let them look to it, that they keep up their zeal; let
them press forward and persevere; else their good beginnings will avail
them little; they that seemed to be first, would be last. Sometimes
those that are converted later in their lives, outstrip those that are
converted earlier. Paul was as one born out of due time, yet came not
behind the chiefest of the apostles, and outdid those that were in
Christ before him. Something of affinity there is between this parable
and that of the prodigal son, where he that returned from his wandering,
was as dear to his father as he was, that never went astray; first and
last alike. 3. That the recompence of reward will be given to the
saints, not according to the time of their conversion, but according to
the preparations for it by grace in this world; not according to the
seniority ([Gen 43:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#033)), but according
to the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ. Christ had
promised the apostles, who followed him in the regeneration, at the
beginning of the gospel dispensation, great glory ([Mat
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)); but he now tells them that
those who are in like manner faithful to him, even in the latter end of
the world, shall have the same reward, shall sit with Christ on his
throne, as well as the apostles, Rev. 2:26-3:21. Sufferers for Christ in
the latter days, shall have the same reward with the martyrs and
confessors of the primitive times, though they are more celebrated; and
faithful ministers now, the same with the first fathers.

We have two things in the parable; the agreement with the labourers, and
the account with them.

(1.) Here is the agreement made with the labourers ([Mat
20:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001)); and here it will be asked, as
usual,

\[1.\] Who hires them? A man that is a householder. God is the great
Householder, whose we are, and whom we serve; as a householder, he has
work that he will have to be done, and servants that he will have to be
doing; he has a great family in heaven and earth, which is named from
Jesus Christ ([Eph 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015)), which he is
Owner and Ruler of. God hires labourers, not because he needs them or
their services (for, if we be righteous, what do we unto him?), but as
some charitable generous householders keep poor men to work, in kindness
to them, to save them from idleness and poverty, and pay them for
working for themselves.

\[2.\] Whence they are hired? Out of the market-place, where, till they
are hired into God's service, they stand idle ([Mat
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#003)), all the day idle ([Mat
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#006)). Note, First, The soul of man
stands ready to be hired into some service or other; it was (as all the
creatures were) created to work, and is either a servant to iniquity, or
a servant to righteousness, [Rom 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019).
The devil, by his temptations, is hiring labourers into his field, to
feed swine. God, by his gospel, is hiring labourers into his vineyard,
to dress it, and keep it, paradise-work. We are put to our choice; for
hired we must be ([Jos 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015)); Choose
ye this day whom ye will serve. Secondly, Till we are hired into the
service of God, we are standing all the day idle; a sinful state, though
a state of drudgery to Satan, may really be called a state of idleness;
sinners are doing nothing, nothing to the purpose, nothing of the great
work they were sent into the world about, nothing that will pass well in
the account. Thirdly, The gospel call is given to those that stand idle
in the market-place. The market-place is a place of concourse, and there
Wisdom cries ([Pro 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020), [Pro
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#021)); it is a place of sport, there
the children are playing ([Mat 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#016));
and the gospel calls us from vanity to seriousness; it is a place of
business, of noise and hurry; and from that we are called to retire.
"Come, come from this market-place."

\[3.\] What are they hired to do? To labour in his vineyard. Note,
First, The church is God's vineyard; it is of his planting, watering,
and fencing; and the fruits of it must be to his honour and praise.
Secondly, We are all called upon to be labourers in this vineyard. The
work of religion is vineyard-work, pruning, dressing, digging, watering,
fencing, weeding. We have each of us our own vineyard to keep, our own
soul; and it is God's and to be kept and dressed for him. In this work
we must not be slothful, not loiterers, but labourers, working, and
working out our own salvation. Work for God will not admit of trifling.
A man may go idle to hell; but he that will go to heaven, must be busy.

\[4.\] What shall be their wages? He promises, First, A penny, [Mat
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#002). The Roman penny was, in our
money, of the value of a sevenpence half-penny, a day's wages for a
day's work, and the wages sufficient for a day's maintenance. This doth
not prove that the reward of our obedience to God is of works, or of
debt (no, it is of grace, free grace, [Rom
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#004)), or that there is any proportion
between our services and heaven's glories; no, when we have done all, we
are unprofitable servants; but it is to signify that there is a reward
set before us, and a sufficient one. Secondly, Whatsoever is right, [Mat
20:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#004). Note, God will be sure not to
be behind-hand with any for the service they do him: never any lost by
working for God. The crown set before us is a crown of righteousness,
which the righteous Judge shall give.

\[5.\] For what term are they hired? For a day. It is but a day's work
that is here done. The time of life is the day, in which we must work
the works of him that sent us into the world. It is a short time; the
reward is for eternity, the work is but for a day; man is said to
accomplish, as a hireling, his day, [Job
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#006). This should quicken us to
expedition and diligence in our work, that we have but a little time to
work in, and the night is hastening on, when no man can work; and if our
great work be undone when our day is done, we are undone for ever. It
should also encourage us in reference to the hardships and difficulties
of our work, that it is but for a day; the approaching shadow, which the
servant earnestly desireth, will bring with it both rest, and the reward
of our work, [Job 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#002). Hold out,
faith, and patience, yet a little while.

\[6.\] Notice is taken of the several hours of the day, at which the
labourers were hired. The apostles were sent forth at the first and
third hour of the gospel day; they had a first and a second mission,
while Christ was on earth, and their business was to call in the Jews;
after Christ's ascension, about the sixth and ninth hour, they went out
again on the same errand, preaching the gospel to the Jews only, to them
in Judea first, and afterward to them of the dispersion; but, at length,
as it were about the eleventh hour, they called the Gentiles to the same
work and privilege with the Jews, and told them that in Christ Jesus
there should be no difference made between Jew and Greek.

But this may be, and commonly is, applied to the several ages of life,
in which souls are converted to Christ. The common call is promiscuous,
to come and work in the vineyard; but the effectual call is particular,
and it is then effectual when we come at the call.

First, Some are effectually called, and begin to work in the vineyard
when they are very young; are sent in early in the morning, whose tender
years are seasoned with grace, and the remembrance of their Creator.
John the Baptist was sanctified from the womb, and therefore great ([Luk
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#015)); Timothy from a child ([Ti2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015)); Obadiah feared the Lord from
his youth. Those that have such a journey to go, had need set out
betimes, the sooner the better.

Secondly, Others are savingly wrought upon in middle age; Go work in the
vineyard, at the third, sixth, or ninth hour. The power of divine grace
is magnified in the conversion of some, when they are in the midst of
their pleasures and worldly pursuits, as Paul. God has work for all
ages; no time amiss to turn to God; none can say, "It is all in good
time;" for, whatever hour of the day it is with us, the time past of our
life may suffice that we have served sin; Go ye also into the vineyard.
God turns away none that are willing to be hired, for yet there is room.

Thirdly, Others are hired into the vineyard in old age, at the eleventh
hour, when the day of life is far spent, and there is but one hour of
the twelve remaining. None are hired at the twelfth hour; when life is
done, opportunity is done; but "while there is life, there is hope." 1.
There is hope for old sinners; for if, in sincerity, they turn to God,
they shall doubtless be accepted; true repentance is never too late.
And, 2. There is hope of old sinners, that they may be brought to true
repentance; nothing is too hard for Almighty grace to do, it can change
the Ethiopian's skin, and the leopard's spots; can set those to work,
who have contracted a habit of idleness. Nicodemus may be born again
when he is old, and the old man may be put off, which is corrupt.

Yet let none, upon this presumption, put off their repentance till they
are old. These were sent into the vineyard, it is true, at the eleventh
hour; but nobody had hired them, or offered to hire them, before. The
Gentiles came in at the eleventh hour, but it was because the gospel had
not been before preached to them. those that have had gospel offers made
them at the third, or sixth hour, and have resisted and refused them,
will not have that to say for themselves at the eleventh hour, that
these had; No man has hired us; nor can they be sure that any man will
hire them at the ninth or eleventh hour; and therefore not to discourage
any, but to awaken all, be it remembered, that now is the accepted time;
if we will hear his voice, it must be today.

(2.) Here is the account with the labourers. Observe,

\[1.\] When the account was taken; when the evening was come, then, as
usual, the day-labourers were called and paid. Note, Evening time is the
reckoning time; the particular account must be given up in the evening
of our life; for after death cometh the judgment. Faithful labourers
shall receive their reward when they die; it is deferred till then, that
they may wait with patience for it, but no longer; for God will observe
his own rule, The hire of the labourers shall not abide with thee all
night, until the morning. See [Deu
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#015). When Paul, that faithful
labourer, departs, he is with Christ presently. The payment shall not be
wholly deferred till the morning of the resurrection; but then, in the
evening of the world, will be the general account, when every one shall
receive according to the things done in the body. When time ends, and
with it the world of work and opportunity, then the state of retribution
commences; then call the labourers, and give them their hire. Ministers
call them into the vineyard, to do their work; death calls them out of
the vineyard, to receive their penny: and those to whom the call into
the vineyard is effectual, the call out of it will be joyful. Observe,
They did not come for their pay till they were called; we must with
patience wait God's time for our rest and recompence; go by our master's
clock. The last trumpet, at the great day, shall call the labourers,
[Th1 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016). Then shalt thou call, saith
the good and faithful servant, and I will answer. In calling the
labourers, they must begin from the last, and so to the first. Let not
those that come in at the eleventh hour, be put behind the rest, but,
lest they should be discouraged, call them first. At the great day,
though the dead in Christ shall rise first, yet they which are alive and
remain, on whom the ends of the world (the eleventh hour of its day)
comes, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds; no
preference shall be given to seniority, but every man shall stand in his
own lot at the end of the days.

\[2.\] What the account was; and in that observe,

First, The general pay ([Mat 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#009),
[Mat 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#010)); They received every man a
penny. Note, All that by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for
glory, honour, and immortality, shall undoubtedly obtain eternal life
([Rom 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#007)), not as wages for the value
of their work, but as the gift of God. Though there be degrees of glory
in heaven, yet it will be to all a complete happiness. They that come
from the east and west, and so come in late, that are picked up out of
the highways and the hedges, shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, at the same feast, [Mat 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#011).
In heaven, every vessel will be full, brimful, though every vessel is
not alike large and capacious. In the distribution of future joys, as it
was in the gathering of the manna, he that shall gather much, will have
nothing over, and he that shall gather little, will have no lack, [Exo
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#018). Those whom Christ fed
miraculously, though of different sizes, men, women, and children, did
all eat, and were filled.

The giving of a whole day's wages to those that had not done the tenth
part of a day's work, is designed to show that God distributes his
rewards by grace and sovereignty, and not of debt. The best of the
labourers, and those that begin soonest, having so many empty spaces in
their time, and their works not being filled up before God, may truly be
said to labour in the vineyard scarcely one hour of their twelve; but
because we are under grace, and not under the law, even such defective
services, done in sincerity, shall not only be accepted, but by free
grace richly rewarded. Compare [Luk
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#007), [Luk
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#008), with [Luk
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#037).

Secondly, The particular pleading with those that were offended with
this distribution in gavel-kind. The circumstances of this serve to
adorn the parable; but the general scope is plain, that the last shall
be first. We have here,

1\. The offence taken ([Mat 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#011),
[Mat 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#012)); They murmured at the good
man of the house; not that there is, or can be, any discontent or
murmuring in heaven, for that is both guilt and grief, and in heaven
there is neither; but there may be, and often are, discontent and
murmuring concerning heaven and heavenly things, while they are in
prospect and promise in this world. This signifies the jealousy which
the Jews were provoked to by the admission of the Gentiles into the
kingdom of heaven. As the elder brother, in the parable of the prodigal,
repined at the reception of his younger brother, and complained of his
father's generosity to him; so these labourers quarrelled with their
master, and found fault, not because they had not enough, so much as
because others were made equal with them. They boast, as the prodigal's
elder brother did, of their good services; We have borne the burthen and
heat of the day; that was the most they could make of it. Sinners are
said to labour in the very fire ([Hab
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#013)), whereas God's servants, at the
worst, do but labour in the sun; not in the heat of the iron furnace,
but only in the heat of the day. Now these last have worked but one
hour, and that too in the cool of the day; and yet thou hast made them
equal with us. The Gentiles, who are newly called in, have as much of
the privileges of the kingdom of the Messiah as the Jews have, who have
so long been labouring in the vineyard of the Old Testament church,
under the yoke of the ceremonial law, in expectation of that kingdom.
Note, There is a great proneness in us to think that we have too little,
and other too much, of the tokens of God's favour; and that we do too
much, and others too little, in the work of God. Very apt we all are to
undervalue the deserts of others, and to overvalue our own. Perhaps,
Christ here gives an intimation to Peter, not to boast too much, as he
seemed to do, of his having left all to follow Christ; as if, because he
and the rest of them had borne the burthen and heat of the day thus,
they must have a heaven by themselves. It is hard for those that do or
suffer more than ordinary for God, not to be elevated too much with the
thought of it, and to expect to merit by it. Blessed Paul guarded
against this, when, though the chief of the apostles, he owned himself
to be nothing, to be less than the least of all saints.

2\. The offence removed. Three things the master of the house urges, in
answer to this ill-natured surmise.

(1.) That the complainant had no reason at all to say he had any wrong
done to him, [Mat 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#013), [Mat
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#014). Here he asserts his own
justice; Friend, I do thee no wrong. He calls him friend, for in
reasoning with others we should use soft words and hard arguments; if
our inferiors are peevish and provoking, yet we should not thereby be
put into a passion, but speak calmly to them. \[1.\] It is incontestably
true, that God can do no wrong. This is the prerogative of the King of
kings. Is there unrighteousness with God? The apostle startles at the
thought of it; God forbid! [Rom 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005),
[Rom 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#006). His word should silence all
our murmurings, that, whatever God does to us, or withholds from us, he
does us no wrong. \[2.\] If God gives that grace to others, which he
denies to us, it is kindness to them, but no injustice to us; and bounty
to another, while it is no injustice to us, we ought not to find fault
with. Because it is free grace, that is given to those that have it,
boasting is for ever excluded; and because it is free grace, that is
withheld from those that have it not, murmuring is for ever excluded.
Thus shall every mouth be stopped, and all flesh be silent before God.

To convince the murmurer that he did no wrong, he refers him to the
bargain: "Didst not thou agree with me for a penny? And if thou hast
what thou didst agree for, thou hast no reason to cry out of wrong; thou
shalt have what we agreed for." Though God is a debtor to none, yet he
is graciously pleased to make himself a debtor by his own promise, for
the benefit of which, through Christ, believers agree with him, and he
will stand to his part of the agreement. Note, It is good for us often
to consider what it was that we agreed with God for. First, Carnal
worldlings agree with God for their penny in this world; they choose
their portion in this life ([Psa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014)); in these things they are
willing to have their reward ([Mat
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#002), [Mat
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005)), their consolation ([Luk
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#024)), their good things ([Luk
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#025)); and with these they shall be
put off, shall be cut off from spiritual and eternal blessings; and
herein God does them no wrong; they have what they chose, the penny they
agreed for; so shall their doom be, themselves have decided it; it is
conclusive against them. Secondly, Obedient believers agree with God for
their penny in the other world, and they must remember that they have so
agreed. Didst not thou agree to take God's word for it? Thou didst; and
wilt thou go and agree with the world? Didst not thou agree to take up
with heaven as thy portion, thy all, and to take up with nothing short
of it? And wilt thou seek for a happiness in the creature, or think from
thence to make up the deficiencies of thy happiness in God?

He therefore, 1. Ties him to his bargain ([Mat
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#014)); Take that thine is, and go thy
way. If we understand it of that which is ours by debt or absolute
propriety, it would be a dreadful word; we are all undone, if we be put
off with that only which we can call our own. The highest creature must
go away into nothing, if he must go away with that only which is his
own: but if we understand it of that which is ours by gift, the free
gift of God, it teaches us to be content with such things as we have.
Instead of repining that we have no more, let us take what we have, and
be thankful. If God be better in any respect to others than to us, yet
we have no reason to complain while he is so much better to us than we
deserve, in giving us our penny, though we are unprofitable servants. 2.
He tells him that those he envied should fare as well as he did; "I will
give unto this last, even as unto thee; I am resolved I will." Note, The
unchangeableness of God's purposes in dispensing his gifts should
silence our murmurings. If he will do it, it is not for us to gainsay;
for he is in one mind, and who can turn him? Neither giveth he an
account of any of his matters; nor is it fit he should.

(2.) He had no reason to quarrel with the master; for what he gave was
absolutely his own, [Mat 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#015). As
before he asserted his justice, so here his sovereignty; Is it not
lawful for me to do what I will with my own? Note, \[1.\] God is the
Owner of all good; his propriety in it is absolute, sovereign, and
unlimited. \[2.\] He may therefore give or withhold his blessings, as he
pleases. What we have, is not our own, and therefore it is not lawful
for us to do what we will with it; but what God has, is his own; and
this will justify him, First, In all the disposals of his providence;
when God takes from us that which was dear to us, and which we could ill
spare, we must silence our discontents with this; May he not do what he
will with his own? Abstulit, sed et dedit - He hath taken away; but he
originally gave. It is not for such depending creatures as we are to
quarrel with our Sovereign. Secondly, In all the dispensations of his
grace, God gives or withholds the means of grace, and the Spirit of
grace, as he pleases. Not but that there is a counsel in every will of
God, and what seems to us to be done arbitrarily, will appear at length
to have been done wisely, and for holy ends. But this is enough to
silence all murmurs and objectors, that God is sovereign Lord of all,
and may do what he will with his own. We are in his hand, as clay in the
hands of a potter; and it is not for us to prescribe to him, or strive
with him.

(3.) He had no reason to envy his fellow servant, or to grudge at him;
or to be angry that he came into the vineyard no sooner; for he was not
sooner called; he had no reason to be angry that the master had given
him wages for the whole day, when he had idled away the greatest part of
it; for Is thine eye evil, because I am good? See here,

\[1.\] The nature of envy; It is an evil eye. The eye is often both the
inlet and the outlet of this sin. Saul saw that David prospered, and he
eyed him, [Sa1 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#009), [Sa1
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#015). It is an evil eye, which is
displeased at the good of others, and desires their hurt. What can have
more evil in it? It is grief to ourselves, anger to God, and ill-will to
our neighbour; and it is a sin that has neither pleasure, profit, nor
honour, in it; it is an evil, an only evil.

\[2.\] The aggravation of it; "It is because I am good." Envy is
unlikeness to God, who is good, and doeth good, and delighteth in doing
good; nay, it is an opposition and contradiction to God; it is a dislike
of his proceedings, and a displeasure at what he does, and is pleased
with. It is a direct violation of both the two great commandments at
once; both that of love to God, in whose will we should acquiesce, and
love to our neighbour, in whose welfare we should rejoice. Thus man's
badness takes occasion from God's goodness to be more exceedingly
sinful.

Lastly, Here is the application of the parable ([Mat
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#016)), in that observation which
occasioned it ([Mat 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#030)); So the
first shall be last, and the last first. There were many that followed
Christ now in the regeneration, when the gospel kingdom was first set
up, and these Jewish converts seemed to have got the start of others;
but Christ, to obviate and silence their boasting, here tells them,

1\. That they might possibly be outstripped by their successors in
profession, and, though they were before others in profession, might be
found inferior to them in knowledge, grace, and holiness. The Gentile
church, which was as yet unborn, the Gentile world, which as yet stood
idle in the market-place, would produce greater numbers of eminent,
useful Christians, than were found among the Jews. More and more
excellent shall be the children of the desolate than those of the
married wife, [Isa 54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001). Who knows but
that the church, in its old age, may be more fat and flourishing than
ever, to show that the Lord is upright? Though primitive Christianity
had more of the purity and power of that holy religion than is to be
found in the degenerate age wherein we live, yet what labourers may be
sent into the vineyard in the eleventh hour of the church's day, in the
Philadelphian period, and what plentiful effusions of the Spirit may
then be, above what has been yet, who can tell?

2\. That they had reason to fear, lest they themselves should be found
hypocrites at last; for many are called but few chosen. This is applied
to the Jews ([Mat 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#014)); it was so
then, it is too true still; many are called with a common call, that are
not chosen with a saving choice. All that are chosen from eternity, are
effectually called, in the fulness of time ([Rom
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030)), so that in making our effectual
calling sure we make sure our election ([Pe2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#010)); but it is not so as to the
outward call; many are called, and yet refuse ([Pro
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#024)), nay, as they are called to God,
so they go from him ([Hos 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#002), [Hos
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#007)), by which it appears that they
were not chosen, for the election will obtain, [Rom
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007). Note, There are but few chosen
Christians, in comparison with the many that are only called Christians;
it therefore highly concerns us to build our hope for heaven upon the
rock of an eternal choice, and not upon the sand of an external call;
and we should fear lest we be found but seeming Christians, and so
should really come short; nay, lest we be found blemished Christians,
and so should seem to come short, [Heb
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001).

[Matthew 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 20:17</span></span>

This is the third time that Christ gave his disciples notice of his
approaching sufferings; he was not going up to Jerusalem to celebrate
the passover, and to offer up himself the great Passover; both must be
done at Jerusalem: there the passover must be kept ([Deu
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005)), and there a prophet must
perish, because there the great Sanhedrim sat, who were judges in that
case, [Luk 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#033). Observe,

I. The privacy of this prediction; He took the twelve disciples apart in
the way. This was one of those things which were told to them in
darkness, but which they were afterward to speak in the light, [Mat
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027). His secret was with them, as
his friends, and this particularly. It was a hard saying, and, if any
could bear it, they could. They would be more immediately exposed to
peril with him, and therefore it was requisite that they should know of
it, that, being fore-warned, they might be fore-armed. It was not fit to
be spoken publicly as yet, 1. Because many that were cool toward him,
would hereby have been driven to turn their backs upon him; the scandal
of the cross would have frightened them from following him any longer.
2. Because many that were hot for him, would hereby be driven to take up
arms in his defense, and it might have occasioned an uproar among the
people ([Mat 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#005)), which would have
been laid to his charge, if he had told them of it publicly before: and,
besides that such methods are utterly disagreeable to the genius of his
kingdom, which is not of this world, he never countenanced any thing
which had a tendency to prevent his sufferings. This discourse was not
in the synagogue, or in the house, but in the way, as they travelled
along; which teaches us, in our walks or travels with our friends, to
keep up such discourse as is good, and to the use of edifying. See [Deu
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#007).

II\. The prediction itself, [Mat
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#018), [Mat
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#019). Observe,

1\. It is but a repetition of what he had once and again said before,
[Mat 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021); [Mat
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#022), [Mat
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#023). This intimates that he not only
saw clearly what troubles lay before him, but that his heart was upon
his suffering-work; it filled him, not with fear, then he would have
studied to avoid it, and could have done it, but with desire and
expectation; he spoke thus frequently of his sufferings, because through
them he was to enter into his glory. Note, It is good for us to be often
thinking and speaking of our death, and of the sufferings which, it is
likely, we may meet with betwixt this and the grave; and thus, by making
them more familiar, they would become less formidable. This is one way
of dying daily, and of taking up our cross daily, to be daily speaking
of the cross, and of dying; which would come neither the sooner nor the
surer, but much the better, for our thoughts and discourses of them.

2\. He is more particular here in foretelling his sufferings than any
time before. He had said ([Mat 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021)),
that he should suffer many things, and be killed; and ([Mat
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#022)), that he should be betrayed
into the hands of men, and they should kill him; but here he adds; that
he shall be condemned, and delivered to the Gentiles, that they shall
mock him, and scourge him, and crucify him. These are frightful things,
and the certain foresight of them was enough to damp an ordinary
resolution, yet (as was foretold concerning him, [Isa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004)) he did not fail, nor was
discouraged; but the more clearly he foresaw his sufferings, the more
cheerfully he went forth to meet them. He foretels by whom he should
suffer, by the chief priests and the scribes; so he had said before, but
here he adds, They shall deliver him to the Gentiles, that he might be
the better understood; for the chief priests and scribes had no power to
put him to death, nor was crucifying a manner of death in use among the
Jews. Christ suffered from the malice both of Jews and Gentiles, because
he was to suffer for the salvation both of Jews and Gentiles; both had a
hand in his death, because he was to reconcile both by his cross, [Eph
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#016).

3\. Here, as before, he annexes the mention of his resurrection and his
glory to that of his death and sufferings; The third day he shall rise
again. He still brings this in, (1.) To encourage himself in his
sufferings, and to carry him cheerfully through them. He endured the
cross for the joy set before him; he foresaw he should rise again, and
rise quickly, the third day. He shall be straightway glorified, [Joh
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#032). The reward is not only sure,
but very near. (2.) To encourage his disciples, and comfort them, who
would be overwhelmed and greatly terrified by his sufferings. (3.) To
direct us, under all the sufferings of this present time, to keep up a
believing prospect of the glory to be revealed, to look at the things
that are not seen, that are eternal, which will enable us to call the
present afflictions light, and but for a moment.

[Matthew 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 20:20</span></span>

Here, is first, the request of the two disciples to Christ, and the
rectifying of the mistake upon which that was grounded, [Mat
20:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020). The sons of Zebedee were
James and John, two of the first three of Christ's disciples; Peter and
they were his favourites; John was the disciple whom Jesus loved; yet
none were so often reproved as they; whom Christ loves best he reproves
most, [Rev 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#019).

I. Here is the ambitious address they made to Christ - that they might
sit, the one on his right hand, and the other on his left, in his
kingdom, [Mat 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020), [Mat
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#021). It was a great degree of faith,
that they were confident of his kingdom, though now he appeared in
meanness; but a great degree of ignorance, that they still expected a
temporal kingdom, with worldly pomp and power, when Christ had so often
told them of sufferings and self-denial. In this they expected to be
grandees. They ask not for employment in this kingdom, but for honour
only; and no place would serve them in this imaginary kingdom, but the
highest, next to Christ, and above every body else. It is probable that
the last word in Christ's foregoing discourse gave occasion to this
request, that the third day he should rise again. They concluded that
his resurrection would be his entrance upon his kingdom, and therefore
were resolved to put in betimes for the best place; nor would they lose
it for want of speaking early. What Christ said to comfort them, they
thus abused, and were puffed up with. Some cannot bear comforts, but
they turn them to a wrong purpose; as sweetmeats in a foul stomach
produce bile. Now observe,

1\. There was policy in the management of this address, that they put
their mother on to present it, that it might be looked upon as her
request, and not theirs. Though proud people think well of themselves,
they would not be thought to do so, and therefore affect nothing more
than a show of humility ([Col 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018)),
and others must be put on to court that honour for them, which they are
ashamed to court for themselves. The mother of James and John was
Salome, as appears by comparing [Mat
27:61](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#061), with [Mar
15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040). Some think she was daughter of
Cleophas or Alpheus, and sister or cousin german to Mary the mother of
our Lord. She was one of those women that attended Christ, and
ministered to him; and they thought she had such an interest in him,
that he could deny her nothing, and therefore they made her their
advocate. Thus when Adonijah had reasonable request to make to Solomon,
he put Bathsheba on to speak for him. It was their mother's weakness
thus to become that tool of their ambition, which she should have given
a check to. Those that are wise and good, would not be seen in an
ill-favoured thing. In gracious requests, we should learn this wisdom,
to desire the prayers of those that have an interest at the throne of
grace; we should beg of our praying friends to pray for us, and reckon
it a real kindness.

It was likewise policy to ask first for a general grant, that he would
do a certain thing for them, not in faith, but in presumption, upon that
general promise; Ask, and it shall be given you; in which is implied
this qualification of our request, that it be according to the revealed
will of God, otherwise we ask and have not, if we ask to consume it upon
our lusts, [Jam 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#003).

2\. There was pride at the bottom of it, a proud conceit of their own
merit, a proud contempt of their brethren, and a proud desire of honour
and preferment; pride is a sin that most easily besets us, and which it
is hard to get clear of. It is a holy ambition to strive to excel others
in grace and holiness; but it is a sinful ambition to covet to exceed
others in pomp and grandeur. Seekest thou great things for thyself, when
thou hast just now heard of thy Master's being mocked, and scourged, and
crucified? For shame! Seek them not, [Jer
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#005).

II\. Christ's answer to this address ([Mat
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022), [Mat
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)), directed not to the mother,
but to the sons that set her on. Though others be our mouth in prayer,
the answer will be given to us according as we stand effected. Christ's
answer is very mild; they were overtaken in the fault of ambition, but
Christ restored them with the spirit of meekness. Observe,

1\. How he reproved the ignorance and error of their petition; Ye know
not what ye ask. (1.) They were much in the dark concerning the kingdom
they had their eye upon; they dreamed of a temporal kingdom, whereas
Christ's kingdom is not of this world. They knew not what it was to sit
on his right hand, and on his left; they talked of it as blind men do of
colours. Our apprehensions of that glory which is yet to be revealed,
are like the apprehensions which a child has of the preferments of grown
men. If at length, through grace, we arrive at perfection, we shall then
put away such childish fancies: when we come to see face to face, we
shall know what we enjoy; but now, alas, we know not what we ask; we can
but ask for the good as it lies in the promise, [Tit
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#002). What it will be in the
performance, eye has not seen, nor ear heard. (2.) They were much in the
dark concerning the way to that kingdom. They know not what they ask,
who ask for the end, but overlook the means, and so put asunder what God
has joined together. The disciples thought, when they had left what
little all they had for Christ, and had gone about the country awhile
preaching the gospel of the kingdom, all their service and sufferings
were over, and it was now time to ask, What shall we have? As if nothing
were now to be looked for but crowns and garlands; whereas there were
far greater hardships and difficulties before them than they had yet met
with. They imagined their warfare was accomplished when it was scarcely
begun, and they had yet but run with the footmen. They dream of being in
Canaan presently, and consider not what they shall do in the swellings
of Jordan. Note, \[1.\] We are all apt, when we are but girding on the
harness, to boast as though we had put it off. \[2.\] We know not what
we ask, when we ask for the glory of wearing the crown, and ask not for
grace to bear the cross in our way to it.

2\. How he repressed the vanity and ambition of their request. They were
pleasing themselves with the fancy of sitting on his right hand, and on
his left, in great state; now, to check this, he leads them to the
thoughts of their sufferings, and leaves them in the dark about their
glory.

(1.) He leads them to the thoughts of their sufferings, which they were
not so mindful of as they ought to have been. They looked so earnestly
upon the crown, the prize, that they were ready to plunge headlong and
unprepared into the foul way that led to it; and therefore he thinks it
necessary to put them in mind of the hardships that were before them,
that they might be no surprise or terror to them.

Observe, \[1.\] How fairly he puts the matter to them, concerning these
difficulties ([Mat 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022)); "You would
stand candidates for the first post of honour in the kingdom; but are
you able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of? You talk of what
great things you must have when you have done your work; but are you
able to hold out to the end of it?" Put the matter seriously to
yourselves. These same two disciples once knew not what manner of spirit
they were of, when they were disturbed with anger, [Luk
9:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055); and now they were not aware what
was amiss in their spirits when they were lifted up with ambition.
Christ sees that pride in us which we discern not in ourselves.

Note, First, That to suffer for Christ is to drink of a cup, and to be
baptized with a baptism. In this description of sufferings, 1. It is
true, that affliction doth abound. It is supposed to be a bitter cup,
that is drunk of, wormwood and gall, those waters of a full cup, that
are wrung out to God's people ([Psa
73:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#010)); a cup of trembling indeed, but
not of fire and brimstone, the portion of the cup of wicked men, [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006). It is supposed to be a baptism,
a washing with the waters of affliction; some are dipped in them; the
waters compass them about even to the soul ([Jon
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#005)); others have but a sprinkling of
them; both are baptism, some are overwhelmed in them, as in a deluge,
others ill wet, as in a sharp shower. But, 2. Even in this, consolation
doth more abound. It is but a cup, not an ocean; it is but a draught,
bitter perhaps, but we shall see the bottom of it; it is a cup in the
hand of a Father ([Joh 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#011)); and it
is full of mixture, [Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008). It is
but a baptism; if dipped, that is the worst of it, not drowned;
perplexed, but not in despair. Baptism is an ordinance by which we join
ourselves to the Lord in covenant and communion; and so is suffering for
Christ, [Eze 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#037); [Isa
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#010). Baptism is "an outward and
visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace;" and so is suffering for
Christ, for unto us it is given, [Phi
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#029).

Secondly, It is to drink of the same cup that Christ drank of, and to be
baptized with the same baptism that he was baptized with. Christ is
beforehand with us in suffering, and in that as in other things left us
an example. 1. It bespeaks the condescension of a suffering Christ, that
he would drink of such a cup ([Joh
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#011)), nay, and such a brook ([Psa
110:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#007)), and drink so deep, and yet so
cheerfully; that he would be baptized with such a baptism, and was so
forward to it, [Luk 12:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#050). It was much
that he would be baptized with water as a common sinner, much more with
blood as an uncommon malefactor. But in all this he was made in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and was made sin for us. 2. It bespeaks the
consolation of suffering Christians, that they do but pledge Christ in
the bitter cup, are partakers of his sufferings, and fill up that which
is behind of them; we must therefore arm ourselves with the same mind,
and go to him without the camp.

Thirdly, It is good for us to be often putting it to ourselves, whether
we are able to drink of this cup, and to be baptized with this baptism.
We must expect suffering, and not look upon it as a hard thing to suffer
well and as becomes us. Are we able to suffer cheerfully, and in the
worst of times still to hold fast our integrity? What can we afford to
part with for Christ? How far will we give him credit? Could I find in
my heart to drink of a bitter cup, and to be baptized with a bloody
baptism, rather than let go my hold of Christ? The truth is, Religion,
if it be worth any thing, is worth every thing; but it is worth little,
if it be not worth suffering for. Now let us sit down, and count the
cost of dying for Christ rather than denying him, and ask, Can we take
him upon these terms?

\[2.\] See how boldly they engage for themselves; they said, We are
able, in hopes of sitting on his right hand, and on his left; but at the
same time they fondly hoped that they should never be tried. As before
they knew not what they asked, so now they knew not what they answered.
We are able; they would have done well to put in, "Lord, by thy
strength, and in thy grace, we are able, otherwise we are not." But the
same that was Peter's temptation, to be confident of his own
sufficiency, and presume upon his own strength, was here the temptation
of James and John; and it is a sin we are all prone to. They knew not
what Christ's cup was, nor what his baptism, and therefore they were
thus bold in promising for themselves. But those are commonly most
confident, that are least acquainted with the cross.

\[3.\] See how plainly and positively their sufferings are here foretold
([Mat 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)); Ye shall drink of my
cup. Sufferings foreseen will be the more easily borne, especially if
looked upon under a right notion, as drinking of his cup, and being
baptized with his baptism. Christ began in suffering for us, and expects
we should pledge him in suffering for him. Christ will have us know the
worst, that we may make the best of our way to heaven; Ye shall drink;
that is, ye shall suffer. James drank the bloody cup first of all the
apostles, [Act 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002). John, though at
last he died in his bed, if we may credit the ecclesiastical historians,
yet often drank of this bitter cup, as when he was banished into the
isle of Patmos ([Rev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009)), and when
(as they say) at Ephesus he was put into a caldron of boiling oil, but
was miraculously preserved. He was, as the rest of the apostles, in
deaths often. He took the cup, offered himself to the baptism, and it
was accepted.

(2.) He leaves them in the dark about the degrees of their glory. To
carry them cheerfully through their sufferings, it was enough to be
assured that they should have a place in his kingdom. The lowest seat in
heaven is an abundant recompence for the greatest sufferings on earth.
But as to the preferments there, it was not fit there should be any
intimation given for whom they were intended; for the infirmity of their
present state could not bear such a discovery with any evenness; "To sit
on my right hand and on my left is not mine to give, and therefore it is
not for you to ask it or to know it; but it shall be given to them for
whom it is prepared of my Father." Note, \[1.\] It is very probable that
there are degrees of glory in heaven; for our Saviour seems to allow
that there are some that shall sit on his right hand and on his left, in
the highest places. \[2.\] As the future glory itself, so the degrees of
it, are purposed and prepared in the eternal counsel of God; as the
common salvation, so the more peculiar honours, are appointed, the whole
affair is long since settled, and there is a certain measure of the
stature, both in grace and glory, [Eph
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013). \[3.\] Christ, in dispensing the
fruits of his own purchase, goes exactly by the measures of his Father's
purpose; It is not mine to give, save to them (so it may be read) for
whom it is prepared. Christ has the sole power of giving eternal life,
but then it is to as many as were given him, [Joh
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002). It is not mine to give, that is,
to promise now; that matter is already settled and concerted, and the
Father and Son understand one another perfectly well in this matter. "It
is not mine to give to those that seek and are ambitious of it, but to
those that by great humility and self-denial are prepared for it."

III\. Here are the reproof and instruction which Christ gave to the
other ten disciples for their displeasure at the request of James and
John. He had much to bear with in them all, they were so weak in
knowledge and grace, yet he bore their manners.

1\. The fret that the ten disciples were in ([Mat
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#024)). They were moved with
indignation against the two brethren; not because they were desirous to
be preferred, which was their sin, and for which Christ was displeased
with them, but because they were desirous to be preferred before them,
which was a reflection upon them. Many seem to have indignation at sin;
but it is not because it is sin, but because it touches them. They will
inform against a man that swears; but it is only if he swear at them,
and affront them, not because he dishonours God. These disciples were
angry at their brethren's ambition, though they themselves, bay because
they themselves, were as ambitious. Note, It is common for people to be
angry at those sins in others which they allow of and indulge in
themselves. Those that are proud and covetous themselves do not care to
see others so. Nothing makes more mischief among brethren, or is the
cause of more indignation and contention, than ambition, and desire of
greatness. We never find Christ's disciples quarreling, but something of
this was at the bottom of it.

2\. The check that Christ gave them, which was very gentle, rather by
way of instruction what they should be, than by way of reprehension for
what they were. He had reproved this very sin before ([Mat
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003)), and told them they must be
humble as little children; yet they relapsed into it, and yet he
reproved them for it thus mildly.

He called them unto him, which intimates great tenderness and
familiarity. He did not, in anger, bid them get out of his presence, but
called them, in love, to come into his presence: for therefore he is fit
to teach, and we are invited to learn of him, because he is meek and
lowly in heart. What he had to say concerned both the two disciples and
the ten, and therefore he will have them all together. And he tells
them, that, whereas they were asking which of them should have dominion
a temporal kingdom, there was really no such dominion reserved for any
of them. For,

(1.) They must not be like the princes of the Gentiles. Christ's
disciples must not be like Gentiles, no not like princes of the
Gentiles. Principality doth no more become ministers than Gentilism doth
Christians.

Observe, \[1.\] What is the way of the princes of the Gentiles ([Mat
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#025)); to exercise dominion and
authority over their subjects, and (if they can but win the upper hand
with a strong hand) over one another too. That which bears them up in it
is, that they are great, and great men think they may do any thing.
Dominion and authority are the great things which the princes of the
Gentiles pursue, and pride themselves in; they would bear sway, would
carry all before them, have every body truckle to them, and every sheaf
bow to theirs. They would have it cried before them, Bow the knee; like
Nebuchadnezzar, who slew, and kept alive, at pleasure.

\[2.\] What is the will of Christ concerning his apostles and ministers,
in this matter.

First, "It shall not be so among you. The constitution of the spiritual
kingdom is quite different from this. You are to teach the subjects of
this kingdom, to instruct and beseech them, to counsel and comfort them,
to take pains with them, and suffer with them, not to exercise dominion
or authority over them; you are not to lord it over God's heritage ([Pe1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#003)), but to labour in it." This
forbids not only tyranny, and abuse of power, but the claim or use of
any such secular authority as the princes of the Gentiles lawfully
exercise. So hard is it for vain men, even good men, to have such
authority, and not to be puffed up with it, and do more hurt than good
with it, that our Lord Jesus saw fit wholly to banish it out of his
church. Paul himself disowns dominion over the faith of any, [Co2
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#024). The pomp and grandeur of the
princes of the Gentiles ill become Christ's disciples. Now, if there
were no such power and honour intended to be in the church, it was
nonsense for them to be striving who should have it. They knew not what
they asked.

Secondly, How then shall it be among the disciples of Christ? Something
of greatness among them Christ himself had intimated, and here he
explains it; "He that will be great among you, that will be chief, that
would really be so, and would be found to be so at last, let him be your
minister, your servant," [Mat 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026),
[Mat 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#027). Here observe, 1. That it
is the duty of Christ's disciples to serve one another, for mutual
edification. This includes both humility and usefulness. The followers
of Christ must be ready to stoop to the meanest offices of love for the
good one of another, must submit one to another ([Pe1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005); [Eph
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#021)), and edify one another ([Rom
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#019)), please one another for good,
[Rom 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#002). The great apostle made
himself every one's servant; see [Co1
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019). 2. It is the dignity of Christ's
disciples faithfully to discharge this duty. The way to be great and
chief is to be humble and serviceable. Those are to be best accounted
of, and most respected, in the church, and will be so by all that
understand things aright; not those that are dignified with high and
mighty names, like the names of the great ones of the earth, that appear
in pomp, and assume to themselves a power proportionable, but those that
are most humble and self-denying, and lay out themselves most to do
good, though to the diminishing of themselves. These honour God most,
and those he will honour. As he must become a fool that would be wise,
so he must become a servant that would be chief. St. Paul was a great
example of this; he laboured more abundantly than they all, made himself
(as some would call it) a drudge to his work; and is not he chief? Do we
not by consent call him the great apostle, though he called himself less
than the least? And perhaps our Lord Jesus had an eye to him, when he
said, There were last that should be first; for Paul was one born out of
due time ([Co1 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008)); not only the
youngest child of the family of the apostles, but a posthumous one, yet
he became greatest. And perhaps he it was for whom the first post of
honour in Christ's kingdom was reserved and prepared of his Father, not
for James who sought it; and therefore just before Paul began to be
famous as an apostle, Providence ordered it so that James was cut off
([Act 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002)), that in the college of
the twelve Paul might be substituted in his room.

(2.) They must be like the Master himself; and it is very fit that they
should, that, while they were in the world, they should be as he was
when he was in the world; for to both the present state is a state of
humiliation, the crown and glory were reserved for both in the future
state. Let them consider that the Son of Man came not to be ministered
to, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many, [Mat
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028). Our Lord Jesus here sets
himself before his disciples as a pattern of those two things before
recommended, humility, and usefulness.

\[1.\] Never was there such an example of humility and condescension as
there was in the life of Christ, who came not to be ministered unto, but
to minister. When the Son of God came into the world, his Ambassador to
the children of men, one would think he should have been ministered to,
should have appeared in an equipage agreeable to his person and
character; but he did not so; he made no figure, had no pompous train of
state-servants to attend him, nor was he clad in robes of honour, for he
took upon him the form of a servant. He was indeed ministered to as a
poor man, which was a part of his humiliation; there were those that
ministered to him of their substance ([Luk
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#002), [Luk
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#003)); but he was never ministered to
as a great man; he never took state upon him, was not waited on at
table; he once washed his disciples' feet, but we never read that they
washed his feet. He came to minister help to all that were in distress;
he made himself a servant to the sick and diseased; was as ready to
their requests as ever any servant was at the beck of his master, and
took as much pains to serve them; he attended continually to this very
thing, and denied himself both food and rest to attend to it.

\[2.\] Never was there such an example of beneficence and usefulness as
there was in the death of Christ, who gave his life a ransom for many.
He lived as a servant, and went about doing good; but he died as a
sacrifice, and in that he did the greatest good of all. He came into the
world on purpose to give his life a ransom; it was first in his
intention. The aspiring princes of the Gentiles make the lives of many a
ransom for their own honour, and perhaps a sacrifice to their own
humour. Christ doth not do so; his subjects' blood is precious to him,
and he is not prodigal of it ([Psa
72:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#014)); but on the contrary, he gives
his honour and life too ransom for his subjects. Note, First, Jesus
Christ laid down his life for a ransom. Our lives were forfeited into
the hands of divine justice by sin. Christ, by parting with his life,
made atonement for sin, and so rescued ours; he was made sin, and a
curse for us, and died, not only for our good, but in our stead, [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028); [Pe1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018), [Pe1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019). Secondly, It was a ransom for
many, sufficient for all, effectual for many; and, if for many, then,
saith the poor doubting soul, "Why not for me?" It was for many, that by
him many may be made righteous. These many were his seed, for which his
soul travailed ([Isa 53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010), [Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011)); for many, so they will be when
they come all together, though now they appear but a little flock.

Now this is a good reason why we should not strive for precedency,
because the cross is our banner, and our Master's death is our life. It
is a good reason why we should study to do good, and, in consideration
of the love of Christ in dying for us, not hesitate to lay down our
lives for the brethren, [Jo1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#016).
Ministers should be more forward than others to serve and suffer for the
good of souls, as blessed Paul was, [Act
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#024); [Phi
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017). The nearer we are all concerned
in, and the more we are advantaged by, the humility and humiliation of
Christ, the more ready and careful we should be to imitate it.

[Matthew 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 20:29</span></span>

We have here an account of the cure of two poor blind beggars; in which
we may observe,

I. Their address to Christ, [Mat
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029), [Mat
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#030). And in this,

1\. The circumstances of it are observable. It was as Christ and his
disciples departed from Jericho; of that devoted place, which was
rebuilt under a curse, Christ took his leave with this blessing, for he
received gifts even for the rebellious. It was in the presence of a
great multitude that followed him; Christ had a numerous, though not a
pompous, attendance, and did good to them, though he did not take state
to himself. This multitude that followed him for loaves, and some for
love, some for curiosity, and some in expectation of his temporal reign,
which the disciples themselves dreamed of, very few with desire to be
taught their duty; yet, for the sake of those few, he confirmed his
doctrine by miracles wrought in the presence of great multitudes; who,
if they were not convinced by them, would be the more inexcusable. Two
blind men concurred in their request; for joint-prayer is pleasing to
Christ, [Mat 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#019). These
joint-sufferers were joint-suitors; being companions in the same
tribulation, they were partners in the same supplication. Note, It is
good for those that are labouring under the same calamity, or infirmity
of body or mind, to join together in the same prayer to God for relief,
that they may quicken one another's fervency, and encourage one
another's faith. There is mercy enough in Christ for all the
petitioners. These blind men were sitting by the way-side, as blind
beggars used to do. Note, Those that would receive mercy from Christ,
must place themselves there where his out-goings are; where he manifests
himself to those that seek him. It is good thus to way-lay Christ, to be
in his road.

They heard that Jesus passed by. Though they were blind, they were not
deaf. Seeing and hearing are the learning senses. It is a great calamity
to want either; but the defect of one may be, and often is, made up in
the acuteness of the other; and therefore it has been observed by some
as an instance of the goodness of Providence, that none were ever known
to be born both blind and deaf; but that, one way or other, all are in a
capacity of receiving knowledge. These blind men had heard of Christ by
the hearing of the ear, but they desired that their eyes might see him.
When they heard that Jesus passed by, they asked no further questions,
who were with him, or whether he was in haste, but immediately cried
out. Note, It is good to improve the present opportunity, to make the
best of the price now in the hand, because, if once let slip, it may
never return; these blind men did so, and did wisely; for we do not find
that Christ ever came to Jericho again. Now is the accepted time.

2\. The address itself is more observable; Have mercy on us, O Lord,
thou Son of David, repeated again, [Mat
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#031). Four things are recommended to
us for an example in this address; for, though the eye of the body was
dark, the eye of the mind was enlightened concerning truth, duty, and
interest.

(1.) Here is an example of importunity in prayer. They cried out as men
in earnest; men in want are earnest, of course. Cold desires do but beg
denials. Those that would prevail in prayer, must stir up themselves to
take hold on God in duty. When they were discountenanced in it, they
cried the more. The stream of fervency, if it be stopped, will rise and
swell the higher. This wrestling with God in prayer, and makes us the
fitter to receive mercy; for the more it is striven for, the more it
will be prized and thankfully acknowledged.

(2.) Of humility in prayer; in that word, Have mercy on us, not
specifying the favour, or prescribing what, much less pleading merit,
but casting themselves upon, and referring themselves cheerfully to, the
Meditator's mercy, in what way he pleases; "Only have mercy." They ask
not for silver and gold, though they were poor, but mercy, mercy. This
is that which our hearts must be upon, when we come to the throne of
grace, that we may find mercy, [Heb
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016); [Psa
130:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#007).

(3.) Of faith in prayer; in the title they gave to Christ, which was in
the nature of a plea; O Lord, thou Son of David; they confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord, and therefore had authority to command deliverance for
them. Surely it was by the Holy Ghost that they called Christ Lord, [Co1
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003). Thus they take their
encouragement in prayer from his power, as in calling him the Son of
David they take encouragement from his goodness, as Messiah, of whom so
many kind and tender things had been foretold, particularly his
compassion to the poor and needy, [Psa
72:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#012), [Psa
72:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#013). It is of excellent use, in
prayer, to eye Christ in the grace and glory of his Messiahship; to
remember that he is the Son of David, whose office it is to help, and
save, and to plead it with him.

(4.) Of perseverance in prayer, notwithstanding discouragement. The
multitude rebuked them, as noisy, clamorous, and impertinent, and bid
them hold their peace, and not disturb the Master, who perhaps at first
himself seemed not to regard them. In following Christ with our prayers,
we must expect to meet with hindrances and manifold discouragements from
within and from without, something or other that bids us hold our peace.
Such rebuke are permitted, that faith and fervency, patience and
perseverance, may be tried. These poor blind men were rebuked by the
multitude that followed Christ. Note, the sincere and serious beggars at
Christ's door commonly meet with the worst rebukes from those that
follow him but in pretence and hypocrisy. But they would not be beaten
off so; when they were in pursuit of such a mercy, it was no time to
compliment, or to practise a timid delicacy; no, they cried the more.
Note, Men ought always to pray, and not to faint; to pray with all
perseverance ([Luk 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001)); to continue
in prayer with resolution, and not to yield to opposition.

II\. The answer of Christ to this address of theirs. The multitude
rebuked them; but Christ encouraged them. It were sad for us, if the
Master were not more kind and tender than the multitude; but he loves to
countenance those with special favour, that are under frowns, and
rebukes, and contempts from men. He will not suffer his humble
supplicants to be run down, and put out of countenance.

1\. He stood still, and called them, [Mat
20:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#032). He was now going up to
Jerusalem, and was straitened till his work there was accomplished; and
yet he stood still to cure these blind men. Note, When we are ever so
much in haste about any business, yet we should be willing to stand
still to do good. He called them, not because he could not cure them at
a distance, but because he would do it in the most obliging and
instructive way, and would countenance weak but willing patients and
petitioners. Christ not only enjoins us to pray, but invites us; holds
out the golden sceptre to us, and bids us come touch the top of it.

2\. He enquired further into their case; What will ye that I shall do
unto you? This implies, (1.) A very fair offer; "Here I am; let me know
what you would have, and you shall have it." What would we more? He is
able to do for us, and as willing as he is able; Ask, and it shall be
given you. (2.) A condition annexed to this offer, which is a very easy
and reasonable one - that they should tell him what they would have him
do for them. One would think this a strange question, any one might tell
what they would have. Christ knew well enough; but he would know it from
them, whether they begged only for alms, as from a common person, or for
a cure, as from the Messiah. Note, It is the will of God that we should
in every thing make our requests known to him by prayer and
supplication; not to inform or move him, but to qualify ourselves for
the mercy. The waterman in the boat, who with his hook takes hold of the
shore, does not thereby pull the shore to the boat, but the boat to the
shore. So in prayer we do not draw the mercy to ourselves, but ourselves
to the mercy.

They soon made known their request to him, such a one as they never made
to any one else; Lord, that our eyes may be opened. The wants and
burthens of the body we are soon sensible of, and can readily relate;
Ubi dolor, ubi digitus - The finger promptly points to the seat of pain.
O that we were but as apprehensive of our spiritual maladies, and could
as feelingly complain of them, especially our spiritual blindness! Lord,
that the eyes of our mind may be opened! Many are spiritually blind, and
yet say they see, [Joh 9:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#041). Were we
but sensible of our darkness, we should soon apply ourselves to him, who
alone has the eye-salve, with this request, Lord, that our eyes may be
opened.

3\. He cured them; when he encouraged them to seek him, he did not say,
Seek in vain. What he did was an instance,

(1.) Of his pity; He had compassion on them. Misery is the object of
mercy. They that are poor and blind are wretched and miserable ([Rev
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#017)), and the objects of compassion.
It was the tender mercy of our God, that gave light and sight to them
that sat in darkness, [Luk 1:78](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#078), [Luk
1:79](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#079). We cannot help those that are
under such calamities, as Christ did; but we may and must pity them, as
Christ did, and draw out our soul to them.

(2.) Of his power; He that formed the eye, can he not heal it? Yes, he
can, he did, he did it easily, he touched their eyes; he did it
effectually, Immediately their eyes received sight. Thus he not only
proved that he was sent of God, but showed on what errand he was sent -
to give sight to those that are spiritually blind, to turn them from
darkness to light.

Lastly, These blind men, when they had received sight, followed him.
Note, None follow Christ blindfold. He first by his grace opens men's
eyes, and so draws their hearts after him. They followed Christ, as his
disciples, to learn of him, and as his witnesses, eye-witnesses, to bear
their testimony to him and to his power and goodness. The best evidence
of spiritual illumination is a constant inseparable adherence to Jesus
Christ as our Lord and Leader.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 21](mat021)

</div>
