<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic005)  [Next](mic007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#001)

[Micah](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mic 6:0</span></span>

After the precious promises in the two foregoing chapters, relating to
the Messiah's kingdom, the prophet is here directed to set the sins of
Israel in order before them, for their conviction and humiliation, as
necessary to make way for the comfort of gospel-grace. Christ's
forerunner was a reprover, and preached repentance, and so prepared his
way. Here, I. God enters an action against his people for their base
ingratitude, and the bad returns they had made him for his favours ([Mic
6:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#001)). II. He shows the wrong course
they should have taken ([Mic 6:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006)).
III. He calls upon them to hear the voice of his judgments, and sets the
sins in order before them for which he still proceeded in his
controversy with them ([Mic 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009)),
their injustice ([Mic 6:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#010)), and
their idolatry ([Mic 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#016)), for both
which ruin was coming upon them.

[Micah 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 6:1</span></span>

Here, I. The prefaces to the message are very solemn and such as may
engage our most serious attention. 1. The people are commanded to give
audience: Hear you now what the Lord says. What the prophet speaks he
speaks from God, and in his name; they are therefore bound to hear it,
not as the word of a sinful dying man, but of the holy living God. Hear
now what he saith, for, first or last, he will be heard. 2. The prophet
is commanded to speak in earnest, and to put an emphasis upon what he
said: Arise, contend thou before the mountains, or with the mountains,
and let the hills hear thy voice, if it were possible; contend with the
mountains and hills of Judea, that is, with the inhabitants of those
mountains and hills; and, some think, reference is had to those
mountains and hills on which they worshipped idols and which were thus
polluted. But it is rather to be taken more generally, as appears by his
call, not only to the mountains, but to the strong foundations of the
earth, pursuant to the instructions given him. This is designed, (1.) To
excite the earnestness of the prophet; he must speak as vehemently as if
he designed to make even the hills and mountains hear him, must cry
aloud, and not spare; what he had to say in God's name he must proclaim
publicly before the mountains, as one that was neither ashamed nor
afraid to own his message; he must speak as one concerned, as one that
desired to speak to the heart, and therefore appeared to speak from the
heart. (2.) To expose the stupidity of the people; "Let the hills hear
thy voice, for this senseless careless people will not hear it, will not
heed it. Let the rocks, the foundations of the earth, that have no ears,
hear, since Israel, that has ears, will not hear." It is an appeal to
the mountains and hills; let them bear witness that Israel has fair
warning given them, and good counsel, if they would but take it. Thus
Isaiah begins with, Hear, O heavens! and give ear, O earth! Let them
judge between God and his vineyard.

II\. The message itself is very affecting. He is to let all the world
know that God has a quarrel with his people, good ground for an action
against them. Their offences are public, and therefore so are the
articles of impeachment exhibited against them. Take notice the Lord has
a controversy with his people and he will plead with Israel, will plead
by his prophets, plead by his providences, to make good his charge.
Note, 1. Sin begets a controversy between God and man. The righteous God
has an action against every sinner, an action of debt, an action of
trespass, an action of slander. 2. If Israel, God's own professing
people, provoke him by sin, he will let them know that he has a
controversy with them; he sees sin in them, and is displeased with it,
nay, their sins are more displeasing to him than the sins of others, as
they are a greater grief to his Spirit and dishonour to his name. 3. God
will plead with those whom he has a controversy with, will plead with
his people Israel, that they may be convinced and that he may be
justified. In the close of the foregoing chapter he pleaded with the
heathen in anger and fury, to bring them to ruin; but here he pleads
with Israel in compassion and tenderness, to bring them to repentance,
Come now, and let us reason together. God reasons with us, to teach us
to reason with ourselves. See the equity of God's cause, it will bear to
be pleaded, and sinners themselves will be forced to confess judgment,
and to own that God's ways are equal, but their ways are unequal, [Eze
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#025). Now, (1.) God here challenges
them to show what he had done against them which might give them
occasion to desert him. They had revolted from God and rebelled against
him; but had they any cause to do so? ([Mic
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#003)): "O my people! what have I done
unto thee? Wherein have I wearied thee?" If subjects quit their
allegiance to their prince, they will pretend (as the ten tribes did
when they revolted from Rehoboam), that his yoke is too heavy for them;
but can you pretend any such thing? What have I done to you that is
unjust or unkind? Wherein have I wearied you with the impositions of
service or the exactions of tribute? Have I made you to serve with an
offering? [Isa 43:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#023). What iniquity
have your fathers found in me? [Jer
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#005). He never deceived us, nor
disappointed our expectations from him, never did us wrong, nor put
disgrace upon us; why then do we wrong and dishonour him, and frustrate
his expectations from us? Here is a challenge to all that ever were in
God's service to testify against him if they have found him, in any
thing, a hard Master, or if they have found his demands unreasonable.
(2.) Since they could not show any thing that he had done against them,
he will show them a great deal that he has done for them, which should
have engaged them for ever to his service, [Mic
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#004), [Mic
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#005). They are here directed, and we in
them, to look a great way back in their reviews of the divine favour;
let them remember their former days, their first days, when they were
formed into a people, and the great things God did for them, \[1.\] When
he brought them out of Egypt, the land of their bondage, [Mic
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#004). They were content with their
slavery, and almost in love with their chains, for the sake of the
garlic and onions they had plenty of; but God brought them up, inspired
them with an ambition of liberty and animated them with a resolution by
a bold effort to shake off their fetters. The Egyptians held them fast,
and would not let the people go; but God redeemed them, not by price,
but by force, out of the house of servants, or, rather, the house of
bondage, for it is the same word that is used in the preface to the ten
commandments, which insinuates that the considerations which are
arguments for duty, if they be not improved by us, will be improved
against us as aggravations of sin. When he brought them out of Egypt
into a vast howling wilderness, as he left not himself without witness,
so he left not them without guides, for he sent before them Moses,
Aaron, and Miriam, three prophets (says the Chaldee paraphrase), Moses
the great prophet of the Old Testament, Aaron his prophet ([Exo
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)), and Miriam a prophetess, [Exo
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020). Note, When we are calling to
mind God's former mercies to us we must not forget the mercy of good
teachers and governors when we were young; let those be made mention of,
to the glory of God, who went before us, saying, This is the way, walk
in it; it was God that sent them before us, to prepare the way of the
Lord and to prepare a people for him. \[2.\] When he brought them into
Canaan. God no less glorified himself, and honoured them, in what he did
for them when he brought them into the land of their rest than in what
he did for them when he brought them out of the land of their servitude.
When Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, were dead, yet they found God the same.
Let them remember now what God did for them, First, In baffling and
defeating the designs of Balak and Balaam against them, which he did by
the power he has over the hearts and tongues of men, [Mic
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#005). Let them remember what Balak the
king of Moab consulted, what mischief he devised and designed to do to
Israel, when they encamped in the plains of Moab; that which he
consulted was to curse Israel, to divide between them and their God, and
to disengage him from the protection of them. Among the heathen, when
they made war upon any people, they endeavoured by magic charms or
otherwise to get from them their tutelar gods, as to rob Troy of its
Palladium. Macrobius has a chapter de ritu evocandi Deos - concerning
the solemnity of calling out the gods. Balak would try this against
Israel; but remember what Balaam the son of Beor answered him, how
contrary to his own intention and inclination; instead of cursing
Israel, he blessed them, to the extreme confusion and vexation of Balak.
Let them remember the malice of the heathen against them, and for that
reason never learn the way of the heathen, nor associate with them. Let
them remember the kindness of their God to them, how he turned the curse
into a blessing (because the Lord thy God loved thee, as it is, [Deu
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#005)), and for that reason never
forsake him. Note, The disappointing of the devices of the church's
enemies ought always to be remembered to the glory of the church's
protector, who can make the answer of the tongue directly to contradict
the preparation and consultation of the heart, [Pro
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#001). Secondly, In bringing them from
Shittim, their last lodgment out of Canaan, unto Gilgal, their first
lodgment in Canaan. There it was, between Shittim and Gilgal, that, upon
the death of Moses, Joshua, a type of Christ, was raised up to put
Israel in possession of the land of promise and to fight their battles;
there it was that they passed over Jordan through the divided waters,
and renewed the covenant of circumcision; these mercies of God to their
fathers they must now remember, that they may know the righteousness of
the Lord, his righteousness (so the word is), his justice in destroying
the Canaanites, his goodness in giving rest to his people Israel, and
his faithfulness to his promise made unto the fathers. The remembrance
of what God had done to them might convince them of all this, and engage
them for ever to his service. Or they may refer to the controversy now
pleaded between God and Israel; let them remember God's many favours to
them and their fathers, and compare with them their unworthy ungrateful
conduct towards him, that they may know the righteousness of the Lord in
contending with them, and it may appear that in this controversy he has
right on his side; his ways are equal, for he will be justified when he
speaks, and clear when he judges.

[Micah 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mic 6:6</span></span>

Here is the proposal for accommodation between God and Israel, the
parties that were at variance in the beginning of the chapter. Upon the
trial, judgment is given against Israel; they are convicted of injustice
and ingratitude towards God, the crimes with which they stood charged.
Their guilt is too plain to be denied, too great to be excused, and
therefore,

I. They express their desires to be at peace with God upon any terms
([Mic 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006), [Mic
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#007)): Wherewith shall I come before
the Lord? Being made sensible of the justice of God's controversy with
them, and dreading the consequences of it, they were inquisitive what
they might do to be reconciled to God and to make him their friend. They
apply to a proper person, with this enquiry, to the prophet, the Lord's
messenger, by whose ministry they had been convinced. Who so fit to show
them their way as he that had made them sensible of their having missed
it? And it is observable that each one speaks for himself: Wherewith
shall I come? Knowing every one the plague of his own heart, they ask,
not, What shall this man do? But, What shall I do? Note, Deep
convictions of guilt and wrath will put men upon careful enquiries after
peace and pardon, and then, and not till then, there begins to be some
hope of them. They enquire wherewith they may come before the Lord, and
bow themselves before the high God. They believe there is a God, that he
is Jehovah, and that he is the high God, the Most High. Those whose
consciences are convinced learn to speak very honourably of God, whom
before they spoke slightly of. Now, 1. We know we must come before God;
he is the God with whom we have to do; we must come as subjects, to pay
our homage to him, as beggars, to ask alms from him, nay, we must come
before him, as criminals, to receive our doom from him, must come before
him as our Judge. 2. When we come before him we must bow before him; it
is our duty to be very humble and reverent in our approaches to him;
and, when we come before him, there is no remedy but we must submit; it
is to no purpose to contend with him. 3. When we come and bow before him
it is our great concern to find favour with him, and to be accepted of
him; their enquiry is, What will the Lord be pleased with? Note, All
that rightly understand their own interest cannot but be solicitous what
they must do to please God, to avoid his displeasure and to obtain his
good-will. 4. In order to God's being pleased with us, our care must be
that the sin by which we have displeased him may be taken away, and an
atonement made for it. The enquiry here is, What shall I give for my
transgression, for the sin of my soul? Note, The transgression we are
guilty of is the sin of our soul, for the soul acts it (without the
soul's act it is not sin) and the soul suffers by it; it is the
disorder, disease, and defilement of the soul, and threatens to be the
death of it: What shall I give for my transgressions? What will be
accepted as a satisfaction to his justice, a reparation of his honour?
And what will avail to shelter me from his wrath? 5. We must therefore
ask, Wherewith may we come before him? We must not appear before the
Lord empty. What shall we bring with us? In what manner must we come? In
whose name must we come? We have not that in ourselves which will
recommend us to him, but must have it from another. What righteousness
then shall we appear before him in?

II\. They make proposals, such as they are, in order to it. Their
enquiry was very good and right, and what we are all concerned to make,
but their proposals betray their ignorance, though they show their zeal;
let us examine them: -

1\. They bid high. They offer, (1.) That which is very rich and costly -
thousands of rams. God required one ram for a sin-offering; they proffer
flocks of them, their whole stock, will be content to make themselves
beggars, so that they may but be at peace with God. They will bring the
best they have, the rams, and the most of them, till it comes to
thousands. (2.) That which is very dear to them, and which they would be
most loth to part with. They could be content to part with their
first-born for their transgressions, if that would be accepted as an
atonement, and the fruit of their body for the sin of their soul. To
those that had become vain in their imaginations this seemed a probable
expedient of making satisfaction for sin, because our children are
pieces of ourselves; and therefore the heathen sacrificed their
children, to appease their offended deities. Note, Those that are
thoroughly convinced of sin, of the malignity of it, and of their misery
and danger by reason of it, would give all the world, if they had it,
for peace and pardon.

2\. Yet they do not bid right. It is true some of these things were
instituted by the ceremonial law, as the bringing of burnt-offerings to
God's altar, and calves of a year old, rams for sin-offerings, and oil
for the meat-offerings; but these alone would not recommend them to God.
God had often declared that to obey is better than sacrifice, and to
hearken than the fat of rams, that sacrifice and offering he would not;
the legal sacrifices had their virtue and value from the institution,
and the reference they had to Christ the great propitiation; but
otherwise, of themselves, it was impossible that the blood of bulls and
goats should take away sin. And as to the other things here mentioned,
(1.) Some of them are impracticable things, as rivers of oil, which
nature has not provided to feed men's luxury, but rivers of water to
supply men's necessity. All the proposals of peace but those that are
according to the gospel are absurd. One stream of the blood of Christ is
worth ten thousand rivers of oil. (2.) Some of them are wicked things,
as to give our first-born and the fruit of our body to death, which
would but add to the transgression and the sin of the soul. He that
hates robbery for burnt-offerings much more hates murder, such murder.
What right have we to our first born and the fruit of our body? Do they
not belong to God? Are they not his already, and born to him? Are they
not sinners by nature, and their lives forfeited upon their own account?
How then can they be a ransom for ours? (3.) They are all external
things, parts of that bodily exercise which profiteth little, and which
could not make the comers thereunto perfect. (4.) They are all
insignificant, and insufficient to attain the end proposed; they could
not answer the demands of divine justice, nor satisfy the wrong done to
God in his honour by sin, nor would they serve in lieu of the
sanctification of the heart and the reformation of the life. Men will
part with any thing rather than their sins, but they part with nothing
to God's acceptance unless they part with them.

III\. God tells them plainly what he demands, and insists upon, from
those that would be accepted of him, [Mic
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#008). Let their money perish with them
that think the pardon of sin and the favour of God may be so purchased;
no, God has shown thee, O man! what is good. Here we are told,

1\. That God has made a discovery of his mind and will to us, for the
rectifying of our mistakes and the direction of our practice. (1.) It is
God himself that has shown us what we must do. We need not trouble
ourselves to make proposals, the terms are already settled and laid
down. He whom we have offended, and to whom we are accountable, has told
us upon what conditions he will be reconciled to us. (2.) It is to man
that he has shown it, not only to thee, O Israel! but to thee, O man!
Gentiles as well as Jews - to men, who are rational creatures, and
capable of receiving the discovery, and not to brutes, - to men, for
whom a remedy is provided, not to devils, whose case is desperate. What
is spoken to all men every where in general, must by faith be applied to
ourselves in particular, as if it were spoken to thee, O man! by name,
and to no other. (3.) It is a discovery of that which is good, and which
the Lord requires of us. He has shown us our end, which we should aim
at, in showing us what is good, wherein our true happiness does consist;
he has shown us our way in which we must walk towards that end in
showing us what he requires of us. There is something which God requires
we should do for him and devote to him; and it is good. It is good in
itself; there is an innate goodness in moral duties, antecedent to the
command; they are not, as ceremonial observances, good because they are
commanded, but commanded because they are good, consonant to the eternal
rule and reason of good and evil, which are unalterable. It has likewise
a direct tendency to our good; our conformity to it is not only the
condition of our future happiness, but is a great expedient of our
present happiness; in keeping God's commandments there is great reward,
as well as after keeping them. (4.) It is shown us. God has not only
made it known, but made it plain; he has discovered it to us with such
convincing evidence as amounts to a demonstration. Lo this, we have
searched it, so it is.

2\. What that discovery is. The good which God requires of us is not the
paying of a price for the pardon of sin and acceptance with God, but
doing the duty which is the condition of our interest in the pardon
purchased. (1.) We must do justly, must render to all their due,
according as our relation and obligation to them are; we must do wrong
to none, but do right to all, in their bodies, goods, and good name.
(2.) We must love mercy; we must delight in it, as our God does, must be
glad of an opportunity to do good, and do it cheerfully. Justice is put
before mercy, for we must not give that in alms which is wrongfully got,
or with which our debts should be paid. God hates robbery for a
burnt-offering. (3.) We must walk humbly with our God. This includes all
the duties of the first table, as the two former include all the duties
of the second table. We must take the Lord for our God in covenant, must
attend on him and adhere to him as ours, and must make it our constant
care and business to please him. Enoch's walking with God is interpreted
([Heb 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#005)) his pleasing God. We must,
in the whole course of our conversation, conform ourselves to the will
of God, keep up our communion with God, and study to approve ourselves
to him in our integrity; and this we must do humbly (submitting our
understandings to the truths of God and our will to his precepts and
providences); we must humble ourselves to walk with God (so the margin
reads it); every thought within us must be brought down, to be brought
into obedience to God, if we would walk comfortably with him. This is
that which God requires, and without which the most costly services are
vain oblations; this is more than all burnt-offerings and sacrifices.

[Micah 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mic 6:9</span></span>

God, having shown them how necessary it was that they should do justly,
here shows them how plain it was that they had done unjustly; and since
they submitted not to his controversy, nor went the right way to have it
taken up, here he proceeds in it. Observe,

I. How the action is entered against them, [Mic
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009). God speaks to the city, to
Jerusalem, to Samaria. His voice cries to it by his servants the
prophets who were to cry aloud and not spare. Note, The voice of the
prophets is the Lord's voice, and that cries to the city, cries to the
country. Doth not wisdom cry? [Pro
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#001). When the sin of a city cries to
God his voice cries against the city; and, when the judgments of God are
coming upon a city, his voice first cries unto it. He warns before he
wounds, because he is not willing that any should perish. Now observe,
1. How the voice of God is discerned by some: The man of wisdom will see
thy name. When the voice of God cries to us we may by it see his name,
may discern and perceive that by which he makes himself known. Yet many
see it not, are not aware of it, because they do not regard it. God
speaks once, yea, twice, and they perceive it not ([Job
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#014)); but those that are men of
wisdom will see it, and perceive it, and make a good use of it. Note, It
is a point of true wisdom to discover the name of God in the voice of
God, and to learn what he is from what he says. Wisdom shall see thy
name, for the knowledge of the holy is understanding. 2. What this voice
of God says to all: "Hear you the rod, and who hath appointed it. Hear
the rod when it is coming; hear it at a distance, before you see it and
feel it; and be awakened to go forth to meet the Lord in the way of his
judgments. Hear the rod when it has come, and is actually upon you, and
you are sensible of the smart of it; hear what it says to you, what
convictions, what counsels, what cautions, it speaks to you." Note,
Every rod has a voice, and it is the voice of God that is to be heard in
the rod of God, and it is well for those that understand the language of
it, which if we would do we must have an eye to him that appointed it.
Note, Every rod is appointed, of what kind it shall be, where it shall
light, and how long it shall lie. God in every affliction performs the
thing that is appointed for us ([Job
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#014)), and to him therefore we must
have an eye, to him we must have an ear; we must hear what he says to us
by the affliction. Hear it, and know it for thy good, [Job
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#027). The work of ministers is to
explain the providences of God and to quicken and direct men to learn
the lessons that are taught by them.

II\. What is the ground of the action, and what are the things that are
laid to their charge.

1\. They are charged with injustice, a sin against the second table. Are
there yet to be found among them the marks and means of fraudulent
dealing? What! after all the methods that God has taken to teach them to
do justly, will they yet deal unjustly? It seems, they will, [Mic
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#010). And shall I count them pure?
[Mic 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#011). No; this is a sin which
will by no means consist with a profession of purity. Those that are
dishonest in their dealings have not the spots of God's children, and
shall never be reckoned pure, whatever shows of devotion they may make.
Be not deceived, God is not mocked. When a man is suspected of theft, or
fraud, the justice of peace will send a warrant to search his house. God
here does, as it were, search the houses of those citizens, and there he
finds, (1.) Treasures of wickedness, abundance of wealth, but it is
ill-got, and not likely to prosper; for treasures of wickedness profit
nothing. (2.) A scant measure, by which they sold to the poor, and so
exacted upon them and cheated them. (3.) They had wicked balances and a
bag of false weights, by which, under a pretence of weighing what they
sold, and giving the buyer what was right, they did him the greatest
wrong, [Mic 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#011). (4.) Those that had
wealth and power in their hands abused it to oppression and extortion;
The rich men thereof are full of violence; for those that have much
would have more, and are in a capacity of making it more by the power
which their abundance of wealth gives them. They are full of violence,
that is, they have their houses full of that which is got by violence.
(5.) Those that had not the advantage of doing wrong by their wealth yet
found means of defrauding those they dealt with: The inhabitants thereof
have spoken lies; if they are not able to use force and violence, they
use fraud and deceit; the inhabitants have spoken lies, and their tongue
is deceitful in their mouth; they do not stick at a deliberate lie, to
make a good bargain. Some understand it of their speaking falsely
concerning God, saying, The Lord seeth not; he hath forsaken the earth,
[Eze 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#012).

2\. They are charged with idolatry ([Mic
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006)): The statutes of Omri are kept,
and all the work of the house of Ahab. Both these kings were wicked, and
did evil in the sight of the Lord; but the wickedness which they
established by a law, concerning which they made statutes, and which was
the peculiar work of that house, was idolatry. Omri walked in the way of
Jeroboam, and in his sin of provoking God to anger with their vanities,
[Kg1 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#026), [Kg1
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#031). Ahab introduced the worship of
Baal. These reigns were some ages before the time when this prophet
lived, and yet the wickedness which they established by their laws and
examples remained to this day; those statutes were still kept, and that
work was still done; and the princes and people still walked in their
counsels, took the same measures, and governed themselves and the people
by the same politics. Observe, (1.) The same wickedness continued from
one generation to another. Sin is a root of bitterness, soon planted,
but not so soon plucked up again. The iniquity of former ages is often
transmitted to, and entailed upon, the succeeding ones. Those that make
corrupt laws, and bring in corrupt usages, are doing that which perhaps
may prove the ruin of the child unborn. (2.) It was not the less evil in
itself, provoking to God, and dangerous to the sinners, for its having
been established and confirmed by the laws of princes, the examples of
great men, and a long prescription. Though the worship of idols is
enacted by the statutes of Omri, recommended by the practice of the
house of Ahab, and pleads that it has been the usage of many
generations, yet it is still displeasing to God and destructive to
Israel; for no laws nor customs are of force against the divine command.

III\. What is the judgment given upon this. Being found guilty of these
crimes, the sentence is that that which God had given them warning of
([Mic 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009)) shall be brought upon them
([Mic 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#013)): Therefore also will I
make thee sick, in smiting thee. As they had smitten the poor with the
rod of their oppressions, so would God in like manner smite them, so as
to make them sick, sick of the gains they had unjustly gotten, so that
though they had swallowed down riches they should vomit them up again,
[Job 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#015). Their doom is,

1\. That what they have they shall not have any comfortable enjoyment
of; it shall do them no good. They grasped at more than enough, but,
when they have it, it shall not be enough to make them easy and happy.
What is got by fraud and oppression cannot be kept or enjoyed with any
satisfaction. (1.) Their food shall not nourish them: Thou shalt eat,
but not be satisfied, either because the food shall not digest, for want
of God's blessing going along with it, or because the appetite shall by
disease be made insatiable and still craving, the just punishment of
those that were greedy of gain and enlarged their desires as hell. Men
may be surfeited with the good things of this world and yet not
satisfied, [Ecc 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#010); [Isa
55:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#002). (2.) Their country shall not
harbour and protect them: "Thy casting down shall be in the midst of
thee, that is, thou shalt be broken and ruined by the intestine
troubles, mischiefs at home enough to cast thee down, though thou
shouldst not be invaded by a foreign force." God can cast a nation down
by that which is in the midst of them, can consume them by a fire in
their own bowels. (3.) They shall not be able to preserve what they have
from a foreign force, nor to recover what they have lost: "Thou shalt
take hold of what is about to be taken from thee, but thou shalt not
hold it fast, shalt catch at it, but shalt not deliver it, shalt not
retrieve it." It is meant of their wives and children, that were very
dear to them, which they took hold of, as resolved not to part with
them, but there is no remedy, they must go into captivity. Note, What we
hold closest we commonly lose soonest, and that proves least safe which
is most dear. (4.) What they save for a time shall be reserved for a
future and sorer stroke: That which thou deliverest out of the hand of
one enemy will I give up to the sword of another enemy; for God has many
arrows in his quiver; if one miss the sinner, the next shall not. (5.)
What they have laboured for they shall not enjoy ([Mic
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#015)): "Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt
not reap; it shall be blasted and withered, and there shall be nothing
to reap, or an enemy shall come and reap it for himself, or thou shalt
be carried into captivity, and leave it to be reaped by thou knowest not
whom. Thou shalt tread the olives, but thou shalt not anoint thyself
with oil, having no heart to make use of ornaments and refreshments when
all is going to ruin. Thou shalt tread out the sweet wine, but shalt not
drink wine, for many things may fall between the cup and the lip." Note,
It is very grievous to be disappointed of our expectations, and not to
have the pleasure of that which we have taken pains for; and this will
be the just punishment of those that frustrate God's expectations from
them, and answer not the cost he has been at upon them. See this
threatened in the law, [Lev 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#016);
[Deu 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#030), [Deu
28:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#038), etc.; and compare [Isa
62:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#008), [Isa
62:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#009).

2\. That all they have shall at length be taken from them ([Mic
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#013)): Thou shalt be made desolate
because of thy sins; and [Mic 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#016), a
desolation and a hissing. Sin makes a nation desolate; and when a people
that have been famous and flourishing are made desolate it is the
astonishment of some and the triumph of others; some lament it, and
others hiss at it. Thus you shall bear the reproach of my people. Their
being the people of God, in name and profession while they kept close to
their duty and kept themselves in his love, was an honour to them, and
all their neighbours thought it so; but now that they have corrupted and
ruined themselves, now that their sins and God's judgments have made
their land desolate, their having been once the people of God does but
turn so much the more to their reproach; their enemies will say, These
are the people of the Lord, [Eze
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#020). Note, If professors of religion
ruin themselves, their ruin will be the most reproachful of any; and
they in a special manner will rise at the last day to everlasting shame
and contempt.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 7](mic007)

</div>
