<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num030)  [Next](num032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 31:0</span></span>

This chapter belongs to "the book of the wars of the Lord," in which it
is probable it was inserted. It is the history of a holy war, a war with
Midian. Here is, I. A divine command for the war ([Num
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#001), [Num
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#002)). II. The undertaking of the war
([Num 31:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#003)). III. The glorious
success of it ([Num 31:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#007)). IV.
Their triumphant return from the war. 1. The respect Moses paid to the
soldiers ([Num 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#013)). 2. The rebuke
he gave them for sparing the women ([Num
31:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#014)). 3. The directions he gave
them for the purifying of themselves and their effects ([Num
31:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#019)). 4. The distribution of the
spoil they had taken, one half to the soldiers, the other to the
congregation, and a tribute to the Lord out of each (v. 25-47). 5. The
free-will offering of the officers ([Num
31:48](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#048), etc.).

[Numbers 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 31:1</span></span>

Here, I. The Lord of hosts gives orders to Moses to make war upon the
Midianites, and his commission no doubt justified this war, though it
will not serve to justify the like without such commission. The
Midianites were the posterity of Abraham by Ketuarah, [Gen
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#002). Some of them settled south of
Canaan, among whom Jethro lived, and they retained the worship of the
true God; but these were settled east of Canaan, and had fallen into
idolatry, neighbours to, and in confederacy with, the Moabites. Their
land was not designed to be given to Israel, nor would Israel have
meddled with them if they had not made themselves obnoxious to their
resentment by sending their bad women among them to draw them to
whoredom and idolatry. This was the provocation, this was the quarrel.
For this (says God) avenge Israel of the Midianites, [Num
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#002). 1. God would have the Midianites
chastised, an inroad made upon that part of their country which lay next
to the camp of Israel, and which was probably more concerned in that
mischief than the Moabites, who therefore were let alone. God will have
us to reckon those our worst enemies that draw us to sin, and to avoid
them; and since every man is tempted when he is drawn aside of his own
lusts, and these are the Midianites which ensnare us with their wiles,
on them we should avenge ourselves, not only make no league with them,
but make war upon them by living a life of mortification. God had taken
vengeance on his own people for yielding to the Midianites' temptations;
now the Midianites, that gave the temptation, must be reckoned with, for
the deceived and the deceiver are his ([Job
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#016)), both accountable to his
tribunal; and, though judgment begin at the house of God, it shall not
end there, [Pe1 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017). There is a day
coming when vengeance will be taken on those that have introduced errors
and corruptions into the church, and the devil that deceived men will be
cast into the lake of fire. Israel's quarrel with Amalek, that fought
against them, was not avenged till long after: but their quarrel with
Midian, that debauched them, was speedily avenged, for they were looked
upon as much more the dangerous and malicious enemies. 2. God would have
it done by Moses, in his life-time, that he who had so deeply resented
that injury might have the satisfaction of seeing it avenged. "See this
execution done upon the enemies of God and Israel, and afterwards thou
shalt be gathered to thy people." This was the only piece of service of
this kind that Moses must further do, and then he has accomplished, as a
hireling, his day, and shall have his quietus - enter into rest:
hitherto his usefulness must come, and no further; the wars of Canaan
must be carried on by another hand. Note, God sometimes removes useful
men when we think they can be ill spared; but this ought to satisfy us,
that they are never removed till they have done the work which was
appointed them.

II\. Moses gives orders to the people to prepare for this expedition,
[Num 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#003). He would not have the whole
body of the camp to stir, but they must arm some of themselves to the
war, such as were either most fit or most forward, and avenge the Lord
of Midian. God said, Avenge Israel; Moses says, Avenge the Lord; for the
interests of God and Israel are united, and the cause of both is one and
the same. And if God, in what he does, shows himself jealous for the
honour of Israel, surely Israel, in what they do, ought to show
themselves jealous for the glory of God. Then only we can justify the
avenging of ourselves when it is the vengeance of the Lord that we
engage in. Nay, for this reason we are forbidden to avenge ourselves,
because God has said, Vengeance is mine, I will repay.

III\. A detachment is drawn out accordingly for this service, 1000 out
of every tribe, 12,000 in all, a small number in comparison with what
they could have sent, and it is probable small in comparison with the
number of the enemies they were sent against. But God would teach them
that it is all one to him to save by many or by few, [Sa1
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#006).

IV\. Phinehas the son of Eleazar is sent along with them. It is strange
that no mention is made of Joshua in this great action. If he was
general of these forces, who do we not find him leading them out? If he
tarried at home, why do we not find him meeting them with Moses at their
return? It is probable, each tribe having a captain of its own thousand,
there was no general, but they proceeded in the order of their march
through the wilderness, Judah first, and the rest in their posts, under
the command of their respective captains, spoken of [Num
31:48](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#048). But, the war being a holy war,
Phinehas was their common head, not to supply the place of a general,
but, by the oracle of God, to determine the resolves of their counsels
of war, in which the captains of thousands would all acquiesce, and
according to which they would act in conjunction. He therefore took with
him the holy instruments or vessels, probably the breast-plate of
judgment, by which God might he consulted in any emergency. Though he
was not yet the high priest, yet he might be delegated pro hac vice -
for this particular occasion, to bear the urim and thummim, as [Sa1
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#006). And there was a particular
reason for sending Phinehas to preside in this expedition; he has
already signalized himself for his zeal against the Midianites and their
cursed arts to ensnare Israel when he slew Cozbi, a daughter of a chief
house in Midian, for her impudence in the matter of Peor, [Sa1
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#015). He that had so well used the
sword of justice against a particular criminal was best qualified to
guide the sword of war against the whole nation. Thou hast been faithful
over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things.

[Numbers 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 31:7</span></span>

Here is, 1. The descent which this little army of Israelites made, under
the divine commission, conduct, and command, upon the country of Midian.
They warred against the Midianites. It is very probable that they first
published their manifesto, showing the reasons of the war, and requiring
them to give up the ringleaders of the mischief to justice; for such
afterwards was the law ([Deu 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010)),
and such the practice, [Jdg 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#012),
[Jdg 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#013). But the Midianites
justifying what they had done, and standing by those that had done it,
the Israelites attacked them with fire and sword, and all the pious fury
with which their zeal for God and their people inspired them. 2. The
execution (the military execution) they did in this descent. (1.) They
slew all the males ([Num 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#007)), that
is, all they met with as far as they went; they put them all to the
sword, and gave no quarter. But that they did not slay all the males of
the nation is certain, for we find the Midianites a powerful and
formidable enemy to Israel in the days of Gideon; and they were the
Midianites of this country, for they are reckoned with the children of
the east, [Jdg 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#003). (2.) They slew the
kings of Midian the same that are called elders of Midian ([Num
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#004)), and the dukes of Sihon, [Jos
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#021). Five of these princes are here
named, one of whom is Zur, probably the same Zur whose daughter Cosbi
was, [Num 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#015). (3.) They slew
Balaam. Many conjectures there are as to what brought Balaam among the
Midianites at this time; it is probable that the Midianites, having
intelligence of the march of this army of Israelites against them, hired
Balaam to come and assist them with his enchantments, that if he could
not prevail to act offensively in their favour, by cursing the armies of
Israel, yet he might act defensively, by blessing the country of Midian.
Whatever was the occasion of his being there, God's overruling
providence brought him thither, and there his just vengeance found him.
Had he himself believed what he said of the happy state of Israel, he
would not have herded thus with the enemies of Israel; but justly does
he die the death of the wicked (though he pretended to desire that of
the righteous), and go down slain to the pit with the uncircumcised, who
rebelled thus against the convictions of his own conscience. The
Midianites' wiles were Balaam's projects, it was therefore just that he
should perish with them, [Hos 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#005). Now
was his folly made manifest to all men, who foretold the fate of others,
but foresaw not his own. (4.) They took all the women and children
captives, [Num 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#009). (5.) They burnt
their cities and goodly castles ([Num
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#010)), not designing to inhabit them
themselves (that country was out of their line), but they thus prevented
those who had made their escape from sheltering themselves in their own
country and settling there again. Some understand it of their
idol-temples; it was fit that they should share in this vengeance. (6.)
They plundered the country, and carried off all the cattle and valuable
goods, and so returned to the camp of Israel laden with a very rich
booty, [Num 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#009), [Num
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#011), [Num
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#012). Thus (as when they came out of
Egypt) they were enriched with the spoils of their enemies, and
furnished with stock for the good land into which God was bringing them.

[Numbers 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 31:13</span></span>

We have here the triumphant return of the army of Israel from the war
with Midian, and here,

I. They were met with great respect, [Num
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#013). Moses himself, notwithstanding
his age and gravity, walked out of the camp to congratulate them on
their victory, and to grace the solemnity of their triumphs. Public
successes should be publicly acknowledged, to the glory of God, and the
encouragement of those that have jeoparded their lives in their
country's cause.

II\. They were severely reproved for saving the women alive. It is very
probable that Moses had commanded them to kill the women, at least this
was implied in the general order to avenge Israel of the Midianites; the
execution having reference to that crime, their drawing them in to the
worship of Peor, it was easy to conclude that the women, who were the
principal criminals, must not be spared. What! says Moses, have you
saved the women alive? [Num 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#015). He
was moved with a holy indignation at the sight of them. These were those
that caused the children of Israel to commit this trespass; and
therefore, 1. It is just that they should die. The law in case of
whoredom was, The adulterer and adulteress should surely be put to
death. God had put to death the adulterers of Israel by the plague, and
now it was fit that the adulteresses of Midian, especially since they
had been the tempters, should be put to death by the sword. 2. "It is
dangerous to let them live; they will be still tempting the Israelites
to uncleanness, and so your captives will be your conquerors and a
second time your destroyers." Severe orders are therefore given that all
the grown women should be slain in cold blood, and only the female
children spared.

III\. They were obliged to purify themselves, according to the ceremony
of the law, and to abide without the camp seven days, till their
purification was accomplished. For, 1. They had imbrued their hands in
blood, by which though they had not contracted any moral guilt, the war
being just and lawful, yet they were brought under a ceremonial
uncleanness, which rendered them unfit to come near the tabernacle till
they were purified. Thus God would preserve in their minds a dread and
detestation of murder. David must not build the temple because he had
been a man of war, and had shed blood, [Ch1
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#003). 2. They could not but have
touched dead bodies, by which they were polluted, and that required they
should be purified with the water of separation, [Num
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#019), [Num
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#020), [Num
31:24](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#024).

IV\. They must likewise purify the spoil they had taken, the captives
([Num 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#019)) and all the goods, [Num
31:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#021). What would bear the fire
must pass through the fire, and what would not must be washed with
water. These things had been use by Midianites, and, having now come
into the possession of Israelites, it was fit that they should be
sanctified to the service of that holy nation and the honour of their
holy God. To us now every thing is sanctified by the word and prayer, if
we are sanctified by the Spirit, who is compared both to fire and water.
To the pure all things are pure.

[Numbers 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 31:25</span></span>

We have here the distribution of the spoil which was taken in this
expedition against Midian. God himself directed how it should be
distributed, and Moses and Eleazar did according to the directions, and
thus unhappy contests among themselves were prevented and the victory
was made to turn to the common benefit. It was fit that he who gave them
the prey should order the disposal of it. All we have is from God, and
therefore must be subject to his will.

I. The prey is ordered to be divided into two parts, one for the 12,000
men that undertook the war, and the other for the congregation. The prey
that was divided seems to have been only the captives and the cattle; as
for the plate, and jewels, and other goods, every man kept what he took,
as is intimated, [Num 31:50-53](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#050). That
only was distributed which would be of use for the stocking of that good
land into which they were going. Now observe, 1. That the one half of
the prey was given to the whole congregation, Moses allotting to each
tribe its share, and then leaving it to the heads of the tribes to
divide their respective shares among themselves, according to their
families. The war was undertaken on the behalf of the whole
congregation; they would all have been ready to go to the help of the
Lord against the mighty, if they had been so ordered, and they did help,
it is likely, by their prayers; and therefore God appoints that those
that tarried at home should divide the spoil, [Psa
68:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#012). David, in his time, made it a
statute and an ordinance for Israel, that, as his part is that goes down
to the battle, so shall his part be that tarrieth by the stuff, [Sa1
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#024), [Sa1
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#025). Those that are employed in
public trusts must not think to benefit themselves only by their toils
and hazards, but must aim at the advantage of the community. 2. That yet
the 12,000 that went to the battle had as much for their share as the
whole congregation (which were fifty times as many) had for theirs; so
that the particular persons of the soldiery had a much better share than
any of their brethren that tarried at home: and good reason they should.
The greater pains we take, and the greater hazards we run, in the
service of God and our generation, the greater will our recompence be at
last; for God is not unrighteous to forget the work and labour of love.

II\. God was to have a tribute out of it, as an acknowledgment of his
sovereignty over them in general, and that he was their king to whom
tribute was due, and particularly of his interest in this war and the
gains of it, he having given them their success; and that the priests,
the Lord's receivers, might have something added to the provision made
for their maintenance. Note, Whatever we have, God must have his dues
out of it. And here (as before) the soldiers are favoured above the rest
of the congregation, for out of the people's share God required one in
fifty, but out of the soldier's share only one in 500, because the
people got theirs easily, without any peril or fatigue. The less
opportunity we have of honouring God with our personal services the more
it is expected we should honour him with our substance. The tribute out
of the soldiers' half was given to the priests ([Num
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#029)), that out of the people's half
was given to the Levites, [Num 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#030).
For the priests were taken from among the Levites, as these soldiers
from among the people, for special and hazardous service, and their pay
was proportioned accordingly.

[Numbers 31:48](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">num 31:48</span></span>

Here is a great example of piety and devotion in the officers of the
army, the colonels, that are called captains of thousands, and the
inferior officers that were captains of hundreds; they came to Moses as
their general and commander-in-chief, and, though he was now going off
the stage they very humbly and respectfully addressed themselves to him,
calling themselves his servants; the honours they had won did not puff
them up, so as to make them forget their duty to him. Observe in their
address to them, 1. The pious notice they take of God's wonderful
goodness to them in this late expedition, in preserving not only their
own lives, but the lives of all the men of war that they had under their
charge; so that, upon the review of their muster-roll, it appeared there
was not one missing, [Num 31:49](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#049). This
was very extraordinary, and perhaps cannot be paralleled in any history.
So many thousands of lives jeoparded in the high places of the field,
and not one lost, either by the sword of the enemy or by any disease or
disaster. This was the Lord's doing, and cannot but be marvellous in the
eyes of those that consider how the lives of all men, especially
soldiers, are continually in their hands. It is an evidence of the
tender feeling which these commanders had for their soldiers, and that
their lives were very precious to them, that they looked upon it as a
mercy to themselves that none of those under their charge miscarried. Of
all that were given them they had lost none; so precious also is the
blood of Christ's subjects and soldiers to him, [Psa
72:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#014). 2. The pious acknowledgment
they make for this favour: Therefore we have brought an oblation to the
Lord, [Num 31:50](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#050). The oblation they
brought was out of that which every man had gotten, and it was gotten
honestly by a divine warrant. Thus every man should lay by according as
God has prospered him, [Co1 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002). For
where God sows plentifully in the gifts of his bounty he expects to reap
accordingly in the fruits of our piety and charity. The tabernacle
first, and the temple afterwards, were beautified and enriched with the
spoils taken from the enemies of Israel; as by David ([Sa2
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#011), [Sa2
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#012)), and his captains, [Ch1
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#026), [Ch1
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#027). We should never take any thing
to ourselves, in war or trade, which we cannot in faith consecrate a
part of to God, who hates robbery for burnt-offerings; but, when God has
remarkably preserved and prospered us, he expects that we should make
some particular return of gratitude to him. As to this oblation, (1.)
The captains offered it to make an atonement for their souls, [Num
31:50](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#050). Instead of coming to Moses to
demand a recompence for the good service they had done in avenging the
Lord of Midian, or to set up trophies of their victory for the
immortalizing of their own names, they bring an oblation to make
atonement for their souls, being conscious to themselves, as the best
men must be even in their best services, that they had been defective in
their duty, not only in that instance for which they were reproved ([Num
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#014)), but in many others; for there
is not a just man upon the earth that doeth good and sinneth not. (2.)
Moses accepted it, and laid it up in the tabernacle as a memorial for
the children of Israel ([Num 31:54](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#054)),
that is, a monument of God's goodness to them, that they might be
encouraged to trust in him in their further wars, and a monument of
their gratitude to God (sacrifices are said to be memorials), that he,
being well pleased with this thankful acknowledgment of favours
bestowed, might continue and repeat his mercies to them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 32](num032)

</div>
