<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num001)  [Next](num003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#001.md)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 2:0</span></span>

The thousands of Israel, having been mustered in the former chapter, in
this are marshalled, and a regular disposition is made of their camp, by
a divine appointment. Here is, I. A general order concerning it ([Num
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#001.md), [Num
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#002).md). II. Particular directions for
the posting of each of the tribes, in four distinct squadrons, three
tribes in each squadron. 1. In the vanguard on the east were posted
Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun ([Num
2:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#003).md). 2. In the right wing,
southward, Reuben, Simeon, and Gad ([Num
2:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#010).md). 3. In the rear, westward,
Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin, ([Num
2:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#018).md). 4. In the left wing,
northward, Dan, Asher, and Naphtali ([Num
2:25-31](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#025).md). 5. The tabernacle in the
centre ([Num 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#017).md). III. The
conclusion of this appointment ([Num
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#032), etc..md).

[Numbers 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 2:1</span></span>

Here is the general appointment given both for their orderly encampment
where they rested and their orderly march when they moved. Some order,
it is possible, they had observed hitherto; they came out of Egypt in
rank and file ([Exo 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#018).md), but now
they were put into a better model. 1. They all dwelt in tents, and when
they marched carried all their tents along with them, for they found no
city to dwell in, [Psa 107:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#004.md). This
represents to us our state in this world. It is a movable state (we are
here today and gone tomorrow); and it is a military state: is not our
life a warfare? We do but pitch our tents in this world, and have in it
no continuing city. Let us, therefore, while we are pitching in this
world, be pressing through it. 2. Those of a tribe were to pitch
together, every man by his own standard. Note, It is the will of God
that mutual love and affection, converse and communion, should be kept
up among relations. Those that are of kin to each other should, as much
as they can, be acquainted with each other; and the bonds of nature
should be improved for the strengthening of the bonds of Christian
communion. 3. Every one must know his place and keep in it; they were
not allowed to fix where they pleased, nor to remove when they pleased,
but God quarters them, with a charge to abide in their quarters. Note,
It is God that appoints us the bounds of our habitation, and to him we
must refer ourselves. He shall choose our inheritance for us ([Psa
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#004).md), and in his choice we must
acquiesce, and not love to flit, nor be as the bird that wanders from
her nest. 4. Every tribe had its standard, flag, or ensign, and it
should seem every family had some particular ensign of their father's
house, which was carried as with us the colours of each troop or company
in a regiment are. These were of use for the distinction of tribes and
families, and the gathering and keeping of them together, in allusion to
which the preaching of the gospel is said to lift up an ensign, to which
the Gentiles shall seek, and by which they shall pitch, [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010.md), [Isa
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012.md). Note, God is the God of order,
and not of confusion. These standards made this mighty army seem more
beautiful to its friends and more formidable to its enemies. The church
of Christ is said to be as terrible as an army with banners, [Sol
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#010.md). It is uncertain how these
standards were distinguished: some conjecture that the standard of each
tribe was of the same colour with the precious stone in which the name
of that tribe was written in the high priest's ephod, and that this was
all the difference. Many of the modern Jews think there was some coat of
arms painted in each standard, which had reference to the blessing of
that tribe by Jacob. Judah bore a lion, Dan a serpent, Naphtali a hind,
Benjamin a wolf, etc. Some of them say the four principal standards
were, Judah a lion, Reuben a man, Joseph an ox, and Dan an eagle, making
the appearances in Ezekiel's vision to allude it. Others say the name of
each tribe was written in its standard. Whatever it was, no doubt it
gave a certain direction. 5. They were to pitch about the tabernacle,
which was to be in the midst of them, as the tent of pavilion of a
general in the centre of an army. They must encamp round the tabernacle,
(1.) That it might be equally a comfort and joy to them all, as it was a
token of God's gracious presence with them. [Psa
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005.md), God is in the midst of her, she
shall not be moved. Their camp had reason to be hearty, when thus they
had God in the heart of them. To have bread from heaven every day round
about their camp, and fire from heaven, with other tokens of God's
favour, in the midst of their camp, was abundantly sufficient to answer
that question, Is the Lord among us, or is he not? Happy art thou, O
Israel! It is probable that the doors of all their tents were made to
look towards the tabernacle from all sides, for every Israelite should
have his eyes always towards the Lord; therefore they worshipped at the
tent-door. The tabernacle was in the midst of the camp, that it might be
near to them; for it is a very desirable thing to have the solemn
administrations of holy ordinances near us and within our reach. The
kingdom of God is among you. (2.) That they might be a guard and defence
upon the tabernacle and the Levites on every side. No invader could come
near God's tabernacle without first penetrating the thickest of their
squadrons. Note, If God undertake the protection of our comforts, we
ought in our places to undertake the protection of his institutions, and
stand up in defence of his honour, and interest, and ministers. 6. Yet
they were to pitch afar off, in reverence to the sanctuary, that it
might not seem crowded and thrust up among them, and that the common
business of the camp might be no annoyance to it. They were also taught
to keep their distance, lest too much familiarity should breed contempt.
It is supposed (from [Jos 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#004).md) that
the distance between the nearest part of the camp and the tabernacle (or
perhaps between them and the camp of the Levites, who pitched near the
tabernacle) was 2000 cubits, that is, 1000 yards, little more than half
a measured mile with us; but the outer parts of the camp must needs be
much further off. Some compute that the extent of their camp could be no
less than twelve miles square; for it was like a movable city, with
streets and lanes, in which perhaps the manna fell, as well as on the
outside of the camp, that they might have it at their doors. In the
Christian church we read of a throne (as in the tabernacle there was a
mercy-seat) which is called a glorious high throne from the beginning
([Jer 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012).md), and that throne
surrounded by spiritual Israelites, twenty-four elders, double to the
number of the tribes, clothed in white raiment ([Rev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004).md), and the banner over them is
Love; but we are not ordered, as they were, to pitch afar off; no, we
are invited to draw near, and come boldly. The saints of the Most High
are said to be round about him, [Psa
76:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011.md). God by his grace keep us close
to him!

[Numbers 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 2:3</span></span>

We have here the particular distribution of the twelve tribes into four
squadrons, three tribes in a squadron, one of which was to lead the
other two. Observe, 1. God himself appointed them their place, to
prevent strife and envy among them. Had they been left to determine
precedency among themselves, they would have been in danger of
quarrelling with one another (as the disciples who strove which should
be greatest); each would have had a pretence to be first, or at least
not to be last. Had it been left to Moses to determine, they would have
quarrelled with him, and charged him with partiality; therefore God does
it, who is himself the fountain and judge of honour, and in his
appointment all must acquiesce. If God in his providence advance others
above us, and abase us, we ought to be as well satisfied in his doing it
in that way as if he did it, as this was done here, by a voice out of
the tabernacle; and this consideration, that it appears to be the will
of God it should be so, should effectually silence all envies and
discontents. And as far as our place comes to be our choice our Saviour
has given us a rule in [Luk 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#008.md), Sit
not down in the highest room; and another in [Mat
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#027.md), He that will be chief, let him
be your servant. Those that are most humble and most serviceable are
really most honourable. 2. Every tribe had a captain, a prince, or
commander-in-chief, whom God himself nominated, the same that had been
appointed to number them, [Num 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005.md).
Our being all the children of one Adam is so far from justifying the
levellers, and taking away the distinction of place and honour, that
even among the children of the same Abraham, the same Jacob, the same
Judah, God himself appointed that one should be captain of all the rest.
There are powers ordained of God, and those to whom honour and fear are
due and must be paid. Some observe the significancy of the names of
these princes, at least, in general, how much God was in the thoughts of
those that gave them their names, for most of them have El, God, at one
end or other of their names. Nethaneel, the gift of God; Eliab, my God a
Father; Elizur, my God a rock; Shelumiel, God my peace; Eliasaph, God
has added; Elishama, my God has heard: Gamaliel, God my reward; Pagiel,
God has met me. By this it appears that the Israelites in Egypt did not
quite forget the name of their God, but, when they wanted other
memorials, preserved the remembrance of it in the names of their
children, and therewith comforted themselves in their affliction. 3.
Those tribes were placed together under the same standard that were
nearest of kin to each other; Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun, were the
three younger sons of Leah, and they were put together; and Issachar and
Zebulun would not grudge to be under Judah, since they were his younger
brethren. Reuben and Simeon would not have been content in their place.
Therefore Reuben, Jacob's eldest son, is made chief of the next
squadron; Simeon, no doubt, is willing to be under him, and Gad, the son
of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid, is fitly added to them in Levi's room:
Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin, are all the posterity of Rachel. Dan,
the eldest son of Bilhah, is made a leading tribe, though the son of a
concubine, that more abundant honour might be bestowed on that which
lacked; and it was said, Dan should judge his people, and to him were
added two younger sons of the handmaids. Thus unexceptionable was the
order in which they were placed. 4. The tribe of Judah was in the first
post of honour, encamped towards the rising sun, and in their marches
led the van, not only because it was the most numerous tribe, but
chiefly because from that tribe Christ was to come, who is the Lion of
the tribe of Judah, and was to descend from the loins of him who was now
nominated chief captain of that tribe. Nahshon is reckoned among the
ancestors of Christ, [Mat 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#004.md). So
that, when he went before them, Christ himself went before them in
effect, as their leader. Judah was the first of the twelve sons of Jacob
that was blessed. Reuben, Simeon, and Levi, were censured by their dying
father; he therefore being first in blessing, though not in birth, is
put first, to teach children how to value the smiles of their godly
parents and dread their frowns. 5. The tribes of Levi pitched closely
about the tabernacle, within the rest of their tribes, [Num
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#017.md). They must defend the sanctuary,
and then the rest of the tribes must defend them. Thus, in the vision
which John saw of the glory of heaven, between the elders and the throne
were four living creatures full of eyes, [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006.md), [Rev
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008.md). Civil powers should protect the
religious interests of a nation, and be a defence upon that glory. 6.
The camp of Dan (and so that tribe is called long after their settlement
in Canaan ([Jdg 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#025).md), because
celebrated for their military prowess), though posted in the left wing
when they encamped, was ordered in their march to bring up the rear,
[Num 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#031.md). They were the most
numerous, next to Judah, and therefore were ordered into a post which,
next to the front, required the most strength, for as the strength is so
shall the day be. Lastly, The children of Israel observed the orders
given them, and did as the Lord commanded Moses, [Num
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#034.md). They put themselves in the posts
assigned them, without murmuring or disputing, and, as it was their
safety, so it was their beauty; Balaam was charmed with the sight of it:
How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob! [Num
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#005.md). Thus the gospel church, called
the camp of saints, ought to be compact according to the scripture
model, every one knowing and keeping his place, and then all that wish
well to the church rejoice, beholding their order, [Col
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#005.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 3](num003.md)

</div>
