<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num006)  [Next](num008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#001.md)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 7:0</span></span>

God having set up house (as it were) in the midst of the camp of Israel,
the princes of Israel here come a visiting with their presents, as
tenants to their landlord, in the name of their respective tribes. I.
They brought presents, 1. Upon the dedication of the tabernacle, for the
service of that ([Num 7:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#001).md). 2. Upon
the dedication of the altar, for the use of that (v. 10-88). And, II.
God graciously signified his acceptance of them ([Num
7:89](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#089).md). The two foregoing chapters were
the records of additional laws which God gave to Israel, this is the
history of the additional services which Israel performed to God.

[Numbers 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 7:1</span></span>

Here is the offering of the princes to the service of the tabernacle.
Observe,

I. When it was; not till it was fully set up, [Num
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#001.md). When all things were done both
about the tabernacle itself, and the camp of Israel which surrounded it,
according to the directions given, then they began their presents,
probably about the eighth day of the second month. Note, Necessary
observances must always take place of free-will offerings: first those,
and then these.

II\. Who it was that offered: The princes of Israel, heads of the house
of their fathers, [Num 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#002.md). Note,
Those that are above others in power and dignity ought to go before
others, and endeavour to go beyond them, in every thing that is good.
The more any are advanced the more is expected from them, on account of
the greater opportunity they have of serving God and their generation.
What are wealth and authority good for, but as they enable a man to do
so much the more good in the world?

III\. What was offered: six wagons, with each of them a yoke of oxen to
draw them, [Num 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#003.md). Doubtless these
wagons were agreeable to the rest of the furniture of the tabernacle and
its appurtenances, the best of the kind, like the carriages which great
princes use when they go in procession. Some think that God, by Moses,
intimated to them what they should bring, or their own consideration
perhaps suggested to them to make this present. Though God's wisdom had
ordained all the essentials of the tabernacle, yet it seems these
accidental conveniences were left to be provided by their own
discretion, which was to set in order that which was wanting ([Tit
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005).md), and these wagons were not
refused, though no pattern of them was shown to Moses in the mount.
Note, It must not be expected that the divine institution of ordinances
should descend to all those circumstances which are determinable, and
are fit to be left alterable, by human prudence, that wisdom which is
profitable to direct. Observe, No sooner is the tabernacle fully set up
than this provision is made for the removal of it. Note, Even when we
are but just settled in the world, and think we are beginning to take
root, we must be preparing for changes and removes, especially for the
great change. While we are here in this world, every thing must be
accommodated to a militant and movable state. When the tabernacle was
framing, the princes were very generous in their offerings, for then
they brought precious stones, and stones to be set ([Exo
35:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#027).md), yet now they bring more
presents. Note, Those that have done good should study to abound therein
yet more and more, and not be weary of well-doing.

IV\. How the offering was disposed of, and what use was made of it: the
wagons and oxen were given to the Levites, to be used in carrying the
tabernacle, both for their ease (for God would not have any of his
servants overburdened with work), and for the more safe and right
conveyance of the several parts of the tabernacle, which would be best
kept together, and sheltered from the weather, in wagons. 1. The
Gershonites, that had the light carriage, the curtains and hangings, had
but two wagons, and two yoke of oxen ([Num
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#007).md); when they had loaded these, they
must carry the rest, if any remained, upon their shoulders. 2. The
Merarites, that had the heavy carriage, and that which was most
unwieldy, the boards, pillars, sockets, etc., had four wagons, and four
yoke of oxen allotted them ([Num 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#008).md);
and yet, if they had not more wagons of their own, they would be obliged
to carry a great deal upon their backs too, for the silver sockets alone
weighed 100 talents, which was above four tons, and that was enough to
load four wagons that were drawn but by one yoke of oxen a-piece. But
each socket being a talent weight, which is about a man's burden (as
appears, [Kg2 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#023).md) probably they
carried those on their backs, and put the boards and pillars into the
wagons. Observe here, How God wisely and graciously ordered the most
strength to those that had the most work. Each had wagons according to
their service. Whatever burden God in his providence lays upon us, he
will by his sufficient grace proportion the strength to it, [Co1
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013.md). 3. The Kohathites, that had the
most sacred carriage, had no wagons at all, because they were to carry
their charge upon their shoulders ([Num
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#009).md), with a particular care and
veneration. When in David's time they carried the ark in a cart, God
made them to know to their terror, by the death of Uzza, that they did
not seek him in the due order. See [Ch1
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#013.md).

[Numbers 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 7:10</span></span>

We have here an account of the great solemnity of dedicating the altars,
both that of burnt-offerings and that of incense; they had been
sanctified before, when they were anointed ([Lev
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#010.md), [Lev
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#011).md), but now they were handselled,
as it were, by the princes, with their free-will offerings. They began
the use of them with rich presents, great expressions of joy and
gladness, and extraordinary respect to those tokens of God's presence
with them. Now observe here,

I. That the princes and great men were first and forwardest in the
service of God. Those that are entitled to precedency should go before
in good works, and that is true honour. Here is an example to the
nobility and gentry, those that are in authority and of the first rank
in their country; they ought to improve their honour and power, their
estate and interest, for the promoting of religion, and the service of
God, in the places where they live. It is justly expected that those who
have more than others should do more good than others with what they
have, else they are unfaithful stewards, and will not make up their
account with joy. Nay, great men must not only with their wealth and
power assist and protect those that serve God, but they must make
conscience of being devout and religious themselves, and employing
themselves in the exercises of piety, which will greatly redound to the
honour of God ([Psa 138:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#004.md), [Psa
138:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#005).md), and have a good influence upon
others, who will be the more easily persuaded to acts of devotion when
they see them thus brought into reputation. It is certain that the
greatest of men is less than the least of the ordinances of God; nor are
the meanest services of religion any disparagement to those that make
the greatest figure in the world.

II\. The offerings they brought were very rich and valuable, so rich
that some think there was not so great a difference in estate between
them and others as that they were able to bear the expense of them
themselves, but that the heads of each tribe contributed to the offering
which their prince brought.

1\. They brought some things to remain for standing service, twelve
large silver dishes, each about sixty ounces weight, as many large
silver cups, or bowls, of about thirty-five ounces - the former to be
used for the meat-offerings, the latter for the drink-offerings - the
former for the flesh of the sacrifices, the latter for the blood. The
latter was God's table (as it were), and it was fit that so great a King
should be served in plate. The golden spoons being filled with incense
were intended, it is probable, for the service of the golden altar, for
both the altars were anointed at the same time. Note, In works of piety
and charity we ought to be generous according as our ability is. He that
is the best should be served with the best we have. The Israelites
indeed might well afford to part with their gold and silver in abundance
to the service of the sanctuary, for they needed it not to buy meat and
victual their camp, being daily fed with bread from heaven; nor did they
need it to buy land, or pay their army, for they were shortly to be put
in possession of Canaan.

2\. They brought some things to be used immediately, offerings of each
sort, burnt-offerings, sin-offerings, and a great many peace-offerings
(on part of which they were to feast with their friends), and the
meat-offerings that were to be annexed to them. Hereby they signified
their thankful acceptance of, and cheerful submission to, all those laws
concerning the sacrifices which God had lately by Moses delivered to
them. And, though it was a time of joy and rejoicing, yet it is
observable that still in the midst of their sacrifices we find a
sin-offering. Since in our best services we are conscious to ourselves
that there is a mixture of sin, it is fit that there should be even in
our most joyful services a mixture of repentance. In all our approaches
to God, we must by faith have an eye to Christ as the great
sin-offering, and make mention of him.

3\. They brought their offerings each on a separate day, in the order
that they had been lately put into, so that the solemnity lasted twelve
days. So God appointed ([Num 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#011).md):
They shall bring their offering, each prince on his day, and so they
did. One sabbath must needs fall within the twelve days, if not two, but
it should seem they did not intermit on the sabbath, for it was holy
work, proper enough for a holy day. God appointed that it should thus be
done on several days, (1.) That solemnity might be prolonged, and so
might be universally taken notice of by all Israel, and the remembrance
of it more effectually preserved. (2.) That an equal honour might
thereby be put upon each tribe respectively; in Aaron's breast-plate
each had his precious stone, so in this offering each had his day. (3.)
Thus it would be done more decently and in order; God's work should not
be done confusedly, and in a hurry; take time, and we shall have done
the sooner, or at least we shall have done the better. (4.) God hereby
signified how much pleased he is, and how much pleased we should be,
with the exercises of piety and devotion. The repetition of them should
be a continual pleasure to us, and we must not be weary of well doing.
If extraordinary service be required to be done for twelve days
together, we must not shrink from it, nor call it a task and a burden.
(5.) The priests and Levites, having this occasion to offer the same
sacrifices, and those some of every sort, every day, for so many days
together, would have their hands well set in, and would be well versed
in the laws concerning them. (6.) The peace-offerings were all to be
eaten the same day they were offered, and two oxen, five rams, five
he-goats, and five lambs, were enough for one day's festival; had there
been more, especially if all had been brought on one day, there might
have been danger of excess. The virtue of temperance must not be left,
under pretence of the religion of feasting.

4\. All their offerings were exactly the same, without any variation,
though it is probable that neither the princes nor the tribes were all
alike rich; but thus it was intimated that all the tribes of Israel had
an equal share in the altar, and an equal interest in the sacrifices
that were offered upon it. Though one tribe was posted more honourably
in the camp than another, yet they and their services were all alike
acceptable to God. Nor must we have faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with
respect to persons, [Jam 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001.md).

5\. Nahshon, the prince of the tribe of Judah, offered first, because
God had given that tribe the first post of honour in the camp; and the
rest of the tribes acquiesced, and offered in the same order in which
God had appointed them to encamp. Judah, of which tribe Christ came,
first, and then the rest; thus, in the dedication of souls to God, every
man is presented in his own order, Christ the first-fruits, [Co1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023.md). Some observe that Nahshon is
the only one that is not expressly called a prince ([Num
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#012).md), which the Jews give this
account of: he is not called a prince, that he might not be puffed up
because he offered first; and all the others are called princes because
they (though some of them of the elder house) submitted, and offered
after him. Or, because the title of prince of Judah did more properly
belong to Christ, for unto him shall the gathering of the people be.

6\. Though the offerings were all the same, yet the account of them is
repeated at large for each tribe, in the same words. We are sure there
are no vain repetitions in scripture; what then shall we make of these
repetitions? Might it not have served to say of this noble jury that the
same offering which their foreman brought each on his day brought
likewise? No, God would have it specified for each tribe: and why so?
(1.) It was for the encouragement of these princes, and of their
respective tribes, that each of their offerings being recorded at large
no slight might seem to be put upon them; for rich and poor meet
together before God. (2.) It was for the encouragement of all generous
acts of piety and charity, by letting us know that what is so given is
lent to the Lord, and he carefully records it, with every one's name
prefixed to his gift, because what is so given he will pay again, and
even a cup of cold water shall have its reward. He is not unrighteous,
to forget either the cost or the labour of love, [Heb
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#010.md). We find Christ taking particular
notice of what was cast into the treasury, [Mar
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#041.md). Though what is offered be but
little, though it be a contribution to the charity of others, yet if it
be according to our ability it shall be recorded, that it may be
recompensed in the resurrection of the just.

7\. The sum total is added at the foot of the account ([Num
7:84-88](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#084).md), to show how much God was
pleased with the mention of his freewill-offerings, and what a great
deal they amounted to in the whole, when every prince brought in his
quota! How greatly would the sanctuary of God be enriched and beautified
if all would in their places do their part towards it, by exemplary
purity and devotion, extensive charity, and universal usefulness!

8\. God signified his gracious acceptance of these presents that were
brought him, by speaking familiarly to Moses, as a man speaks to his
friend, from off the mercy-seat ([Num
7:89](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#089.md), [Num
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008).md); and in speaking to him he did
in effect speak to all Israel, showing them this token for good, [Psa
103:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#007.md). Note, By this we may know that
God hears and accepts our prayers if he gives us grace to hear and
receive his word, for thus our communion with him is maintained and kept
up. I know not why we may not suppose that upon each of the days on
which these offerings were brought (probably while the priests and
offerers were feasting upon the peace-offerings) Moses was in the
tabernacle, receiving some of those laws and orders which we have
already met with in this and the foregoing book. And here the excellent
bishop Patrick observes that God's speaking to Moses thus by an audible
articulate voice, as if he had been clothed with a holy body, might be
looked upon as an earnest of the incarnation of the Son of God in the
fulness of time, when the Word should be made flesh, and speak in the
language of the sons of men. For, however God at sundry times and in
divers manners spoke unto the fathers, he has in these last days spoken
unto us by his Son. And that he who now spoke to Moses, as the shechinah
or divine Majesty, from between the cherubim, was the eternal Word, the
second person in the Trinity, was the pious conjecture of many of the
ancients; for all God's communion with man is by his Son, by whom he
made the world, and rules the church, and who is the same yesterday,
today, and for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 8](num008.md)

</div>
