<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num008)  [Next](num010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 9:0</span></span>

This chapter is, I. Concerning the great ordinance of the passover; 1.
Orders given for the observance of it, at the return of the year ([Num
9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001)). 2. Provisos added in regard to
such as should be ceremonially unclean, or otherwise disabled, at the
time when the passover was to be kept ([Num
9:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#006)). II. Concerning the great
favour of the pillar of cloud, which was a guide to Israel through the
wilderness ([Num 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015), etc.).

[Numbers 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 9:1</span></span>

Here we have,

I. An order given for the solemnization of the passover, the day
twelvemonth after they came out of Egypt, on the fourteenth day of the
first month of the second year, some days before they were numbered, for
that was done in the beginning of the second month. Observe, 1. God gave
particular orders for the keeping of this passover, otherwise (it should
seem) they would not have kept it, for, in the first institution of this
ordinance, it was appointed to be kept when they should come into the
land of promise, [Exo 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#025). And, no
passover till they came to Canaan, [Jos
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#010). This was an early indication of
the abolishing of the ceremonial institutions at last, that, so soon
after they were first appointed, some of them were suffered to lie
asleep for so many years. The ordinance of the Lord's supper (which came
in the room of the passover) was not thus intermitted or set aside in
the first days of the Christian church, though those were days of
greater difficulty and distress than Israel knew in the wilderness; nay,
in the times of persecution, the Lord's supper was celebrated more
frequently than afterwards. The Israelites in the wilderness could not
forget their deliverance out of Egypt, their present state was a
constant memorandum of it to them. All the danger was when they came to
Canaan; there therefore they had need to be reminded of the rock out of
which they were hewn. However, because the first passover was celebrated
in a hurry, and was rather the substance itself than the sign, it was
the will of God that at the return of the year, when they were more
composed, and better acquainted with the divine law, they should observe
it again, that their children might more distinctly understand the
solemnity and the better remember it hereafter. Calvin supposes that
they were obliged to keep it now, and notes it as an instance of their
carelessness that they had need to be reminded of an institution which
they so lately received. 2. Moses faithfully transmitted to the people
the orders given him, [Num 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#004). Thus
Paul delivered to the churches what he received of the Lord concerning
the gospel passover, [Co1 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023). Note,
Magistrates must be monitors, and ministers must stir up men's minds by
way of remembrance to that which is good. 3. The people observed the
orders given them, [Num 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#005). Though
they had lately kept the feast of dedication (ch. 7), yet they did not
desire to excuse themselves with that from keeping this feast. Note,
Extraordinary performances must not supersede or jostle out or stated
services. They kept the passover even in the wilderness: though our
condition be solitary and unsettled, yet we must keep up our attendance
on God by holy ordinances as we have opportunity, for in them we may
find the best conversation and the best repose. Thus is God' Israel
provided for in a desert.

II\. Instructions given concerning those that were ceremonially unclean
when they were to eat the passover. The law of the passover required
every Israelite to eat of it. Some subsequent laws had forbidden those
that had contracted any ceremonial pollution to eat of the holy things;
those whose minds and consciences are defiled by sin are utterly unfit
for communion with God, and cannot partake, with any true comfort, of
the gospel passover, till they are cleansed by true repentance and
faith: and a sad dilemma they are in; if they come not to holy
ordinances, they are guilty of a contempt of them; if they do come in
their pollution, they are guilty of a profanation of them. They must
therefore wash, and then compass God's altar. Now,

1\. Here is the case that happened in Israel when this passover was to
be kept: Certain men were defiled by the dead body of a man ([Num
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#006)), and they lay under that
defilement seven days ([Num 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011)),
and in that time might not eat of the holy things, [Lev
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#020). This was not their iniquity, but
their infelicity: some persons must touch dead bodies, to bury them out
of sight, and therefore they could, with the better grace, bring their
complaint to Moses.

2\. The application made to Moses by the person concerned, [Num
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#007). Note, It is people's wisdom, in
difficult cases concerning sin and duty, to consult with their ministers
whom God has set over them, and to ask the law at their mouth, [Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007). These means we must use in
pursuance of our prayers to God to lead us in a plain path. Observe with
what trouble and concern these men complained that they were kept back
from offering to the Lord. They did not complain of the law as unjust,
but lamented their unhappiness that they fell under the restraint of it
at this time, and desired some expedient might be found out for their
relief. Note, It is a blessed thing to see people hungering and
thirsting after God's ordinances, and to hear them complaining of that
which prevents their enjoyment of them. It should be a trouble to us
when by any occasion we are kept back from bringing our offering in the
solemnities of a sabbath or a sacrament, as it was to David when he was
banished from the altar, [Psa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001),
[Psa 42:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#002).

3\. The deliberation of Moses in resolving this case. Here seemed to be
law against law; and, though it is a rule that the latter law must
explain the former, yet he pitied these Israelites that were thus
deprived of the privilege of the passover, and therefore took time to
consult the oracles, and to know what was the mind of God in this case:
I will hear what the Lord will command concerning you, [Num
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#008). Ministers must take example hence
in resolving cases of conscience. (1.) They must not determine rashly,
but take time to consider, that every circumstance may be duly weighted,
the case viewed in a true light, and spiritual things compared with
spiritual. (2.) They must ask counsel at God's mouth, and not determine
according to the bias of their own fancy or affection, but impartially,
according to the mind of God, to the best of their knowledge. We have no
such oracle to consult as Moses had, but we must have recourse to the
law and the testimony, and speak according to that rule; and if, in
difficult cases, we take time to spread the matter in particular before
God by humble believing prayer, we have reason to hope that the Spirit
who is promised to lead us into all truth will enable us to direct
others in the good and right way.

4\. The directions which God gave in this case, and in other similar
cases, explanatory of the law of the passover. The disagreeable accident
produced good laws. (1.) Those that happened to be ceremonially unclean
at the time when the passover should be eaten were allowed to eat it
that day month, when they were clean; so were those that happened to be
in a journey afar off, [Num 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#010), [Num
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#011). See here, \[1.\] That when we
are to attend upon God in solemn ordinances it is very necessary both
that we be clean and that we be composed. \[2.\] That that may excuse
the deferring of a duty for a time which yet will not justify us in the
total neglect and omission of it. He that is at variance with his
brother may leave his gift before the altar, while he goes to be
reconciled to his brother; but when he has done his part towards it,
whether it be effected or no, he must come again and offer his gift,
[Mat 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023), [Mat
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024). This secondary passover was to
be kept on the same day of the month with the first, because the
ordinance was a memorial of their deliverance on that day of the month.
Once we find the whole congregation keeping the passover on this
fourteenth day of the second month, in Hezekiah's time ([Ch2
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#015)), which perhaps may help to
account for the admission of some that were not clean to the eating of
it. Had the general passover been kept in the first month, the unclean
might have been put off till the second; but, that being kept in the
second month, they had no warrant to eat it in the third month, and
therefore, rather than not eat of it at all, they were admitted, though
not cleansed according to the purification of the sanctuary, [Num
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#019), [Num
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#020). (2.) Whenever the passover was
kept in the second month, all the rites and ceremonies of it must be
strictly observed, [Num 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#012). They
must not think that, because the time was dispensed with, any part of
the solemnity of it might be abated; when we cannot do as we would we
must do the utmost we can in the service of God. (3.) This allowance in
a case of necessity would be no means countenance or indulge any in
their neglect to keep the passover at the time appointed, when they were
not under the necessity, [Num 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#013).
When a person is under no incapacity to eat the passover in the
appointed time, if he neglects it then, upon the presumption of the
liberty granted by this law, he puts an affront upon God, impiously
abuses his kindness, and he shall certainly bear his sin, and be cut off
from his people. Note, As those who against their minds are forced to
absent themselves from God's ordinances may comfortably expect the
favours of God's grace under their affliction, so those who of choice
absent themselves may justly expect the tokens of God's wrath for their
sin. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. (4.) Here is a clause added in
favour of strangers, [Num 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#014). Though
it was requisite that the stranger who would join with them in eating
the passover should be circumcised as a proselyte to their religion
([Exo 12:48](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#048), [Exo
12:49](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#049)), yet this kind admission of
those that were not native Israelites to eat the passover was an
intimation of the favour designed for the poor Gentiles by Christ. As
then there was one law, so in the days of the Messiah there should be
one gospel, for the stranger and for him that was born in the land; for
in every nation he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted of
him, and this was a truth before Peter perceived it, [Act
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034), [Act
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035).

[Numbers 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 9:15</span></span>

We have here the history of the cloud; not a natural history: who knows
the balancings of the clouds? but a divine history of a cloud that was
appointed to be the visible sign and symbol of God's presence with
Israel.

I. When the tabernacle was finished this cloud, which before had hung on
high over their camp, settled upon the tabernacle, and covered it, to
show that God manifests his presence with his people in and by his
ordinances; there he makes himself known, and to them we must look if we
would see the beauty of the Lord, [Psa
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004); [Eze
37:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#026), [Eze
37:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#027). Thus God glorified his own
appointments, and signified his acceptance of his people's love and
obedience.

II\. That which appeared as a cloud by day appeared as a fire all night.
Had it been a cloud only, it would not have been visible by night; and,
had it been a fire only, it would have been scarcely discernible by day;
but God would give them sensible demonstrations of the constancy of his
presence with them, and his care of them, and that he kept them night
and day, [Isa 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#003); [Psa
121:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#006). And thus we are taught to set
God always before us, and to see him near us both night and day.
Something of the nature of that divine revelation which the Old
Testament church was governed by might also be signified by these
visible signs of God's presence, the cloud denoting the darkness and the
fire the terror of that dispensation, in comparison with the more clear
and comfortable discoveries God has made of his glory in the face of
Jesus Christ.

III\. This pillar of cloud and fire directed and determined all the
motions, marches, and encampments, of Israel in the wilderness. 1. As
long as the cloud rested upon the tabernacle, so long they continued in
the same place, and never stirred; though no doubt they were very
desirous to be pressing forward in their journey towards Canaan, where
they longed to be and hoped to be quickly, yet as long as the cloud
rested, if it was a month or a year, so long they rested, [Num
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#022). Note, He that believeth doth not
make haste. There is no time lost while we are waiting God's time. It is
as acceptable a piece of submission to the will of God to sit still
contentedly when our lot requires it as to work for him when we are
called to it. 2. When the cloud was taken up, they removed, how
comfortably soever they were encamped, [Num
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#017). Whether it moved by day or
night, they delayed not to attend its motions ([Num
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#021)), and probably there were some
appointed to stand sentinel day and night within sight of it, to give
timely notice to the camp of its beginning to stir, and this called
keeping the charge of the Lord. The people, being thus kept at a
constant uncertainty, and having no time fixed for stopping or removing,
were obliged to hold themselves in constant readiness to march upon very
short warning. And for the same reason we are kept at uncertainty
concerning the time of our putting off the earthly house of this
tabernacle, that we may be always ready to remove at the commandment of
the Lord. 3. As long and as far as the cloud moved, so long and so far
they marched, and just where it abode they pitched their tents about it,
and God's tent under it, [Num 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#017).
Note, It is uncomfortable staying when God has departed, but very safe
and pleasant going when we see God go before us and resting where he
appoints us to rest. This is repeated again and again in these verses,
because it was a constant miracle, and often repeated, and what never
failed in all their travels, and because it is a matter which we should
take particular notice of as very significant and instructive. It is
mentioned long after by David ([Psa
105:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#039)), and by the people of God
after their captivity, [Neh 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#019). And
the guidance of this cloud is spoken of as signifying the guidance of
the blessed Spirit. [Isa 63:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#014), The
Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest, and so didst thou lead thy
people. This teaches us, (1.) The particular care God takes of his
people. Nothing could be more expressive and significant of God's
tenderness of Israel than the guidance of this cloud was; it led them by
the right way ([Psa 107:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#007)), went on
their pace: God did by it, as it were, cover them with his feathers. We
are not now to expect such sensible tokens of the divine presence and
guidance as this was, but the promise is sure to all God's spiritual
Israel that he will guide them by his counsel ([Psa
73:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#024)), even unto death ([Psa
48:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#014)), that all the children of God
shall be led by the Spirit of God ([Rom
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014)), that he will direct the paths
of those who in all their ways acknowledge him, [Pro
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#006). There is a particular providence
conversant about all their affairs, to direct and overrule them for the
best. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, [Psa
37:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#023). (2.) The particular regard we
ought to have to God in all our ways. In our affections and actions we
must follow the direction of his word and Spirit; all the motions of our
souls must be guided by the divine will; at the commandment of the Lord
our hearts should always move and rest; in all our affairs we must
follow Providence, reconciling ourselves to all its disposals, and
bringing our mind to our condition, whatever it is. The people of
Israel, having the cloud for their guide, were eased of the trouble of
holding councils of war, to consider when and whither they should march,
which might have occasioned strifes and debates among them: nor needed
they to send spies before to inform them of the posture of the country,
or pioneers to clear the way, or officers to mark out their camp; the
pillar of cloud did all this for them: and those that by faith commit
their works to the Lord, though they are bound to the prudent use of
means, yet may in like manner be easy in the expectation of the event.
"Father, thy will be done; dispose of me and mine as thou pleasest; here
I am, desirous to be found waiting on my God continually, to journey and
rest at the commandment of the Lord. What thou wilt, and where thou
wilt, only let me be thine, and always in the way of my duty."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 10](num010)

</div>
