<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num015)  [Next](num017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 16:0</span></span>

The date of the history contained in this chapter is altogether
uncertain. Probably these mutinies happened after their removal back
again from Kadesh-barnea, when they were fixed (if I may so speak) for
their wandering in the wilderness, and began to look upon that as their
settlement. Presently after new laws given follows the story of a new
rebellion, as if sin took occasion from the commandment to become more
exceedingly sinful. Here is, I. A daring and dangerous rebellion raised
against Moses and Aaron, by Korah, Dathan, and Abiram ([Num
16:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)). 1. Korah and his accomplices
contend for the priesthood against Aaron ([Num
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#003)). Moses reasons with them, and
appeals to God for a decision of the controversy ([Num
16:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#004)). 2. Dathan and Abiram quarrel
with Moses, and refuse to obey his summons, which greatly grieves him
([Num 16:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#012)). II. A solemn
appearance of the pretenders to the priesthood before God, according to
order, and a public appearance of the glory of the Lord, which would
have consumed the whole congregation if Moses and Aaron had not
interceded ([Num 16:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#016)). III. The
deciding of the controversy, and the crushing of the rebellion, by the
cutting off of the rebels. 1. Those in their tents were buried alive
([Num 16:23-34](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#023)). 2. Those at the door
of the tabernacle were consumed by fire ([Num
16:35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#035)), and their censers preserved
for a memorial ([Num 16:37-40](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#037)). IV. A
new insurrection of the people ([Num
16:41-43](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#041)). 1. God stayed in the
insurrection by a plague ([Num 16:45](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#045)).
2. Aaron stayed the plague by offering incense ([Num
16:46-50](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#046)). The manner and method of
recording this story plainly show the ferment to have been very great.

[Numbers 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 16:1</span></span>

Here is, I. An account of the rebels, who and what they were, not, as
formerly, the mixed multitude and the dregs of the people, who are
therefore never named, but men of distinction and quality, that made a
figure. Korah was the ring-leader: he formed and headed the faction;
therefore it is called the gainsaying of Korah, [Jde
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#011). He was cousin-german to Moses,
they were brothers' children, yet the nearness of the relation could not
restrain him from being insolent and rude to Moses. Think it not strange
if a man's foes be those of his own house. With him joined Dathan and
Abiram, chief men of the tribe of Reuben, the eldest son of Jacob.
Probably Korah was disgusted both at the preferment of Aaron to the
priesthood and the constituting of Elizaphan to the head of the
Kohathites ([Num 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#030)); and perhaps
the Reubenites were angry that the tribe of Judah had the first post of
honour in the camp. On is mentioned ([Num
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)) as one of the heads of the
faction, but never after in the whole story, either because, as some
think, he repented and left them, or because he did not make himself so
remarkable as Dathan and Abiram did. The Kohathites encamped on the same
side of the tabernacle that the Reubenites did, which perhaps gave Korah
an opportunity of drawing them in, whence the Jews say, Woe to the
wicked man, and woe to his neighbour, who is in danger of being infected
by him. And, these being themselves men of renown, they seduced into the
conspiracy two hundred and fifty princes of the assembly ([Num
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#002)); probably they were first-born,
or at least heads of families, who, before the elevation of Aaron, had
themselves ministered in holy things. Note, The pride, ambition, and
emulation, of great men, have always been the occasion of a great deal
of mischief both in churches and states. God by his grace make great men
humble, and so give peace in our time, O Lord! Famous men, and men of
renown, as these are described to be, were the great sinners of the old
world, [Gen 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004). The fame and renown
which they had did not content them; they were high, but would be
higher, and thus the famous men became infamous.

II\. The rebels' remonstrance, [Num
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#003). That which they quarrel with is
the settlement of the priesthood upon Aaron and his family, which they
think an honour too great for Moses to give and Aaron to accept, and so
they are both charged with usurpation: You take too much upon you; or,
"Let it suffice you to have domineered thus long, and now think of
resigning your places to those who have as good a title to them and are
as well able to manage them." 1. They proudly boast of the holiness of
the congregation, and the presence of God in it. "They are holy, every
one of them, and as fit to be employed in offering sacrifice as Aaron
is, and as masters of families formerly were, and the Lord is among
them, to direct and own them." Small reason they had to boast of the
people's purity, or of God's favour, as the people had been so
frequently and so lately polluted with sin, and were now under the marks
of God's displeasure, which should have made them thankful for priests
to mediate between them and God; but, instead of that, they envy them.
2. They unjustly charge Moses and Aaron with taking the honour they had
to themselves, whereas it was evident, beyond contradiction, that they
were called of God to it, [Heb 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004). So
that they would either have no priests at all, nor any government, none
to preside either in civil or sacred things, none over the congregation,
none above it, or they would not acquiesce in that constitution of the
government which God had appointed. See here, (1.) What spirit levellers
are of, and those that despise dominions, and resist the powers that God
has set over them; they are proud, envious, ambitious, turbulent,
wicked, and unreasonable men. (2.) What usage even the best and most
useful men may expect, even from those they have been serviceable to. If
those be represented as usurpers that have the best titles, and those as
tyrants that govern best, let them recollect that Moses and Aaron were
thus abused.

III\. Moses's conduct when their remonstrance was published against him.
How did he take it?

1\. He fell on his face ([Num 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#004)),
as before, [Num 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#005). Thus he showed
how willing he would have been to yield to them, and how gladly he would
have resigned his government, if it would have consisted with his duty
to God and his fidelity to the trust reposed in him. Thus also he
applied to God, by prayer, for direction what to say and to do upon this
sad occasion. He would not speak to them till he had thus humbled and
composed his own spirit (which could not but begin to be heated), and
had received instruction from God. The heart of the wise in such a case
studies to answer, and asks counsel at God's mouth.

2\. He agrees to refer the case to God, and leave it to him to decide
it, as one well assured of the goodness of his title, and yet well
content to resign, if God thought fit, to gratify this discontented
people with another nomination. An honest cause fears not a speedy
trial; even tomorrow let it be brought on, [Num
16:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#005). Let Korah and his partisans
bring their censers, and offer incense before the Lord, and, if he
testify his acceptance of them, well and good; Moses is now as willing
that all the Lord's people should be priests, if God so pleased, as
before that they should all be prophets, [Num
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#029). But if God, upon an appeal to
him, determine (as no doubt he would) for Aaron, they would find it
highly dangerous to make the experiment: and therefore he puts it off
till tomorrow, to try whether, when they had slept upon it, they would
desist, and let fall their pretensions.

3\. He argues the case fairly with them, to still the mutiny with fair
reasoning, if possible, before the appeal came to God's tribunal, for
then he knew it would end in the confusion of the complainants.

(1.) He calls them the sons of Levi, [Num
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#007), and again [Num
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#008). They were of his own tribe, nay,
they were of God's tribe; it was therefore the worse in them thus to
mutiny both against God and against him. It was not long since the sons
of Levi had bravely appeared on God's side, in the matter of the golden
calf, and got immortal honour by it; and shall those that were then the
only innocents now be the leading criminals, and lose all the honour
they had won? Could there be such chaff on God's floor? Levites, and yet
rebels?

(2.) He retorts their charge upon themselves. They had unjustly charged
Moses and Aaron with taking too much upon them, though they had done no
more than what God put upon them; nay, says Moses, You take too much
upon you, you sons of Levi. Note, Those that take upon them to control
and contradict God's appointment take too much upon them. It is enough
for us to submit; it is too much to prescribe.

(3.) He shows them the privilege they had as Levites, which was
sufficient for them, they needed not to aspire to the honour of the
priesthood, [Num 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#009), [Num
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#010). He reminds them how great the
honour was to which they were preferred, as Levites. \[1.\] They were
separated from the congregation of Israel, distinguished from them,
dignified above them; instead of complaining that Aaron's family was
advanced above theirs, they ought to have been thankful that their tribe
was advanced above the rest of the tribes, though they had been in all
respects upon the level with them. Note, It will help to keep us from
envying those that are above us duly to consider how many there are
below us. Instead of fretting that any are preferred before us in
honour, power, estate, or interest, in gifts, graces, or usefulness, we
have reason to bless God if we, who are less than the least, are not put
among the very last. Many perhaps who deserve better are not preferred
so well. \[2.\] They were separated to very great and valuable honours,
First, To draw near to God, nearer than the common Israelites, though
they also were a people near unto him; the nearer any are to God the
greater is their honour. Secondly, To do the service of the tabernacle.
It is honour enough to bear the vessels of the sanctuary, and to be
employed in any part of the service of the tabernacle. God's service is
not only perfect freedom, but high preferment. Thirdly, To stand before
the congregation to minister unto them. Note, Those are truly great that
serve the public, and it is the honour of God's ministers to be the
church's ministers; nay, which adds to the dignity put upon them, \[3.\]
It was the God of Israel himself that separated them. It was his act and
deed to put them into their place, and therefore they ought not to have
been discontented: and he it was likewise that put Aaron into his place,
and therefore they ought not to have envied him.

(4.) He convicts them of the sin of undervaluing those privileges:
Seemeth it a small thing unto you? As if he had said, "It ill becomes
you of all men to grudge Aaron the priesthood, when at the same time
that he was advanced to that honour you were designed for another honour
dependent upon it, and shine with rays borrowed from him." Note, \[1.\]
The privilege of drawing near to the God of Israel is not a small thing
in itself, and therefore must not appear small to us. To those who
neglect opportunities of drawing near to God, who are careless and
formal in it, to whom it is a task and not a pleasure, we may properly
put this question: "Seemeth it a small thing to you that God has made
you a people near unto him?" \[2.\] Those who aspire after and usurp the
honours forbidden them put a great contempt upon the honours allowed
them. We have each of us as good a share of reputation as God sees fit
for us, and sees us fit for, and much better than we deserve; and we
ought to rest satisfied with it, and not, as these, exercise ourselves
in things too high for us: Seek you the priesthood also? They would not
own that they sought it, but Moses saw that they had this in their eye;
the law had provided very well for those that served at the altar, and
therefore they would put in for the office.

(5.) He interprets their mutiny to be a rebellion against God ([Num
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#011)); while they pretended to assert
the holiness and liberty of the Israel of God, they really took up arms
against the God of Israel: You are gathered together against the Lord.
Note, Those that strive against God's ordinances and providences,
whatever they pretend, and whether they are aware of it or no, do indeed
strive with their Maker. Those resist the prince who resist those that
are commissioned by him: for, alas! says Moses, What is Aaron, that you
murmur against him? If murmurers and complainers would consider that the
instruments they quarrel with are but instruments whom God employs, and
that they are but what he makes them, and neither more nor less, better
nor worse, they would not be so bold and free in their censures and
reproaches as they are. Those that found the priesthood, as it was
settled, a blessing, must give all the praise to God; but if any found
it a burden they must not therefore quarrel with Aaron, who is but what
he is made, and does but as he is bidden. Thus he interested God in the
cause, and so might be sure of speeding well in his appeal.

[Numbers 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 16:12</span></span>

Here is, I. The insolence of Dathan and Abiram, and their treasonable
remonstrance. Moses had heard what Korah had to say, and had answered
it; now he summons Dathan and Abiram to bring in their complaints ([Num
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#012)); but they would not obey his
summons, either because they could not for shame say that to his face
which they were resolved to say, and then it is an instance of some
remains of modesty in them; or, rather, because they would not so far
own his authority, and then it is an instance of the highest degree of
impudence. They spoke the language of Pharaoh himself, who set Moses at
defiance, but they forgot how dearly he paid for it. Had not their heads
been wretchedly heated, and their hearts hardened, they might have
considered that, if they regarded not these messengers, Moses could soon
in God's name send messengers of death for them. But thus the God of
this world blinds the minds of those that believe not. But by the same
messengers they send their articles of impeachment against Moses; and
the charge runs very high. 1. They charge him with having done them a
great deal of wrong in bringing them out of Egypt, invidiously calling
that a land flowing with milk and honey, [Num
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#013). Onions, and garlick, and fish,
they had indeed plenty of in Egypt, but it never pretended to milk and
honey; only they would thus banter the promise of Canaan. Ungrateful
wretches, to represent that as an injury to them which was really the
greatest favour that ever was bestowed upon any people! 2. They charge
him with a design upon their lives, that he intended to kill them in the
wilderness, though they were so well provided for. And, if they were
sentenced to die in the wilderness, they must thank themselves. Moses
would have healed them, and they would not be healed. 3. They charge him
with a design upon their liberties, that he meant to enslave them, by
making himself a prince over them. A prince over them! Was he not a
tender father to them? nay, their devoted servant for the Lord's sake?
Had they not their properties secured, their order preserved, and
justice impartially administered? Did they not live in ease and honour?
And yet they complain as if Moses's yoke were heavier than Pharaoh's.
And did Moses make himself a prince? Far from it. How gladly would he
have declined the office at first! How gladly would he have resigned it
many a time since! And yet he is thus put under the blackest characters
of a tyrant and a usurper. 4. They charge him with cheating them,
raising their expectations of a good land, and then defeating them ([Num
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#014)): Thou hast not brought us, as
thou promisedst us, into a land that floweth with milk and honey; and
pray whose fault was that? He had brought them to the borders of it, and
was just ready, under God, to put them in possession of it; but they
thrust it away from them, and shut the door against themselves; so that
it was purely their own fault that they were not now in Canaan, and yet
Moses must bear the blame. Thus when the foolishness of man perverteth
his way his heart fretteth against the Lord, [Pro
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#003). 5. They charge him in the
general with unfair dealing, that he put out the eyes of these men, and
then meant to lead them blindfold as he pleased. The design of all he
did for them was to open their eyes, and yet they insinuate that he
intended to put out their eyes, that they might not see themselves
imposed upon. Note, The wisest and best cannot please every body, nor
gain the good word of all. Those often fall under the heaviest censures
who have merited the highest applause. Many a good work Moses had shown
them from the Father, and for which of these do they reproach him?

II\. Moses's just resentment of their insolence, [Num
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#015). Moses, though the meekest man,
yet, finding God reproached in him, was very wroth; he could not bear to
see a people ruining themselves for whose salvation he had done so much.
In this discomposure,

1\. He appeals to God concerning his own integrity; whereas they basely
reflected upon him as ambitious, covetous, and oppressive, in making
himself a prince over them, God was his witness, (1.) That he never got
any thing by them: I have not taken one ass from them, not only not by
way of bribery and extortion, but not by way of recompence or gratuity
for all the good offices he had done them; he never took the pay of a
general, or the salary of a judge, much less the tribute of a prince. He
got more in his estate when he kept Jethro's flock than when he came to
be king in Jeshurun. (2.) That they never lost any thing by him: Neither
have I hurt any one of them, no, not the least, no, not the worst, no,
not those that had been most peevish and provoking to him: he never
abused his power to the support of wrong. Note, Those that have never
blemished themselves need not fear being slurred by others: when men
condemn us we may be easy, if our own hearts condemn us not.

2\. He begs of God to plead his cause, and clear him, by showing his
displeasure at the incense which Korah and his company were to offer,
with whom Dathan and Abiram were in confederacy. Lord, says he, Respect
not thou their offering. Herein he seems to refer to the history of
Cain, lately written by his own hand, of whom it is said that to him and
his offering God had not respect, [Gen
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#005). These that followed the
gainsaying of Korah walked in the way of Cain (these are put together,
[Jde 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#011)), and therefore he prays
that they might be frowned upon as Cain was, and put to the same
confusion.

III\. Issue joined between Moses and his accusers. 1. Moses challenges
them to appear with Aaron next morning, at the time of offering up the
morning incense, and refer the matter to God's judgment, [Num
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#016), [Num
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#017). Since he could not convince
them by his calm and affectionate reasoning, he is ready to enter into
bonds to stand God's award, not doubting but that God would appear, to
decide the controversy. This reference he had agreed to before ([Num
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#006), [Num
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#007)), and here adds only one clause,
which bespeaks his great condescension to the plaintiffs, that Aaron,
against whose advancement they excepted, though now advanced by the
divine institution to the honour of burning incense within the
tabernacle, yet, upon this trial, should put himself into the place of a
probationer, and stand upon the level with Korah, at the door of the
tabernacle; nay, and Moses himself would stand with them, so that the
complainant shall have all the fair dealing he can desire; and thus
every mouth shall be stopped. 2. Korah accepts the challenge, and makes
his appearance with Moses and Aaron at the door of the tabernacle, to
make good his pretensions, [Num 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#018),
[Num 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#019). If he had not had a very
great stock of impudence, he could not have carried on the matter thus
far. Had not he lately seen Nadab and Abihu, the consecrated priests,
struck dead for daring to offer incense with unhallowed fire? and could
he and his accomplices expect to fare any better in offering incense
with unhallowed hands? Yet, to confront Moses and Aaron, in the height
of his pride he thus bids defiance to Heaven, and pretends to demand the
divine acceptance without a divine warrant; thus wretchedly is the heart
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. They took every man his
censer. Perhaps these were some of the censers which these heads of
families had made use of at their family-altars, before this part of
religious service was confined to the priesthood and the altar in the
tabernacle (and they would bring them into use and reputation again); or
they might be common chafing-dishes, which were for their ordinary use.
Now to attend the solemn trial, and to be witness of the issue, one
would have thought Moses should have gathered the congregation against
the rebels, but it seems Korah gathered them against Moses ([Num
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#019)), which intimates that a great
part of the congregation sided with Korah, were at his beck, and wished
him success, and that Korah's hopes were very high of carrying the point
against Aaron; for, had he suspected the event, he would not have
coveted to make the trial thus public: but little did he think that he
was now calling the congregation together to be the witnesses of his own
confusion! Note, Proud and ambitious men, while they are projecting
their own advancement, often prove to have been hurrying on their own
shameful fall.

IV\. The judgment set, and the Judge taking the tribunal, and
threatening to give sentence against the whole congregation. 1. The
glory of the Lord appeared, [Num
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#019). The same glory that appeared to
instal Aaron in his office at first ([Lev
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#023)) now appeared to confirm him in
it, and to confound those that oppose him, and set up themselves in
competition with him. The shechinah, or divine Majesty, the glory of the
eternal Word, which ordinarily dwelt between the cherubim within the
veil, now was publicly seen over the door of the tabernacle, to the
terror of the whole congregation; for, though they saw no manner of
similitude, yet probably the appearances of the light and fire were such
as plainly showed God to be angry with them; as when he appeared, [Num
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#010). Nothing is more terrible to
those who are conscious of guilt than the appearances of divine glory;
for such a glorious Being must needs be a formidable enemy. 2. God
threatened to consume them all in a moment, and, in order to that, bade
Moses and Aaron stand from among them, [Num
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#021). God thus showed what their sin
deserved, and how very provoking it was to him. See what a dangerous
thing it is to have fellowship with sinners, and in the least to partake
with them. Many of the congregation, it is likely, came only for
company, following the crowd, or for curiosity, to see the issue, yet
not coming, as they ought to have done, to bear their testimony against
the rebels, and openly to declare for God and Moses, they had like to
have been all consumed in a moment. If we follow the herd into which the
devil has entered, it is at our peril.

V. The humble intercession of Moses and Aaron for the congregation, [Num
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#022). 1. Their posture was
importuning: they fell on their faces, prostrating themselves before
God, as supplicants in good earnest, that they might prevail for sparing
mercy. Though the people had treacherously deserted them, and struck in
with those that were in arms against them, yet they approved themselves
faithful to the trusts reposed in them, as shepherds of Israel, who were
to stand in the breach when they saw the flock in danger. Note, If
others fail in their duty to us, this does not discharge us from our
duty to them, nor take off the obligations we lie under to seek their
welfare. 2. Their prayer was a pleading prayer, and it proved a
prevailing one. Now God would have destroyed them if Moses had not
turned away his wrath ([Psa 106:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#023));
yet far be it from us to imagine that Moses was more considerate or more
compassionate than God in such a case as this: but God saw fit to show
his just displeasure against the sin of sinners by the sentence, and at
the same time to show his gracious condescension to the prayers of the
saints, by the revocation of the sentence at the intercession of Moses.
Observe in the prayer, (1.) The title they give to God: The God of the
spirits of all flesh. See what man is; he is a spirit in flesh, a soul
embodied, a creature wonderfully compounded of heaven and earth. See
what God is; he is the God of the spirits of all mankind. He forms the
spirit, [Zac 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001). He fathers it, [Heb
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#009). He has an ability to fashion it
([Psa 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#015)), and authority to dispose
of it, for he has said, All souls are mine, [Eze
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004). They insinuate hereby that
though, as the God of the spirits of all flesh, he might in sovereignty
consume this congregation in a moment, yet it was to be hoped that he
would in mercy spare them, not only because they were the work of his
own hands, and he had a propriety in them, but because, being the God of
spirits, he knew their frame, and could distinguish between the leaders
and the led, between those who sinned maliciously and those who were
drawn in by their wiles, and would make a difference accordingly in his
judgments. (2.) The argument they insist on; it is much the same with
that which Abraham urged in his intercession for Sodom ([Gen
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023)): Wilt thou destroy the
righteous with the wicked? Such is the plea here: Shall one man sin and
wilt thou be wroth with all the congregation? Not but that it was the
sin of them all to join in this matter, but the great transgression was
his that first hatched the treason. Note, Whatever God may do in
sovereignty and strict justice, we have reason to hope that he will not
destroy a congregation for the sin of one, but that, righteousness and
peace having kissed each other in the undertaking of the Redeemer, mercy
shall rejoice against judgment. Moses knew that all the congregation
must perish in the wilderness by degrees, yet he is thus earnest in
prayer that they might not be consumed at once, and would reckon it a
favour to obtain a reprieve. Lord, let it alone this year.

[Numbers 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 16:23</span></span>

We have here the determining of the controversy with Dathan and Abiram,
who rebelled against Moses, as in the next paragraph the determining of
the controversy with Korah and his company, who would be rivals with
Aaron. It should seem that Dathan and Abiram had set up a spacious
tabernacle in the midst of the tents of their families, where they kept
court, met in council, and hung out their flag of defiance against
Moses; it is here called the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram,
[Num 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#024), [Num
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#027). There, as in the place of
rendezvous, Dathan and Abiram staid, when Korah and his friends went up
to the tabernacle of the Lord, waiting the issue of their trial; but
here we are told how they had their business done, before that trial was
over. For God will take what method he pleases in his judgments.

I. Public warning is given to the congregation to withdraw immediately
from the tents of the rebels. 1. God bids Moses speak to this purport,
[Num 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#024). This was in answer to
Moses's prayer. He had begged that God would not destroy the whole
congregation. "Well," says God, "I will not, provided they be so wise as
to shift for their own safety, and get out of the way of danger. If they
will quit the rebels, well and good, they shall not perish with them;
otherwise, let them take what follows." Note, We cannot expect to reap
benefit by the prayers of our friends for our salvation, unless we
ourselves be diligent and faithful in making use of the means of
salvation; for God never promised to save by miracles those that would
not save themselves by means. Moses that had prayed for them must preach
this to them, and warn them to flee from this wrath to come. 2. Moses
accordingly repairs to the head-quarters of the rebels, leaving Aaron at
the door of the tabernacle, [Num
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#025). Dathan and Abiram had
contumaciously refused to come up to him ([Num
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#012)), yet he humbly condescends to
go down to them, to try if he could yet convince and reclaim them.
Ministers must thus with meekness instruct those that oppose themselves,
and not think it below them to stoop to those that are most stubborn,
for their good. Christ himself stretches out his hand to a rebellious
and gainsaying people. The seventy elders of Israel attend Moses and his
guard, to secure him from the insolence of the rabble, and by their
presence to put an honour upon him, and if possible to strike an awe
upon the rebels. It is our duty to contribute all we can to the
countenance and support of injured innocency and honour. 3. Proclamation
is made that all manner of persons, as they tendered their own safety,
should forthwith depart from the tents of these wicked men ([Num
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#026)), and thus should signify that
they deserted their cause and interest, detested their crimes and
counsels, and dreaded the punishment coming upon them. Note, Those that
would not perish with sinners must come out from among them, and be
separate. In vain do we pray, Gather not our souls with sinners, if we
save not ourselves from the untoward generation. God's people are called
out of Babylon, lest they share both in her sins and in her plagues,
[Rev 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004).

II\. The congregation takes the warning, but the rebels themselves
continue obstinate, [Num 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#027). 1.
God, in mercy, inclined the people to forsake the rebels: They got up
from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, both those whose lot
it was to pitch near them (who doubtless with themselves removed their
families, and all their effects) and those also who had come from all
parts of their camp to see the issue. It was in answer to the prayer of
Moses that God thus stirred up the hearts of the congregation to shift
for their own preservation. Note, To those whom God will save he gives
repentance, that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the
devil. Grace to separate from evil doers is one of the things that
accompany salvation. 2. God, in justice, left the rebels to the
obstinacy and hardness of their own hearts. Though they saw themselves
abandoned by all their neighbours, and set up as a mark to the arrows of
God's justice, yet instead of falling down and humbling themselves
before God and Moses, owning their crime and begging pardon, instead of
fleeing and dispersing themselves to seek for shelter in the crowd, they
impudently stood in the doors of their tents, as if they would out-face
God himself, and dare him to his worst. Thus were their hearts hardened
to their own destruction, and they were fearless when their case was
most fearful. But what a pity was it that their little children, who
were not capable of guilt or fear, should by the presumption of their
parents be put in this audacious posture! Happy they who are taught
betimes to bow before God, and not as those unhappy little ones to stand
it out against him!

III\. Sentence is solemnly pronounced upon them by Moses in the name of
the Lord, and the decision of the controversy is put upon the execution
of that sentence by the almighty power of God. Moses, by divine instinct
and direction, when the eyes of all Israel were fastened upon him,
waiting the event, moved with a just and holy indignation at the
impudence of the rebels, boldly puts the whole matter to a surprising
issue, [Num 16:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#028). 1. If the rebels
die a common death, he will be content to be called and counted an
impostor; not only if they die a natural death, but if they die by any
sort of judgment that has formerly been executed on other malefactors.
"If they die by the plague, or by fire from heaven, or by the sword,
then say, God has disowned Moses;" but, 2. "If the earth open and
swallow them up" (a punishment without precedent), "then let all the
house of Israel know assuredly that I am God's servant, sent by him, and
employed for him, and that those that fight against me fight against
him." The judgment itself would have been proof enough of God's
displeasure against the rebels, and would have given all men to
understand that they had provoked the Lord; but when it was thus
solemnly foretold and appealed to by Moses beforehand, when there was
not the least previous indication of it from without, the convincing
evidence of it was much the stronger, and it was put beyond dispute that
he was not only a servant but a favourite of Heaven, who was so
intimately acquainted with the divine counsels, and could obtain such
extraordinary appearances of the divine power in his vindication.

IV\. Execution is immediately done. It appeared that God and his servant
Moses understood one another very well; for, as soon as ever Moses had
spoken the word, God did the work, the earth clave asunder ([Num
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#031)), opened her mouth, and
swallowed them all up, them and theirs ([Num
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#032)), and then closed upon them,
[Num 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#033). This judgment was, 1.
Unparalleled. God, in it, created a new thing, did what he never did
before; for he has many arrows in his quiver; and there are diversities
of operations in wrath as well as mercy. Dathan and Abiram thought
themselves safe because they were at a distance from the shechinah,
whence the fire of the Lord had sometimes issued, qui procul Jove (they
say) procul fulmine - he who is far from Jove is far from the
thunderbolt. But God made them to know that he was not tied up to one
way of punishing; the earth, when he pleases, shall serve his justice as
effectually as the fire. 2. It was very terrible to the sinners
themselves to go down alive into their own graves, to be dead and buried
in an instant, to go down thus to the bars of the pit when they were in
their full strength wholly at ease and quiet. 3. It was severe upon
their poor children, who, for the greater terror of the judgment, and
fuller indication of the divine wrath, perished as parts of their
parents, in which, though we cannot particularly tell how bad they might
be to deserve it or how good God might be otherwise to them to
compensate it, yet of this we are sure in the general, that Infinite
Justice did them no wrong. Far be it from God that he should do
iniquity. 4. It was altogether miraculous. The cleaving of the earth was
as wonderful, and as much above the power of nature, as the cleaving of
the sea, and the closing of the earth again more so than the closing of
the waters. God has all the creatures at his command, and can make any
of them, when he pleases, instruments of his justice; nor will any of
them be our friends if he be our enemy. God now confirmed to Israel what
Moses had lately taught them in that prayer of his, [Psa
90:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#011), Who knows the power of thy
anger? He has, when he pleases, strange punishments for the workers of
iniquity, [Job 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#003). Let us therefore
conclude, Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God? 5. It was very
significant. They set their mouths against the heavens, and their throat
was an open sepulchre; justly therefore does the earth open her mouth
upon them and swallow them up. They made a rent in the congregation;
justly therefore is the earth rent under them. Presumptuous sinners,
that hate to be reformed, are a burden to the earth, the whole creation
groans under them, which here was signified by this, that the earth sunk
under these rebels, as weary of bearing them and being under them. And,
considering how the earth is still in like manner loaded with the weight
of iniquity, we have reason to wonder that this was the only time it
ever sunk under its load. 6. It was typical of the eternal ruin of
sinners who die impenitent, who, perhaps in allusion to this, are said
to sink down into the pit ([Psa 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015))
and to go down quickly into hell, [Psa
55:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#015). But David, even when he sinks
in deep mire, yet prays in faith, Let not the pit shut her mouth upon
me, as it does on the damned, between whom and life there is a gulf
fixed, [Psa 69:2-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002). His case was bad,
but not, like this, desperate.

V. All Israel is alarmed at the judgment: They fled at the cry of them,
[Num 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#034). They cried for help when
it was too late. Their doleful shrieks, instead of fetching their
neighbours in to their relief, drove them so much the further off; for
knowing their own guilt, and one another's, they hastened one another,
saying, Lest the earth swallow us up also. Note, Others' ruins should be
our warnings. Could we by faith hear the outcries of those that have
gone down to the bottomless pit, we should give more diligence than we
do to escape for our lives, lest we also come into that condemnation.

[Numbers 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">num 16:35</span></span>

We must now look back to the door of the tabernacle, where we left the
pretenders to the priesthood with their censers in their hands ready to
offer incense; and here we find,

I. Vengeance taken on them, [Num
16:35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#035). It is probable that when the
earth opened in the camp to swallow up Dathan and Abiram a fire went out
from the Lord and consumed the 250 men that offered incense, while Aaron
that stood with them was preserved alive. This punishment was not indeed
so new a thing as the former, for Nadab and Abihu thus died; but it was
not less strange or dreadful, and in it it appeared, 1. That our God is
a consuming fire. Is thunder a sensible indication of the terror of his
voice? Lightning is also the power of his hand. We must see in this his
fiery indignation which devours the adversaries, and infer from it what
a fearful thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God, [Heb
10:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#027). 2. That it is at our peril
if we meddle with that which does not belong to us. God is jealous of
the honour of his own institutions, and will not have them invaded. It
is most probable that Korah himself was consumed with those 250 that
presumed to offer incense; for the priesthood was the thing he aimed at,
and therefore we have reason to think that he would not quit his post at
the door of the tabernacle. But, behold, those are made sacrifices to
the justice of God who flattered themselves with the hopes of being
priests. Had they been content with their office as Levites, which was
sacred and honourable, and better than they deserved, they might have
lived and died with joy and reputation; but, like the angels that
sinned, leaving their first estate, and aiming at the honours that were
not appointed them, they were thrust down to Hades, their censers struck
out of their hands, and their breath out of their bodies, by a burning
which typified the vengeance of eternal fire.

II\. Care is taken to perpetuate the remembrance of this vengeance. No
mention is made of the taking up of their carcases: the scripture leaves
them as dung upon the face of the earth; but orders are given about
their censers, 1. That they be secured, because they are hallowed.
Eleazar is charged with this, [Num
16:37](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#037). Those invaders of the
priesthood had proceeded so far, by the divine patience and submission,
as to kindle their incense with fire from off the altar, which they were
suffered to use by way of experiment: but, as soon as they had kindled
their fire, God kindled another, which put a fatal final period to their
pretensions; now Eleazar is ordered to scatter the fire, with the
incense that was kindled with it, in some unclean place without the
camp, to signify God's abhorrence of their offering as a polluted thing:
The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord. But he is to
gather up the censers out of the mingled burning, God's fire and theirs,
because they are hallowed. Having been once put to a holy use, and that
by God's own order (though only for trial), they must not return to
common service; so some understand it: rather, they are devoted, they
are an anathema; and therefore, as all devoted things, they must be made
some way or other serviceable to the glory of God. 2. That they be used
in the service of the sanctuary, not as censers, which would rather have
put honour upon the usurpers whose disgrace was intended; nor was there
occasion for brazen censers, the golden altar was served with golden
ones; but they must be beaten into broad plates for a covering of the
brazen altar, [Num 16:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#038). These
pretenders thought to have ruined the altar, by laying the priesthood in
common again; but to show that Aaron's office was so far from being
shaken by their impotent malice that it was rather confirmed by it,
their censers, which offered to rival his, were used both for the
adorning and for the preserving of the altar at which he ministered. Yet
this was not all; this covering of the altar must be a memorial to the
children of Israel, throughout their generations, of this great event.
Though there was so much in it astonishing, and though Moses was to
record it in his history, yet there was danger of its being forgotten in
process of time; impressions that seem deep are not always durable;
therefore it was necessary to appoint this record of the judgment, that
the Levites who attended this altar, and had their inferior services
appointed them, might learn to keep within their bounds, and be afraid
of transgressing them, lest they should be made like Korah and his
company, who were Levites, and would have been priests. These censers
were preserved in terrorem, that others might hear and fear, and do no
more presumptuously. Thus God has provided that his wonderful works,
both in mercy and judgment, should be had in everlasting remembrance,
that the end of them may be answered, and they may serve for instruction
and admonition to those on whom the ends of the world are come.

[Numbers 16:41](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">num 16:41</span></span>

Here is, I. A new rebellion raised the very next day against Moses and
Aaron. Be astonished, O heavens, at this, and wonder, O earth! Was there
ever such an instance of the incurable corruption of sinners? On the
morrow ([Num 16:41](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#041)) the body of the
people mutinied. 1. Though they were so lately terrified by the sight of
the punishment of the rebels. The shrieks of those sinking sinners,
those sinners against their own souls, were yet sounding in their ears,
the smell of the fire yet remained, and the gaping earth was scarcely
thoroughly closed, and yet the same sins were re-acted and all these
warnings slighted. 2. Though they were so lately saved from sharing in
the same punishment, and the survivors were as brands plucked out of the
burning, yet they fly in the face of Moses and Aaron, to whose
intercession they owed their preservation. Their charge runs very high:
You have killed the people of the Lord. Could any thing have been said
more unjustly and maliciously? They canonize the rebels, calling those
the people of the Lord who died in arms against him. They stigmatize
divine justice itself. It was plain enough that Moses and Aaron had no
hand in their death (they did what they could to save them), so that in
charging them with murder they did in effect charge God himself with it.
The continued obstinacy of this people, notwithstanding the terrors of
God's law as it was given on Mount Sinai, and the terrors of his
judgments as they were here executed on the disobedient, shows how
necessary the grace of God is to the effectual change of men's hearts
and lives, without which the most likely means will never attain the
end. Love will do what fear could not.

II\. God's speedy appearance against the rebels. When they had gathered
against Moses and Aaron, perhaps with a design to depose or murder them,
they looked towards the tabernacle, as if their misgiving consciences
expected some frowns thence, and, behold, the glory of the Lord appeared
([Num 16:42](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#042)), for the protection of
his servants, and the confusion of his and their accusers and
adversaries. Moses and Aaron thereupon came before the tabernacle,
partly for their own safety (there they took sanctuary from the strife
of tongues, [Psa 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005); [Psa
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020)), and partly for advice, to know
what was the mind of God upon this occasion, [Num
16:43](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#043). Justice hereupon declares that
they deserve to be consumed in a moment, [Num
16:45](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#045). Why should those live another
day who hate to be reformed, and whose rebellions are their daily
practices? Let just vengeance take place and do its work, and the
trouble will soon be over; only Moses and Aaron must first be secured.

III\. The intercession which Moses and Aaron made for them. Though they
had as much reason, one would think, as Elias had to make intercession
against Israel ([Rom 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#002)), yet they
forgive and forget the indignities offered them, and are the best
friends their enemies have. 1. They both fell on their faces, humbly to
intercede with God for mercy, knowing how great the provocation was.
This they had done several times before, upon similar occasions; and,
though the people had basely requited them for it, yet, God having
graciously accepted them, they still have recourse to the same method.
This is praying always. 2. Moses, perceiving that the plague had begun
in the congregation of the rebels (that is, that body of them which was
gathered against Moses), sent Aaron by an act of his priestly office to
make atonement for them, [Num 16:46](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#046).
And Aaron readily went and burned incense between the living and the
dead, not to purify the infected air, but to pacify an offended God, and
so stayed the progress of the judgment. By this it appeared, (1.) That
Aaron was a very good man, and a man that had a true love for the
children of his people, though they hated and envied him. Though God was
now avenging his quarrel and pleading the cause of his priesthood, yet
he interposes to turn away God's wrath. Nay, forgetting his age and
gravity, he ran into the midst of the congregation to help them. He did
not say, "Let them smart awhile, and then, when I come, I shall be the
more welcome;" but, as one tender of the life of every Israelite, he
makes all possible speed into the gap at which death was entering. Moses
and Aaron, who had been charged with killing the people of the Lord,
might justly have upbraided them now; could they expect those to be
their saviours whom they had so invidiously called their murderers? But
those good men have taught us here by their example not to be sullen
towards those that are peevish with us, nor to take the advantage which
men give us by their provoking language to deny them any real kindness
which it is in the power of our hands to do them. We must render good
for evil. (2.) That Aaron was a very bold man - bold to venture into the
midst of an enraged rabble that were gathered together against him, and
who, for aught he knew, might be the more exasperated by the plague that
had begun - bold to venture into the midst of the infection, where the
arrows of death flew thickest, and hundreds, nay thousands, were falling
on the right hand and on the left. To save their lives he put his own
into his hand, not counting it dear to him, so that he might but fulfil
his ministry. (3.) That Aaron was a man of God, and ordained for men, in
things pertaining to God. His call to the priesthood was hereby
abundantly confirmed and set above all contradiction; God had not only
saved his life when the intruders were cut off, but now made him an
instrument for saving Israel. Compare the censer of Aaron here with the
censers of those sinners against their own souls. Those provoked God's
anger, this pacified it; those destroyed men's lives, this saved them;
no room therefore is left to doubt of Aaron's call to the priesthood.
Note, Those make out the best title to public honours that lay out
themselves the most for public good and obtain mercy of the Lord to be
faithful and useful. If any man will be great, let him make himself the
servant of all. (4.) That Aaron was a type of Christ, who came into the
world to make an atonement for sin and to turn away the wrath of God
from us, and who, by his mediation and intercession, stands between the
living and the dead, to secure his chosen Israel to himself, and save
them out of the midst of a world infected with sin and the curse.

IV\. The result and issue of the whole matter. 1. God's justice was
glorified in the death of some. Great execution the sword of the Lord
did in a very little time. Though Aaron made all the haste he could,
yet, before he could reach his post of service, there were 14,700 men
laid dead upon the spot, [Num 16:49](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#049).
There were but few comparatively that died about the matter of Korah,
the ring-leaders only were made examples; but, the people not being led
to repentance by the patience and forbearance of God with them, justice
is not now so sparing of the blood of Israelites. They complained of the
death of a few hundreds as an unmerciful slaughter made among the people
of the Lord, but here God silences that complaint by the slaughter of
many thousands. Note, Those that quarrel with less judgments prepare
greater for themselves; for when God judges he will overcome. 2. His
mercy was glorified in the preservation of the rest. God showed them
what he could do by his power, and what he might do in justice, but then
showed them what he would do in his love and pity: he would,
notwithstanding all this, preserve them a people to himself in and by a
mediator. The cloud of Aaron's incense coming from his hand stayed the
plague. Note, It is much for the glory of God's goodness that many a
time even in wrath he remembers mercy. And, even when judgments have
been begun, prayer puts a stop to them; so ready is he to forgive, and
so little pleasure does he take in the death of sinners.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 17](num017)

</div>
