<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philippians Index](phi)  
  [Previous](phi003)  [Next](col000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)

[Philippians](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">phi 4:0</span></span>

Exhortations to several Christian duties, as stedfastness, unanimity,
joy, etc. ([Phi 4:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)). The apostle's
grateful acknowledgments of the Philippians' kindness to him, with
expressions of his own content, and desire of their good ([Phi
4:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010)). He concludes the epistle
with praise, salutations, and blessing ([Phi
4:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#020)).

[Philippians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">phi 4:1</span></span>

The apostle begins the chapter with exhortations to divers Christian
duties.

I. To stedfastness in our Christian profession, [Phi
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001). It is inferred from the close of
the foregoing chapter: Therefore stand fast, etc. Seeing our
conversation is in heaven, and we look for the Saviour to come thence
and fetch us thither, therefore let us stand fast. Note, The believing
hope and prospect of eternal life should engage us to be steady, even,
and constant, in our Christian course. Observe here,

1\. The compellations are very endearing: My brethren, dearly beloved
and longed for, my joy and crown; and again, My dearly beloved. Thus he
expresses the pleasure he took in them, the kindness he had for them, to
convey his exhortations to them with so much the greater advantage. He
looked upon them as his brethren, though he was a great apostle. All we
are brethren. There is difference of gifts, graces, and attainments,
yet, being renewed by the same Spirit, after the same image, we are
brethren; as the children of the same parents, though of different ages,
statures, and complexions. Being brethren, (1.) He loved them, and loved
them dearly: Dearly beloved; and again, My dearly beloved. Warm
affections become ministers and Christians towards one another.
Brotherly love must always go along with brotherly relation. (2.) He
loved them and longed for them, longed to see them and hear from them,
longed for their welfare and was earnestly desirous of it. I long after
you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ, [Phi
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#008). (3.) He loved them and rejoiced
in them. They were his joy; he had no greater joy than to hear of their
spiritual health and prosperity. I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy
children walking in the truth, [Jo2
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#004); [Jo3
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#004). (4.) he loved them and gloried in
them. They were his crown as well as his joy. Never was proud ambitious
man more pleased with the ensigns of honour than Paul was with the
evidences of the sincerity of their faith and obedience. All this is to
prepare his way to greater regard.

2\. The exhortation itself: So stand fast in the Lord. Being in Christ,
they must stand fast in him, be even and steady in their walk with him,
and close and constant unto the end. Or, To stand fast in the Lord is to
stand fast in his strength and by his grace; not trusting in ourselves,
and disclaiming any sufficiency of our own. We must be strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might, [Eph
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010). "So stand fast, so as you have
done hitherto, stand fast unto the end, so as you are by beloved, and my
joy and crown; so stand fast as those in whose welfare and perseverance
I am so nearly interested and concerned."

II\. He exhorts them to unanimity and mutual assistance ([Phi
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#002), [Phi
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003)): I beseech Euodias and Syntyche
that they be of the same mind in the Lord. This is directed to some
particular persons. Sometimes there is need of applying the general
precepts of the gospel to particular persons and cases. Euodias and
Syntyche, it seems, were at variance, either one with the other or with
the church; either upon a civil account (it may be they were engaged in
a law-suit) or upon a religious account - it may be they were of
different opinions and sentiments. "Pray," says he, "desire them from me
to be of the same mind in the Lord, to keep the peace and live in love,
to be of the same mind one with another, not thwarting and
contradicting, and to be of the same mind with the rest of the church,
not acting in opposition to them." Then he exhorts to mutual assistance
([Phi 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003)), and this exhortation he
directs to particular persons: I entreat thee also, true yoke-fellow.
Who this person was whom he calls true yoke-fellow is uncertain. Some
think Epaphroditus, who is supposed to have been one of the pastors of
the church of the Philippians. Others think it was some eminently good
woman, perhaps Paul's wife, because he exhorts his yoke-fellow to help
the women who laboured with him. Whoever was the yoke-fellow with the
apostle must be a yoke-fellow too with his friends. It seems, there were
women who laboured with Paul in the gospel; not in the public ministry
(for the apostle expressly forbids that, [Ti1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#012), I suffer not a woman to teach),
but by entertaining the ministers, visiting the sick, instructing the
ignorant, convincing the erroneous. Thus women may be helpful to
ministers in the work of the gospel. Now, says the apostle, do thou help
them. Those who help others should be helped themselves when there is
occasion. "Help them, that is, join with them, strengthen their hands,
encourage them in their difficulties." - With Clement also, and other my
fellow-labourers. Paul had a kindness for all his fellow-labourers; and,
as he had found the benefit of their assistance, he concluded how
comfortable it would be to them to have the assistance of others. Of his
fellow-labourers he says, Whose names are in the book of life; either
they were chosen of God from all eternity, or registered and enrolled in
the corporation and society to which the privilege of eternal life
belongs, alluding to the custom among the Jews and Gentiles of
registering the inhabitants or the freemen of the city. So we read of
their names being written in heaven ([Luk
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020)), not blotting his name out of
the book of life ([Rev 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005)), and of
those who are written in the Lamb's book of life, [Rev
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027). Observe, There is a book of
life; there are names in that book and not characters and conditions
only. We cannot search into that book, or know whose names are written
there; but we may, in a judgment of charity, conclude that those who
labour in the gospel, and are faithful to the interest of Christ and
souls, have their names in the book of life.

III\. He exhorts to holy joy and delight in God: Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again I say, Rejoice, [Phi
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004). All our joy must terminate in
God; and our thoughts of God must be delightful thoughts. Delight
thyself in the Lord ([Psa 37:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004)), in
the multitude of our thoughts within us (grievous and afflicting
thoughts) his comforts delight our souls ([Psa
94:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#019)), and our meditation of him is
sweet, [Psa 104:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#034). Observe, It is our
duty and privilege to rejoice in God, and to rejoice in him always; at
all times, in all conditions; even when we suffer for him, or are
afflicted by him. We must not think the worse of him or of his ways for
the hardships we meet with in his service. There is enough in God to
furnish us with matter of joy in the worst circumstance on earth. He had
said it before ([Phi 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#001)): Finally, my
brethren, rejoice in the Lord. Here he says it again, Rejoice in the
Lord always; and again I say Rejoice. Joy in God is a duty of great
consequence in the Christian life; and Christians need to be again and
again called to it. If good men have not a continual feast, it is their
own fault.

IV\. We are here exhorted to candour and gentleness, and good temper
towards our brethren: "Let your moderation be known to all men, [Phi
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005). In things indifferent do not run
into extremes; avoid bigotry and animosity; judge charitably concerning
one another." The word to epieikes signifies a good disposition towards
other men; and this moderation is explained, Rom. 14. Some understand it
of the patient bearing of afflictions, or the sober enjoyment of worldly
good; and so it well agrees with the following verse. The reason is, the
Lord is at hand. The consideration of our Master's approach, and our
final account, should keep us from smiting our fellow-servants, support
us under present sufferings, and moderate our affections to outward
good. "He will take vengeance on your enemies, and reward your
patience."

V. Here is a caution against disquieting perplexing care ([Phi
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)): Be careful for nothing - mēden
merimnate: the same expression with that [Mat
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025), Take no thought for your life;
that is, avoid anxious care and distracting thought in the wants and
difficulties of life. Observe, It is the duty and interest of Christians
to live without care. There is a care of diligence which is our duty,
and consists in a wise forecast and due concern; but there is a care of
diffidence and distrust which is our sin and folly, and which only
perplexes and distracts the mind. "Be careful for nothing, so as by your
care to distrust God, and unfit yourselves for his service."

VI\. As a sovereign antidote against perplexing care he recommends to us
constant prayer: In every thing by prayer and supplication, with
thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God. Observe, 1. We
must not only keep up stated times for prayer, but we must pray upon
every particular emergency: In every thing by prayer. When any thing
burdens our spirits, we must ease our minds by prayer; when our affairs
are perplexed or distressed, we must seek direction and support. 2. We
must join thanksgiving with our prayers and supplications. We must not
only seek supplies of good, but own receipts of mercy. Grateful
acknowledgments of what we have argue a right disposition of mind, and
are prevailing motives for further blessings. 3. Prayer is the offering
up of our desires to God, or making them known to him: Let your requests
be made known to God. Not that God needs to be told either our wants or
desires; for he knows them better than we can tell him: but he will know
them from us, and have us show our regards and concern, express our
value of the mercy and sense of our dependence on him. 4. The effect of
this will be the peace of God keeping our hearts, [Phi
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007). The peace of God, that is, the
comfortable sense of our reconciliation to God and interest in his
favour, and the hope of the heavenly blessedness, and enjoyment of God
hereafter, which passeth all understanding, is a great good than can be
sufficiently valued or duly expressed. It has not entered into the heart
of ham, [Co1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009). This peace will keep
our hearts and minds through Christ Jesus; it will keep us from sinning
under our troubles, and from sinking under them; keep us calm and
sedate, without discomposure of passion, and with inward satisfaction.
Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee, [Isa
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#003).

VII\. We are exhorted to get and keep a good name, a name for good
things with God and good men: Whatsoever things are true and honest
([Phi 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008)), a regard to truth in our
words and engagements, and to decency and becomingness in our behaviour,
suitable to our circumstances and condition of life. Whatsoever things
are just and pure, - agreeable to the rules of justice and righteousness
in all our dealings with men, and without the impurity or mixture of
sin. Whatsoever things are lovely and of good report, that is, amiable;
that will render us beloved, and make us well spoken of, as well as well
thought of, by others. If there is any virtue, if there is any praise -
any thing really virtuous of any kind and worthy of commendation.
Observe, 1. The apostle would have the Christians learn any thing which
was good of their heathen neighbours: "If there be any virtue, think of
these things - imitate them in what is truly excellent among them, and
let not them outdo you in any instance of goodness." We should not be
ashamed to learn any good thing of bad men, or those who have not our
advantages. 2. Virtue has its praise, and will have. We should walk in
all the ways of virtue, and abide therein; and then, whether our praise
be of men or no, it will be of God, [Rom
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029).

In these things he proposes himself to them for an example ([Phi
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#009)): Those things which you have
learned, and received, and heard and seen in me, do. Observe, Paul's
doctrine and life were of a piece. What they saw in him was the same
thing with what they heard from him. He could propose himself as well as
his doctrine to their imitation. It gives a great force to what we say
to others when we can appeal to what they have seen in us. And this is
the way to have the God of peace with us - to keep close to our duty to
him. The Lord is with us while we are with him.

[Philippians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">phi 4:10</span></span>

In these verses we have the thankful grateful acknowledgment which the
apostle makes of the kindness of the Philippians in sending him a
present for his support, now that he was a prisoner at Rome. And here,

I. He takes occasion to acknowledge their former kindnesses to him, and
to make mention of them, [Phi 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015),
[Phi 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#016). Paul had a grateful spirit;
for, though what his friends did for him was nothing in comparison of
what he deserved from them and the obligations he had laid upon them,
yet he speaks of their kindness as if it had been a piece of generous
charity, when it was really far short of a just debt. If they had each
of them contributed half their estates to him, they had not given him
too much, since they owed to him even their own souls; and yet, when
they send a small present to him, how kindly does he take it, how
thankfully does he mention it, even in this epistle which was to be left
upon record, and read in the churches, through all ages; so that
wherever this epistle shall be read there shall this which they did to
Paul be told for a memorial of them. Surely never was present so well
repaid. He reminds them that in the beginning of the gospel no church
communicated with him as to giving and receiving but they only, [Phi
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015). They not only maintained him
comfortably while he was with them, but when he departed from Macedonia
they sent tokens of their kindness after him; and this when no other
church did so. None besides sent after him of their carnal things, in
consideration of what they had reaped of his spiritual things. In works
of charity, we are ready to ask what other people do. But the church of
the Philippians never considered that. It redounded so much the more to
their honour that they were the only church who were thus just and
generous. Even in Thessalonica (after he had departed from Macedonia)
you sent once and again to my necessity, [Phi
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#016). Observe, 1. It was but little
which they sent; they sent only to his necessity, just such things as he
had need of; perhaps it was according to their ability, and he did not
desire superfluities nor dainties. 2. It is an excellent thing to see
those to whom God has abounded in the gifts of his grace abounding in
grateful returns to his people and ministers, according to their own
ability and their necessity: You sent once and again. Many people make
it an excuse for their charity that they have given once; why should the
charge come upon them again? But the Philippians sent once and again;
they often relieved and refreshed him in his necessities. He makes this
mention of their former kindness, not only out of gratitude, but for
their encouragement.

II\. He excuses their neglect of late. It seems, for some time they had
not sent to enquire after him, or sent him any present; but now at the
last their care of him flourished again ([Phi
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010)), like a tree in the spring,
which seemed all the winter to be quite dead. Now, in conformity to the
example of his great Master, instead of upbraiding them for their
neglect, he makes an excuse for them: Wherein you were also careful, but
you lacked opportunity. How could they lack opportunity, if they had
been resolved upon it? They might have sent a messenger on purpose. But
the apostle is willing to suppose, in favour of them, that they would
have done it if a fair opportunity had offered. How contrary is this to
the behaviour of many to their friends, by whom neglects which really
are excusable are resented very heinously, when Paul excused that which
he had reason enough to resent.

III\. He commends their present liberality: Notwithstanding, you have
well done that you did communicate with my affliction, [Phi
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#014). It is a good work to succour and
help a good minister in trouble. Here see what is the nature of true
Christian sympathy; not only to be concerned for our friends in their
troubles, but to do what we can to help them. They communicated with his
affliction, in relieving him under it. He who says, Be you warmed, be
you filled, and giveth not those things they have need of, what doth it
profit? [Jam 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#016). He rejoiced greatly
in it ([Phi 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010)), because it was an
evidence of their affection to him and the success of his ministry among
them. When the fruit of their charity abounded towards the apostle, it
appeared that the fruit of his ministry abounded among them.

IV\. He takes care to obviate the bad use some might make of his taking
so much notice of what was sent him. It did not proceed either from
discontent and distrust ([Phi 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#011)) or
from covetousness and love of the world, [Phi
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012). 1. It did not come from
discontent, or distrust of Providence: Not that I speak in respect of
want ([Phi 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#011)); not in respect of
any want he felt, nor of any want he feared. As to the former, he was
content with the little he had, and that satisfied him; as to the
latter, he depended upon the providence of God to provide for him from
day to day, and that satisfied him: so that he did not speak in respect
of want any way. For I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith
to be content. We have here an account of Paul's learning, not that
which he got at the feet of Gamaliel, but that which he got at the feet
of Christ. He had learnt to be content; and that was the lesson he had
as much need to learn as most men, considering the hardships and
sufferings with which he was exercised. He was in bonds, and
imprisonments, and necessities, often; but in all he had learnt to be
content, that is, to bring his mind to his condition, and make the best
of it. - I know both how to be abased and I know how to abound, [Phi
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012). This is a special act of grace,
to accommodate ourselves to every condition of life, and carry an equal
temper of mind through all the varieties of our state. (1.) To
accommodate ourselves to an afflicted condition - to know how to be
abased, how to be hungry, how to suffer want, so as not to be overcome
by the temptations of it, either to lose our comfort in God or distrust
his providence, or to take any indirect course for our own supply. (2.)
To a prosperous condition - to know how to abound, how to be full, so as
not to be proud, or secure, or luxurious. And this is as hard a lesson
as the other; for the temptations of fulness and prosperity are not less
than those of affliction and want. But how must we learn it? I can do
all things through Christ who strengthens me, [Phi
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#013). We have need of strength from
Christ, to enable us to perform not only those duties which are purely
Christian, but even those which are the fruit of moral virtue. We need
his strength to teach us to be content in every condition. The apostle
had seemed to boast of himself, and of his own strength: I know how to
be abased ([Phi 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012)); but here he
transfers all the praise to Christ. "What do I talk of knowing how to be
abased, and how to abound? It is only through Christ who strengthens me
that I can do it, not in my own strength." So we are required to be
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might ([Eph
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010)), and to be strong in the grace
which is in Christ Jesus ([Ti2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#001));
and we are strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man, [Eph
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#016). The word in the original is a
participle of the present tense, en tō endunamounti me Christō, and
denotes a present and continued act; as if he had said, "Through Christ,
who is strengthening me, and does continually strengthen me; it is by
his constant and renewed strength I am enabled to act in every thing; I
wholly depend upon him for all my spiritual power." 2. It did not come
from covetousness, or an affection to worldly wealth: "Not because I
desired a gift ([Phi 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#017)): that is, I
welcome your kindness, not because it adds to my enjoyments, but because
it adds to your account." He desired not so much for his own sake, but
theirs: "I desire fruit that may abound to your account, that is, that
you may be enabled to make such a good use of your worldly possessions
that you may give an account of them with joy." It is not with any
design to draw more from you, but to encourage you to such an exercise
of beneficence as will meet with a glorious reward hereafter. "For my
part," says he, "I have all, and abound, [Phi
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018). What can a man desire more than
enough? I do not desire a gift for the gift's sake, for I have all, and
abound." They sent him a small token, and he desired no more; he was not
solicitous for a present superfluity, or a future supply: I am full,
having received from Epaphroditus the things which were sent by you.
Note, A good man will soon have enough of this world; not only of living
in it, but of receiving from it. A covetous worldling, if he has ever so
much, would still have more; but a heavenly Christian, though he has
little, has enough.

V. The apostle assures them that God did accept, and would recompense,
their kindness to him. 1. He did accept it: It is an odour of a sweet
smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God. Not a sacrifice of
atonement, for none makes atonement for sin but Christ; but a sacrifice
of acknowledgment, and well-pleasing to God. It was more acceptable to
God as it was the fruit of their grace than it was to Paul as it was the
supply of his want. With such sacrifices God is well pleased, [Heb
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016). 2. He would recompense it: But
my God shall supply all your wants according to his riches in glory by
Christ Jesus, [Phi 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#019). He does as it
were draw a bill upon the exchequer in heaven, and leaves it to God to
make them amends for the kindness they had shown him. "He shall do it,
not only as your God, but as my God, who takes what is done to me as
done to himself. You supplied my needs, according to your poverty; and
he shall supply yours, according to his riches." But still it is by
Christ Jesus; through him we have grace to do that which is good, and
through him we must expect the reward of it. Not of debt, but of grace;
for the more we do for God the more we are indebted to him, because we
receive the more from him.

[Philippians 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">phi 4:20</span></span>

The apostle concludes the epistle in these verses,

1\. With praises to God: Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever
and ever, Amen, [Phi 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#020). Observe,
(1.) God is to be considered by us as our Father: Now unto God and our
Father. It is a great condescension and favour in God to own the
relation of Father to sinners, and allow us to say to him, Our Father;
and it is a title peculiar to the gospel dispensation. It is also a
great privilege and encouragement to us to consider him as our Father,
as one so nearly related and who bears so tender an affection towards
us. We should look upon God, under all our weaknesses and fears, not as
a tyrant or an enemy, but as a Father, who is disposed to pity us and
help us. (2.) We must ascribe glory to God as a Father, the glory of his
own excellence and of all his mercy unto us. We must thankfully own the
receipt of all from him, and give the praise of all to him. And our
praise must be constant and perpetual; it must be glory for ever and
ever.

2\. With salutations to his friends at Philippi: "Salute every saint in
Christ Jesus ([Phi 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#021)); give my
hearty love to all the Christians in your parts." He desires
remembrances not only to the bishops and deacons, and the church in
general, but to every particular saint. Paul had a kind affection to all
good Christians.

3\. He sends salutations from those who were at Rome: "The brethren who
are with me salute you; the ministers, and all the saints here, send
their affectionate remembrances to you. Chiefly those who are of
Caesar's household; the Christian converts who belonged to the emperor's
court." Observe, (1.) There were saints in Caesar's household. Though
Paul was imprisoned at Rome, for preaching the gospel, by the emperor's
command, yet there were some Christians in his own family. The gospel
early obtained among some of the rich and great. Perhaps the apostle
fared the better, and received some favour, by means of his friends at
court. (2.) Chiefly those, etc. Observe, They, being bred at court, were
more complaisant than the rest. See what an ornament to religion
sanctified civility is.

4\. The apostolical benediction, as usual: "The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all, Amen. The free favour and good will of Christ be
your portion and happiness."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Introduction](col000)

</div>
