<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philippians Index](phi)  
  [Previous](eph006)  [Next](phi001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)

[Philippians](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">phi 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Epistle of St. Paul
to the Philippians

Philippi was a chief city of the western part of Macedonia, prōtē tēs
Makedonias polis, [Act 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#012). It took
its name from Philip, the famous king of Macedon, who repaired and
beautified it, and it was afterwards made a Roman colony. Near this
place were the Campi Philippici, remarkable for the famous battles
between Julius Caesar and Pompey the Great, and that between Augustus
and Antony on one side and Cassius and Brutus on the other. But it is
most remarkable among Christians for this epistle, which was written
when Paul was a prisoner at Rome, a.d. 62. Paul seems to have had a very
particular kindness for the church at Philippi, which he himself had
been instrumental in planting; and, though he had the care of all the
churches, he had, upon that account, a particular fatherly tender care
of this. To those to whom God has employed us to do any good we should
look upon ourselves both as encouraged and engaged to study to do more
good. He looked upon them as his children, and, having begotten them by
the gospel, he was desirous by the same gospel to nourish and nurse them
up. I. He was called in an extraordinary manner to preach the gospel at
Philippi, [Act 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#009). A vision appeared
to Paul in the night: There stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him,
saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us. He saw God going before
him, and was encouraged to use all means for carrying on the good work
which was begun among them, and building upon the foundation which was
laid. II. At Philippi he suffered hard things; he was scourged, and put
into the stocks ([Act 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#023), [Act
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#024)); yet he had not the less
kindness for the place for the hard usage he met with there. We must
never love our friends the less for the ill treatment which our enemies
give us. III. The beginnings of that church were very small; Lydia was
converted there, and the jailer, and a few more: yet that did not
discourage him. If good be not done at first, it may be done afterwards,
and the last works may be more abundant. We must not be discouraged by
small beginnings. IV. It seems, by many passages in this epistle, that
this church at Philippi grew into a flourishing church, and particularly
that the brethren were very kind to Paul. He had reaped of their
temporal things, and he made a return in spiritual things. He
acknowledges the receipt of a present they had sent him ([Phi
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018)), and this when no other church
communicated with him as concerning giving and receiving ([Phi
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015)); and he gives them a prophet's,
an apostle's reward, in this epistle, which is of more value than
thousands of gold and silver.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Chapter 1](phi001)

</div>
