<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Proverbs Index](pro.md)  
  [Previous](pro030)  [Next](ecc000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#001.md)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 31:0</span></span>

This chapter is added to Solomon's proverbs, some think because it is of
the same author, supposing king Lemuel to be king Solomon; others only
because it is of the same nature, though left in writing by another
author, called Lemuel; however it be, it is a prophecy, and therefore
given by inspiration and direction of God, which Lemuel was under in the
writing of it, and putting it into this form, as his mother was in
dictating to him the matter of it. Here is, I. An exhortation to Lemuel,
a young prince, to take heed of the sins he would be tempted to and to
do the duties of the place he was called to ([Pro
31:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#001).md). II. The description of a
virtuous woman, especially in the relation of a wife and the mistress of
a family, which Lemuel's mother drew up, not as an encomium of herself,
though, no doubt, it was her own true picture, but either as an
instruction to her daughters, as the foregoing verses were to her son,
or as a direction to her son in the choice of a wife; she must be chaste
and modest, diligent and frugal, dutiful to her husband, careful of her
family, discreet in her discourse, and in the education of her children,
and, above all, conscientious in her duty to God: such a one as this, if
he can find her, will make him happy (v. 10-31).

[Proverbs 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 31:1</span></span>

Most interpreters are of opinion that Lemuel is Solomon; the name
signifies one that is for God, or devoted to God; and so it agrees well
enough with that honourable name which, by divine appointment, was given
to Solomon ([Sa2 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#025).md), Jedediah -
beloved of the Lord. Lemuel is supposed to be a pretty, fond, endearing
name, by which his mother used to call him; and so much did he value
himself upon the interest he had in his mother's affections that he was
not ashamed to call himself by it. One would the rather incline to think
it is Solomon that here tells us what his mother taught him because he
tells us ([Pro 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#004).md) what his father
taught him. But some think (and the conjecture is not improbable) that
Lemuel was a prince of some neighbouring country, whose mother was a
daughter of Israel, perhaps of the house of David, and taught him these
good lessons. Note, 1. It is the duty of mothers, as well as fathers, to
teach their children what is good, that they may do it, and what is
evil, that they may avoid it; when they are young and tender they are
most under the mother's eye, and she has then an opportunity of moulding
and fashioning their minds well, which she ought not to let slip. 2.
Even kings must be catechised; the greatest of men is less than the
least of the ordinances of God. 3. Those that have grown up to maturity
should often call to mind, and make mention of, the good instructions
they received when they were children, for their own admonition, the
edification of others, and the honour of those who were the guides of
their youth.

Now, in this mother's (this queen mother's) catechism, observe,

I. Her expostulation with the young prince, by which she lays hold of
him, claims an interest in him, and awakens his attention to what she is
about to say ([Pro 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#002).md): "What! my
son? What shall I say to thee?" She speaks as one considering what
advice to give him, and choosing out words to reason with him; so full
of concern is she for his welfare! Or, What is it that thou doest? It
seems to be a chiding question. She observed, when he was young, that he
was too much inclined to women and wine, and therefore she found it
necessary to take him to task and deal roundly with him. "What! my son?
Is this the course of life thou intendest to lead? Have I taught thee no
better than thus? I must reprove thee, and reprove thee sharply, and
thou must take it well, for," 1. "Thou art descended from me; thou art
the son of my womb, and therefore what I say comes from the authority
and affection of a parent and cannot be suspected to come from any
ill-will. Thou art a piece of myself. I bore thee with sorrow, and I
expect no other return for all the pains I have taken with thee, and
undergone for thee, than this, Be wise and good, and then I am well
paid." 2. "Thou art devoted to my God; thou art the son of my vows, the
son I prayed to God to give me and promised to give back to God, and did
so" (thus Samuel was the son of Hannah's vows); "Thou art the son I have
often prayed to God to give his grace to ([Psa
72:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#001).md), and shall a child of so many
prayers miscarry? And shall all my hopes concerning thee be
disappointed?" Our children that by baptism are dedicated to God, for
whom and in whose name we covenanted with God, may well be called the
children of our vows; and, as this may be made a good plea with God in
our prayers for them, so it may be made a good plea with them in the
instructions we give them; we may tell them they are baptized, are the
children of our vows, and it is at their peril if they break those bonds
in sunder which in their infancy they were solemnly brought under.

II\. The caution she gives him against those two destroying sins of
uncleanness and drunkenness, which, if he allowed himself in them, would
certainly be his ruin. 1. Against uncleanness ([Pro
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#003).md): Give not thy strength unto
women, unto strange women. He must not be soft and effeminate, nor spend
that time in a vain conversation with the ladies which should be spent
in getting knowledge and despatching business, nor employ that wit
(which is the strength of the soul) in courting and complimenting them
which he should employ about the affairs of his government. "Especially
shun all adultery, fornication, and lasciviousness, which waste the
strength of the body, and bring into it dangerous diseases. Give not thy
ways, thy affections, thy conversation, to that which destroys kings,
which has destroyed many, which gave such a shock to the kingdom even of
David himself, in the matter of Uriah. Let the sufferings of others be
thy warnings." It lessens the honour of kings and makes them mean. Are
those fit to govern others that are themselves slaves to their own
lusts? It makes them unfit for business, and fills their court with the
basest and worst of animals. Kings lie exposed to temptations of this
kind, having wherewith both to please the humours and to bear the
charges of the sin, and therefore they ought to double their guard; and,
if they would preserve their people from the unclean spirit, they must
themselves be patterns of purity. Meaner people may also apply it to
themselves. Let none give their strength to that which destroys souls.
2. Against drunkenness, [Pro 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#004.md),
[Pro 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#005.md). He must not drink wine or
strong drink to excess; he must never sit to drink, as they used to do
in the day of their king, when the princes made him sick with bottles of
wine, [Hos 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#007.md). Whatever temptation he
might be in from the excellency of the wine, or the charms of the
company, he must deny himself, and be strictly sober, considering, (1.)
The indecency of drunkenness in a king. However some may call it a
fashionable accomplishment and entertainment, it is not for kings, O
Lemuel! it is not for kings, to allow themselves that liberty; it is a
disparagement to their dignity, and profanes their crown, by confusing
the head that wears it; that which for the time unmans them does for the
time unking them. Shall we say, They are gods? No, they are worse than
the beasts that perish. All Christians are made to our God kings and
priests, and must apply this to themselves. It is not for Christians, it
is not for Christians, to drink to excess; they debase themselves if
they do; it ill becomes the heirs of the kingdom and the spiritual
priests, [Lev 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009). (2..md) The ill
consequences of it ([Pro 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#005).md): Lest
they drink away their understandings and memories, drink and forget the
law by which they are to govern; and so, instead of doing good with
their power, do hurt with it, and pervert or alter the judgment of all
the sons of affliction, and, when they should right them, wrong them,
and add to their affliction. It is a sad complaint which is made of the
priests and prophets ([Isa 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#007).md), that
they have erred through wine, and through strong drink they are out of
the way; and the effect is as bad in kings, who when they are drunk, or
intoxicated with the love of wine, cannot but stumble in judgment.
Judges must have clear heads, which those cannot have who so often make
themselves giddy, and incapacitate themselves to judge of the most
common things.

III\. The counsel she gives him to do good. 1. He must do good with his
wealth. Great men must not think that they have their abundance only
that out of it they may made provision for the flesh, to fulfil the
lusts of it, and may the more freely indulge their own genius; no, but
that with it they may relieve such as are in distress, [Pro
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#006.md), [Pro
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#007.md). "Thou hast wine or strong drink
at command; instead of doing thyself hurt with it, do others good with
it; let those have it that need it." Those that have wherewithal must
not only give bread to the hungry and water to the thirsty, but they
must give strong drink to him that is ready to perish through sickness
or pain and wine to those that are melancholy and of heavy heart; for it
was appointed to cheer and revive the spirits, and make glad the heart
(as it does where there is need of it), not to burden and oppress the
spirits, as it does where there is no need of it. We must deny ourselves
in the gratifications of sense, that we may have to spare for the relief
of the miseries of others, and be glad to see our superfluities and
dainties better bestowed upon those whom they will be a real kindness to
than upon ourselves whom they will be a real injury to. Let those that
are ready to perish drink soberly, and it will be a means so to revive
their drooping spirits that they will forget their poverty for the time
and remember their misery no more, and so they will be the better able
to bear it. The Jews say that upon this was grounded the practice of
giving a stupifying drink to condemned prisoners when they were going to
execution, as they did to our Saviour. But the scope of the place is to
show that wine is a cordial, and therefore to be used for want and not
for wantonness, by those only that need cordials, as Timothy, who is
advised to drink a little wine, only for his stomach's sake and his
often infirmities, [Ti1 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023.md). 2. He
must do good with his power, his knowledge, and interest, must
administer justice with care, courage, and compassion, [Pro
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#008.md), [Pro
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#009). (1..md) He must himself take
cognizance of the causes his subjects have depending in his courts, and
inspect what his judges and officers do, that he may support those that
do their duty, and lay those aside that neglect it or are partial. (2.)
He must, in all matters that come before him, judge righteously, and,
without fear of the face of man, boldly pass sentence according to
equity: Open thy mouth, which denotes the liberty of speech that princes
and judges ought to use in passing sentence. Some observe that only wise
men open their mouths, for fools have their mouths always open, are full
of words. (3.) He must especially look upon himself as obliged to be the
patron of oppressed innocency. The inferior magistrates perhaps had not
zeal and tenderness enough to plead the cause of the poor and needy;
therefore the king himself must interpose, and appear as an advocate,
\[1.\] For those that were unjustly charged with capital crimes, as
Naboth was, that were appointed to destruction, to gratify the malice
either of a particular person or of a party. It is a case which it well
befits a king to appear in, for the preserving of innocent blood. \[2.\]
For those that had actions unjustly brought against them, to defraud
them of their right, because they were poor and needy, and unable to
defend it, not having wherewithal to fee counsel; in such a case also
kings must be advocates for the poor. Especially, \[3.\] For those that
were dumb, and knew not how to speak for themselves, either through
weakness or fear, or being over-talked by the prosecutor or over-awed by
the court. It is generous to speak for those that cannot speak for
themselves, that are absent, or have not words at command, or are
timorous. Our law appoints the judge to be of counsel for the prisoner.

[Proverbs 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 31:10</span></span>

This description of the virtuous woman is designed to show what wives
the women should make and what wives the men should choose; it consists
of twenty-two verses, each beginning with a letter of the Hebrew
alphabet in order, as some of the Psalms, which makes some think it was
no part of the lesson which Lemuel's mother taught him, but a poem by
itself, written by some other hand, and perhaps had been commonly
repeated among the pious Jews, for the ease of which it was made
alphabetical. We have the abridgment of it in the New Testament ([Ti1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009.md), [Ti1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#010.md), [Pe1
3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001).md), where the duty prescribed to
wives agrees with this description of a good wife; and with good reason
is so much stress laid upon it, since it contributes as much as any one
thing to the keeping up of religion in families, and the entail of it
upon posterity, that the mothers be wise and good; and of what
consequence it is to the wealth and outward prosperity of a house every
one is sensible. He that will thrive must ask his wife leave. Here is,

I. A general enquiry after such a one ([Pro
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#010).md), where observe, 1. The person
enquired after, and that is a virtuous woman - a woman of strength (so
the word is), though the weaker vessel, yet made strong by wisdom and
grace, and the fear of God: it is the same word that is used in the
character of good judges ([Exo 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#021).md),
that they are able men, men qualified for the business to which they are
called, men of truth, fearing God. So it follows, A virtuous woman is a
woman of spirit, who has the command of her own spirit and knows how to
manage other people's, one that is pious and industrious, and a help
meet for a man. In opposition to this strength, we read of the weakness
of the heart of an imperious whorish woman, [Eze
16:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#030.md). A virtuous woman is a woman of
resolution, who, having espoused good principles, is firm and steady to
them, and will not be frightened with winds and clouds from any part of
her duty. 2. The difficulty of meeting with such a one: Who can find
her? This intimates that good women are very scarce, and many that seem
to be so do not prove so; he that thought he had found a virtuous woman
was deceived; Behold, it was Leah, and not the Rachel he expected. But
he that designs to marry ought to seek diligently for such a one, to
have this principally in his eye, in all his enquiries, and to take heed
that he be not biassed by beauty or gaiety, wealth or parentage,
dressing well or dancing well; for all these may be and yet the woman
not be virtuous, and there is many a woman truly virtuous who yet is not
recommended by these advantages. 3. The unspeakable worth of such a one,
and the value which he that has such a wife ought to put upon her,
showing it by his thankfulness to God and his kindness and respect to
her, whom he must never think he can do too much for. Her price is far
above rubies, and all the rich ornaments with which vain women adorn
themselves. The more rare such good wives are the more they are to be
valued.

II\. A particular description of her and of her excellent
qualifications.

1\. She is very industrious to recommend herself to her husband's esteem
and affection. Those that are good really will be good relatively. A
good woman, if she be brought into the marriage state, will be a good
wife, and make it her business to please her husband, [Co1
7:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#034.md). Though she is a woman of spirit
herself, yet her desire is to her husband, to know his mind, that she
may accommodate herself to it, and she is willing that he should rule
over her. (1.) She conducts herself so that he may repose an entire
confidence in her. He trusts in her chastity, which she never gave him
the least occasion to suspect or to entertain any jealousy of; she is
not morose and reserved, but modest and grave, and has all the marks of
virtue in her countenance and behaviour; her husband knows it, and
therefore his heart doth safely trust in her; he is easy, and makes her
so. He trusts in her conduct, that she will speak in all companies, and
act in all affairs, with prudence and discretion, so as not to occasion
him either damage or reproach. He trusts in her fidelity to his
interests, and that she will never betray his counsels nor have any
interest separate from that of his family. When he goes abroad, to
attend the concerns of the public, he can confide in her to order all
his affairs at home, as well as if he himself were there. She is a good
wife that is fit to be trusted, and he is a good husband that will leave
it to such a wife to manage for him. (2.) She contributes so much to his
content and satisfaction that he shall have no need of spoil; he needs
not be griping and scraping abroad, as those must be whose wives are
proud and wasteful at home. She manages his affairs so that he is always
before-hand, has such plenty of his own that he is in no temptation to
prey upon his neighbours. He thinks himself so happy in her that he
envies not those who have most of the wealth of this world; he needs it
not, he has enough, having such a wife. Happy the couple that have such
a satisfaction as this in each other! (3.) She makes it her constant
business to do him good, and is afraid of doing any thing, even through
inadvertency, that may turn to his prejudice, [Pro
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#012.md). She shows her love to him, not
by a foolish fondness, but by prudent endearments, accommodating herself
to his temper, and not crossing him, giving him good words, and not bad
ones, no, not when he is out of humour, studying to make him easy, to
provide what is fit for him both in health and sickness, and attending
him with diligence and tenderness when any thing ails him; nor would
she, no, not for the world, wilfully do any thing that might be a damage
to his person, family, estate, or reputation. And this is her care all
the days of her life; not at first only, or now and then, when she is in
a good humour, but perpetually; and she is not weary of the good offices
she does him: She does him good, not only all the days of his life, but
of her own too; if she survive him, still she is doing him good in her
care of his children, his estate, and good name, and all the concerns he
left behind him. We read of kindness shown, not only to the living, but
to the dead, [Rut 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#020). (4..md) She adds
to his reputation in the world ([Pro
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#023).md): Her husband is known in the
gates, known to have a good wife. By his wise counsels, and prudent
management of affairs, it appears that he has a discreet companion in
his bosom, by conversation with whom he improves himself. By his
cheerful countenance and pleasant humour it appears that he has an
agreeable wife at home; for many that have not have their tempers
strangely soured by it. Nay, by his appearing clean and neat in his
dress, every thing about him decent and handsome, yet not gaudy, one may
know he has a good wife at home, that takes care of his clothes.

2\. She is one that takes pains in the duty of her place and takes
pleasure in it. This part of her character is much enlarged upon here.
(1.) She hates to sit still and do nothing: She eats not the bread of
idleness, [Pro 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#027.md). Though she needs
not work for her bread (she has an estate to live upon), yet she will
not eat it in idleness, because she knows that we were none of us sent
into this world to be idle, that when we have nothing to do the devil
will soon find us something to do, and that it is not fit that those who
will not labour should eat. Some eat and drink because they can find
themselves nothing else to do, and needless visits must be received with
fashionable entertainments; these are eating the bread of idleness,
which she has no relish for, for she neither gives nor receives idle
visits nor idle talk. (2.) She is careful to fill up time, that none of
that be lost. When day-light is done, she does not then think it time to
lay by her work, as those are forced to do whose business lies abroad in
the fields ([Psa 104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023).md), but her
business lying within-doors, and her work worth candle-light, with that
she lengthens out the day; and her candle goes not out by night, [Pro
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#018.md). It is a mercy to have
candle-light to supply the want of day-light, and a duty, having that
advantage, to improve it. We say of an elaborate piece, It smells of the
lamp. (3.) She rises early, while it is yet night ([Pro
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#015).md), to give her servants their
breakfast, that they may be ready to go cheerfully about their work as
soon as the day breaks. She is none of those who sit up playing at
cards, or dancing, till midnight, till morning, and then lie in bed till
noon. No; the virtuous woman loves her business better than her ease or
her pleasure, is in care to be found in the way of her duty every hour
of the day, and has more true satisfaction in having given meat to her
household betimes in the morning than those can have in the money they
have won, much more in what they have lost, who sat up all night at
play. Those that have a family to take care of should not love their bed
too well in a morning. (4.) She applies herself to the business that is
proper for her. It is not in a scholar's business, or statesman's
business, or husbandman's business, that she employs herself, but in
women's business: She seeks wool and flax, where she may have the best
of each at the best hand, and cheapest; she has a stock of both by her,
and every thing that is necessary to the carrying on both of the woollen
and the linen manufacture ([Pro
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#013).md), and with this she does not
only set the poor on work, which is a very good office, but does herself
work, and work willingly, with her hands; she works with the counsel or
delight of her hands (so the word is); she goes about it cheerfully and
dexterously, lays not only her hand, but her mind to it, and goes on in
it without weariness in well-doing. She lays her own hands to the
spindle, or spinning-wheel, and her hands hold the distaff ([Pro
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#019).md), and she does not reckon it
either an abridgment of her liberty or a disparagement to her dignity,
or at all inconsistent with her repose. The spindle and the distaff are
here mentioned as her honour, while the ornaments of the daughters of
Zion are reckoned up to their reproach, [Isa
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#018), etc. (5..md) She does what she does
with all her might, and does not trifle in it ([Pro
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#017).md); She girds her loins with
strength and strengthens her arms; she does not employ herself in
sitting work only, or in that which is only the nice performance of the
fingers (there are works that are scarcely one remove from doing
nothing); but, if there be occasion, she will go through with work that
requires all the strength she has, which she will use as one that knows
it is the way to have more.

3\. She is one that makes what she does to turn to a good account, by
her prudent management of it. She does not toil all night and catch
nothing; no, she herself perceives that her merchandise is good ([Pro
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#018).md); she is sensible that in all
her labour there is profit, and that encourages her to go on in it. She
perceives that she can make things herself better and cheaper than she
can buy them; she finds by observation what branch of her employment
brings in the best returns, and to that she applies herself most
closely. (1.) She brings in provisions of all things necessary and
convenient for her family, [Pro 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#014.md).
No merchants' ships, no, not Solomon's navy, ever made a more
advantageous return than her employments do. Do they bring in foreign
commodities with the effects they export? So does she with the fruit of
her labours. What her own ground does not produce she can furnish
herself with, if she have occasion for it, by exchanging her own goods
for it; and so she brings her food from afar. Not that she values things
the more for their being far-fetched, but, if they be ever so far off,
if she must have them she knows how to come by them. (2.) She purchases
lands, and enlarges the demesne of the family ([Pro
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#016).md): She considers a field, and
buys it. She considers what an advantage it will be to the family and
what a good account it will turn to, and therefore she buys it; or,
rather, though she have ever so much mind to it she will not buy it till
she has first considered it, whether it be worth her money, whether she
can afford to take so much money out of her stock as must go to purchase
it, whether the title be good, whether the ground will answer the
character given of it, and whether she has money at command to pay for
it. Many have undone themselves by buying without considering; but those
who would make advantageous purchases must consider, and then buy. She
also plants a vineyard, but it is with the fruit of her hands; she does
not take up money, or run into debt, to do it, but she does it with what
she can spare out of the gains of her own housewifery. Men should not
lay out any thing upon superfluities, till, by the blessing of God upon
their industry, they have got before-hand, and can afford it; and then
the fruit of the vineyard is likely to be doubly sweet, when it is the
fruit of honest industry. (3.) She furnishes her house well and has good
clothing for herself and her family ([Pro
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#022).md): She makes herself coverings of
tapestry to hang her rooms, and she may be allowed to use them when they
are of her own making. Her own clothing is rich and fine: it is silk and
purple, according to her place and rank. Though she is not so vain as to
spend much time in dressing herself, nor makes the putting on of apparel
her adorning, nor values herself upon it, yet she has rich clothes and
puts them on well. The senator's robes which her husband wears are of
her own spinning, and they look better and wear better than any that are
bought. She also gets good warm clothing for her children, and her
servants' liveries. She needs not fear the cold of the most pinching
winter, for she and her family are well provided with clothes,
sufficient to keep out cold, which is the end chiefly to be aimed at in
clothing: All her household are clothed in scarlet, strong cloth and fit
for winter, and yet rich and making a good appearance. They are all
double clothed (so some read it), have change of raiment, a winter suit
and a summer suit. (4.) She trades abroad. She makes more than she and
her household have occasion for; and therefore, when she has
sufficiently stocked her family, she sells fine linen and girdles to the
merchants ([Pro 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#024).md), who carry them
to Tyre, the mart of the nations, or some other trading city. Those
families are likely to thrive that sell more than they buy; as it is
well with the kingdom when abundance of its home manufactures are
exported. It is no disgrace to those of the best quality to sell what
they can spare, nor to deal in trade and send ventures by sea. (5.) She
lays up for hereafter: She shall rejoice in time to come, having laid in
a good stock for her family, and having good portions for her children.
Those that take pains when they are in their prime will have the
pleasure and joy of it when they are old, both in reflecting upon it and
in reaping the benefit of it.

4\. She takes care of her family and all the affairs of it, gives meat
to her household ([Pro 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#015).md), to
every one his portion of meat in due season, so that none of her
servants have reason to complain of being kept short or faring hard. She
gives also a portion (an allotment of work, as well as meat) to her
maidens; they shall all of them know their business and have their task.
She looks well to the ways of her household ([Pro
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#027).md); she inspects the manners of
all her servants, that she may check what is amiss among them, and
oblige them all to behave properly and do their duty to God and one
another, as well as to her; as Job, who put away iniquity far from his
tabernacle, and David, who would suffer no wicked thing in his house.
She does not intermeddle in the concerns of other people's houses; she
thinks it enough for her to look well to her own.

5\. She is charitable to the poor, [Pro
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#020.md). She is as intent upon giving as
she is upon getting; she often serves the poor with her own hand, and
she does if freely, cheerfully, and very liberally, with an
out-stretched hand. Nor does she relieve her poor neighbours only, and
those that are nigh at hand, but she reaches forth her hands to the
needy that are at a distance, seeking opportunities to do good and to
communicate, which is as good housewifery as any thing she does.

6\. She is discreet and obliging in all her discourse, not talkative,
censorious, nor peevish, as some are, that know how to take pains; no,
she opens her mouth with wisdom; when she does speak, it is with a great
deal of prudence and very much to the purpose; you may perceive by every
word she says how much she governs herself by the rules of wisdom. She
not only takes prudent measures herself, but gives prudent advice to
others; and this not as assuming the authority of a dictator, but with
the affection of a friend and an obliging air: In her tongue is the law
of kindness; all she says is under the government of that law. The law
of love and kindness is written in the heart, but it shows itself in the
tongue; if we are kindly affectioned one to another, it will appear by
affectionate expression. It is called a law of kindness, because it
gives law to others, to all she converses with. Her wisdom and kindness
together put a commanding power into all she says; they command respect,
they command compliance. How forcible are right words! In her tongue is
the law of grace, or mercy (so some read it), understanding it of the
word and law of God, which she delights to talk of among her children
and servants. She is full of pious religious discourse, and manages it
prudently, which shows how full her heart is of another world even when
her hands are most busy about this world.

7\. That which completes and crowns her character is that she fears the
Lord, [Pro 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#030.md). With all those good
qualities she lacks not that one thing needful; she is truly pious, and,
in all she does, is guided and governed by principles of conscience and
a regard to God; this is that which is here preferred far before beauty;
that is vain and deceitful; all that are wise and good account it so,
and value neither themselves nor others on it. Beauty recommends none to
God, nor is it any certain indication of wisdom and goodness, but it has
deceived many a man who has made his choice of a wife by it. There may
be an impure deformed soul lodged in a comely and beautiful body; nay,
many have been exposed by their beauty to such temptations as have been
the ruin of their virtue, their honour, and their precious souls. It is
a fading thing at the best, and therefore vain and deceitful. A fit of
sickness will stain and sully it in a little time; a thousand accidents
may blast this flower in its prime; old age will certainly wither it and
death and the grave consume it. But the fear of God reigning in the
heart is the beauty of the soul; it recommends those that have it to the
favour of God, and is, in his sight, of great price; it will last for
ever, and bid defiance to death itself, which consumes the beauty of the
body, but consummates the beauty of the soul.

III\. The happiness of this virtuous woman.

1\. She has the comfort and satisfaction of her virtue in her own mind
([Pro 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#025).md): Strength and honour are
her clothing, in which she wraps herself, that is, enjoys herself, and
in which she appears to the world, and so recommends herself. She enjoys
a firmness and constancy of mind, has spirit to bear up under the many
crosses and disappointments which even the wise and virtuous must expect
to meet with in this world; and this is her clothing, for defence as
well as decency. She deals honourably with all, and she has the pleasure
of doing so, and shall rejoice in time to come; she shall reflect upon
it with comfort, when she comes to be old, that she was not idle or
useless when she was young. In the day of death it will be a pleasure to
her to think that she has lived to some good purpose. Nay, she shall
rejoice in an eternity to come; she shall be recompensed for her
goodness with fulness of joy and pleasures for evermore.

2\. She is a great blessing to her relations, [Pro
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#028). (1..md) Her children grow up in
her place, and they call her blessed. They give her their good word,
they are themselves a commendation to her, and they are ready to give
great commendations of her; they pray for her, and bless God that they
had such a good mother. It is a debt which they owe her, a part of that
honour which the fifth commandment requires to be paid to father and
mother; and it is a double honour that is due to a good father and a
good mother. (2.) Her husband thinks himself so happy in her that he
takes all occasions to speak well of her, as one of the best of women.
It is no indecency at all, but a laudable instance of conjugal love, for
husbands and wives to give one another their due praises.

3\. She gets the good word of all her neighbours, as Ruth did, whom all
the city of her people knew to be a virtuous woman, [Rut
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#011.md). Virtue will have its praise,
[Phi 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008.md). A woman that fears the Lord,
shall have praise of God ([Rom 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029).md)
and of men too. It is here shown, (1.) That she shall be highly praised
([Pro 31:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#029).md): Many have done
virtuously. Virtuous women, it seems, are precious jewels, but not such
rare jewels as was represented [Pro
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#010.md). There have been many, but such
a one as this cannot be paralleled. Who can find her equal? She excels
them all. Note, Those that are good should aim and covet to excel in
virtue. Many daughters, in their father's house, and in the single
state, have done virtuously, but a good wife, if she be virtuous, excels
them all, and does more good in her place than they can do in theirs.
Or, as some explain it, A man cannot have his house so well kept by good
daughters, as by a good wife. (2.) That she shall be incontestably
praised, without contradiction, [Pro
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#031.md). Some are praised above what is
their due, but those that praise her do but give her of the fruit of her
hands; they give her that which she has dearly earned and which is
justly due to her; she is wronged if she have it not. Note, Those ought
to be praised the fruit of whose hands is praise-worthy. The tree is
known by its fruits, and therefore, if the fruit be good, the tree must
have our good word. If her children be dutiful and respectful to her,
and conduct themselves as they ought, they then give her the fruit of
her hands; she reaps the benefit of all the care she has taken of them,
and thinks herself well paid. Children must thus study to requite their
parents, and this is showing piety at home, [Ti1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004.md). But, if men be unjust, the thing
will speak itself, her own works will praise her in the gates, openly
before all the people. \[1.\] She leaves it to her own works to praise
her, and does not court the applause of men. Those are none of the truly
virtuous women that love to hear themselves commended. \[2.\] Her own
works will praise her; if her relations and neighbours altogether hold
their peace, her good works will proclaim her praise. The widows gave
the best encomium of Dorcas when they showed the coats and garments she
had made for the poor, [Act 9:39](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#039.md).
\[3.\] The least that can be expected from her neighbours is that they
should let her own works praise her, and do nothing to hinder them.
Those that do that which is good, let them have praise of the same ([Rom
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#003).md) and let us not enviously say, or
do, any thing to the diminishing of it, but be provoked by it to a holy
emulation. Let none have an ill report from us, that have a good report
even of the truth itself. Thus is shut up this looking-glass for ladies,
which they are desired to open and dress themselves by; and, if they do
so, their adorning will be found to praise, and honour, and glory, at
the appearing of Jesus Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Introduction](ecc000.md)

</div>
