<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Proverbs Index](pro.md)  
  [Previous](pro026)  [Next](pro028.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#001.md)

[Proverbs 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 27:1</span></span>

Here is, 1. A good caution against presuming upon time to come: Boast
not thyself, no, not of tomorrow, much less of many days or years to
come. This does not forbid preparing for tomorrow, but presuming upon
tomorrow. We must not promise ourselves the continuance of our lives and
comforts till tomorrow, but speak of it with submission to the will of
God and as those who with good reason are kept at uncertainty about it.
We must not take thought for the morrow ([Mat
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034).md), but we must cast our care
concerning it upon God. See [Jam
4:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013.md). We must not put off the great
work of conversion, that one thing needful, till tomorrow, as if we were
sure of it, but today, while it is called today, hear God's voice. 2. A
good consideration, upon which this caution is grounded: We know not
what a day may bring forth, what event may be in the teeming womb, of
time; it is a secret till it is born, [Ecc
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#005.md). A little time may produce
considerable changes, and such as we little think of. We know not what
the present day may bring forth; the evening must commend it. Nescis
quid serus vesper vehat - Thou knowest not what the close of evening may
bring with it. God has wisely kept us in the dark concerning future
events, and reserved to himself the knowledge of them, as a flower of
the crown, that he may train us up in a dependence upon himself and a
continued readiness for every event, [Act
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007.md).

[Proverbs 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 27:2</span></span>

Note, 1. We must do that which is commendable, for which even strangers
may praise us. Our light must shine before men, and we must do good
works that may be seen, though we must not do them on purpose that they
may be seen. Let our own works be such as will praise us, even in the
gates, [Phi 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008.md). 2. When we have done
it we must not commend ourselves, for that is an evidence of pride,
folly, and self-love, and a great lessening to a man's reputation. Every
one will be forward to run him down that cries himself up. There may be
a just occasion for us to vindicate ourselves, but it does not become us
to applaud ourselves. Proprio laus sordet in ore - Self-praise defiles
the mouth.

[Proverbs 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 27:3</span></span>

These two verses show the intolerable mischief, 1. Of ungoverned
passion. The wrath of a fool, who when he is provoked cares not what he
says and does, is more grievous than a great stone or a load of sand. It
lies heavily upon himself. Those who have no command of their passions
do themselves even sink under the load of them. The wrath of a fool lies
heavily upon those he is enraged at, to whom, in his fury, he will be in
danger of doing some mischief. It is therefore our wisdom not to give
provocation to a fool, but, if he be in a passion, to get out of his
way. 2. Of rooted malice, which is as much worse than the former as
coals of juniper are worse than a fire of thorns. Wrath (it is true) is
cruel, and does many a barbarous thing, and anger is outrageous; but a
secret enmity at the person of another, an envy at his prosperity, and a
desire of revenge for some injury or affront, are much more mischievous.
One may avoid a sudden heat, as David escaped Saul's javelin, but when
it grows, as Saul's did, to a settled envy, there is no standing before
it; it will pursue; it will overtake. He that grieves at the good of
another will be still contriving to do him hurt, and will keep his anger
for ever.

[Proverbs 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 27:5</span></span>

Note, 1. It is good for us to be reproved, and told of our faults, by
our friends. If true love in the heart has but zeal and courage enough
to show itself in dealing plainly with our friends, and reproving them
for what they say and do amiss, this is really better, not only than
secret hatred (as [Lev 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#017).md), but
than secret love, that love to our neighbours which does not show itself
in this good fruit, which compliments them in their sins, to the
prejudice of their souls. Faithful are the reproofs of a friend, though
for the present they are painful as wounds. It is a sign that our
friends are faithful indeed if, in love to our souls, they will not
suffer sin upon us, nor let us alone in it. The physician's care is to
cure the patient's disease, not to please his palate. 2. It is dangerous
to be caressed and flattered by an enemy, whose kisses are deceitful We
can take no pleasure in them because we can put no confidence in them
(Joab's kiss and Judas's were deceitful), and therefore we have need to
stand upon our guard, that we be not deluded by them; they are to be
deprecated. Some read it: The Lord deliver us from an enemy's kisses,
from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue.

[Proverbs 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 27:7</span></span>

Solomon here, as often in this book, shows that the poor have in some
respects the advantage of the rich; for, 1. They have a better relish of
their enjoyments than the rich have. Hunger is the best sauce. Coarse
fare, with a good appetite to it has a sensible pleasantness in it,
which those are strangers to whose hearts are overcharged with
surfeiting. Those that fare sumptuously every day nauseate even delicate
food, as the Israelites did the quails; whereas those that have no more
than their necessary food, though it be such as the full soul would call
bitter, to them it is sweet; they eat it with pleasure, digest it, and
are refreshed by it. 2. They are more thankful for their enjoyments: The
hungry will bless God for bread and water, while those that are full
think the greatest dainties and varieties scarcely worth giving thanks
for. The virgin Mary seems to refer to this when she says ([Luk
1:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#053).md), The hungry, who know how to
value God's blessings, are filled with good things, but the rich, who
despise them, are justly sent empty away.

[Proverbs 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 27:8</span></span>

Note, 1. There are many that do not know when they are well off, but are
uneasy with their present condition, and given to change. God, in his
providence, has appointed them a place fit for them and has made it
comfortable to them; but they affect unsettledness; they love to wander;
they are glad of a pretence to go abroad, and do not care for staying
long at a place; they needlessly absent themselves from their own work
and care, and meddle with that which belongs not to them. 2. Those that
thus desert the post assigned to them are like a bird that wanders from
her nest. It is an instance of their folly; they are like a silly bird;
they are always wavering, like the wandering bird that hops from bough
to bough and rests nowhere. It is unsafe; the bird that wanders is
exposed; a man's place is his castle; he that quits it makes himself an
easy prey to the fowler. When the bird wanders from her nest the eggs
and young ones there are neglected. Those that love to be abroad leave
their work at home undone. Let every man therefore, in the calling
wherein he is called, therein abide, therein abide with God.

[Proverbs 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 27:9</span></span>

Here is, 1. A charge given to be faithful and constant to our friends,
our old friends, to keep up an intimacy with them, and to be ready to do
them all the offices that lie in our power. It is good to have a friend,
a bosom-friend, whom we can be free with, and with whom we may
communicate counsels. It is not necessary that this friend should be a
relation, or any way akin to us, though it is happiest when, among those
who are so, we find one fit to make a friend of. Peter and Andrew were
brethren, so were James and John; yet Solomon frequently distinguishes
between a friend and a brother. But it is advisable to choose a friend
among our neighbours who live near us, that acquaintance may be kept up
and kindnesses the more frequently interchanged. It is good also to have
a special respect to those who have been friends to our family: "Thy own
friend, especially if he have been thy father's friend, forsake not;
fail not both to serve him and to use him, as there is occasion. He is a
tried friend; he knows thy affairs; he has a particular concern for
thee; therefore be advised by him." It is a duty we owe to our parents,
when they are gone, to love their friends and consult with them.
Solomon's son undid himself by forsaking the counsel of his father's
friends. 2. A good reason given why we should thus value true friendship
and be choice of it. (1.) Because of the pleasure of it. There is a
great deal of sweetness in conversing and consulting with a cordial
friend. It is like ointment and perfume, which are very grateful to the
smell, and exhilarate the spirits. It rejoices the heart; the burden of
care is made lighter by unbosoming ourselves to our friend, and it is a
great satisfaction to us to have his sentiments concerning our affairs.
The sweetness of friendship lies not in hearty mirth, and hearty
laughter, but in hearty counsel, faithful advice, sincerely given and
without flattery, by counsel of the soul (so the word is), counsel which
reaches the case, and comes to the heart, counsel about soul-concerns,
[Psa 66:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#016.md). We should reckon that the
most pleasant conversation which is about spiritual things, and promotes
the prosperity of the soul. (2.) Because of the profit and advantage of
it, especially in a day of calamity. We are here advised not to go into
a brother's house, not to expect relief from a kinsman merely for
kindred-sake, for the obligation of that commonly goes little further
than calling cousin and fails when it comes to the trial of a real
kindness, but rather to apply ourselves to our neighbours, who are at
hand, and will be ready to help us at an exigence. It is wisdom to
oblige them by being neighbourly, and we shall have the benefit of it in
distress, by finding them so to us, [Psa
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#024.md).

[Proverbs 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 27:11</span></span>

Children are here exhorted to be wise and good, 1. That they may be a
comfort to their parents and may make their hearts glad, even when the
evil days come, and so recompense them for their care, [Pro
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#015.md). 2. That they may be a credit to
them: "That I may answer him that reproaches me with having been
over-strict and severe in bringing up my children, and having taken a
wrong method with them in restraining them from the liberties which
other young people take. My son, be wise, and then it will appear, in
the effect, that I went the wisest way to work with my children." Those
that have been blessed with a religious education should in every thing
conduct themselves so as to be a credit to their education and to
silence those who say, A young saint, an old devil; and to prove the
contrary, A young saint, an old angel.

[Proverbs 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 27:12</span></span>

This we had before, [Pro 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#003.md). Note,
1. Evil may be foreseen. Where there is temptation, it is easy to
foresee that if we thrust ourselves into it there will be sin, and as
easy to foresee that if we venture upon the evil of sin there will
follow the evil of punishment; and, commonly, God warns before he
wounds, having set watchmen over us, [Jer
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#017.md). 2. It will be well or ill with
us according as we do or do not improve the foresight we have of evil
before us: The prudent man, foreseeing the evil, forecasts accordingly,
and hides himself, but the simple is either so dull that he does not
foresee it or so wilful and slothful that he will take no care to avoid
it, and so he passes on securely and is punished. We do well for
ourselves when we provide for hereafter.

[Proverbs 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 27:13</span></span>

This also we had before, [Pro 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#016.md).
1. It shows who those are that are hastening to poverty, those that have
so little consideration as to be bound for every body that will ask them
and those that are given to women. Such as these will take up money as
far as ever their credit will go, but they will certainly cheat their
creditors at last, nay, they are cheating them all along. An honest man
may be made a beggar, but he is not honest that makes himself one. 2. It
advises us to be so discreet in ordering our affairs as not to lend
money to those who are manifestly wasting their estates, unless they
give very good security for it. Foolish lending is injustice to our
families. He does not say, "Get another to be bound with him," for he
that makes himself a common voucher will have those to be his security
who are as insolvent as himself; therefore take his garment.

[Proverbs 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 27:14</span></span>

Note, 1. It is a great folly to be extravagant in praising even the best
of our friends and benefactors. It is our duty to give every one his due
praise, to applaud those who excel in knowledge, virtue, and usefulness,
and to acknowledge the kindnesses we have received with thankfulness;
but to do this with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, to be
always harping on this string, in all companies, even to our friend's
face, or so as that he may be sure to hear it, to do it studiously, as
we do that which we rise early to, to magnify the merits of our friend
above measure and with hyperboles, is fulsome, and nauseous, and savours
of hypocrisy and design. Praising men for what they have done is only to
get more out of them; and every body concludes the parasite hopes to be
well paid for his panegyric or epistle dedicatory. We must not give that
praise to our friend which is due to God only, as some think is
intimated in rising early to do it; for in the morning God is to be
praised. We must not make too much haste to praise men (so some
understand it), not cry up men too soon for their abilities and
performances, but let them first be proved; lest they be lifted up with
pride, and laid to sleep in idleness. 2. It is a greater folly to be
fond of being ourselves extravagantly praised. A wise man rather counts
it a curse, and a reflection upon him, not only designed to pick his
pocket, but which may really turn to his prejudice. Modest praises (as a
great man observes) invite such as are present to add to the
commendation, but immodest immoderate praises tempt them to detract
rather, and to censure one that they hear over-commended. And, besides,
over-praising a man makes him the object of envy; every man puts in for
a share of reputation, and therefore reckons himself injured if another
monopolize it or have more given him than his share. And the greatest
danger of all is that it is a temptation to pride; men are apt to think
of themselves above what is meet when others speak of them above what is
meet. See how careful blessed Paul was not to be over-valued, [Co2
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#006.md).

[Proverbs 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 27:15</span></span>

Here, as before, Solomon laments the case of him that has a peevish
passionate wife, that is continually chiding, and making herself and all
about her uneasy. 1. It is a grievance that there is no avoiding, for it
is like a continual dropping in a very rainy day. The contentions of a
neighbour may be like a sharp shower, troublesome for the time, yet,
while it lasts, one may take shelter; but the contentions of a wife are
like a constant soaking rain, for which there is no remedy but patience
See [Pro 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#013.md). 2. It is a grievance
that there is no concealing. A wise man would hide it if he could, for
the sake both of his own and his wife's reputation, but he cannot, any
more than he can conceal the noise of the wind when it blows or the
smell of a strong perfume. Those that are froward and brawling will
proclaim their own shame, even when their friends, in kindness to them,
would cover it.

[Proverbs 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 27:17</span></span>

This intimates both the pleasure and the advantage of conversation. One
man is nobody; nor will poring upon a book in a corner accomplish a man
as the reading and studying of men will. Wise and profitable discourse
sharpens men's wits; and those that have ever so much knowledge may by
conference have something added to them. It sharpens men's looks, and,
by cheering the spirits, puts a briskness and liveliness into the
countenance, and gives a man such an air as shows he is pleased himself
and makes him pleasing to those about him. Good men's graces are
sharpened by converse with those that are good, and bad men's lusts and
passions are sharpened by converse with those that are bad, as iron is
sharpened by its like, especially by the file. Men are filed, made
smooth, and bright, and fit for business (who were rough, and dull, and
inactive), by conversation. This is designed, 1. To recommend to us this
expedient for sharpening ourselves, but with a caution to take heed whom
we choose to converse with, because the influence upon us is so great
either for the better or for the worse. 2. To direct us what we must
have in our eye in conversation, namely to improve both others and
ourselves, not to pass away time or banter one another, but to provoke
one another to love and to good works and so to make one another wiser
and better.

[Proverbs 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 27:18</span></span>

This is designed to encourage diligence, faithfulness, and constancy,
even in mean employments. Though the calling be laborious and
despicable, yet those who keep to it will find there is something to be
got by it. 1. Let not a poor gardener, who keeps the fig-tree, be
discouraged; though it require constant care and attendance to nurse up
fig-trees, and, when they have grown to maturity, to keep them in good
order, and gather the figs in their season, yet he shall be paid for his
pains: He shall eat the fruit of it, [Co1
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007.md). 2. Nay, let not a poor servant
think himself incapable of thriving and being preferred; for if he be
diligent in waiting on his master, observant of him and obedient to him,
if he keep his master (so the word is), if he do all he can for the
securing of his person and reputation and take care that his estate be
not wasted or damaged, such a one shall be honoured, shall not only get
a good word, but be preferred and rewarded. God is a Master who has
engaged to put an honour on those that serve him faithfully, [Joh
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#026.md).

[Proverbs 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 27:19</span></span>

This shows us that there is a way, 1. Of knowing ourselves. As the water
is a looking-glass in which we may see our faces by reflection, so there
are mirrors by which the heart of a man is discovered to a man, that is,
to himself. Let a man examine his own conscience, his thoughts,
affections, and intentions. Let him behold his natural face in the glass
of the divine law ([Jam 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#023).md), and he
may discern what kind of man he is and what is his true character, which
it will be of great use to every man rightly to know. 2. Of knowing one
another by ourselves; for, as there is a similitude between the face of
a man and the reflection of it in the water, so there is between one
man's heart and another's for God has fashioned men's hearts alike; and
in many cases we may judge of others by ourselves, which is one of the
foundations on which that rule is built of doing to others as we would
be done by, [Exo 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#009.md) Nihil est unum
uni tam simile, tam par, quam omnes inter nosmet ipsos sumus. Sui nemo
ipse tam similis quam omnes sunt omnium - No one thing is so like
another as man is to man. No person is so like himself as each person is
to all besides. Cic. de Legib. lib. 1. One corrupt heart is like
another, and so is one sanctified heart, for the former bears the same
image of the earthy, the latter the same image of the heavenly.

[Proverbs 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 27:20</span></span>

Two things are here said to be insatiable, and they are two things near
of kin - death and sin. 1. Death is insatiable. The first death, the
second death, both are so. The grave is not clogged with the multitude
of dead bodies that are daily thrown into it, but is still an open
sepulchre, and cries, Give, give. Hell also has enlarged itself, and
still has room for the damned spirits that are committed to that prison.
Tophet is deep and large, [Isa 30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033.md).
2. Sin is insatiable: The eyes of man are never satisfied, nor the
appetites of the carnal mind towards profit or pleasure. The eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor is he the loves silver satisfied with silver.
Men labour for that which surfeits, but satisfies not; nay, it is
dissatisfying; but satisfies not; nay, it is dissatisfying; such a
perpetual uneasiness have men justly been doomed to ever since our first
parents were not satisfied with all the trees of Eden, but they must
meddle with the forbidden tree. Those whose eyes are ever toward the
Lord in him are satisfied, and shall for ever be so.

[Proverbs 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 27:21</span></span>

This gives us a touchstone by which we may try ourselves. Silver and
gold are tried by putting them into the furnace and fining-pot; so is
man tried by praising him. Let him be extolled and preferred, and then
he will show himself what he is. 1. If a man be made, by the applause
that is given him, proud, conceited, and scornful, - if he take the
glory to himself which he should transmit to God, as Herod did, - if,
the more he is praised, the more careless he is of what he says and
does, - if he lie in bed till noon because his name is up, thereby it
will appear that he is a vain foolish man, and a man who, though he be
praised, has nothing in him truly praise-worthy. 2. If, on the contrary,
a man is made by his praise more thankful to God, more respectful to his
friends, more watchful against every thing that may blemish his
reputation, more diligent to improve himself, and do good to others,
that he may answer the expectations of his friends from him, by this it
will appear that he is a wise and good man. He has a good temper of mind
who knows how to pass by evil report and good report, and is still the
same, [Co2 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#008.md).

[Proverbs 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 27:22</span></span>

Solomon had said ([Pro 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#015).md), The
foolishness which is bound in the heart of a child may be driven out by
the rod of correction, for then the mind is to be moulded, the vicious
habits not having taken root; but here he shows that, if it be not done
then, it will be next to impossible to do it afterwards; if the disease
be inveterate, there is a danger of its being incurable. Can the
Ethiopian change his skin? Observe, 1. Some are so bad that rough and
severe methods must be used with them, after gentle means have been
tried in vain; they must be brayed in a mortar. God will take this way
with them by his judgments; the magistrates must take this way with them
by the rigour of the law. Force must be used with those that will not be
ruled by reason, and love, and their own interest. 2. Some are so
incorrigibly bad that even those rough and severe methods do not answer
the end, their foolishness will not depart from them, so fully are their
hearts set in them to do evil; they are often under the rod and yet not
humbled, in the furnace and yet not refined, but, like Ahaz, trespass
yet more ([Ch2 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#022).md); and what
remains then but that they should be rejected as reprobate silver?

[Proverbs 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 27:23</span></span>

Here is, I. A command given us to be diligent in our callings. It is
directed to husbandmen and shepherds, and those that deal in cattle, but
it is to be extended to all other lawful callings; whatever our business
is, within doors or without, we must apply our minds to it. This command
intimates, 1. That we ought to have some business to do in this world
and not to live in idleness. 2. We ought rightly and fully to understand
our business, and know what we have to do, and not meddle with that
which we do not understand. 3. We ought to have an eye to it ourselves,
and not turn over all the care of it to others. We should, with our own
eyes, inspect the state of our flocks, it is the master's eye that makes
them fat. 4. We must be discreet and considerate in the management of
our business, know the state of things, and look well to them, that
nothing may be lost, no opportunity let slip, but every thing done in
proper time and order, and so as to turn to the best advantage. 5. We
must be diligent and take pains; not only sit down and contrive, but be
up and doing: "Set thy heart to thy herds, as one in care; lay thy
hands, lay thy bones, to thy business."

II\. The reasons to enforce this command. Consider,

1\. The uncertainty of worldly wealth ([Pro
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#024)): Riches are not for ever. (1..md)
Other riches are not so durable as these are: "Look well to thy flocks
and herds, thy estate in the country and the stock upon that, for these
are staple commodities, which, in a succession, will be for ever,
whereas riches in trade and merchandise will not be so; the crown itself
may perhaps not be so sure to thy family as thy flocks and herds." (2.)
Even these riches will go to decay if they be not well looked after. If
a man had an abbey (as we say), and were slothful and wasteful, he might
make an end of it. Even the crown and the revenues of it, if care be not
taken, will suffer damage, nor will it continue to every generation
without very good management. Though David had the crown entailed on his
family, yet he looked well to his flocks, [Ch1
27:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#029.md), [Ch1
27:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#031.md).

2\. The bounty and liberality of nature, or rather of the God of nature,
and his providence ([Pro 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#025).md): The
hay appears. In taking care of the flocks and herds, (1.) "There needs
no great labour, no ploughing or sowing; the food for them is the
spontaneous product of the ground; thou hast nothing to do but to turn
them into it in the summer, when the grass shows itself, and to gather
the herbs of the mountains for them against winter. God has done his
part; thou art ungrateful to him, and unjustly refusest to serve his
providence, if thou dost not do thine." (2.) "There is an opportunity to
be observed and improved, a time when the hay appears; but, if thou let
slip that time, thy flocks and herds will fare the worse for it. As for
ourselves, so for our cattle, we ought, with the ant, to provide meat in
summer."

3\. The profit of good husbandry in a family: "Keep thy sheep, and thy
sheep will help to keep thee; thou shalt have food for thy children and
servants, goats' milk enough ([Pro
27:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#027).md); and enough is as good as a
feast. Thou shalt have raiment likewise: the lambs' wool shall be for
thy clothing. Thou shalt have money to pay thy rent; the goats thou
shalt have to sell shall be the price of thy field;" nay, as some
understand it, "Thou shalt become a purchaser, and buy land to leave to
thy children," ([Pro 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#026).md). Note,
(1.) If we have food and raiment, and wherewithal to give every body his
own, we have enough, and ought to be not only content, but thankful.
(2.) Masters of families must provide not only for themselves, but for
their families, and see that their servants have a fitting maintenance.
(3.) Plain food and plain clothing, if they be but competent, are all we
should aim at. "Reckon thyself well done to if thou be clothed with
home-spun cloth with the fleece of thy own lambs, and fed with goats'
milk; let that serve for thy food which serves for the food of thy
household and the maintenance of thy maidens. Be not desirous of
dainties, far-fetched and dear-bought." (4.) This should encourage us to
be careful and industrious about our business, that that will bring in a
sufficient maintenance for our families; we shall eat the labour of our
hands.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 28](pro028.md)

</div>
