<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa066)  [Next](psa068) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 67](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 67:0</span></span>

This psalm relates to the church and is calculated for the public. Here
is, I. A prayer for the prosperity of the church of Israel ([Psa
67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001)). II. A prayer for the conversion
of the Gentiles and the bringing of them into the church ([Psa
67:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002)). III. A prospect of happy and
glorious times when God shall do this ([Psa
67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006), [Psa
67:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#007)). Thus was the psalmist carried
out by the spirit of prophecy to foretel the glorious estate of the
Christian church, in which Jews and Gentiles should unite in one flock,
the beginning of which blessed work ought to be the matter of our joy
and praise, and the completing of it of our prayer and hope, in singing
this psalm.

To the chief musician on Neginoth. A psalm or song.

[Psalms 67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 67:1</span></span>

The composition of this psalm is such as denotes the penman's affections
to have been very warm and lively, by which spirit of devotion he was
elevated to receive the spirit of prophecy concerning the enlargement of
God's kingdom.

I. He begins with a prayer for the welfare and prosperity of the church
then in being, in the happiness of which he should share, and think
himself happy, [Psa 67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001). Our Saviour,
in teaching us to say, Our Father, has intimated that we ought to pray
with and for others; so the psalmist here prays not, God be merciful to
me, and bless me, but to us, and bless us; for we must make supplication
for all saints, and be willing and glad to take our lot with them. We
are here taught, 1. That all our happiness comes from God's mercy and
takes rise in that; and therefore the first thing prayed for is, God be
merciful to us, to us sinners, and pardon our sins ([Luk
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)), to us miserable sinners, and
help us out of our miseries. 2. That it is conveyed by God's blessing,
and secured in that: God bless us; that is, give us an interest in his
promises, and confer upon us all the good contained in them. God's
speaking well to us amounts to his doing well for us. God bless us is a
comprehensive prayer; it is a pity such excellent words should ever be
used slightly and carelessly, and as a byword. 3. That it is completed
in the light of his countenance: God cause his face to shine upon us;
that is, God by his grace qualify us for his favour and then give us the
tokens of his favour. We need desire no more to make us happy than to
have God's face shine upon us, to have God love us, and let us know that
he loves us: To shine with us (so the margin reads it); with us doing
our endeavour, and let it crown that endeavour with success. If we by
faith walk with God, we may hope that his face will shine with us.

II\. He passes from this to a prayer for the conversion of the Gentiles
([Psa 67:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002)): That thy way may be known
upon earth. "Lord, I pray not only that thou wilt be merciful to us and
bless us, but that thou wilt be merciful to all mankind, that thy way
may be known upon earth." Thus public-spirited must we be in our
prayers. Father in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come. We
shall have never the less of God's mercy, and blessing, and favour, for
others coming in to share with us. Or it may be taken thus: "God be
merciful to us Jews, and bless us, that thereby thy way may be known
upon earth, that by the peculiar distinguishing tokens of thy favour to
us others may be allured to come and join themselves to us, saying, We
will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you," [Zac
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023).

1\. These verses, which point at the conversion of the Gentiles, may be
taken, (1.) As a prayer; and so it speaks the desire of the Old
Testament saints; so far were they from wishing to monopolize the
privileges of the church that they desired nothing more than the
throwing down of the enclosure and the laying open of the advantages.
See then how the spirit of the Jews, in the days of Christ and his
apostles, differed from the spirit of their fathers. The Israelites
indeed that were of old desired that God's name might be known among the
Gentiles; those counterfeit Jews were enraged at the preaching of the
gospel to the Gentiles; nothing in Christianity exasperated them so much
as that did. (2.) As a prophecy that it shall be as he here prays. Many
scripture-prophecies and promises are wrapped up in prayers, to intimate
that the answer of the church's prayer is as sure as the performance of
God's promises.

2\. Three things are here prayed for, with reference to the Gentiles: -

(1.) That divine revelation might be sent among them, [Psa
67:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002). Two things he desires might be
know upon earth, even among all nations, and not to the nation of the
Jews only: - \[1.\] God's way, the rule of duty: "Let them all know, as
well as we do, what is good and what the Lord our God requires of them;
let them be blessed and honoured with the same righteous statutes and
judgments which are so much the praise of our nation and the envy of all
its neighbours," [Deu 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#008). \[2.\] His
saving health, or his salvation. The former is wrapped up in his law,
this in his gospel. If God make known his way to us, and we walk in it,
he will show us his saving health, [Psa
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023). Those that have themselves
experimentally known the pleasantness of God's ways, and the comforts of
his salvation, cannot but desire and pray that they may be known to
others, even among all nations. All upon earth are bound to walk in
God's way, all need his salvation, and there is in it enough for all;
and therefore we should pray that both the one and the other may be made
known to all.

(2.) That divine worship may be set up among them, as it will be where
divine revelation is received and embraced ([Psa
67:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#003)): "Let the people praise thee, O
God! let them have matter for praise, let them have hearts for praise;
yea, let not only some, but all the people, praise thee," all nations in
their national capacity, some of all nations. It is again repeated ([Psa
67:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#005)) as that which the psalmist's
heart was very much upon. Those that delight in praising God themselves
cannot but desire that others also may be brought to praise him, that he
may have the honour of it and they may have the benefit of it. It is a
prayer, \[1.\] That the gospel might be preached to them, and then they
would have cause enough to praise God, as for the day-spring after a
long and dark night. Ortus est sol - The sun has risen. [Act
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#008). \[2.\] That they might be
converted and brought into the church, and then they would have a
disposition to praise God, the living and true God, and not the dumb and
dunghill deities they had worshipped, [Dan
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#004). Then their hard thoughts of God
would be silenced, and they would see him, in the gospel glass, to be
love itself, and the proper object of praise. \[3.\] That they might be
incorporated into solemn assemblies, and might praise God in a body,
that they might all together praise him with one mind and one mouth.
Thus a face of religion appears upon a land when God is publicly owned
and the ordinances of religious worship are duly celebrated in religious
assemblies.

(3.) That the divine government may be acknowledged and cheerfully
submitted to ([Psa 67:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#004)): O let the
nations be glad, and sing for joy! Holy joy, joy in God and in his name,
is the heart and soul of thankful praise. That all the people may praise
thee, let the nations be glad. Those that rejoice in the Lord always
will in every thing give thanks. The joy he wishes to the nations is
holy joy; for it is joy in God's dominion, joy that God has taken to
himself his great power and has reigned, which the unconverted nations
are angry at, [Rev 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#017), [Rev
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#018). Let them be glad, \[1.\] That
the kingdom is the Lord's ([Psa
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#028)), that he, as an absolute
sovereign, shall govern the nations upon earth, that by the kingdom of
his providence he shall overrule the affairs of kingdoms according to
the counsel of his will, though they neither know him nor own him, and
that in due time he shall disciple all nations by the preaching of his
gospel ([Mat 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)) and set up the
kingdom of his grace among them upon the ruin of the devil's kingdom -
that he shall make them a willing people in the day of his power, and
even the kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of the Lord
and of his Christ. \[2.\] That every man's judgment proceeds from the
Lord. "Let them be glad that thou shalt judge the people righteously,
that thou shalt give a law and gospel which shall be a righteous rule of
judgment, and shalt pass an unerring sentence, according to that rule,
upon all the children of men, against which there will lie no
exception." Let us all be glad that we are not to be one another's
judges, but that he that judges us is the Lord, whose judgment we are
sure is according to truth.

III\. He concludes with a joyful prospect of all good when God shall do
this, when the nations shall be converted and brought to praise God.

1\. The lower world shall smile upon them, and they shall have the
fruits of that ([Psa 67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006)): Then shall
the earth yield her increase. Not but that God gave rain from heaven and
fruitful seasons to the nations when they sat in darkness ([Act
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)); but when they were converted
the earth yielded its increase to God; the meat and the drink then
became a meat-offering and a drink-offering to the Lord our God ([Joe
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#014)); and then it was fruitful to
some good purpose. Then it yielded its increase more than before to the
comfort of men, who through Christ acquired a covenant-title to the
fruits of it and had a sanctified use of it. Note, The success of the
gospel sometimes brings outward mercies along with it; righteousness
exalts a nation. See [Isa 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002); [Isa
62:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#009).

2\. The upper world shall smile upon them, and they shall have the
favours of that, which is much better: God, even our own God, shall
bless us, [Psa 67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006). And again ([Psa
67:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#007)), God shall bless us. Note, (1.)
There are a people in the world that can, upon good grounds, call God
their God. (2.) Believers have reason to glory in their relation to God
and the interest they have in him. It is here spoken with an air of
triumph. God, even our own God. (2.) Those who through grace call God
their own may with a humble confidence expect a blessing from him. If he
be our God, he will bless us with special blessings. (4.) The blessing
of God, as ours in covenant, is that which sweetens all our
creature-comforts to us, and makes them comforts indeed; then we receive
the increase of the earth as a mercy indeed when with it God, even our
own God, gives us his blessing.

3\. All the world shall hereby be brought to do like them: The ends of
the earth shall fear him, that is, worship him, which is to be done with
a godly fear. The blessings God bestows upon us call upon us not only to
love him, but to fear him, to keep up high thoughts of him and to be
afraid of offending him. When the gospel begins to spread it shall get
ground more and more, till it reach to the ends of the earth. The leaven
hidden in the meal shall diffuse itself, till the whole be leavened. And
the many blessings which those will own themselves to have received that
are brought into the church invite others to join themselves to them. It
is good to cast in our lot with those that are the blessed of the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 68](psa068)

</div>
