<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa051)  [Next](psa053) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 52](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 52:0</span></span>

David, no doubt, was in very great grief when he said to Abiathar ([Sa1
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#022)), "I have occasioned the death
of all the persons of thy father's house," who were put to death upon
Doeg's malicious information; to give some vent to that grief, and to
gain some relief to his mind under it, he penned this psalm, wherein, as
a prophet, and therefore with as good an authority as if he had been now
a prince upon the throne, I. He arraigns Doeg for what he had done ([Psa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001)). II. He accuses him, convicts
him, and aggravates his crimes ([Psa
52:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002)). III. He passes sentence upon
him ([Psa 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005)). IV. He foretels the
triumphs of the righteous in the execution of the sentence ([Psa
52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006), [Psa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007)). V. He comforts himself in the
mercy of God and the assurance he had that he should yet praise him
([Psa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008), [Psa
52:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#009)). In singing this psalm we should
conceive a detestation of the sin of lying, foresee the ruin of those
that persist in it, and please ourselves with the assurance of the
preservation of God's church and people, in spite of all the malicious
designs of the children of Satan, that father of lies.

To the chief musician, Maschil. A psalm of David, when Doeg the Edomite
came and told Saul, and said unto him, David is come to the house of
Ahimelech.

[Psalms 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 52:1</span></span>

The title is a brief account of the story which the psalm refers to.
David now, at length, saw it necessary to quit the court, and shift for
his own safety, for fear of Saul, who had once and again attempted to
murder him. Being unprovided wit harms and victuals, he, by a wile, got
Ahimelech the priest to furnish him with both. Doeg an Edomite happened
to be there, and he went and informed Saul against Ahimelech,
representing him as confederate with a traitor, upon which accusation
Saul grounded a very bloody warrant, to kill all the priests; and Doeg,
the prosecutor, was the executioner, [Sa1
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#009), etc. In these verses,

I. David argues the case fairly with this proud and mighty man, [Psa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001). Doeg, it is probably, was mighty
in respect of bodily strength; but, if he was, he gained no reputation
to it by his easy victory over the unarmed priests of the Lord; it is no
honour for those that wear a sword to hector those that wear an ephod.
However, he was, by his office, a mighty man, for he was set over the
servants of Saul, chamberlain of the household. This was he that boasted
himself, not only in the power he had to do mischief, but in the
mischief he did. Note, It is bad to do ill, but it is worse to boast of
it and glory in it when we have done, not only not to be ashamed of a
wicked action, but to justify it, not only to justify it, but to magnify
it and value ourselves upon it. Those that glory in their sin glory in
their shame, and then it becomes yet more shameful; might men are often
mischievous men, and boast of their heart's desire, [Psa
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003). It is uncertain how the
following words come in: The goodness of God endures continually. Some
make it the wicked man's answer to this question. The patience and
forbearance of God (those great proofs of his goodness) are abused by
sinners to the hardening of their hearts in their wicked ways; because
sentence against their evil works is not executed speedily, nay, because
God is continually doing them good, therefore they boast in mischief; as
if their prosperity in their wickedness were an evidence that there is
no harm in it. But it is rather to be taken as an argument against him,
to show, 1. The sinfulness of his sin: "God is continually doing good,
and those that therein are like him have reason to glory in their being
so; but thou art continually doing mischief, and therein art utterly
unlike him, and contrary to him, and yet gloriest in being so." 2. The
folly of it: "Thou thinkest, with the mischief which thou boastest of
(so artfully contrived and so successfully carried on), to run down and
ruin the people of God; but thou wilt find thyself mistaken: the
goodness of God endures continually for their preservation, and then
they need not fear what man can do unto them." The enemies in vain boast
in their mischief while we have God's mercy to boast in.

II\. He draws up a high charge against him in the court of heaven, as he
had drawn up a high charge against Ahimelech in Saul's court, [Psa
52:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002). He accuses him of the
wickedness of his tongue (that unruly evil, full of deadly poison) and
the wickedness of his heart, which that was an evidence of. Four things
he charges him with: - 1. Malice. His tongue does mischief, not only
pricking like a needle, but cutting like a sharp razor. Scornful
bantering words would not content him; he loved devouring words, words
that would ruin the priests of the Lord, whom he hated. 2. Falsehood. It
was a deceitful tongue that he did this mischief with ([Psa
52:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#004)); he loved lying ([Psa
52:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#003)), and this sharp razor did work
deceitfully ([Psa 52:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002)), that is,
before he had this occasion given him to discover his malice against the
priests, he had acted very plausibly towards them; though he was an
Edomite, he attended the altars, and brought his offerings, and paid his
respects to the priests, as decently as any Israelite; therein he put a
force upon himself (for he was detained before the Lord), but thus he
gained an opportunity of doing them so much the greater mischief. Or it
may refer to the information itself which he gave in against Ahimelech;
for the matter of fact was, in substance, true, yet it was
misrepresented, and false colours were put upon it, and therefore he
might well be said to love lying, and to have a deceitful tongue. He
told the truth, but not all the truth, as a witness ought to do; had he
told that David made Ahimelech believe he was then going upon Saul's
errand, the kindness he showed him would have appeared to be not only
not traitorous against Saul, but respectful to him. It will not save us
from the guilt of lying to be able to say, "There was some truth in what
we said," if we pervert it, and make it to appear otherwise than it was.
3. Subtlety in sin: "Thy tongue devises mischiefs; that is, it speaks
the mischief which thy heart devises." The more there is of craft and
contrivance in any wickedness the more there is of the devil in it. 4.
Affection to sin: "Thou lovest evil more than good; that is, thou lovest
evil, and hast no love at all to that which is good; thou takest delight
in lying, and makest no conscience of doing right. Thou wouldst rather
please Saul by telling a lie than please God by speaking truth." Those
are of Doeg's spirit who, instead of being pleased (as we ought all to
be) with an opportunity of doing a man a kindness in his body, estate,
or good name, are glad when they have a fair occasion to do a man a
mischief, and readily close with an opportunity of that kind; that is
loving evil more than good. It is bad to speak devouring words, but it
is worse to love them either in others or in ourselves.

III\. He reads his doom and denounces the judgments of God against him
for his wickedness ([Psa 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005)): "Thou
hast destroyed the priests of the Lord and cut them off, and therefore
God shall likewise destroy thee for ever." Sons of perdition actively
shall be sons of perdition passively, as Judas and the man of sin.
Destroyers shall be destroyed; those especially that hate, and
persecute, and destroy the priests of the Lord, his ministers and
people, who are made to our God priests, a royal priesthood, shall be
taken away with a swift and everlasting destruction. Doeg is here
condemned, 1. To be driven out of the church: He shall pluck thee out of
the tabernacle, not thy dwelling-place, but God's (so it is most
probably understood); "thou shalt be cut off from the favour of God, and
his presence, and all communion with him, and shalt have no benefit
either by oracle or offering." Justly was he deprived of all the
privileges of God's house who had been so mischievous to his servants;
he had come sometimes to God's tabernacle, and attended in his courts,
but he was detained there; he was weary of his service, and sought an
opportunity to defame his family; it was very fit therefore that he
should be taken away, and plucked out thence; we should forbid any one
our house that should serve us so. Note, We forfeit the benefit of
ordinances if we make an ill use of them. 2. To be driven out of the
world; "He shall root thee out of the land of the living, in which thou
thoughtest thyself so deeply rooted." When good men die they are
transplanted from the land of the living on earth, the nursery of the
plants of righteousness, to that in heaven, the garden of the Lord,
where they shall take root for ever; but, when wicked men die, they are
rooted out of the land of the living, to perish for ever, as fuel to the
fire of divine wrath. This will be the portion of those that contend
with God.

[Psalms 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 52:6</span></span>

David was at this time in great distress; the mischief Doeg had done him
was but the beginning of his sorrows; and yet here we have him
triumphing, and that is more than rejoicing, in tribulation. Blessed
Paul, in the midst of his troubles, is in the midst of his triumphs,
[Co2 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#014). David here triumphs,

I. In the fall of Doeg. Yet, lest this should look like personal
revenge, he does not speak of it as how own act, but the language of
other righteous persons. They shall observe God's judgments on Doeg, and
speak of them, 1. To the glory of God: They shall see and fear ([Psa
52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006)); that is, they shall reverence
the justice of God, and stand in awe of him, as a God of almighty power,
before whom the proudest sinner cannot stand and before whom therefore
we ought every one of us to humble ourselves. Note, God's judgments on
the wicked should strike an awe upon the righteous and make them afraid
of offending God and incurring his displeasure, [Psa
119:120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120); [Rev
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003), [Rev
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#004). 2. To the shame of Doeg. They
shall laugh at him, not with a ludicrous, but a rational serious
laughter, as he that sits in heaven shall laugh at him, [Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004). He shall appear ridiculous, and
worthy to be laughed at. We are told how they shall triumph in God's
just judgments on him ([Psa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007)): Lo,
this is the man that made not God his strength. The fall and ruin of a
wealthy mighty man cannot but be generally taken notice of, and every
one is apt to make his remarks upon it; now this is the remark which the
righteous should make upon Doeg's fall, that no better could come of it,
since he took the wrong method of establishing himself in his wealth and
power. If a newly-erected fabric tumbles down, every one immediately
enquires where was the fault in the building of it. Now that which
ruined Doeg's prosperity was, (1.) That he did not build it upon a rock:
He made not God his strength, that is, he did not think that the
continuance of his prosperity depended upon the favour of God, and
therefore took no care to make sure that favour nor to keep himself in
God's love, made no conscience of his duty to him nor sought him in the
least. Those wretchedly deceive themselves that think to support
themselves in their power and wealth without God and religion. (2.) That
he did build it upon the sand. He thought his wealth would support
itself: He trusted in the abundance of his riches, which, he imagined,
were laid up for many years; nay, he thought his wickedness would help
to support it. He was resolved to stick at nothing for the securing and
advancing of his honour and power. Right or wrong, he would get what he
could and keep what he had, and be the ruin of any one that stood in his
way; and this, he thought, would strengthen him. Those may have any
thing that will make conscience of nothing. But now see what it comes
to; see what untempered mortar he built his house with, now that it has
fallen and he is himself buried in the ruins of it.

II\. In his own stability, [Psa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008),
[Psa 52:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#009). "This mighty man is plucked
up by the roots; but I am like a green olive-tree, planted and rooted,
fixed and flourishing; he is turned out of God's dwelling-place, but I
am established in it, not detained, as Doeg, by any thing but the
abundant satisfaction I meet with there." Note, Those that by faith and
love dwell in the house of God shall be like green olive-trees there;
the wicked are said to flourish like a green bay-tree ([Psa
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035)), which bears no useful fruit,
though it has abundance of large leaves; but the righteous flourish like
a green olive-tree, which is fat as well as flourishing ([Psa
92:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#014)) and with its fatness honours
God and man ([Jdg 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#009)), deriving its
root and fatness from the good olive, [Rom
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017). Now what must we do that we may
be as green olive-trees? 1. We must live a life of faith and holy
confidence in God and his grace? "I see what comes of men's trusting in
the abundance of their riches, and therefore I trust in the mercy of God
for ever and ever - not in the world, but in God, not in my own merit,
but in God's mercy, which dispenses its gifts freely, even to the
unworthy, and has in it an all-sufficiency to be our portion and
happiness." This mercy is for ever; it is constant and unchangeable, and
its gifts will continue to all eternity. We must therefore for ever
trust in it, and never come off from that foundation. 2. We must live a
life of thankfulness and holy joy in God ([Psa
52:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#009)): "I will praise thee for ever,
because thou hast done it, has avenged the blood of thy priests upon
their bloody enemy, and given him blood to drink, and hast performed thy
promise to me," which he was as sure would be done in due time as if it
were done already. It contributes very much to the beauty of our
profession, and to our fruitfulness in every grace, to be much in
praising God; and it is certain that we never want matter for praise. 3.
We must live a life of expectation and humble dependence upon God: "I
will wait on thy name; I will attend upon thee in all those ways wherein
thou hast made thyself known, hoping for the discoveries of thy favour
to me and willing to tarry till the time appointed for them; for it is
good before thy saints," or in the opinion and judgment of thy saints,
with whom David heartily concurs. Communis sensus fidelium - All the
saints are of this mind, (1.) That God's name is good in itself, that
God's manifestations of himself to his people are gracious and very
kind; there is no other name given than his that can be our refuge and
strong tower. (2.) That it is very good for us to wait on that name,
that there is nothing better to calm and quiet our spirits when they are
ruffled and disturbed, and to keep us in the way of duty when we are
tempted to use any indirect courses for our own relief, than to hope and
quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord, [Lam
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#026). All the saints have experienced
the benefit of it, who never attended him in vain, never followed his
guidance but it ended well, nor were ever made ashamed of their
believing expectations from him. What is good before all the saints let
us therefore abide and abound in, and in this particularly: Turn thou to
thy God; keep mercy and judgment, and wait on thy God continually, [Hos
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#006).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 53](psa053)

</div>
