<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa047)  [Next](psa049) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 48](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 48:0</span></span>

This psalm, as the two former, is a triumphant song; some think it was
penned on occasion of Jehoshaphat's victory (2 Chr. 20), others of
Sennacherib's defeat, when his army laid siege to Jerusalem in
Hezekiah's time; but, for aught I know, it might be penned by David upon
occasion of some eminent victory obtained in his time; yet not so
calculated for that but that it might serve any other similar occasion
in aftertimes, and be applicable also to the glories of the gospel
church, of which Jerusalem was a type, especially when it shall come to
be a church triumphant, the "heavenly Jerusalem" ([Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022)), "the Jerusalem which is
above," [Gal 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026). Jerusalem is here
praised, I. For its relation to God ([Psa
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001), [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002)). II. For God's care of it ([Psa
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#003)). III. For the terror it strikes
upon its enemies ([Psa 48:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#004)). IV.
For the pleasure it gives to its friends, who delight to think, 1. Of
what God has done, does, and will do for it ([Psa
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#003)). 2. Of the gracious discoveries
he makes of himself in and for that holy city ([Psa
48:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#009), [Psa
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#010)). 3. Of the effectual provision
which is made for its safety ([Psa
48:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#011)). 4. Of the assurance we have
of the perpetuity of God's covenant with the children of Zion ([Psa
48:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#014)). In singing this psalm we must
be affected with the privilege we have as members of the gospel church,
and must express and excite our sincere good-will to all its interests.

A song and psalm for the sons of Korah.

[Psalms 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 48:1</span></span>

The psalmist is designing to praise Jerusalem and to set forth the
grandeur of that city; but he begins with the praises of God and his
greatness ([Psa 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001)), and ends with
the praises of God and his goodness, [Psa
48:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#014). For, whatever is the subject of
our praises, God must be both the Alpha and Omega of them. And,
particularly, whatever is said to the honour of the church must redound
to the honour of the church's God.

What is here said to the honour of Jerusalem is,

I. That the King of heaven owns it: it is the city of our God ([Psa
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001)), which he chose out of all the
cities of Israel to put his name there. Of Zion he said kinder things
than ever he said of place upon earth. This is my rest for ever; here
will I dwell, for I have desired it, [Psa
132:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#013), [Psa
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014). It is the city of the great
King ([Psa 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002)), the King of all the
earth, who is pleased to declare himself in a special manner present
there. This our Saviour quotes to prove that to swear by Jerusalem is
profanely to swear by God himself ([Mat
5:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#035)), for it is the city of the great
King, who has chosen it for the special residence of his grace, as
heaven is of his glory. 1. It is enlightened with the knowledge of God.
In Judah God is known, and his name is great, but especially in
Jerusalem, the head-quarters of the priests, whose lips were to keep
this knowledge. In Jerusalem God is great ([Psa
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001)) who in other places was made
little of, was made nothing of. Happy the kingdom, the city, the family,
the heart, in which God is great, in which he is uppermost, in which he
is all. There God is known ([Psa 48:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#003))
and where he is known he will be great; none contemn God but those that
are ignorant of him. 2. It is devoted to the honour of God. It is
therefore called the mountain of his holiness, for holiness to the Lord
is written upon it and all the furniture of it, [Zac
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#020), [Zac
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#021). This is the privilege of the
church of Christ, that it is a holy nation, a peculiar people;
Jerusalem, the type of it, is called the holy city, bad as it was ([Mat
27:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#053)), till that was set up, but
never after. 3. It is the place appointed for the solemn service and
worship of God; there he is greatly praised, and greatly to be praised,
[Psa 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001). Note, The clearer
discoveries are made to us of God and his greatness the more it is
expected that we should abound in his praises. Those that from all parts
of the country brought their offerings to Jerusalem had reason to be
thankful that God would not only permit them thus to attend him, but
promise to accept them, and meet them with a blessing, and reckon
himself praised and honoured by their services. Herein Jerusalem
typified the gospel church; for what little tribute of praise God has
from this earth arises from that church upon earth, which is therefore
his tabernacle among men. 4. It is taken under his special protection
([Psa 48:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#003)): He is known for a refuge;
that is, he has approved himself such a one, and as such a one he is
there applied to by his worshippers. Those that know him will trust in
him, and seek to him, [Psa 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010). God
was known, not only in the streets, but even in the palaces of
Jerusalem, for a refuge; the great men had recourse to God and
acquaintance with him. And then religion was likely to flourish in the
city when it reigned in the palaces. 5. Upon all these accounts,
Jerusalem, and especially Mount Zion, on which the temple was built,
were universally beloved and admired - beautiful for situation, and the
joy of the whole earth, [Psa 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002). The
situation must needs be every way agreeable, when Infinite Wisdom chose
it for the place of the sanctuary; and that which made it beautiful was
that it was the mountain of holiness, for there is a beauty in holiness.
This earth is, by sin, covered with deformity, and therefore justly
might that spot of ground which was thus beautified with holiness he
called the joy of the whole earth, that is, what the whole earth had
reason to rejoice in, that God would thus in very deed dwell with man
upon the earth. Mount Zion was on the north side of Jerusalem, and so
was a shelter to the city from the cold and bleak winds that blew from
that quarter; or, if fair weather was expected out of the north, they
were thus directed to look Zion-ward for it.

II\. That the kings of the earth were afraid of it. That God was known
in their palaces for a refuge they had had a late instance, and a very
remarkable one. Whatever it was, 1. They had had but too much occasion
to fear their enemies; for the kings were assembled, [Psa
48:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#004). The neighbouring princes were
confederate against Jerusalem; their heads and horns, their policies and
powers, were combined for its ruin; they were assembled with all their
forces; they passed, advanced, and marched on together, not doubting but
they should soon make themselves masters of that city which should have
been the joy, but was the envy of the whole earth. 2. God made their
enemies to fear them. The very sight of Jerusalem struck them into a
consternation and gave check to their fury, as the sight of the tents of
Jacob frightened Balaam from his purpose to curse Israel ([Num
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#002)): They saw it and marvelled, and
hasted away, [Psa 48:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005). Not Veni,
vidi, vici - I came, I saw, I conquered; but, on the contrary, Veni vidi
victus sum - I came, I saw, I was defeated. Not that there was any thing
to be seen in Jerusalem that was so very formidable; but the sight of it
brought to mind what they had heard concerning the special presence of
God in that city and the divine protection it was under, and God
impressed such terrors on their minds thereby as made them retire with
precipitation. Though they were kings, though they were many in
confederacy, yet they knew themselves an unequal match for Omnipotence,
and therefore fear came upon them, and pain, [Psa
48:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#006). Note, God can dispirit the
stoutest of his church's enemies, and soon put those in pain that live
at ease. The fright they were in upon the sight of Jerusalem is here
compared to the throes of a woman in travail, which are sharp and
grievous, which sometimes come suddenly ([Th1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)), which cannot be avoided, and
which are effects of sin and the curse. The defeat hereby given to their
designs upon Jerusalem is compared to the dreadful work made with a
fleet of ships by a violent storm, when some are split, others
shattered, all dispersed ([Psa 48:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#007)):
Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an east wind; effects at sea
lie thus exposed. The terrors of God are compared to an east wind ([Job
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#020), [Job
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#021)); these shall put them into
confusion, and break all their measures. Who knows the power of God's
anger?

[Psalms 48:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 48:8</span></span>

We have here the good use and improvement which the people of God are
taught to make of his late glorious and gracious appearances for them
against their enemies, that they might work for their good.

I. Let our faith in the word of God be hereby confirmed. If we compare
what God has done with what he has spoken, we shall find that, as we
have heard, so have we seen ([Psa
48:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#008)), and what we have seen obliges
us to believe what we have heard. 1. "As we have heard done in former
providences, in the days of old, so have we seen done in our own days."
Note, God's latter appearances for his people against his and their
enemies are consonant to his former appearances, and should put us in
mind of them. 2. "As we have heard in the promise and prediction, so
have we seen in the performance and accomplishment. We have heard that
God is the Lord of hosts, and that Jerusalem is the city of our God, is
dear to him, is his particular care; and now we have seen it; we have
seen the power of our God; we have seen his goodness; we have seen his
care and concern for us, that he is a wall of fire round about Jerusalem
and the glory in the midst of her." Note, In the great things that God
has done, and is doing, for his church, it is good to take notice of the
fulfilling of the scriptures; and this would help us the better to
understand both the providence itself and the scripture that is
fulfilled in it.

II\. Let our hope of the stability and perpetuity of the church be
hereby encouraged. "From what we have seen, compared with what we have
heard, in the city of our God, we may conclude that God will establish
it for ever." This was not fulfilled in Jerusalem (that city was long
since destroyed, and all its glory laid in the dust), but has its
accomplishment in the gospel church. We are sure that that shall be
established for ever; it is built upon a rock, and the gates of hell
cannot prevail against it, [Mat 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018).
God himself has undertaken the establishment of it; it is the Lord that
has founded Zion, [Isa 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#032). And what
we have seen, compared with what we have heard, may encourage us to hope
in that promise of God upon which the church is built.

III\. Let our minds be hereby filled with good thoughts of God. "From
what we have heard, and seen, and hope for, we may take occasion to
think much of God's loving-kindness, whenever we meet in the midst of
his temple," [Psa 48:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#009). All the
streams of mercy that flow down to us must be traced up to the fountain
of God's lovingkindness. It is not owing to any merit of ours, but
purely to his mercy, and the peculiar favour he bears to his people.
This therefore we must think of with delight, think of frequently and
fixedly. What subject can we dwell upon more noble, more pleasant, more
profitable? We must have God's lovingkindness always before our eyes
([Psa 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#003)), especially when we attend
upon him in his temple. When we enjoy the benefit of public ordinances
undisturbed, when we meet in his temple and there is none to make us
afraid, we should take occasion thence to think of his lovingkindness.

IV\. Let us give to God the glory of the great things which he has done
for us, and mention them to his honour ([Psa
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#010)): "According to thy name, O God!
so is thy praise, not only in Jerusalem, but to the ends of the earth."
By the late signal deliverance of Jerusalem God had made himself a name;
that is, he had gloriously discovered his wisdom, power, and goodness,
and made all the nations about sensible of it; and so was his praise;
that is, some in all parts would be found giving glory to him
accordingly. As far as his name goes his praise will go, at least it
should go, and, at length, it shall go, when all the ends of the world
shall praise him, [Psa 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027); [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015). Some, by his name, understand
especially that glorious name of his, the Lord of hosts; according to
that name, so is his praise; for all the creatures, even to the ends of
the earth, are under his command. But his people must, in a special
manner, acknowledge his justice in all he does for them. "Righteousness
fills thy right hand;" that is, all the operations of thy power are
consonant to the eternal rules of equity.

V. Let all the members of the church in particular take to themselves
the comfort of what God does for his church in general ([Psa
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#011)): "Let Mount Zion rejoice, the
priests and Levites that attend the sanctuary, and then let all the
daughters of Judah, the country towns, and the inhabitants of them, be
glad: let the women in their songs and dances, as usual on occasion of
public joys, celebrate with thankfulness the great salvation which God
has wrought for us." Note, When we have given God the praise we may then
take the pleasure of the extraordinary deliverances of the church, and
be glad because of God's judgments (that is, the operations of his
providence), all which we may see wrought in wisdom (therefore called
judgments) and working for the good of his church.

VI\. Let us diligently observe the instances and evidences of the
church's beauty, strength, and safety, and faithfully transmit our
observations to those that shall come after us ([Psa
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#012), [Psa
48:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#013)): Walk about Zion. Some think
this refers to the ceremony of the triumph; let those who are employed
in that solemnity walk round the walls (as they did, [Neh
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#031)), singing and praising God. In
doing this let them tell the towers and mark well the bulwarks, 1. That
they might magnify the late wonderful deliverance God had wrought for
them. Let them observe, with wonder, that the towers and bulwarks are
all in their full strength and none of them damaged, the palaces in
their beauty and none of them blemished; there is not the least damage
done to the city by the kings that were assembled against it ([Psa
48:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#004)): Tell this to the generation
following, as a wonderful instance of God's care of his holy city, that
the enemies should not only not ruin or destroy it, but not so much as
hurt or deface it. 2. That they might fortify themselves against the
fear of the like threatening danger another time. And so, (1.) We may
understand it literally of Jerusalem, and the strong-hold of Zion. Let
the daughters of Judah see the towers and bulwarks of Zion, with a
pleasure equal to the terror with which the kings their enemies saw
them, [Psa 48:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005). Jerusalem was
generally looked upon as an impregnable place, as appears, [Lam
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#012). All the inhabitants of the world
would not have believed that an enemy should enter the gates of
Jerusalem; nor could they have entered if the inhabitants had not sinned
away their defence. Set your heart to her bulwarks. This intimates that
the principal bulwarks of Zion were not the objects of sense, which they
might set their eye upon, but the objects of faith, which they must set
their hearts upon. It was well enough fortified indeed both by nature
and art; but its bulwarks that were mostly to be relied upon were the
special presence of God in it, the beauty of holiness he had put upon
it, and the promises he had made concerning it. "Consider Jerusalem's
strength, and tell it to the generations to come, that they may do
nothing to weaken it, and that, if at any time it be in distress, they
may not basely surrender it to the enemy as not tenable." Calvin
observes here that when they are directed to transmit to posterity a
particular account of the towers, and bulwarks, and palaces of
Jerusalem, it is intimated that in process of time they would all be
destroyed and remain no longer to be seen; for, otherwise, what need was
thee to preserve the description and history of them? When the disciples
were admiring the buildings of the temple their Master told them that in
a little time one stone of it should not be left upon another, [Mat
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001), [Mat
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#002). Therefore, (2.) This must
certainly be applied to the gospel church, that Mount Zion, [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022). "Consider the towers, and
bulwarks, and palaces of that, that you may be invited and encouraged to
join yourselves to it and embark in it. See it founded on Christ, the
rock fortified by the divine power, guarded by him that neither slumbers
nor sleeps. See what precious ordinances are its palaces, what precious
promises are its bulwarks; tell this to the generation following, that
they may with purpose of heart espouse its interests and cleave to it."

VII\. Let us triumph in God, and in the assurances we have of his
everlasting lovingkindness, [Psa
48:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#014). Tell this to the generation
following; transmit this truth as a sacred deposit to your posterity,
That this God, who has now done such great things for us, is our God for
ever and ever; he is constant and unchangeable in his love to us and
care for us. 1. If God be our God, he is ours for ever, not only through
all the ages of time, but to eternity; for it is the everlasting
blessedness of glorified saints that God himself will be with them and
will be their God, [Rev 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003). 2. If he
be our God, he will be our guide, our faithful constant guide, to show
us our way and to lead us in it; he will be so, even unto death, which
will be the period of our way, and will bring us to our rest. He will
lead and keep us even to the last. He will be our guide above death (so
some); he will so guide us as to set us above the reach of death, so
that it shall not be able to do us any real hurt. He will be our guide
beyond death (so others); he will conduct us safely to a happiness on
the other side death, to a life in which there shall be no more death.
If we take the Lord for our God, he will conduct and convey us safely to
death, through death, and beyond death - down to death and up again to
glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 49](psa049)

</div>
