<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](job042)  [Next](psa001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 0:0</span></span>

An Exposition, with Practical Observations, of The Book of Psalms

We have now before us one of the choicest and most excellent parts of
all the Old Testament; nay, so much is there in it of Christ and his
gospel, as well as of God and his law, that it had been called the
abstract, or summary, of both Testaments. The History of Israel, which
we were long upon, let us to camps and council-boards, and there
entertained and instructed us in the knowledge of God. The book of Job
brought us into the schools, and treated us with profitable disputations
concerning God and his providence. But this book brings us into the
sanctuary, draws us off from converse with men, with the politicians,
philosophers, or disputers of this world, and directs us into communion
with God, by solacing and reposing our souls in him, lifting up and
letting out our hearts towards him. Thus may we be in the mount with
God; and we understand not our interests if we say not, It is good to be
here. Let us consider,

I. The title of this book. It is called, 1. The Psalms; under that title
it is referred to, [Luk 24:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044). The
Hebrew calls it Tehillim, which properly signifies Psalms of praise,
because many of them are such; but Psalms is a more general word,
meaning all metrical compositions fitted to be sung, which may as well
be historical, doctrinal, or supplicatory, as laudatory. Though singing
be properly the voice of joy, yet the intention of songs is of a much
greater latitude, to assist the memory, and both to express and to
excite all the other affections as well as this of joy. The priests had
a mournful muse as well as joyful ones; and the divine institution of
singing psalms is thus largely intended; for we are directed not only to
praise God, but to teach and admonish ourselves and one another in
psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, [Col
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#016). 2. It is called the Book of
Psalms; so it is quoted by St. Peter, [Act
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020). It is a collection of psalms, of
all the psalms that were divinely inspired, which, though composed at
several times and upon several occasions, are here put together without
any reference to or dependence upon one another; thus they were
preserved from being scattered and lost, and were in so much greater
readiness for the service of the church. See what a good master we
serve, and what pleasantness there is in wisdom's ways, when we are not
only commanded to sing at our work, and have cause enough given us to do
so, but have words also put in our mouths and songs prepared to our
hands.

II\. The author of this book. It is, no doubt, derived originally from
the blessed Spirit. They are spiritual songs, words which the Holy Ghost
taught. The penman of most of them was David the son of Jesse, who is
therefore called the sweet psalmist of Israel, [Sa2
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001). Some that have not his name in
their titles yet are expressly ascribed to him elsewhere, as [Psa
2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001) ([Act
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#025)) and [Psa
96:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001) and 105 (1 Chr. 16). One psalm
is expressly said to be the prayer of Moses (Ps. 90); and that some of
the psalms were penned by Asaph is intimated, [Ch2
29:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#030), where they are said to praise
the Lord in the words of David and Asaph, who is there called a seer or
prophet. Some of the psalms seem to have been penned long after, as [Psa
137:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001), at the time of the captivity
in Babylon; but the far greater part of them were certainly penned by
David himself, whose genius lay towards poetry and music, and who was
raised up, qualified, and animated, for the establishing of the
ordinance of singing psalms in the church of God, as Moses and Aaron
were, in their day, for the settling of the ordinances of sacrifice;
theirs is superseded, but his remains, and will to the end of time, when
it shall be swallowed up in the songs of eternity. Herein David was a
type of Christ, who descended from him, not from Moses, because he came
to take away sacrifice (the family of Moses was soon lost and extinct),
but to establish and perpetuate joy and praise; for of the family of
David in Christ there shall be no end.

III\. The scope of it. It is manifestly intended, 1. To assist the
exercises of natural religion, and to kindle in the souls of men those
devout affections which we owe to God as our Creator, owner, ruler, and
benefactor. The book of Job helps to prove our first principles of the
divine perfections and providence; but this helps to improve them in
prayers and praises, and professions of desire towards him, dependence
on him, and an entire devotedness and resignation to him. Other parts of
scripture show that God is infinitely above man, and his sovereign Lord;
but this shows us that he may, notwithstanding, be conversed with by us
sinful worms of the earth; and there are ways in which, if it be not our
own fault, we may keep up communion with him in all the various
conditions of human life. 2. To advance the excellencies of revealed
religion, and in the most pleasing powerful manner to recommend it to
the world. There is indeed little or nothing of the ceremonial law in
all the book of Psalms. Though sacrifice and offering were yet to
continue many ages, yet they are here represented as things which God
did not desire ([Psa 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006), [Psa
51:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016)), as things comparatively
little, and which in time were to vanish away. But the word and law of
God, those parts of it which are moral and of perpetual obligation are
here all along magnified and made honourable, nowhere more. And Christ,
the crown and centre of revealed religion, the foundation, corner, and
top-stone, of that blessed building, is here clearly spoken of in type
and prophecy, his sufferings and the glory that should follow, and the
kingdom that he should set up in the world, in which God's covenant with
David, concerning his kingdom, was to have its accomplishment. What a
high value does this book put upon the word of God, his statutes and
judgments, his covenant and the great and precious promises of it; and
how does it recommend them to us as our guide and stay, and our heritage
for ever!

IV\. The use of it. All scripture, being given by inspiration of God, is
profitable to convey divine light into our understandings; but this book
is of singular use with that to convey divine life and power, and a holy
warmth, into our affections. There is no one book of scripture that is
more helpful to the devotions of the saints than this, and it has been
so in all ages of the church, ever since it was written and the several
parts of it were delivered to the chief musician for the service of the
church. 1. It is of use to be sung. Further than David's psalms we may
go, but we need not, for hymns and spiritual songs. What the rules of
the Hebrew metre were even the learned are not certain. But these psalms
ought to be rendered according to the metre of every language, at least
so as that they may be sung for the edification of the church. And
methinks it is a great comfort to us, when we are singing David's
psalms, that we are offering the very same praises to God that were
offered to him in the days of David and the other godly kings of Judah.
So rich, so well made, are these divine poems, that they can never be
exhausted, can never be worn thread-bare. 2. It is of use to be read and
opened by the ministers of Christ, as containing great and excellent
truths, and rules concerning good and evil. Our Lord Jesus expounded the
psalms to his disciples, the gospel psalms, and opened their
understandings (for he had the key of David) to understand them, [Luk
24:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044). 3. It is of use to be read and
meditated upon by all good people. It is a full fountain, out of which
we may all be drawing water with joy. (1.) The Psalmist's experiences
are of great use for our direction, caution, and encouragement. In
telling us, as he often does, what passed between God and his soul, he
lets us know what we may expect from God, and what he will expect, and
require, and graciously accept, from us. David was a man after God's own
heart, and therefore those who find themselves in some measure according
to his heart have reason to hope that they are renewed by the grace of
God, after the image of God, and many have much comfort in the testimony
of their consciences for them that they can heartily say Amen to David's
prayers and praises. (2.) Even the Psalmist's expressions too are of
great use; and by them the Spirit helps our praying infirmities, because
we know not what to pray for as we ought. In all our approaches to God,
as well as in our first returns to God, we are directed to take with us
words ([Hos 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002)), these word, words
which the Holy Ghost teaches. If we make David's psalms familiar to us,
as we ought to do, whatever errand we have at the throne of grace, by
way of confession, petition, or thanksgiving, we may thence be assisted
in the delivery of it; whatever devout affection is working in us, holy
desire or hope, sorrow or joy, we may there find apt words wherewith to
clothe it, sound speech which cannot be condemned. It will be good to
collect the most proper and lively expressions of devotion which we find
here, and to methodize them, and reduce them to the several heads of
prayer, that they may be the more ready to us. Or we may take sometimes
one choice psalm and sometimes another, and pray it over, that is,
enlarge upon each verse in our own thoughts, and offer up our
meditations to God as they arise from the expressions we find there. The
learned Dr. Hammond, in his preface to his paraphrase on the Psalms
(sect. 29), says, "That going over a few psalms with these
interpunctions of mental devotion, suggested, animated, and maintained,
by the native life and vigour which is in the psalms, is much to be
preferred before the saying over the whole Psalter, since nothing is
more fit to be averted in religious offices than their degenerating into
heartless dispirited recitations." If, as St. Austin advises, we form
our spirit by the affection of the psalm, we may then be sure of
acceptance with God in using the language of it. Nor is it only our
devotion, and the affections of our mind, that the book of Psalms
assists, teaching us how to offer praise so as to glorify God, but, it
is also a directory to the actions of our lives, and teaches us how to
order our conversation aright, so as that, in the end, we may see the
salvation of God, [Psa 50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023). The
Psalms were thus serviceable to the Old Testament church, but to us
Christians they may be of more use than they could be to those who lived
before the coming of Christ; for, as Moses's sacrifices, so David's
songs, are expounded and made more intelligible by the gospel of Christ,
which lets us within the veil; so that if to David's prayers and praises
we all St. Paul's prayers in his epistles, and the new songs in the
Revelation, we shall be thoroughly furnished for this good work; for the
scripture, perfected, makes the man of God perfect.

As to the division of this book, we need not be solicitous; there is no
connexion (or very seldom) between one psalm and another, nor any reason
discernable for the placing of them in the order wherein we here find
them; but it seems to be ancient, for that which is now the second psalm
was so in the apostles' time, [Act
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033). The vulgar Latin joins the 9th
and 10th together; all popish authors quote by that, so that,
thenceforward, throughout the book, their number is one short of ours;
our 11 is their 10, our 119 is their 118. But they divide the 147th into
two, and so make up the number of 150. Some have endeavoured to reduce
the psalms to proper heads, according to the matter of them, but there
is often such a variety of matter in one and the same psalm that this
cannot be done with any certainty. But the seven penitential Psalms have
been in a particular manner singled out by the devotions of many. They
are reckoned to be [Psa 6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001), [Psa
32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001), 38, 51,102, [Psa
130:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#001), and [Psa
143:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#001). The Psalms were divided into
five books, each concluding with Amen, Amen, or Hallelujah; the first
ending with [Psa 41:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001), the second
with Ps. 72, the third with Ps. 89, the fourth with Ps. 106, the fifth
with [Psa 150:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001). Others divide them
into three fifties; others into sixty parts, two for every day of the
month, one for the morning, the other for the evening. Let good
Christians divide them for themselves, so as may best increase their
acquaintance with them, that they may have them at hand upon all
occasions and may sing them in the spirit and with the understanding.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 1](psa001)

</div>
