<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa028)  [Next](psa030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 29:0</span></span>

It is the probable conjecture of some very good interpreters that David
penned this psalm upon occasion, and just at the time, of a great storm
of thunder, lightning, and rain, as the eighth psalm was his meditation
in a moon-light night and the nineteenth in a sunny morning. It is good
to take occasion from the sensible operations of God's power in the
kingdom of nature to give glory to him. So composed was David, and so
cheerful, even in a dreadful tempest, when others trembled, that then he
penned this psalm; for, "though the earth be removed, yet will we not
fear." I. He calls upon the great ones of the world to give glory to God
([Psa 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001), [Psa
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#002)). II. To convince them of the
goodness of that God whom they were to adore, he takes notice of his
power and terror in the thunder, and lightning, and thunder-showers
([Psa 29:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#003)), his sovereign dominion
over the world ([Psa 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#010)), and his
special favour to his church ([Psa
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#011)). Great and high thoughts of God
should fill us in singing this psalm.

A psalm of David.

[Psalms 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 29:1</span></span>

In this psalm we have,

I. A demand of the homage of the great men of the earth to be paid to
the great God. Every clap of thunder David interpreted as a call to
himself and other princes to give glory to the great God. Observe, 1.
Who they are that are called to this duty: "O you mighty ([Psa
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001)), you sons of the mighty, who
have power, and on whom that power is devolved by succession and
inheritance, who have royal blood running in your veins!" It is much for
the honour of the great God that the men of this world should pay their
homage to him; and they are bound to do it, not only because, high as
they are, he is infinitely above them, and therefore they must bow to
him, but because they have their power from him, and are to use it for
him, and this tribute of acknowledgment they owe to him for it. 2. How
often this call is repeated; Give unto the Lord, and again, and a third
time, Give unto the Lord. This intimates that the mighty men are
backward to this duty and are with difficulty persuaded to it, but that
it is of great consequence to the interests of God's kingdom among men
that princes should heartily espouse them. Jerusalem flourishes when the
kings of the earth bring their glory and honour into it, [Rev
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024). 3. What they are called to do -
to give unto the Lord, not as if he needed any thing, or could be
benefited by any gifts of ours, nor as if we had any thing to give him
that is not his own already (Who hath first given to him?), but the
recognition of his glory, and of his dominion over us, he is pleased to
interpret as a gift to him: "Give unto the Lord your own selves, in the
first place, and then your services. Give unto the Lord glory and
strength; acknowledge his glory and strength, and give praise to him as
a God of infinite majesty and irresistible power; and whatever glory or
strength he has by his providence entrusted you with offer it to him, to
be used for his honour, in his service. Give him your crowns; let them
be laid at his feet; give him your sceptres, your swords, your keys, put
all into his hand, that you, in the use of them, may be to him for a
name and a praise." Princes value themselves by their glory and
strength; these they must ascribe to God, owning him to be infinitely
more glorious and powerful than they. This demand of homage from the
mighty must be looked upon as directed either to the grandees of David's
own kingdom, the peers of the realm, the princes of the tribes (and it
is to excite them to a more diligent and constant attendance at God's
altars, in which he had observed them very remiss), or to the
neighbouring kings whom he by his sword had made tributaries to Israel
and now would persuade to become tributaries to the God of Israel.
Crowned heads must bow before the King of kings. What is here said to
the mighty is said to all: Worship God; it is the sum and substance of
the everlasting gospel, [Rev 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006),
[Rev 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#007). Now we have here, (1.) The
nature of religious worship; it is giving to the Lord the glory due to
his name, [Psa 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#002). God's name is
that whereby he has made himself known. There is a glory due to his
name. It is impossible that we should give him all the glory due to his
name; when we have said and done out best for the honour of God's name,
still we come infinitely short of the merit of the subject; but when we
answer that revelation which he has made of himself, with suitable
affections and adorations, then we give him some of that glory which is
due to his name. If we would, in hearing and praying, and other acts of
devotion, receive grace from God, we must make it our business to give
glory to God. (2.) The rule of the performance of religious exercises;
Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness, which denotes, \[1.\] The
object of our worship; the glorious majesty of God is called the beauty
of holiness, [Ch2 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#021). In the
worship of God we must have an eye to his beauty, and adore him, not
only as infinitely awful and therefore to be feared above all, but as
infinitely amiable and therefore to be loved and delighted in above all;
especially we must have an eye to the beauty of his holiness; this the
angels fasten upon in their praises, [Rev
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008). Or, \[2.\] The place of worship.
The sanctuary then was the beauty of holiness, [Psa
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001), [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002); [Jer
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012). The beauty of the sanctuary was
the exact agreement of the worship there performed with the divine
appointment - the pattern in the mount. Now, under the gospel, solemn
assemblies of Christians (which purity is the beauty of) are the places
where God is to be worshipped. Or, \[3.\] The manner of worship. We must
be holy in all our religious performances, devoted to God, and to his
will and glory. There is a beauty in holiness, and it is that which puts
an acceptable beauty upon all the acts of worship.

II\. Good reason given for this demand. We shall see ourselves bound to
give glory to God if we consider,

1\. His sufficiency in himself, intimated in his name Jehovah - I am
that I am, which is repeated here no fewer than eighteen times in this
short psalm, twice in every verse but three, and once in two of those
three; I do not recollect that there is the like in all the book of
psalms. Let the mighty ones of the earth know him by this name and give
him the glory due to it.

2\. His sovereignty over all things. Let those that rule over men know
there is a God that rules over them, that rules over all. The psalmist
here sets forth God's dominion,

(1.) In the kingdom of nature. In the wonderful effects of natural
causes, and the operations of the powers of nature, we ought to take
notice of God's glory and strength, which we are called upon to ascribe
to him; in the thunder, and lightning, and rain, we may see, \[1.\] His
glory. It is the God of glory that thunders (thunders is the noise of
his voice, [Job 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#002)), and it declares
him a God of glory, so awful is the sound of the thunder, and so bright
the flash of its companion, the lightning; to the hearing and to the
sight nothing is more affecting than these, as if by those two learning
senses God would have such proofs of his glory to the minds of men as
should leave the most stupid inexcusable. Some observe that there were
then some particular reasons why thunder should be called the voice of
the Lord, not only because it comes from above, is not under the
direction or foresight of any man, speaks aloud, and reaches far, but
because God often spoke in thunder, particularly at Mount Sinai, and by
thunder discomfited the enemies of Israel. To speak it the voice of the
God of glory, it is here said to be upon the water, upon many waters
([Psa 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#003)); it reaches over the vast
ocean, the waters under the firmament; it rattles among the thick
clouds, the waters above the firmament. Every one that hears the thunder
(his ear being made to tingle with it) will own that the voice of the
Lord is full of majesty ([Psa 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#004)),
enough to make the highest humble (for none can thunder with a voice
like him) and the proudest tremble - for, if his voice be so terrible,
what is his arm? Every time we hear it thunder, let our hearts be
thereby filled with great, and high, and honourable thoughts of God, in
the holy adorings and admirings of whom the power of godliness does so
much consist. O Lord our God! thou art very great. \[2.\] His power
([Psa 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#004).): The voice of the Lord is
powerful, as appears by the effects of it; for it works wonders. Those
that write natural histories relate the prodigious effects of thunder
and lightning, even out of the ordinary course of natural causes, which
must be resolved into the omnipotence of the God of nature. First, Trees
have been rent and split by thunderbolts, [Psa
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#005), [Psa
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#006). The voice of the Lord, in the
thunder, often broke the cedars, even those of Lebanon, the strongest,
the stateliest. Some understand it of the violent winds which shook the
cedars, and sometimes tore off their aspiring tops. Earthquakes also
shook the ground itself on which the trees grew, and made Lebanon and
Sirion to dance; the wilderness of Kadesh also was in like manner shaken
([Psa 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#008)), the trees by winds, the
ground by earthquakes, and both by thunders, of which I incline rather
to understand it. The learned Dr. Hammond understands it of the
consternations and conquest of neighbouring kingdoms that warred with
Israel and opposed David, as the Syrians, whose country lay near the
forest of Lebanon, the Amorites that bordered on Mount Hermon, and the
Moabites and Ammonites that lay about the wilderness of Kadesh.
Secondly. Fires have been kindled by lightnings and houses and churches
thereby consumed; hence we read of hot thunderbolts ([Psa
78:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#048)); accordingly the voice of the
Lord, in the thunder, is here said to divide the flames of fire ([Psa
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#007)), that is, to scatter them upon
the earth, as God sees fit to direct them and do execution by them.
Thirdly, The terror of thunder makes the hinds to calve sooner, and some
think more easily, than otherwise they would. The hind is a timourous
creature, and much affected with the noise of thunder; and no marvel,
when sometimes proud and stout men have been made to tremble at it. The
emperor Caligula would hide himself under his bed when it thundered.
Horace, the poet, owns that he was reclaimed from atheism by the terror
of thunder and lightning, which he describes somewhat like this of
David, lib. 1, ode 34. The thunder is said here to discover the forest,
that is, it so terrifies the wild beasts of the forest that they quit
the dens and thickets in which they hid themselves are so are
discovered. Or it throws down the trees, and so discovers the ground
that was shaded by them. Whenever it thunders let us think of this
psalm; and, whenever we sing this psalm, let us think of the dreadful
thunder-claps we have sometimes heard, and thus bring God's words and
his works together, that by both we may be directed and quickened to
give unto him the glory due unto his name; and let us bless him that
there is another voice of his besides this dreadful one, by which God
now speaks to us, even the still small voice of his gospel, the terror
of which shall not make us afraid.

(2.) In the kingdom of providence, [Psa
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#010). God is to be praised as the
governor of the world of mankind. He sits upon the flood; he sits King
for ever. He not only sits at rest in the enjoyment of himself, but he
sits as King in the throne which he has prepared in the heavens ([Psa
103:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#019)), where he takes cognizance of,
and gives orders about, all the affairs of the children of men, and does
all according to his will, according to the counsel of his will.
Observe, \[1.\] The power of his kingdom: He sits upon the flood. As he
has founded the earth, so he has founded his own throne, upon the
floods, [Psa 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002). The ebbings and
flowings of this lower world, and the agitations and revolutions of the
affairs in it, give not the least shake to the repose nor to the
counsels of the Eternal Mind. The opposition of his enemies is compared
to the flood ([Psa 93:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#003), [Psa
93:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#004)); but the Lord sits upon it; he
crushes it, conquers it, and completes his own purposes in despite of
all the devices that are in men's hearts. The word here translated the
flood is never used but concerning Noah's flood; and therefore some
think it is that which is here spoken of. God did sit upon that flood as
a Judge executing the sentence of his justice upon the world of the
ungodly that was swept away by it. And he still sits upon the flood,
restraining the waters of Noah, that they turn not again to cover the
earth, according to his promise never to destroy the earth any more by a
flood, [Gen 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#011); [Isa
54:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#009). \[2.\] The perpetuity of his
kingdom; He sits King for ever; no period can, or shall, be put to his
government. The administration of his kingdom is consonant to his
counsels from eternity and pursuant to his designs for eternity.

(3.) In the kingdom of grace. Here his glory shines most brightly,
\[1.\] In the adorations he receives from the subjects of that kingdom
([Psa 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#009)). In his temple, where
people attend his discoveries of himself and his mind and attend him
with their praises, every one speaks of his glory. In the world every
man sees it, or at least may behold it afar off ([Job
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#025)); but it is only in the temple,
in the church, that it is spoken of to his honour. All his works do
praise him (that is, they minister matter for praise), but his saints
only do bless him, and speak of his glory of his works, [Psa
145:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#010). \[2.\] In the favours he
bestows upon the subjects of that kingdom, [Psa
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#011). First, He will qualify them for
his service: He will give strength to his people, to fortify them
against every evil work and to furnish them for every good work; out of
weakness they shall be made strong; nay, he will perfect strength in
weakness. Secondly, He will encourage them in his service: He will bless
his people with peace. Peace is a blessing of inestimable value, which
God designs for all his people. The work of righteousness is peace
(great peace have those that love thy law); but much more the crown of
righteousness: the end of righteousness is peace; it is endless peace.
When the thunder of God's wrath shall make sinners tremble the saints
shall lift up their heads with joy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 30](psa030)

</div>
