<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa021)  [Next](psa023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 22:0</span></span>

The Spirit of Christ, which was in the prophets, testifies in this
psalm, as clearly and fully as any where in all the Old Testament, "the
sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow" ([Pe1
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011)); of him, no doubt, David here
speaks, and not of himself, or any other man. Much of it is expressly
applied to Christ in the New Testament, all of it may be applied to him,
and some of it must be understood of him only. The providences of God
concerning David were so very extraordinary that we may suppose there
were some wise and good men who then could not but look upon him as a
figure of him that was to come. But the composition of his psalms
especially, in which he found himself wonderfully carried out by the
spirit of prophecy far beyond his own thought and intention, was (we may
suppose) an abundant satisfaction to himself that he was not only a
father of the Messiah, but a figure of him. In this psalm he speaks, I.
Of the humiliation of Christ (v. 1-21), where David, as a type of
Christ, complains of the very calamitous condition he was in upon many
accounts. 1. He complains, and mixes comforts with his complaints; he
complains ([Psa 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001), [Psa
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002)), but comforts himself ([Psa
22:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#003)), complains again ([Psa
22:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#006)), but comforts himself again,
([Psa 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009), [Psa
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#010)). 2. He complains, and mixes
prayers with his complaints; he complains of the power and rage of his
enemies ([Psa 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012), [Psa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#013), [Psa
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016), [Psa
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018)), of his own bodily weakness and
decay ([Psa 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#014), [Psa
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015), [Psa
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017)); but prays that God would not
be far from him ([Psa 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#011), [Psa
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019)), that he would save and deliver
him ([Psa 22:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019)). II. Of the
exaltation of Christ, that his undertaking should be for the glory of
God ([Psa 22:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022)), for the salvation
and joy of his people ([Psa 22:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#026)),
and for the perpetuating of his own kingdom ([Psa
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#030), [Psa
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#031)). In singing this psalm we must
keep our thoughts fixed upon Christ, and be so affected with his
sufferings as to experience the fellowship of them, and so affected with
his grace as to experience the power and influence of it.

To the chief musician upon Aijeleth Shahar. A psalm of David.

[Psalms 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 22:1</span></span>

Some think they find Christ in the title of this psalm, upon Aijeleth
Shahar - The hind of the morning. Christ is as the swift hind upon the
mountains of spices ([Sol 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#014)), as
the loving hind and the pleasant roe, to all believers ([Pro
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#019)); he giveth goodly words like
Naphtali, who is compared to a hind let loose, [Gen
49:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#021). He is the hind of the morning,
marked out by the counsels of God from eternity, to be run down by those
dogs that compassed him, [Psa 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016).
But others think it denotes only the tune to which the psalm was set. In
these verses we have,

I. A sad complaint of God's withdrawings, [Psa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001), [Psa
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002).

1\. This may be applied to David, or any other child of God, in the want
of the tokens of his favour, pressed with the burden of his displeasure,
roaring under it, as one overwhelmed with grief and terror, crying
earnestly for relief, and, in this case, apprehending himself forsaken
of God, unhelped, unheard, yet calling him, again and again, "My God,"
and continuing to cry day and night to him and earnestly desiring his
gracious returns. Note, (1.) Spiritual desertions are the saints' sorest
afflictions; when their evidences are clouded, divine consolations
suspended, their communion with God interrupted, and the terrors of God
set in array against them, how sad are their spirits, and how sapless
all their comforts! (2.) Even their complaint of these burdens is a good
sign of spiritual life and spiritual senses exercised. To cry out, "My
God, why am I sick? Why am I poor?" would give cause to suspect
discontent and worldliness. But, Why has though forsaken me? is the
language of a heart binding up its happiness in God's favour. (3.) When
we are lamenting God's withdrawings, yet still we must call him our God,
and continue to call upon him as ours. When we want the faith of
assurance we must live by a faith of adherence. "However it be, yet God
is good, and he is mine; though he slay me, yet I trust in him; though
he do not answer me immediately, I will continue praying and waiting;
though he be silent, I will not be silent."

2\. But is must be applied to Christ: for, in the first words of this
complaint, he poured out his soul before God when he was upon the cross
([Mat 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)); probably he proceeded to
the following words, and, some think, repeated the whole psalm, if not
aloud (because they cavilled at the first words), yet to himself. Note,
(1.) Christ, in his sufferings, cried earnestly to his Father for his
favour and presence with him. He cried in the day-time, upon the cross,
and in the night-season, when he was in agony in the garden. He offered
up strong crying and tears to him that was able to save him, and with
some fear too, [Heb 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007). (2.) Yet God
forsook him, was far from helping him, and did not hear him, and it was
this that he complained of more than all his sufferings. God delivered
him into the hands of his enemies; it was by his determinate counsel
that he was crucified and slain, and he did not give in sensible
comforts. But, Christ having made himself sin for us, in conformity
thereunto the Father laid him under the present impressions of his wrath
and displeasure against sin. It pleased the Lord to bruise him and put
him to grief, [Isa 53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010). But even
then he kept fast hold of his relation to his Father as his God, by whom
he was now employed, whom he was now serving, and with whom he should
shortly be glorified.

II\. Encouragement taken, in reference hereunto, [Psa
22:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#003). Though God did not hear him,
did not help him, yet, 1. He will think well of God: "But thou art holy,
not unjust, untrue, nor unkind, in any of thy dispensations. Though thou
dost not immediately come in to the relief of thy afflicted people, yet
though lovest them, art true to thy covenant with them, and dost not
countenance the iniquity of their persecutors, [Hab
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013). And, as thou art infinitely pure
and upright thyself, so thou delightest in the services of thy upright
people: Thou inhabitest the praises of Israel; thou art pleased to
manifest thy glory, and grace, and special presence with thy people, in
the sanctuary, where they attend thee with their praises. There thou art
always ready to receive their homage, and of the tabernacle of meeting
thou hast said, This is my rest for ever." This bespeaks God's wonderful
condescension to his faithful worshippers - (that, though he is attended
with the praises of angels, yet he is pleased to inhabit the praises of
Israel), and it may comfort us in all our complaints - that, though God
seem, for a while, to turn a deaf ear to them, yet he is so well pleased
with his people's praises that he will, in due time, give them cause to
change their note: Hope in God, for I shall yet praise him. Our Lord
Jesus, in his sufferings, had an eye to the holiness of God, to preserve
and advance the honour of that, and of his grace in inhabiting the
praises of Israel notwithstanding the iniquities of their holy things.
2. He will take comfort from the experiences which the saints in former
ages had of the benefit of faith and prayer ([Psa
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#004), [Psa
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#005)): "Our fathers trusted in thee,
cried unto thee, and thou didst deliver them; therefore thou wilt, in
due time, deliver me, for never any that hoped in thee were made ashamed
of their hope, never any that sought thee sought thee in vain. And thou
art still the same in thyself and the same to thy people that ever thou
wast. They were our fathers, and thy people are beloved for the fathers'
sake," [Rom 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028). The entail of the
covenant is designed for the support of the seed of the faithful. He
that was our fathers' God must be ours, and will therefore be ours. Our
Lord Jesus, in his sufferings, supported himself with this - that all
the fathers who were types of him in his sufferings, Noah, Joseph,
David, Jonah, and others, were in due time delivered and were types of
his exaltation too; therefore he knew that he also should not be
confounded, [Isa 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007).

III\. The complaint renewed of another grievance, and that is the
contempt and reproach of men. This complaint is by no means so bitter as
that before of God's withdrawings; but, as that touches a gracious soul,
so this a generous soul, in a very tender part, [Psa
22:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#006). Our fathers were honoured, the
patriarchs in their day, first or last, appeared great in the eye of the
world, Abraham, Moses, David; but Christ is a worm, and no man. It was
great condescension that he became man, a step downwards, which is, and
will be, the wonder of angels; yet, as if it were too much, too great,
to be a man, he becomes a worm, and no man. He was Adam - a mean man,
and Enosh - a man of sorrows, but lo Ish - not a considerable man: for
he took upon him the form of a servant, and his visage was marred more
than any man's, [Isa 52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014). Man, at
the best, is a worm; but he became a worm, and no man. If he had not
made himself a worm, he could not have been trampled upon as he was. The
word signifies such a worm as was used in dyeing scarlet or purple,
whence some make it an allusion to his bloody sufferings. See what
abuses were put upon him. 1. He was reproached as a bad man, as a
blasphemer, a sabbath-breaker, a wine-bibber, a false prophet, an enemy
to Caesar, a confederate with the prince of the devils. 2. He was
despised of the people as a mean contemptible man, not worth taking
notice of, his country in no repute, his relations poor mechanics, his
followers none of the rulers, or the Pharisees, but the mob. 3. He was
ridiculed as a foolish man, and one that not only deceived others, but
himself too. Those that saw him hanging on the cross laughed him to
scorn. So far were they from pitying him, or concerning themselves for
him, that they added to his afflictions, with all the gestures and
expressions of insolence upbraiding him with his fall. They make mouths
at him, make merry over him, and make a jest of his sufferings: They
shoot out the lip, they shake their head, saying, This was he that said
he trusted God would deliver him; now let him deliver him. David was
sometimes taunted for his confidence in God; but in the sufferings of
Christ this was literally and exactly fulfilled. Those very gestures
were used by those that reviled him ([Mat
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039)); they wagged their heads, nay,
and so far did their malice make them forget themselves that they used
the very words ([Mat 27:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#043)), He
trusted in God; let him deliver him. Our Lord Jesus, having undertaken
to satisfy for the dishonour we had done to God by our sins, did it by
submitting to the lowest possible instance of ignominy and disgrace.

IV\. Encouragement taken as to this also ([Psa
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009), [Psa
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#010)): Men despise me, but thou art
he that took me out of the womb. David and other good men have often,
for direction to us, encouraged themselves with this, that God was not
only the God of their fathers, as before ([Psa
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#004)), but the God of their infancy,
who began by times to take care of them, as soon as they had a being,
and therefore, they hope, will never cast them off. He that did so well
for us in that helpless useless state will not leave us when he has
reared us and nursed us up into some capacity of serving him. See the
early instances of God's providential care for us, 1. In the birth: He
took us also out of the womb, else we had died there, or been stifled in
the birth. Every man's particular time begins with this pregnant proof
of God's providence, as time, in general, began with the creation, that
pregnant proof of his being. 2. At the breast: "Then didst thou make me
hope;" that is, "thou didst that for me, in providing sustenance for me
and protecting me from the dangers to which I was exposed, which
encourages me to hope in thee all my days." The blessings of the
breasts, as they crown the blessings of the womb, so they are earnests
of the blessings of our whole lives; surely he that fed us then will
never starve us, [Job 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#012). 3. In our
early dedication to him: I was cast upon thee from the womb, which
perhaps refers to his circumcision on the eighth day; he was then by his
parents committed and given up to God as his God in covenant; for
circumcision was a seal of the covenant; and this encouraged him to
trust in God. Those have reason to think themselves safe who were so
soon, so solemnly, gathered under the wings of the divine majesty. 4. In
the experience we have had of God's goodness to us all along ever since,
drawn out in a constant uninterrupted series of preservations and
supplies: Thou art my God, providing me and watching over me for good,
from my mother's belly, that is, from my coming into the world unto this
day. And if, as soon as we became capable of exercising reason, we put
our confidence in God and committed ourselves and our way to him, we
need not doubt but he will always remember the kindness of our youth and
the love of our espousals, [Jer 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#002).
This is applicable to our Lord Jesus, over whose incarnation and birth
the divine Providence watched with a peculiar care, when he was born in
a stable, laid in a manger, and immediately exposed to the malice of
Herod, and forced to flee into Egypt. When he was a child God loved him
and called him thence ([Hos 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001)), and
the remembrance of this comforted him in his sufferings. Men reproached
him, and discouraged his confidence in God; but God had honoured him and
encouraged his confidence in him.

[Psalms 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 22:11</span></span>

In these verses we have Christ suffering and Christ praying, by which we
are directed to look for crosses and to look up to God under them.

I. Here is Christ suffering. David indeed was often in trouble, and
beset with enemies; but many of the particulars here specified are such
as were never true of David, and therefore must be appropriated to
Christ in the depth of his humiliation.

1\. He is here deserted by his friends: Trouble and distress are near,
and there is none to help, none to uphold, [Psa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#011). He trod the wine-press alone;
for all his disciples forsook him and fled. It is God's honour to help
when all other helps and succours fail.

2\. He is here insulted and surrounded by his enemies, such as were of a
higher rank, who for their strength and fury, are compared to bulls,
strong bulls of Bashan ([Psa 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012)),
fat and fed to the full, haughty and sour; such were the chief priests
and elders that persecuted Christ; and others of a lower rank, who are
compared to dogs ([Psa 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016)), filthy
and greedy, and unwearied in running him down. There was an assembly of
the wicked plotting against him ([Psa
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016)); for the chief priests sat in
council, to consult of ways and means to take Christ. These enemies were
numerous and unanimous: "Many, and those of different and clashing
interests among themselves, as Herod and Pilate, have agreed to compass
me. They have carried their plot far, and seem to have gained their
point, for they have beset me round, [Psa
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012). They have enclosed me, [Psa
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016). They are formidable and
threatening ([Psa 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#013)): They gaped
upon me with their mouths, to show me that they would swallow me up; and
this with as much strength and fierceness as a roaring ravening lion
leaps upon his prey."

3\. He is here crucified. The very manner of his death is described,
though never in use among the Jews: They pierced my hands and my feet
([Psa 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016)), which were nailed to the
accursed tree, and the whole body left so to hang, the effect of which
must needs be the most exquisite pain and torture. There is no one
passage in all the Old Testament which the Jews have so industriously
corrupted as this, because it is such an eminent prediction of the death
of Christ and was so exactly fulfilled.

4\. He is here dying ([Psa 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#014), [Psa
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015)), dying in pain and anguish,
because he was to satisfy for sin, which brought in pain, and for which
we must otherwise have lain in everlasting anguish. Here is, (1.) The
dissolution of the whole frame of his body: I am poured out like water,
weak as water, and yielding to the power of death, emptying himself of
all the supports of his human nature. (2.) The dislocation of his bones.
Care was taken that not one of them should be broken ([Joh
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036)), but they were all out of joint
by the violent stretching of his body upon the cross as upon a rack. Or
it may denote the fear that seized him in his agony in the garden, when
he began to be sore amazed, the effect of which perhaps was (as
sometimes it has been of great fear, [Dan
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#006)), that the joints of his loins
were loosed and his knees smote one against another. His bones were put
out of joint that he might put the whole creation into joint again,
which sin had put out of joint, and might make our broken bones to
rejoice. (3.) The colliquation of his spirits: My heart is like wax,
melted to receive the impressions of God's wrath against the sins he
undertook to satisfy for, melting away like the vitals of a dying man;
and, as this satisfied for the hardness of our hearts, so the
consideration of it should help to soften them. When Job speaks of his
inward trouble he says, The Almighty makes my heart soft, [Job
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#016), and see [Psa
58:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#002). (4.) The failing of his natural
force: My strength is dried up; so that he became parched and brittle
like a potsherd, the radical moisture being wasted by the fire of divine
wrath preying upon his spirits. Who then can stand before God's anger?
Or who knows the power of it? If this was done in the green tree, what
shall be done in the dry? (5.) The clamminess of his mouth, a usual
symptom of approaching death: My tongue cleaveth to my jaws; this was
fulfilled both in his thirst upon the cross ([Joh
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028)) and in his silence under his
sufferings; for, as a sheep before the shearers is dumb, so he opened
not his mouth, nor objected against any thing done to him. (6.) His
giving up the ghost: "Thou hast brought me to the dust of death; I am
just ready to drop into the grave;" for nothing less would satisfy
divine justice. The life of the sinner was forfeited, and therefore the
life of the sacrifice must be the ransom for it. The sentence of death
passed upon Adam was thus expressed: Unto dust thou shalt return. And
therefore Christ, having an eye to that sentence in his obedience to
death, here uses a similar expression: Thou hast brought me to the dust
of death.

5\. He was stripped. The shame of nakedness was the immediate
consequence of sin; and therefore our Lord Jesus was stripped of his
clothes, when he was crucified, that he might clothe us with the robe of
his righteousness, and that the shame of our nakedness might not appear.
Now here we are told, (1.) How his body looked when it was thus
stripped: I may tell all my bones, [Psa
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017). His blessed body was lean and
emaciated with labour, grief, and fasting, during the whole course of
his ministry, which made him look as if he was nearly 50 years old when
he was yet but 33, as we find, [Joh
8:57](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#057). His wrinkles now witnessed for
him that he was far from being what was called, a gluttonous man and a
wine-bibber. Or his bones might be numbered, because his body was
distended upon the cross, which made it easy to count his ribs. They
look and stare upon me, that is, my bones do, being distorted, and
having no flesh to cover them, as Job says ([Job
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#008)), My leanness, rising up in me,
beareth witness to my face. Or "the standers by, the passers by, are
amazed to see my bones start out thus; and, instead of pitying me, are
pleased even with such a rueful spectacle." (2.) What they did with his
clothes, which they took from him ([Psa
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018)): They parted my garments among
them, to every soldier a part, and upon my vesture, the seamless coat,
do they cast lots. This very circumstance was exactly fulfilled, [Joh
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023), [Joh
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024). And though it was no great
instance of Christ's suffering, yet it is a great instance of the
fulfilling of the scripture in him. Thus it was written, and therefore
thus it behoved Christ to suffer. Let this therefore confirm our faith
in him as the true Messiah, and inflame our love to him as the best of
friends, who loved us and suffered all this for us.

II\. Here is Christ praying, and with that supporting himself under the
burden of his sufferings. Christ, in his agony, prayed earnestly, prayed
that the cup might pass from him. When the prince of this world with his
terrors set upon him, gaped upon him as a roaring lion, he fell upon the
ground and prayed. And of that David's praying here was a type. He calls
God his strength, [Psa 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019). When we
cannot rejoice in God as our song, yet let us stay ourselves upon him as
out strength, and take the comfort of spiritual supports when we cannot
come at spiritual delights. He prays, 1. That God would be with him, and
not set himself at a distance from him: Be not thou far from me ([Psa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#011)), and again, [Psa
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019). "Whoever stands aloof from my
sore, Lord, do not thou." The nearness of trouble should quicken us to
draw near to God and then we may hope that he will draw near to us. 2.
That he would help him and make haste to help him, help him to bear up
under his troubles, that he might not fail nor be discouraged, that he
might neither shrink from his undertaking no sink under it. And the
Father heard him in that he feared ([Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)) and enabled him to go through
with his work. 3. That he would deliver him and save him, [Psa
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#020), [Psa
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#021). (1.) Observe what the jewel is
which he is in care for, "The safety of my soul, my darling; let that be
redeemed from the power of the grave, [Psa
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015). Father, into thy hands I commit
that, to be conveyed safely to paradise." The psalmist here calls his
soul his darling, his only one (so the word is): "My soul is my only
one. I have but one soul to take care of, and therefore the greater is
my shame if I neglect it and the greater will the loss be if I let it
perish. Being my only one, it ought to be my darling, for the eternal
welfare of which I ought to be deeply concerned. I do not use my soul as
my darling, unless I take care to preserve it from every thing that
would hurt it and to provide all necessaries for it, and be entirely
tender of its welfare." (2.) Observe what the danger is from which he
prays to be delivered, from the sword, the flaming sword of divine
wrath, which turns every way. This he dreaded more than any thing, [Gen
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#024). God's anger was the wormwood and
the gall in the bitter cup that was put into his hands. "O deliver my
soul from that. Lord, though I lose my life, let me not lose thy love.
Save me from the power of the dog, and from the lion's mouth." This
seems to be meant of Satan, that old enemy who bruised the heel of the
seed of the woman, the prince of this world, with whom he was to engage
in close combat and whom he saw coming, [Joh
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030). "Lord, save me from being
overpowered by his terrors." He pleads, "Thou hast formerly heard me
from the horns of the unicorn," that is, "saved me from him in answer to
my prayer." This may refer to the victory Christ had obtained over Satan
and his temptations (Mt. 4), when the devil left him for a season ([Luk
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#013)), but now returned in another
manner to attack him with his terrors. "Lord, thou gavest me the victory
then, give it me now, that I may spoil principalities and powers, and
cast out the prince of this world." Has God delivered us from the horns
of the unicorn, that we be not tossed? Let that encourage us to hope
that we shall be delivered from the lion's mouth, that we be not torn.
He that has delivered doth and will deliver. This prayer of Christ, no
doubt, was answered, for the Father heard him always. And, though he did
not deliver him from death, yet he suffered him not to see corruption,
but, the third day, raised him out of the dust of death, which was a
greater instance of God's favour to him than if he had helped him down
from the cross; for that would have hindered his undertaking, whereas
his resurrection crowned it.

In singing this we should meditate on the sufferings and resurrection of
Christ till we experience in our own souls the power of his resurrection
and the fellowship of his sufferings.

[Psalms 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 22:22</span></span>

The same that began the psalm complaining, who was no other than Christ
in his humiliation, ends it here triumphing, and it can be no other than
Christ in his exaltation. And, as the first words of the complaint were
used by Christ himself upon the cross, so the first words of the triumph
are expressly applied to him ([Heb
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#012)) and are made his own words: I
will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will
I sing praise unto thee. The certain prospect which Christ had of the
joy set before him not only gave him a satisfactory answer to his
prayers, but turned his complaints into praises; he saw of the travail
of his soul, and was well satisfied, witness that triumphant word
wherewith he breathed his last: It is finished.

Five things are here spoken of, the view of which were the satisfaction
and triumph of Christ in his sufferings: -

I. That he should have a church in the world, and that those that were
given him from eternity should, in the fulness of time, be gathered in
to him. This is implied here; that he should see his seed, [Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010). It pleased him to think, 1.
That by the declaring of God's name, by the preaching of the everlasting
gospel in its plainness and purity, many should be effectually called to
him and to God by him. And for this end ministers should be employed to
publish this doctrine to the world, and they should be much his
messengers and his voice that their doing it should be accounted his
doing it; their word is his, and by them he declares God's name. 2. That
those who are thus called in should be brought into a very near and dear
relation to him as his brethren; for he is not only not ashamed, but
greatly well pleased, to call them so; not the believing Jews only, his
countrymen, but those of the Gentiles also who became fellow-heirs and
of the same body, [Heb 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011). Christ is
our elder brother, who takes care of us, and makes provision for us, and
expects that our desire should be towards him and that we should be
willing he should rule over us. 3. That these is brethren should be
incorporated into a congregation, a great congregation; such is the
universal church, the whole family that is named from him, unto which
all the children of God that were scattered abroad are collected, and in
which they are united ([Joh 11:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#052),
[Eph 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010)), and that they should also
be incorporated into smaller societies, members of that great body, many
religious assemblies for divine worship, on which the face of
Christianity should appear and in which the interests of it should be
supported and advanced. 4. That these should be accounted the seed of
Jacob and Israel ([Psa 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#023)), that on
them, though Gentiles, the blessing of Abraham might come ([Gal
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#014)), and to them might pertain the
adoption, the glory, the covenant, and the service of God, as much as
ever they did to Israel according to the flesh, [Rom
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004), [Heb
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010). The gospel church is called the
Israel of God, [Gal 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016).

II\. That God should be greatly honoured and glorified in him by that
church. His Father's glory was that which he had in his eye throughout
his whole undertaking ([Joh 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004)),
particularly in his sufferings, which he entered upon with this solemn
request, Father, glorify thy name, [Joh
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027), [Joh
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028). He foresees with pleasure, 1.
That God would be glorified by the church that should be gathered to
him, and that for this end they should be called and gathered in that
they might be unto God for a name and a praise. Christ by his ministers
will declare God's name to his brethren, as God's mouth to them, and
then by them, as the mouth of the congregation to God, will God's name
be praised. All that fear the Lord will praise him ([Psa
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#023)), even every Israelite indeed.
See [Psa 118:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#002); [Psa
135:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#019), [Psa
135:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#020). The business of Christians,
particularly in their solemn religious assemblies, is to praise and
glorify God with a holy awe and reverence of his majesty, and therefore
those that are here called upon to praise God are called upon to fear
him. 2. That God would be glorified in the Redeemer and in his
undertaking. Therefore Christ is said to praise God in the church, not
only because he is the Master of the assemblies in which God is praised,
and the Mediator of all the praises that are offered up to God, but
because he is the matter of the church's praise. See [Eph
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#021). All our praises must centre in
the work of redemption and a great deal of reason we have to be
thankful, (1.) That Jesus Christ was owned by his Father in his
undertaking, notwithstanding the apprehension he was sometimes under
that his Father had forsaken him. ([Psa
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#024)): For he hath not despised nor
abhorred the affliction of the afflicted one (that is, of the suffering
Redeemer), but has graciously accepted it as a full satisfaction for
sin, and a valuable consideration on which to ground the grant of
eternal life to all believers. Though it was offered for us poor
sinners, he did not despise nor abhor him that offered it for our sakes;
no did he turn his face from him that offered it, as Saul was angry with
his own son because he interceded for David, whom he looked upon as his
enemy. But when he cried unto him, when his blood cried for peace and
pardon for us, he heard him. This, as it is the matter of our rejoicing,
ought to be the matter of our thanksgiving. Those who have thought their
prayers slighted and unheard, if they continue to pray and wait, will
find they have not sought in vain. (2.) That he himself will go on with
his undertaking and complete it. Christ says, I will pay my vows, [Psa
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#025). Having engaged to bring many
sons to glory, he will perform his engagement to the utmost, and will
lose none.

III\. That all humble gracious souls should have a full satisfaction and
happiness in him, [Psa 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#026). It
comforted the Lord Jesus in his sufferings that in and through him all
true believers should have everlasting consolation. 1. The poor in
spirit shall be rich in blessings, spiritual blessings; the hungry shall
be filled with good things. Christ's sacrifice being accepted, the
saints shall feast upon the sacrifice, as, under the law, upon the
peace-offerings, and so partake of the altar: The meek shall eat and be
satisfied, eat of the bread of life, feed with an appetite upon the
doctrine of Christ's mediation, which is meat and drink to the soul that
knows its own nature and case. Those that hunger and thirst after
righteousness in Christ shall have all they can desire to satisfy them
and make them easy, and shall not labour, as they have done, for that
which satisfies not. 2. Those that are much in praying shall be much in
thanksgiving: Those shall praise the Lord that seek him, because through
Christ they are sure of finding him, in the hopes of which they have
reason to praise him even while they are seeking him, and the more
earnest they are in seeking him the more will their hearts be enlarged
in his praises when they have found him. 3. The souls that are devoted
to him shall be for ever happy with him: "Your heart shall live for
ever. Yours that are meek, that are satisfied in Christ, that continue
to seek God; what ever becomes of your bodies, your hearts shall live
for ever; the graces and comforts you have shall be perfected in
everlasting life. Christ has said, Because I live, you shall live also,
([Joh 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#019)); and therefore that life
shall be as sure and as long as his."

IV\. That the church of Christ, and with it the kingdom of God among
men, should extend itself to all the corners of the earth and should
take in all sorts of people.

1\. That it should reach far ([Psa
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027), [Psa
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#028)), that, whereas the Jews had
long been the only professing people of God, now all the ends of the
world should come into the church, and, the partition-wall being taken
down, the Gentiles should be taken in. It is here prophesied, (1.) That
they should be converted: They shall remember, and turn to the Lord.
Note, Serious reflection is the first step, and a good step it is
towards true conversion. We must consider and turn. The prodigal came
first to himself, and then to his father. (2.) That then they should be
admitted into communion with God and with the assemblies that serve him;
They shall worship before thee, for in every place incense shall be
offered to God, [Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011); [Isa
66:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023). Those that turn to God will
make conscience of worshipping before him. And good reason there is why
all the kindreds of nations should do homage to God, for ([Psa
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#028)) the kingdom is the Lord's; his,
and his only, is the universal monarchy. \[1.\] The kingdom of nature is
the Lord Jehovah's, and his providence rules among the nations, and upon
that account we are bound to worship him; so that the design of the
Christian religion is to revive natural religion and its principles and
laws. Christ died to bring us to God, the God that made us, from whom we
had revolted, and to reduce us to our native allegiance. \[2.\] The
kingdom of grace is the Lord Christ's, and he, as Mediator, is appointed
governor among the nations, head over all things to his church. Let
every tongue therefore confess that he is Lord.

2\. That it should include many of different ranks, [Psa
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#029). High and low, rich and poor,
bond and free, meet in Christ. (1.) Christ shall have the homage of many
of the great ones. Those that are fat upon the earth, that live in pomp
and power, shall eat and worship; even those that fare deliciously, when
they have eaten and are full, shall bless the Lord their God for their
plenty and prosperity. (2.) The poor also shall receive his gospel:
Those that go down to the dust, that sit in the dust ([Psa
113:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007)), that can scarcely keep life
and soul together, shall bow before him, before the Lord Jesus, who
reckons it his honour to be the poor man's King ([Psa
72:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#012)) and whose protection does, in a
special manner, draw their allegiance. Or this may be understood in
general of dying men, whether poor or rich. See then what is our
condition - we are going down to the dust to which we are sentenced and
where shortly we must make our bed. Nor can we keep alive our own souls;
we cannot secure our own natural life long, nor can we be the authors of
our own spiritual and eternal life. It is therefore our great interest,
as well as duty, to bow before the Lord Jesus, to give up ourselves to
him to be his subjects and worshippers; for this is the only way, and it
is a sure way, to secure our happiness when we go down to the dust.
Seeing we cannot keep alive our own souls, it is our wisdom, by an
obedient faith, to commit our souls to Jesus Christ, who is able to save
them and keep them alive for ever.

V. That the church of Christ, and with it the kingdom of God among men,
should continue to the end, through all the ages of time. Mankind is
kept up in a succession of generations; so that there is always a
generation passing away and a generation coming up. Now, as Christ shall
have honour from that which is passing away and leaving the world ([Psa
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#029), those that go down to the dust
shall bow before him, and it is good to die bowing before Christ;
blessed are the dead who thus die in the Lord), so he shall have honour
from that which is rising up, and setting out, in the world, [Psa
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#030). Observe, 1. Their application
to Christ: A seed shall serve him, shall keep up the solemn worship of
him and profess and practice obedience to him as their Master and Lord.
Note, God will have a church in the world to the end of time; and, in
order to that, there shall be a succession of professing Christians and
gospel ministers from generation to generation. A seed shall serve him;
there shall be a remnant, more or less, to whom shall pertain the
service of God and to whom God will give grace to serve him, - perhaps
not the seed of the same persons, for grace does not run in a blood (he
does not say their seed, but a seed), - perhaps but few, yet enough to
preserve the entail. 2. Christ's acknowledgment of them: They shall be
accounted to him for a generation; he will be the same to them that he
was to those who went before them; his kindness to his friends shall not
die with them, but shall be drawn out to their heirs and successors, and
instead of the fathers shall be the children, whom all shall acknowledge
to be a seed that the Lord hath blessed, [Isa
61:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#009); [Isa
65:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#023). The generation of the righteous
God will graciously own as his treasure, his children. 3. Their agency
for him ([Psa 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#031)): they shall come,
shall rise up in their day, not only to keep up the virtue of the
generation that is past, and to do the work of their own generation, but
to serve the honour of Christ and the welfare of souls in the
generations to come; they shall transmit to them the gospel of Christ
(that sacred deposit) pure and entire, even to a people that shall be
born hereafter; to them they shall declare two things: - (1.) That there
is an everlasting righteousness, which Jesus Christ has brought in. This
righteousness of his, and not any of our own, they shall declare to be
the foundation of all our hopes and the fountain of all our joys. See
[Rom 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016), [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017). (2.) That the work of our
redemption by Christ is the Lord's own doing ([Psa
118:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#023)) and no contrivance of ours. We
must declare to our children that God has done this; it is his wisdom in
a mystery; it is his arm revealed.

In singing this we must triumph in the name of Christ as above every
name, must give him honour ourselves, rejoice in the honours others do
him, and in the assurance we have that there shall be a people praising
him on earth when we are praising him in heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 23](psa023)

</div>
