<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa034)  [Next](psa036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 35:0</span></span>

David, in this psalm, appeals to the righteous Judge of heaven and earth
against his enemies that hated and persecuted him. It is supposed that
Saul and his party are the persons he means, for with them he had the
greatest struggles. I. He complains to God of the injuries they did him;
they strove with him, fought against him ([Psa
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#001)), persecuted him ([Psa
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#003)), sought his ruin ([Psa
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#004), [Psa
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#007)), accused him falsely ([Psa
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#011)), abused him basely ([Psa
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015), [Psa
35:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#016)), and all his friends ([Psa
35:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#020)), and triumphed over him, ([Psa
35:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#021), [Psa
35:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#025), [Psa
35:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#026)). II. He pleads his own
innocency, that he never gave them any provocation ([Psa
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#007), [Psa
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019)), but, on the contrary, had
studied to oblige them ([Psa
35:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#012)). III. He prays to God to
protect and deliver him, and appear for him ([Psa
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#001), [Psa
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#002)), to comfort him ([Psa
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#003)), to be nigh to him and rescue
him ([Psa 35:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#017), [Psa
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#022)), to plead his cause ([Psa
35:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#023), [Psa
35:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#024)), to defeat all the designs of
his enemies against him ([Psa 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#003),
[Psa 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#004)), to disappoint their
expectations of his fall ([Psa 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019),
[Psa 35:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#025), [Psa
35:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#026)), and, lastly, to countenance
all his friends, and encourage them ([Psa
35:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#027)), IV. He prophesies the
destruction of his persecutors ([Psa
35:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#004), [Psa
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#008)). V. He promises himself that he
shall yet see better days ([Psa 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#009),
[Psa 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#010)), and promises God that he
will then attend him with his praises ([Psa
35:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#018), [Psa
35:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#028)). In singing this psalm, and
praying over it, we must take heed of applying it to any little peevish
quarrels and enmities of our own, and of expressing by it any
uncharitable revengeful resentments of injuries done to us; for Christ
has taught us to forgive our enemies and not to pray against them, but
to pray for them, as he did; but, 1. We may comfort ourselves with the
testimony of our consciences concerning our innocency, with reference to
those that are any way injurious to us, and with hopes that God will, in
his own way and time, right us, and, in the mean time, support us. 2. We
ought to apply it to the public enemies of Christ and his kingdom,
typified by David and his kingdom, to resent the indignities done to
Christ's honour, to pray to God to plead the just and injured cause of
Christianity and serious godliness, and to believe that God will, in due
time, glorify his own name in the ruin of all the irreconcilable enemies
of his church, that will not repent to give him glory.

A psalm of David.

[Psalms 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 35:1</span></span>

In these verses we have,

I. David's representation of his case to God, setting forth the restless
rage and malice of his persecutors. He was God's servant, expressly
appointed by him to be what he was, followed his guidance, and aimed at
his glory in the way of duty, had lived (as St. Paul speaks) in all good
conscience before God unto this day; and yet there were those that
strove with him, that did their utmost to oppose his advancement, and
made all the interest they could against him; they fought against him
([Psa 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#001)), not only undermined him
closely and secretly, but openly avowed their opposition to him and set
themselves to do him all the mischief they could. They persecuted him
with an unwearied enmity, sought after his soul ([Psa
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#004)), that is, his life, no less
would satisfy their bloody minds; they aimed to disquiet his spirit and
put that into disorder. Nor was it a sudden passion against him that
they harboured, but inveterate malice: They devised his hurt, laid their
heads together, and set their wits on work, not only to do him a
mischief, but to find out ways and means to ruin him. They treated him,
who was the greatest blessing of his country, as if he had been the
curse and plague of it; they hunted him as a dangerous beast of prey;
they digged a pit for him and laid a net in it, that they might have him
at their mercy, [Psa 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#007). They took a
great deal of pains in persecuting him, for they digged a pit ([Psa
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015)); and very close and crafty they
were in carrying on their designs; the old serpent taught them subtlety:
they hid their net from David and his friends; but in vain, for they
could not hide it from God. And, lastly, he found himself an unequal
match for them. His enemy, especially Saul, was too strong for him ([Psa
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#010)), for he had the army at his
command, and assumed to himself the sole power of making laws and giving
judgment, attainted and condemned whom he pleased, carried not a
sceptre, but a javelin, in his hand, to cast at any man that stood in
his way; such was the manner of the king, and all about him were
compelled to do as he bade them, right or wrong. The king's word is a
law, and every thing must be carried with a high hand; he has fields,
and vineyards, and preferments, at his disposal, [Sa1
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#007). but David is poor and needy, has
nothing to make friends with, and therefore has none to take his part
but men (as we say) of broken fortunes ([Sa1
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#002)); and therefore no marvel that
Saul spoiled him of what little he had got and the interest he had made.
If the kings of the earth set themselves against the Lord and his
anointed, who can contend with them? Note, It is no new thing for the
most righteous men, and the most righteous cause, to meet with many
mighty and malicious enemies: Christ himself is striven with and fought
against, and war is made upon the holy seed; and we are not to marvel at
the matter: it is a fruit of the old enmity in the seed of the serpent
against the seed of the woman.

II\. His appeal to God concerning his integrity and the justice of his
cause. If a fellow-subject had wronged him, he might have appealed to
his prince, as St. Paul did to Caesar; but, when his prince wronged him,
he appealed to his God, who is prince and Judge of the kings of the
earth: Plead my cause, O Lord! [Psa
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#001). Note, A righteous cause may,
with the greatest satisfaction imaginable, he laid before a righteous
God, and referred to him to give judgment upon it; for he perfectly
knows the merits of it, holds the balance exactly even, and with him
there is no respect of persons. God knew that they were, without cause,
his enemies, and that they had, without cause, digged pits for him, [Psa
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#007). Note, It will be a comfort to
us, when men do us wrong, if our consciences can witness for us that we
have never done them any. It was so to St. Paul. [Act
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#010), To the Jews have I done no
wrong. We are apt to justify our uneasiness at the injuries men do us by
this, That we never gave them any cause to use us so; whereas this
should, more than any thing, make us easy, for then we may the more
confidently expect that God will plead our cause.

III\. His prayer to God to manifest himself both for him and to him, in
this trial. 1. For him. He prays that God would fight against his
enemies, so as to disable them to hurt him, and defeat their designs
against him ([Psa 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#001)), that he would
take hold of shield and buckler, for the Lord is a man of war ([Exo
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#003)), and that he would stand up for
his help ([Psa 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#002)), for he had few
that would stand up for him, and, if he had ever so many, they would
stand him in no stead without God. he prays that God would stop their
way ([Psa 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#003)), that they might not
overtake him when he fled from them. This prayer we may put up against
our persecutors, that God would restrain them and stop their way. 2. To
him: "Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation; let me have inward comfort
under all these outward troubles, to support my soul which they strike
at. Let God be my salvation, not only my Saviour out of my present
troubles, but my everlasting bliss. Let me have that salvation not only
which he is the author of, but which consists in his favour; and let me
know my interest in it; let me have the comfortable assurance of it in
my own breast." If God, by his Spirit, witness to our spirits that he is
our salvation, we have enough, we need desire no more to make us happy;
and this is a powerful support when men persecute us. If God be our
friend, no matter who is our enemy.

IV\. His prospect of the destruction of his enemies, which he prays for,
not in malice or revenge. We find how patiently he bore Shimei's curses
(so let him curse, for the Lord has bidden him); and we cannot suppose
that he who was so meek in his conversation would give vent to any
intemperate heat or passion in his devotion; but, by the spirit of
prophecy, he foretells the just judgments of God that would come upon
them for their great wickedness, their malice, cruelty, and
perfidiousness, and especially the enmity to the counsels of God, the
interests of religion, and that reformation which they knew David, if
ever he had power in his hand, would be an instrument of. They seemed to
be hardened in their sins, and to be of the number of those who have
sinned unto death and are not to be prayed for, [Jer
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016); [Jer
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#014); [Jer
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#011); [Jo1
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016). As for Saul himself, David, it
is probable, knew that God had rejected him and had forbidden Samuel to
mourn for him, [Sa1 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001). And these
predictions look further, and read the doom of the enemies of Christ and
his kingdom, as appears by comparing [Rom
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#009), [Rom
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#010). David here prays, 1. Against
his many enemies ([Psa 35:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#004)): Let
them be confounded, etc. Or, as Dr. Hammond reads it, They shall be
confounded, they shall be turned back. This may be taken as a prayer for
their repentance, for all penitents are put to shame for their sins and
turned back from them. Or, if they were not brought to repentance, David
prays that they might be defeated and disappointed in their designs
against him and so put to shame. Though they should in some degree
prevail, yet he foresees that it would be to their own ruin at last:
They shall be as chaff before the wind, so unable will wicked men be to
stand before the judgments of God and so certainly will they be driven
away by them, [Psa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004). Their way
shall be dark and slippery, darkness and slipperiness (so the margin
reads it); the way of sinners is so, for they walk in darkness and in
continual danger of falling into sin, into hell; and it will prove so at
last, for their foot shall slide in due time, [Deu
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035). But this is not the worst of
it. Even chaff before the wind may perhaps be stopped, and find a place
of rest, and, though the way be dark and slippery, it is possible that a
man may keep his footing; but it is here foretold that the angel of the
Lord shall chase them ([Psa 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#005)) so
that they shall find no rest, shall persecute them ([Psa
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#006)) so that they cannot possibly
escape the pit of destruction. As God's angels encamp against those that
fight against him. They are the ministers of his justice, as well as of
his mercy. Those that make God their enemy make all the holy angels
their enemies. 2. Against his one mighty enemy ([Psa
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#008)): Let destruction come upon him.
It is probable that he means Saul, who laid snares for him and aimed at
his destruction. David vowed that his hand should not be upon him; he
would not be judge in his own cause. But, at the same time, he foretold
that the Lord would smite him ([Sa1
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#010)), and here that the net he had
hidden should catch himself, and into that very destruction he should
fall. This was remarkably fulfilled in the ruin of Saul; for he had laid
a plot to make David fall by the hand of the Philistines ([Sa1
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#025)), that was the net which he hid
for him under pretence of doing him honour, and in that very net was he
himself taken, for he fell by the hand of the Philistines when his day
came to fall.

V. His prospect of his own deliverance, which, having committed his
cause to God, he did not doubt of, [Psa
35:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#009), [Psa
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#010). 1. He hoped that he should have
the comfort of it: "My soul shall be joyful, not in my own ease and
safety, but in the Lord and in his favour, in his promise and in his
salvation according to the promise." Joy in God and in his salvation is
the only true, solid, satisfying joy. Those whose souls are sorrowful in
the Lord, who sow in tears and sorrow after a godly sort, need not
question but that in due time their souls shall be joyful in the Lord;
for gladness is sown for them, and they shall at last enter into the joy
of their Lord. 2. He promised that then God should have the glory of it
([Psa 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#010)): All my bones shall say,
Lord, who is like unto thee? (1.) He will praise God with the whole man,
with all that is within him, and with all the strength and vigour of his
soul, intimated by his bones, which are within the body and are the
strength of it. (2.) He will praise him as one of peerless and
unparalleled perfection. We cannot express how great and good God is,
and therefore must praise him by acknowledging him to be a non-such.
Lord, who is like unto thee? No such patron of oppressed innocency, no
such punisher of triumphant tyranny. The formation of our bones so
wonderfully, so curiously ([Ecc 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#005);
[Psa 139:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#016)), the serviceableness of
our bones, and the preservation of them, and especially the life which,
at the resurrection, shall be breathed upon the dry bones and make them
flourish as a herb, oblige every bone in our bodies, if it could speak,
to say, Lord, who is like unto thee? and willingly to undergo any
services or sufferings for him.

[Psalms 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 35:11</span></span>

Two very wicked things David here lays to the charge of his enemies, to
make good his appeal to God against them - perjury and ingratitude.

I. Perjury, [Psa 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#011). When Saul
would have David attainted of treason, in order to his being outlawed,
perhaps he did it with the formalities of a legal prosecution, produced
witnesses who swore some treasonable words or overt acts against him,
and he being not present to clear himself (or, if he was, it was all the
same), Saul adjudged him a traitor. This he complains of here as the
highest piece of injustice imaginable: False witnesses did rise up, who
would swear anything; they laid to my charge things that I knew not, nor
ever thought of. See how much the honours, estates, liberties, and
lives, even of the best men, lie at the mercy of the worst, against
whose false oaths innocency itself is no fence; and what reason we have
to acknowledge with thankfulness the hold God has of the consciences
even of bad men, to which it is owing that there is not more mischief
done in that way than is. This instance of the wrong done to David was
typical, and had its accomplishment in the Son of David, against whom
false witnesses did arise, [Mat 26:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#060).
If we be at any time charged with what we are innocent of let us not
think it strange, as though some new thing happened to us; so persecuted
they the prophets, even the great prophet.

II\. Ingratitude. Call a man ungrateful and you can call him no worse.
This was the character of David's enemies ([Psa
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#012)): They rewarded me evil for
good. A great deal of good service he had done to his king, witness his
harp, witness Goliath's sword, witness the foreskins of the Philistines;
and yet his king vowed his death, and his country was made too hot for
him. This is to the spoiling of his soul; this base unkind usage robs
him of his comfort, and cuts him to the heart, more than any thing else.
Nay, he had deserved well not only of the public in general, but of
those particular persons that were now most bitter against him. Probably
it was then well known whom he meant; it may be Saul himself for one,
whom he was sent for to attend upon when he was melancholy and ill, and
to whom he was serviceable to drive away the evil spirit, not with his
harp, but with his prayers; to others of the courtiers, it is likely, he
had shown this respect, while he lived at court, who now were, of all
others, most abusive to him. Herein he was a type of Christ, to whom
this wicked world was very ungrateful. [Joh
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#032). Many good works have I shown
you from my Father; for which of those do you stone me? David here
shows,

1\. How tenderly, and with what a cordial affection, he had behaved
towards them in their afflictions ([Psa
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013), [Psa
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#014)): They were sick. Note, Even the
palaces and courts of princes are not exempt from the jurisdiction of
death and the visitation of sickness. Now when these people were sick,
(1.) David mourned for them and sympathized with them in their grief.
They were not related to him; he was under no obligations to them; he
would lose nothing by their death, but perhaps be a gainer by it; and
yet he behaved himself as though they had been his nearest relations,
purely from a principle of compassion and humanity. David was a man of
war, and of a bold stout spirit, and yet was thus susceptible of the
impressions of sympathy, forgot the bravery of the hero, and seemed
wholly made up of love and pity; it was a rare composition of hardiness
and tenderness, courage and compassion, in the same breast. Observe, He
mourned as for a brother or mother, which intimates that it is our duty,
and well becomes us, to lay to heart the sickness, and sorrow, and death
of our near relations. Those that do not are justly stigmatized as
without natural affection. (2.) He prayed for them. He discovered not
only the tender affection of a man, but the pious affection of a saint.
He was concerned for their precious souls, and, since he helped them
with his prayers to God for mercy and grace; and the prayers of one who
had so great an interest in heaven were of more value than perhaps they
knew or considered. With his prayers he joined humiliation and
self-affliction, both in his diet (he fasted, at least from pleasant
bread) and in his dress; he clothed himself with sackcloth, thus
expressing his grief, not only for their affliction, but for their sin;
for this was the guise and practice of a penitent. We ought to mourn for
the sins of those that do not mourn for them themselves. His fasting
also put an edge upon his praying, and was an expression of the fervour
of it; he was so intent in his devotions that he had no appetite to
meat, nor would allow himself time for eating: "My prayer returned into
my own bosom; I had the comfort of having done my duty, and of having
approved myself a loving neighbour, though I could not thereby win upon
them nor make them my friends." We shall not lose by the good offices we
have done to any, how ungrateful soever they are; for our rejoicing will
be this, the testimony of our conscience.

2\. How basely and insolently and with what a brutish enmity, and worse
than brutish, they had behaved towards him ([Psa
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015), [Psa
35:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#016)); In my adversity they rejoiced.
When he fell under the frowns of Saul, was banished the court, and
persecuted as a criminal, they were pleased, were glad at his
calamities, and got together in their drunken clubs to make themselves
and one another merry with the disgrace of this great favourite. Well,
might he call them abjects, for nothing could be more vile and sordid
than to triumph in the fall of a man of such unstained honour and
consummate virtue. But this was not all. (1.) They tore him, rent his
good name without mercy, said all the ill they could of him and fastened
upon him all the reproach their cursed wit and malice could reach to.
(2.) They gnashed upon him with their teeth; they never spoke of him but
with the greatest indignation imaginable, as those that would have eaten
him up if they could. David was the fool in the play, and his
disappointment all the table-talk of the hypocritical mockers at feasts;
it was the song of the drunkards. The comedians, who may fitly be called
hypocritical mockers (for which does a hypocrite signify but a
stage-player?) and whose comedies, it is likely, were acted at feasts
and balls, chose David for their subject, bantered and abused him, while
the auditory, in token of their agreement with the plot, hummed, and
gnashed upon him with their teeth. Such has often been the hard fate of
the best of men. The apostles were made a spectacle to the world. David
was looked upon with ill-will for no other reason than because he was
caressed by the people. It is a vexation of spirit which attends even a
right work that for this a man is envied of his neighbour, [Ecc
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#004). And who can stand before envy?
[Pro 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#004).

[Psalms 35:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 35:17</span></span>

In these verses, as before,

I. David describes the great injustice, malice, and insolence, of his
persecutors, pleading this with God as a reason why he should protect
him from them and appear against them. 1. They were very unrighteous;
they were his enemies wrongfully, for he never gave them any
provocation: They hated him without a cause; nay, for that for which
they ought rather to have loved and honoured him. This is quoted, with
application to Christ, and is said to be fulfilled in him. [Joh
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#025), They hated me without cause. 2.
They were very rude; they could not find in their hearts to show him
common civility: They speak not peace; if they met him, they had not the
good manners to give him the time of day; like Joseph's brethren, that
could not speak peaceably to him, [Gen
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#004). 3. They were very proud and
scornful ([Psa 35:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#021)): They opened
their mouth wide against me; they shouted and huzzaed when they saw his
fall; they bawled after him when he was forced to quit the court, "Aha!
aha! this is the day we longed to see." 4. They were very barbarous and
base, for they trampled upon him when he was down, rejoiced at his hurt,
and magnified themselves against him, [Psa
35:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#026). Turba Remi sequitur fortunam,
ut semper, et odit damnatos - The Roman crowd, varying their opinions
with every turn of fortune, are sure to execrate the fallen. Thus, when
the Son of David was run upon by the rulers, the people cried, Crucify
him, crucify him. 5. They set themselves against all the sober good
people that adhered to David ([Psa
35:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#020)): They devised deceitful
matters, to trepan and ruin those that were quiet in the land. Note,
(1.) It is the character of the godly in the land that they are the
quiet in the land, that they live in all dutiful subjection to
government and governors, in the Lord, and endeavour, as much as in them
lies, to live peaceably with all men, however they may have been
misrepresented as enemies to Caesar and hurtful to kings and provinces.
I am for peace, [Psa 120:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#007). (2.)
Though the people of God are, and study to be, a quiet people, yet it
has been the common practice of their enemies to devise deceitful
matters against them. All the hellish arts of malice and falsehood are
made use of to render them odious or despicable; their words and actions
are misconstrued, even that which they abhor is fathered upon them, laws
are made to ensnare them ([Dan 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#004),
etc.), and all to ruin them and root them out. Those that hated David
thought scorn, like Haman, to lay hands on him alone, but contrived to
involve all the religious people of the land in the same ruin with him.

II\. He appeals to God against them, the God to whom vengeance belongs,
appeals to his knowledge ([Psa 35:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#022)):
This thou hast seen. They had falsely accused him, but God, who knows
all things, knew that he did not falsely accuse them, nor make them
worse than really they were. They had carried on their plots against him
with a great degree of secresy ([Psa
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015)): "I knew it not, till long
after, when they themselves gloried in it; but thy eye was upon them in
their close cabals and thou art a witness of all they have said and done
against me and thy people." He appeals to God's justice: Awake to my
judgment, even to my cause, and let it have a hearing at thy bar, [Psa
35:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#023). "Judge me, O Lord my God! pass
sentence upon this appeal, according to the righteousness of thy nature
and government," [Psa 35:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#024). See this
explained by Solomon, [Kg1 7:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#031), [Kg1
7:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#032). When thou art appealed to, hear
in heaven, and judge, by condemning the wicked and justifying the
righteous.

III\. He prays earnestly to God to appear graciously for him and his
friends, against his and their enemies, that by his providence the
struggle might issue to the honour and comfort of David and to the
conviction and confusion of his persecutors. 1. He prays that God would
act for him, and not stand by as a spectator ([Psa
35:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#017)): "Lord, how long wilt thou look
on? How long wilt thou connive at the wickedness of the wicked? Rescue
my soul from the destructions they are plotting against it; rescue my
darling, my only one, from the lions. My soul is my only one, and
therefore the greater is the shame if I neglect it and the greater the
loss if I lose it: it is my only one, and therefore ought to be my
darling, ought to be carefully protected and provided for. It is my soul
that is in danger; Lord, rescue it. It does, in a peculiar manner,
belong to the Father of spirits, therefore claim thy own; it is thine,
save it. Lord, keep not silence, as if thou didst consent to what is
done against me! Lord, be not far from me ([Psa
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#022)), as if I were a stranger that
thou wert not concerned for; let not me beheld afar off, as the proud
are." 2. He prays that his enemies might not have cause to rejoice ([Psa
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019)): Let them not rejoice over me
(and again, [Psa 35:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#024)); not so much
because it would be a mortification to him to be trampled upon the
abjects, as because it would turn to the dishonour of God and the
reproach of his confidence in God. It would harden the hearts of his
enemies in their wickedness and confirm them in their enmity to him, and
would be a great discouragement to all the pious Jews that were friends
to his righteous cause. He prays that he might never be in such imminent
danger as that they should say in their hearts, Ah! so would we have it
([Psa 35:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#025)), much more that he might
not be reduced to such extremity that they should say, We have swallowed
him up; for then they will reflect upon God himself. But, on the
contrary, that they might be ashamed and brought to confusion together
([Psa 35:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#026), as before, [Psa
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#004)); he desires that his innocency
might be so cleared that they might be ashamed of the calumnies with
which they had loaded him, that his interest might be so confirmed that
they might be ashamed of their designs against him and their
expectations of his ruin, that they might either be brought to that
shame which would be a step towards their reformation or that that might
be their portion which would be their everlasting misery. 3. He prays
that his friends might have cause to rejoice and give glory to God, [Psa
35:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#027). Notwithstanding the arts that
were used to blacken David, and make him odious, and to frighten people
from owning him, there were some that favoured his righteous cause, that
knew he was wronged and bore a good affection to him; and he prays for
them, (1.) That they might rejoice with him in his joys. It is a great
pleasure to all that are good to see an honest man, and an honest cause,
prevail and prosper; and those that heartily espouse the interests of
God's people, and are willing to take their lot with them even when they
are run down and trampled upon, shall in due time shout for joy and be
glad, for the righteous cause will at length be a victorious cause. (2.)
That they might join with him in his praises: Let them say continually,
The Lord be magnified, by us and others, who hath pleasure in the
prosperity of his servant. Note, \[1.\] The great God has pleasure in
this prosperity of good people, not only of his family, the church in
general, but of every particular servant in his family. He has pleasure
in the prosperity both of their temporal and of their spiritual affairs,
and delights not in their griefs; for he does not afflict willingly; and
we ought therefore to have pleasure in their prosperity, and not to envy
it. \[2.\] When God in his providence shows his good-will to the
prosperity of his servants, and the pleasure he takes in it, we ought to
acknowledge it with thankfulness, to his praise, and to say, The Lord be
magnified.

IV\. The mercy he hoped to win by prayer he promises to wear with
praise: "I will give thee thanks, as the author of my deliverance ([Psa
35:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#018)), and my tongue shall speak of
thy righteousness, the justice of thy judgments and the equity of all
thy dispensations;" and this, 1. Publicly, as one that took a pleasure
in owning his obligations to his God, so far was he from being ashamed
of them. he will do it in the great congregation, and among much people,
that God might be honoured and many edified. 2. Constantly. he will
speak God's praise every day (so it may be read) and all the day long;
for it is a subject that will never be exhausted, no, not by the endless
praises of saints and angels.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 36](psa036)

</div>
