<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa077)  [Next](psa079) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 78](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 78:0</span></span>

This psalm is historical; it is a narrative of the great mercies God had
bestowed upon Israel, the great sins wherewith they had provoked him,
and the many tokens of his displeasure they had been under for their
sins. The psalmist began, in the foregoing psalm, to relate God's
wonders of old, for his own encouragement in a difficult time; there he
broke off abruptly, but here resumes the subject, for the edification of
the church, and enlarges much upon it, showing not only how good God had
been to them, which was an earnest of further finishing mercy, but how
basely they had conducted themselves towards God, which justified him in
correcting them as he did at this time, and forbade all complaints. Here
is, I. The preface to this church history, commanding the attention of
the present age to it and recommending it to the study of the
generations to come ([Psa 78:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001)). II.
The history itself from Moses to David; it is put into a psalm or song
that it might be the better remembered and transmitted to posterity, and
that the singing of it might affect them with the things here related,
more than they would be with a bare narrative of them. The general scope
of this psalm we have ([Psa 78:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009))
where notice is taken of the present rebukes they were under ([Psa
78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009)), the sin which brought them
under those rebukes ([Psa 78:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#010)), and
the mercies of God to them formerly, which aggravated that sin ([Psa
78:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#011)). As to the particulars, we are
here told, 1. What wonderful works God had wrought for them in bringing
them out of Egypt ([Psa 78:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#012)),
providing for them in the wilderness ([Psa
78:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#023)), plaguing and ruining their
enemies ([Psa 78:43-53](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#043)), and at length
putting them in possession of the land of promise ([Psa
78:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#054), [Psa
78:55](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#055)). 2. How ungrateful they were to
God for his favours to them and how many and great provocations they
were guilty of. How they murmured against God and distrusted him ([Psa
78:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#017)), and did but counterfeit
repentance and submission when he punished them ([Psa
78:34-37](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#034)), thus grieving and tempting
him ([Psa 78:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#040)). How they
affronted God with their idolatries after they came to Canaan ([Psa
78:56-58](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#056)). 3. How God had justly
punished them for their sins ([Psa
78:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#021), [Psa
78:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#022)) in the wilderness, making their
sin their punishment ([Psa 78:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#029)),
and now, of late, when the ark was taken by the Philistines ([Psa
78:59-64](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#059)). 4. How graciously God had
spared them and returned in mercy to them, notwithstanding their
provocations. He had forgiven them formerly ([Psa
78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038), [Psa
78:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039)), and now, of late, had removed
the judgments they had brought upon themselves, and brought them under a
happy establishment both in church and state ([Psa
78:65-72](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#065)). As the general scope of
this psalm may be of use to us in the singing of it, to put us upon
recollecting what God has done for us and for his church formerly, and
what we have done against him, so the particulars also may be of use to
us, for warning against those sins of unbelief and ingratitude which
Israel of old was notoriously guilty of, and the record of which was
preserved for our learning. "These things happened unto them for
ensamples," [Co1 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011); [Heb
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011).

Maschil of Asaph.

[Psalms 78:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 78:1</span></span>

These verses, which contain the preface to this history, show that the
psalm answers the title; it is indeed Maschil - a psalm to give
instruction; if we receive not the instruction it gives, it is our own
fault. Here,

I. The psalmist demands attention to what he wrote ([Psa
78:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001)): Give ear, O my people! to my
law. Some make these the psalmist's words. David, as a king, or Asaph,
in his name, as his secretary of state, or scribe to the sweet singer of
Israel, here calls upon the people, as his people committed to his
charge, to give ear to his law. He calls his instructions his law or
edict; such was their commanding force in themselves. Every good truth,
received in the light and love of it, will have the power of a law upon
the conscience; yet that was not all: David was a king, and he would
interpose his royal power for the edification of his people. If God, by
his grace, make great men good men, they will be capable of doing more
good than others, because their word will be a law to all about them,
who must therefore give ear and hearken; for to what purpose is divine
revelation brought our ears if we will not incline our ears to it, both
humble ourselves and engage ourselves to hear it and heed it? Or the
psalmist, being a prophet, speaks as God's mouth, and so calls them his
people, and demands subjection to what was said as to a law. Let him
that has an ear thus hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches, [Rev
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007).

II\. Several reasons are given why we should diligently attend to that
which is here related. 1. The things here discoursed of are weighty, and
deserve consideration, strange, and need it ([Psa
78:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002)): I will open my mouth in a
parable, in that which is sublime and uncommon, but very excellent and
well worthy your attention; I will utter dark sayings, which challenge
your most serious regards as much as the enigmas with which the eastern
princes and learned men used to try one another. These are called dark
sayings, not because they are hard to be understood, but because they
are greatly to be admired and carefully to be looked into. This is said
to be fulfilled in the parables which our Saviour put forth ([Mat
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#035)), which were (as this)
representations of the state of the kingdom of God among men. 2. They
are the monuments of antiquity - dark sayings of old which our fathers
have told us, [Psa 78:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#003). They are
things of undoubted certainty; we have heard them and known them, and
there is no room left to question the truth of them. The gospel of Luke
is called a declaration of those things which are most surely believed
among us ([Luk 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)), so were the
things here related. The honour we owe to our parents and ancestors
obliges us to attend to that which our fathers have told us, and, as far
as it appears to be true and good, to receive it with so much the more
reverence and regard. 3. They are to be transmitted to posterity, and it
lies as a charge upon us carefully to hand them down ([Psa
78:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#004)); because our fathers told them
to us we will not hide them from their children. Our children are called
theirs, for they were in care for their seed's seed, and looked upon
them as theirs; and, in teaching our children the knowledge of God, we
repay to our parents some of that debt we owe to them for teaching us.
Nay, if we have no children of our own, we must declare the things of
God to their children, the children of others. Our care must be for
posterity in general, and not only for our own posterity; and for the
generation to come hereafter, the children that shall be born, as well
as for the generation that is next rising up and the children that are
born. That which we are to transmit to our children is not only the
knowledge of languages, arts and sciences, liberty and property, but
especially the praises of the Lord, and his strength appearing in the
wonderful works he has done. Our great care must be to lodge our
religion, that great deposit, pure and entire in the hands of those that
succeed us. There are two things the full and clear knowledge of which
we must preserve the entail of to our heirs: - (1.) The law of God; for
this was given with a particular charge to teach it diligently to their
children ([Psa 78:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#005)): He established a
testimony or covenant, and enacted a law, in Jacob and Israel, gave them
precepts and promises, which he commanded them to make known to their
children, [Deu 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007), [Deu
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#020). The church of God, as the
historian says of the Roman commonwealth, was not to be res unius
aetatis - a thing of one age but was to be kept up from one generation
to another; and therefore, as God provided for a succession of ministers
in the tribe of Levi and the house of Aaron, so he appointed that
parents should train up their children in the knowledge of his law: and,
when they had grown up, they must arise and declare them to their
children ([Psa 78:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#006)), that, as one
generation of God's servants and worshippers passes away, another
generation may come, and the church, as the earth, may abide for ever;
and thus God's name among men may be as the days of heaven. (2.) The
providences of God concerning them, both in mercy and in judgment. The
former seem to be mentioned for the sake of this; since God gave order
that his laws should be made known to posterity, it is requisite that
with them his works also should be made known, the fulfilling of the
promises made to the obedient and the threatenings denounced against the
disobedient. Let these be told to our children and our children's
children, \[1.\] That they may take encouragement to conform to the will
of God ([Psa 78:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#007)): that, not
forgetting the works of God wrought in former days, they might set their
hope in God and keep his commandments, might make his command their rule
and his covenant their stay. Those only may with confidence hope for
God's salvation that make conscience of doing his commandments. The
works of God, duly considered, will very much strengthen our resolution
both to set our hope in him and to keep his commandments, for he is able
to bear us out in both. \[2.\] That they may take warning not to conform
to the example of their fathers ([Psa
78:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008)): That they might not be as their
fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation. See here, First, What was
the character of their fathers. Though they were the seed of Abraham,
taken into covenant with God, and, for aught we know, the only
professing people he had then in the world, yet they were stubborn and
rebellious, and walked contrary to God, in direct opposition to his
will. They did indeed profess relation to him, but they did not set
their hearts aright; they were not cordial in their engagements to God,
nor inward with him in their worship of him, and therefore their spirit
was not stedfast with him, but upon every occasion they flew off from
him. Note, Hypocrisy is the high road to apostasy. Those that do not set
their hearts aright will not be stedfast with God, but play fat and
loose. Secondly, What was a charge to the children: That they be not as
their fathers. Note, Those that have descended from wicked and ungodly
ancestors, if they will but consider the word and works of God, will see
reason enough not to tread in their steps. It will be no excuse for a
vain conversation that it was received by tradition from our fathers
([Pe1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018)); for what we know of them
that was evil must be an admonition to us, that we dread that which was
so pernicious to them as we would shun those courses which they took
that were ruinous to their health or estates.

[Psalms 78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 78:9</span></span>

In these verses,

I. The psalmist observes the late rebukes of Providence that the people
of Israel had been under, which they had brought upon themselves by
their dealing treacherously with God, [Psa
78:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009). The children of Ephraim, in
which tribe Shiloh was, though they were well armed and shot with bows,
yet turned back in the day of battle. This seems to refer to that
shameful defeat which the Philistines gave them in Eli's time, when they
took the ark prisoner, [Sa1 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#010), [Sa1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#011). Of this the psalmist here begins
to speak, and, after a long digression, returns to it again, [Psa
78:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#061). Well might that event be thus
fresh in mind in David's time, above forty years after, for the ark,
which in that memorable battle was seized by the Philistines, though it
was quickly brought out of captivity, was never brought out of obscurity
till David fetched it from Kirjath-jearim to his own city. Observe, 1.
The shameful cowardice of the children of Ephraim, that warlike tribe,
so famed for valiant men, Joshua's tribe; the children of that tribe,
though as well armed as ever, turned back when they came to face the
enemy. Note, Weapons of war stand men in little stead without a martial
spirit, and that is gone if God be gone. Sin dispirits men and takes
away the heart. 2. The causes of their cowardice, which were no less
shameful; and these were, (1.) A shameful violation of God's law and
their covenant with him ([Psa 78:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#010));
they were basely treacherous and perfidious, for they kept not the
covenant of God, and basely stubborn and rebellious (as they were
described, [Psa 78:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008)), for they
peremptorily refused to walk in his law, and, in effect, told him to his
face they would not be ruled by him. (2.) A shameful ingratitude to God
for the favours he had bestowed upon them: They forgot his works and his
wonders, his works of wonder which they ought to have admired, [Psa
78:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#011). Note, Our forgetfulness of
God's works is at the bottom of our disobedience to his laws.

II\. He takes occasion hence to consult precedents and to compare this
with the case of their fathers, who were in like manner unmindful of
God's mercies to them and ungrateful to their founder and great
benefactor, and were therefore often brought under his displeasure. The
narrative in these verses is very remarkable, for it relates a kind of
struggle between God's goodness and man's badness, and mercy, at length,
rejoices against judgment.

1\. God did great things for his people Israel when he first
incorporated them and formed them into a people: Marvellous things did
he in the sight of their fathers, and not only in their sight, but in
their cause, and for their benefit, so strange, so kind, that one would
think they should never be forgotten. What he did for them in the land
of Egypt is only just mentioned here ([Psa
78:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#012)), but afterwards resumed, [Psa
78:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#043). He proceeds here to show, (1.)
How he made a lane for them through the Red Sea, and caused them, gave
them courage, to pass through, though the waters stood over their heads
as a heap, [Psa 78:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#013). See [Isa
63:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#012), [Isa
63:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#013), where God is said to lead them
by the hand, as it were, through the deep that they should not stumble.
(2.) How he provided a guide for them through the untrodden paths of the
wilderness ([Psa 78:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#014)); he led them
step by step, in the day time by a cloud, which also sheltered them from
the heat, and all the night with a light of fire, which perhaps warmed
the air; at least it made the darkness of night less frightful, and
perhaps kept off wild beasts, [Zac
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#005). (3.) How he furnished their camp
with fresh water in a dry and thirsty land where no water was, not by
opening the bottles of heaven (that would have been a common way), but
by broaching a rock ([Psa 78:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#015), [Psa
78:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#016)): He clave the rocks in the
wilderness, which yielded water, though they were not capable of
receiving it either from the clouds above or the springs beneath. Out of
the dry and hard rock he gave them drink, not distilled as out of an
alembic, drop by drop, but in streams running down like rivers, and as
out of the great depths. God gives abundantly, and is rich in mercy; he
gives seasonably, and sometimes makes us to feel the want of mercies
that we may the better know the worth of them. This water which God gave
Israel out of the rock was the more valuable because it was spiritual
drink. And that rock was Christ.

2\. When God began thus to bless them they began to affront him ([Psa
78:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#017)): They sinned yet more against
him, more than they had done in Egypt, though there they were bad
enough, [Eze 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#008). They bore the
miseries of their servitude better than the difficulties of their
deliverance, and never murmured at their taskmasters so much as they did
at Moses and Aaron; as if they were delivered to do all these
abominations, [Jer 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#010). As sin
sometimes takes occasion by the commandment, so at other times it takes
occasion by the deliverance, to become more exceedingly sinful. They
provoked the Most High. Though he is most high, and they knew themselves
an unequal match for him, yet they provoked him and even bade defiance
to his justice; and this in the wilderness, where he had them at his
mercy and therefore they were bound in interest to please him, and where
he showed them so much mercy and therefore they were bound in gratitude
to please him; yet there they said and did that which they knew would
provoke him: They tempted God in their heart, [Psa
78:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#018). Their sin began in their heart,
and thence it took its malignity. They do always err in their heart,
[Heb 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#010). Thus they tempted God,
tried his patience to the utmost, whether he would bear with them or no,
and, in effect, bade him do his worst. Two ways they provoked him: -
(1.) By desiring, or rather demanding, that which he had not thought fit
to give them: They asked meat for their lust. God had given them meat
for their hunger, in the manna, wholesome pleasant food and in
abundance; he had given them meat for their faith out of the heads of
leviathan which he broke in pieces, [Psa
74:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#014). But all this would not serve;
they must have meat for their lust, dainties and varieties to gratify a
luxurious appetite. Nothing is more provoking to God than our
quarrelling with our allotment and indulging the desires of the flesh.
(2.) By distrusting his power to give them what they desired. This was
tempting God indeed. They challenged him to give them flesh; and, if he
did not, they would say it was because he could not, not because he did
not see it fit for them ([Psa 78:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#019)):
They spoke against God. Those that set bounds to God's power speak
against him. It was as injurious a reflection as could be cat upon God
to say, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? They had manna, but
the did not think they had a table furnished unless they had boiled and
roast, a first, a second, and a third course, as they had in Egypt,
where they had both flesh and fish, and sauce too ([Exo
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003), [Num
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#005)), dishes of meat and salvers of
fruit. What an unreasonable insatiable thin is luxury! Such a mighty
thing did these epicures think a table well furnished to be that they
thought it was more than God himself could give them in that wilderness;
whereas the beasts of the forest, and all the fowls of the mountains,
are his, [Psa 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#010), [Psa
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#011). Their disbelief of God's power
was so much the worse in that they did at the same time own that he had
done as much as that came to ([Psa
78:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#020)): Behold, he smote the rock,
that the waters gushed out, which they and their cattle drank of. And
which is easier, to furnish a table in the wilderness, which a rich man
can do, or to fetch water out of a rock, which the greatest potentate on
the earth cannot do? Never did unbelief, though always unreasonable, ask
so absurd a question: "Can he that melted down a rock into streams of
water give bread also? Or can he that has given bread provide flesh
also?" Is any thing too hard for Omnipotence? When once the ordinary
powers of nature are exceeded God has made bare his arm, and we must
conclude that nothing is impossible with him. Be it ever so great a
thing that we ask, it becomes us to own, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst.

3\. God justly resented the provocation and was much displeased with
them ([Psa 78:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#021)): The Lord heard
this, and was wroth. Note, God is a witness to all our murmurings and
distrusts; he hears them and is much displeased with them. A fire was
kindled for this against Jacob; the fire of the Lord burnt among them,
[Num 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001). Or it may be understood of
the fire of God's anger which came up against Israel. To unbelievers our
God is himself a consuming fire. Those that will not believe the power
of God's mercy shall feel the power of his indignation, and be made to
confess that it is a fearful thing to fall into his hands. Now here we
are told, (1.) Why God thus resented the provocation ([Psa
78:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#022)): Because by this it appeared
that they believed not in God; they did not give credit to the
revelation he had made of himself to them, for they durst not commit
themselves to him, nor venture themselves with him: They trusted not in
the salvation he had begun to work for them; for then they would not
thus have questioned its progress. Those cannot be said to trust in
God's salvation as their felicity at last who cannot find in their
hearts to trust in his providence for food convenient in the way to it.
That which aggravated their unbelief was the experience they had had of
the power and goodness of God, [Psa
78:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#023). He had given them undeniable
proofs of his power, not only on earth beneath, but in heaven above; for
he commanded the clouds from above, as one that had created them and
commanded them into being; he made what use he pleased of them. Usually
by their showers they contribute to the earth's producing corn; but now,
when God so commanded them, they showered down corn themselves, which is
therefore called here the corn of heaven; for heaven can do the work
without the earth, but not the earth without heaven. God, who has the
key of the clouds, opened the doors of heaven, and that is more than
opening the windows, which yet is spoken of as a great blessing, [Mal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#010). To all that by faith and prayer
ask, seek, and knock, these doors shall at any time be opened; for the
God of heaven is rich in mercy to all that call upon him. He not only
keeps a good house, but keeps open house. Justly might God take it ill
that they should distrust him when he had been so very kind to them that
he had rained down manna upon them to eat, substantial food, daily,
duly, enough for all, enough for each. Man did eat angels' food, such as
angels, if they had occasion for food, would eat and be thankful for; or
rather such as was given by the ministry of angels, and (as the Chaldee
reads it) such as descended from the dwelling of angels. Every one, even
the least child in Israel, did eat the bread of the mighty (so the
margin reads it); the weakest stomach could digest it, and yet it was so
nourishing that it was strong meat for strong men. And, though the
provision was so good, yet they were not stinted, nor ever reduced to
short allowance; for he sent them meat to the full. If they gathered
little, it was their own fault; and yet even then they had no lack, [Exo
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#018). The daily provision God makes
for us, and has made ever since we came into the world, though it has
not so much of miracle as this, has no less of mercy, and is therefore a
great aggravation of our distrust of God. (2.) How he expressed his
resentment of the provocation, not in denying them what they so
inordinately lusted after, but in granting it to them. \[1.\] Did they
question his power? He soon gave them a sensible conviction that he
could furnish a table in the wilderness. Though the winds seem to blow
where they list, yet, when he pleased, he could make them his caterers
to fetch in provisions, [Psa 78:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#026). He
caused an east wind to blow and a south wind, either a south-east wind,
or an east wind first to bring in the quails from that quarter and then
a south wind to bring in more from that quarter; so that he rained flesh
upon them, and that of the most delicate sort, not butchers' meat, but
wild-fowl, and abundance of it, as dust, as the sand of the sea ([Psa
78:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#027)), so that the meanest Israelite
might have sufficient; and it cost them nothing, no, not the pains of
fetching it from the mountains, for he let it fall in the midst of their
camp, round about their habitation, [Psa
78:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#028). We have the account [Num
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031), [Num
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#032). See how good God is even to the
evil and unthankful, and wonder that his goodness does not overcome
their badness. See what little reason we have to judge of God's love by
such gifts of his bounty as these; dainty bits are no tokens of his
peculiar favour. Christ gave dry bread to the disciples that he loved,
but a sop dipped in the sauce to Judas that betrayed him. \[2.\] Did
they defy his justice and boast that they had gained their point? He
made them pay dearly for their quails; for, though he gave them their
own desire, they were not estranged from their lust ([Psa
78:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#029), [Psa
78:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#030)); their appetite was insatiable;
they were well filled and yet they were not satisfied; for they knew not
what they would have. Such is the nature of lust; it is content with
nothing, and the more it is humoured the more humoursome it grows. Those
that indulge their lust will never be estranged from it. Or it intimates
that God's liberality did not make them ashamed of their ungrateful
lustings, as it would have done if they had had any sense of honour. But
what came of it? While the meat was yet in their mouth, rolled under the
tongue as a sweet morsel, the wrath of God came upon them and slew the
fattest of them ([Psa 78:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#031)), those
that were most luxurious and most daring. See [Num
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#033), [Num
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#034). They were fed as sheep for the
slaughter: the butcher takes the fattest first. We may suppose there
were some pious and contented Israelites, that did eat moderately of the
quails and were never the worse; for it was not the meat that poisoned
them, but their own lust. Let epicures and sensualists here read their
doom. The end of those who make a god of their belly is destruction,
[Phi 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019). The prosperity of fools
shall destroy them, and their ruin will be the greater.

4\. The judgments of God upon them did not reform them, nor attain the
end, any more than his mercies ([Psa
78:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#032)): For all this, they sinned
still; they murmured and quarrelled with God and Moses as much as ever.
Though God was wroth and smote them, yet they went on frowardly in the
way of their heart ([Isa 57:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#017)); they
believed not for his wondrous works. Though his works of justice were as
wondrous and as great proofs of his power as his works of mercy, yet
they were not wrought upon by them to fear God, nor convinced how much
it was their interest to make him their friend. Those hearts are hard
indeed that will neither be melted by the mercies of God nor broken by
his judgments.

5\. They persisting in their sins, God proceeded in his judgments, but
they were judgments of another nature, which wrought not suddenly, but
slowly. He punished them not now with such acute diseases as that was
which slew the fattest of them, but a lingering chronical distemper
([Psa 78:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#033)): Therefore their days did
he consume in vanity in the wilderness and their years in trouble. By an
irreversible doom they were condemned to wear out thirty-eight tedious
years in the wilderness, which indeed were consumed in vanity; for in
all those years there was not a step taken nearer Canaan, but they were
turned back again, and wandered to and fro as in a labyrinth, not one
stroke struck towards the conquest of it: and not only in vanity, but in
trouble, for their carcases were condemned to fall in the wilderness and
there they all perished but Caleb and Joshua. Note, Those that sin still
must expect to be in trouble still. And the reason why we spend our days
in so much vanity and trouble, why we live with so little comfort and to
so little purpose, is because we do not live by faith.

6\. Under these rebukes they professed repentance, but they were not
cordial and sincere in this profession. (1.) Their profession was
plausible enough ([Psa 78:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#034), [Psa
78:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#035)): When he slew them, or
condemned them to be slain, then they sought him; they confessed their
fault, and begged his pardon. When some were slain others in a fright
cried to God for mercy, and promised they would reform and be very good;
then they returned to God, and enquired early after him. So one would
have taken them to be such as desired to find him. And they pretended to
do this because, however they had forgotten it formerly, now they
remembered that God was their rock and therefore now that they needed
him they would fly to him and take shelter in him, and that the high God
was their Redeemer, who brought them out of Egypt and to whom therefore
they might come with boldness. Afflictions are sent to put us in mind of
God as our rock and our redeemer; for, in prosperity, we are apt to
forget him. (2.) They were not sincere in this profession ([Psa
78:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#036), [Psa
78:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#037)): They did but flatter him with
their mouth, as if they thought by fair speeches to prevail with him to
revoke the sentence and remove the judgment, with a secret intention to
break their word when the danger was over; they did not return to God
with their whole heart, but feignedly, [Jer
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#010). All their professions, prayers,
and promises, were extorted by the rack. It was plain that they did not
mean as they said, for they did not adhere to it. They thawed in the
sun, but froze in the shade. They did but lie to God with their tongues,
for their heart was not with him, was not right with him, as appeared by
the issue, for they were not stedfast in his covenant. They were not
sincere in their reformation, for they were not constant; and, by
thinking thus to impose upon a heart-searching God, they really put as
great an affront upon him as by any of their reflections.

7\. God hereupon, in pity to them, put a stop to the judgments which
were threatened and in part executed ([Psa
78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038), [Psa
78:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039)): But he, being full of
compassion, forgave their iniquity. One would think this counterfeit
repentance should have filled up the measure of their iniquity. What
could be more provoking than to lie thus to the holy God, than thus to
keep back part of the price, the chief part? [Act
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#003). And yet he, being full of
compassion, forgave their iniquity thus far, that he did not destroy
them and cut them off from being a people, as he justly might have done,
but spared their lives till they had reared another generation which
should enter into the promised land. Destroy it not, for a blessing is
in it, [Isa 65:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008). Many a time he
turned his anger away (for he is Lord of his anger) and did not stir up
all his wrath, to deal with them as they deserved: and why did he not?
Not because their ruin would have been any loss to him, but, (1.)
Because he was full of compassion and, when he was going to destroy
them, his repentings were kindled together, and he said, How shall I
give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? [Hos
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#008). (2.) Because, though they did
not rightly remember that he was their rock, he remembered that they
were but flesh. He considered the corruption of their nature, which
inclined them to evil, and was pleased to make that an excuse for his
sparing them, though it was really no excuse for their sin. See [Gen
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003). He considered the weakness and
frailty of their nature, and what an easy thing it would be to crush
them: They are as a wind that passeth away and cometh not again. They
may soon be taken off, but, when they are gone, they are gone
irrecoverably, and then what will become of the covenant with Abraham?
They are flesh, they are wind; whence it were easy to argue they may
justly, they may immediately, be cut off, and there would be no loss of
them: but God argues, on the contrary, therefore he will not destroy
them; for the true reason is, He is full of compassion.

[Psalms 78:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">psa 78:40</span></span>

The matter and scope of this paragraph are the same with the former,
showing what great mercies God had bestowed upon Israel, how provoking
they had been, what judgments he had brought upon them for their sins,
and yet how, in judgment, he remembered mercy at last. Let not those
that receive mercy from God be thereby emboldened to sin, for the
mercies they receive will aggravate their sin and hasten the punishment
of it; yet let not those that are under divine rebukes for sin be
discouraged from repentance, for their punishments are means of
repentance, and shall not prevent the mercy God has yet in store for
them. Observe,

I. The sins of Israel in the wilderness again reflected on, because
written for our admonition ([Psa
78:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#040), [Psa
78:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#041)): How often did they provoke him
in the wilderness! Note once, nor twice, but many a time; and the
repetition of the provocation was a great aggravation of it, as well as
the place, [Psa 78:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#017). God kept an
account how often they provoked him, though they did not. [Num
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#022), They have tempted me these ten
times. By provoking him they did not so much anger him as grieve him,
for he looked upon them as his children (Israel is my son, my
first-born), and the undutiful disrespectful behaviour of children does
more grieve than anger the tender parents; they lay it to heart, and
take it unkindly, [Isa 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002). They
grieved him because they put him under a necessity of afflicting them,
which he did not willingly. After they had humbled themselves before him
they turned back and tempted God, as before, and limited the Holy One of
Israel, prescribing to him what proofs he should give of his power and
presence with them and what methods he should take in leading them and
providing for them. They limited him to their way and their time, as if
he did not observe that they quarrelled with him. It is presumption for
us to limit the Holy One of Israel; for, being the Holy One, he will do
what is most for his own glory; and, being the Holy One of Israel, he
will do what is most for their good; and we both impeach his wisdom and
betray our own pride and folly if we go about to prescribe to him. That
which occasioned their limiting God for the future was their forgetting
his former favours ([Psa 78:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#042)): They
remembered not his hand, how strong it is and how it had been stretched
out for them, nor the day when he delivered them from the enemy,
Pharaoh, that great enemy who sought their ruin. There are some days
made remarkable by signal deliverances, which ought never to be
forgotten; for the remembrance of them would encourage us in our
greatest straits.

II\. The mercies of God to Israel, which they were unmindful of when
they tempted God and limited him; and this catalogue of the works of
wonder which God wrought for them begins higher, and is carried down
further, than that before, [Psa 78:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#012),
etc.

1\. This begins with their deliverance out of Egypt, and the plagues
with which God compelled the Egyptians to let them go: these were the
signs God wrought in Egypt ([Psa
78:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#043)), the wonders he wrought in the
field of Zoan, that is, in the country of Zoan, as we say, in Agro N.,
meaning in such a country.

(1.) Several of the plagues of Egypt are here specified, which speak
aloud the power of God and his favour to Israel, as well as terror to
his and their enemies. As, \[1.\] The turning of the waters into blood;
they had made themselves drunk with the bloods of God's people, even the
infants, and now God gave them blood to drink, for they were worthy,
[Psa 78:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#044). \[2.\] The flies and frogs
which infested them, mixtures of insects in swarms, in shoals, which
devoured them, which destroyed them, [Psa
78:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#045). For God can make the weakest
and most despicable animals instruments of his wrath when he pleases;
what they want in strength may be made up in number. \[3.\] The plague
of locusts, which devoured their increase, and that which they had
laboured for, [Psa 78:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#046). They are
called God's great army, [Joe 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025).
\[4.\] The hail, which destroyed their trees, especially their vines,
the weakest of trees ([Psa 78:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#047)), and
their cattle, especially their flocks of sheep, the weakest of their
cattle, which were killed with hot thunder-bolts ([Psa
78:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#048)), and the frost, or congealed
rain (as the word signifies), was so violent that it destroyed even the
sycamore-trees. \[5.\] The death of the first-born was the last and
sorest of the plagues of Egypt, and that which perfected the deliverance
of Israel; it was first in intention ([Exo
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#023)), but last in execution; for, if
gentler methods would have done the work, this would have been
prevented: but it is here largely described, [Psa
78:49-51](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049). First, The anger of God was
the cause of it. Wrath had now come upon the Egyptians to the uttermost;
Pharaoh's heart having been often hardened after less judgments had
softened it, God now stirred up all his wrath; for he cast upon them the
fierceness of his anger, anger in the highest degree, wrath and
indignation the cause, and trouble (tribulation and anguish, [Rom
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#008), [Rom
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#009)) the effect. This from on high he
cast upon them and did not spare, and they could not flee out of his
hands, [Job 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#022). He made a way, or
(as the word is) he weighed a path, to his anger. He did not cast it
upon them uncertainly, but by weight. His anger was weighed with the
greatest exactness in the balances of justice; for, in his greatest
displeasure, he never did, nor ever will do, any wrong to any of his
creatures: the path of his anger is always weighed. Secondly, The angels
of God were the instruments employed in this execution: He sent evil
angels among them, not evil in their own nature, but in respect to the
errand upon which they were sent; they were destroying angels, or angels
of punishment, which passed through all the land of Egypt, with orders,
according to the weighed paths of God's anger, not to kill all, but the
first-born only. Good angels become evil angels to sinners. Those that
make the holy God their enemy must never expect the holy angels to be
their friends. Thirdly, The execution itself was very severe: He spared
not their soul from death, but suffered death to ride in triumph among
them and gave their life over to the pestilence, which cut the thread of
life off immediately; for he smote all the first-born in Egypt ([Psa
78:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#051)), the chief of their strength,
the hopes of their respective families; children are the parents'
strength, and the first-born the chief of their strength. Thus, because
Israel was precious in God's sight, he gave men for them and people for
their life, [Isa 43:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#004).

(2.) By these plagues on the Egyptians God made a way for his own people
to go forth like sheep, distinguishing between them and the Egyptians,
as the shepherd divides between the sheep and the goats, having set his
own mark on these sheep by the blood of the lamb sprinkled on their
door-posts. He made them go forth like sheep, not knowing whither they
went, and guided them in the wilderness, as a shepherd guides his flock,
with all possible care and tenderness, [Psa
78:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#052). He led them on safely, though
in dangerous paths, so that they feared not, that is, they needed not to
fear; they were indeed frightened at the Red Sea ([Exo
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010)), but that was said to them, and
done for them, which effectually silenced their fears. But the sea
overwhelmed their enemies that ventured to pursue them into it, [Psa
78:63](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#063). It was a lane to them, but a
grave to their persecutors.

2\. It is carried down as far as their settlement in Canaan ([Psa
78:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#054)): He brought them to the border
of his sanctuary, to that land in the midst of which he set up his
sanctuary, which was, as it were, the centre and metropolis, the crown
and glory, of it. That is a happy land which is the border of God's
sanctuary. It was the happiness of that land that there God was known,
and there were his sanctuary and dwelling-place, [Psa
76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001), [Psa
76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002). The whole land in general, and
Zion in particular, was the mountain which his right hand had purchased,
which by his own power he had set apart for himself. See [Psa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003). He made them to ride on the high
places of the earth, [Isa 58:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014); [Deu
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013). They found the Canaanites in
the full and quiet possession of that land, but God cast out the heathen
before them, not only took away their title to it, as the Lord of the
whole earth, but himself executed the judgment given against them, and,
as Lord of hosts, turned them out of it, and made his people Israel
tread upon their high places, dividing each tribe an inheritance by
line, and making them to dwell in the houses of those whom they had
destroyed. God could have turned the uninhabited uncultivated wilderness
(which perhaps was nearly of the same extent as Canaan) into fruitful
soil, and have planted them there; but the land he designed for them was
to be a type of heaven, and therefore must be the glory of all lands; it
must likewise be fought for, for the kingdom of heaven suffers violence.

III\. The sins of Israel after they were settled in Canaan, [Psa
78:56-58](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#056). The children were like their
fathers, and brought their old corruptions into their new habitations.
Though God had done so much for them, yet they tempted and provoked the
most high God still. He gave them his testimonies, but they did not keep
them; they began very promisingly, but they turned back, gave God good
words, but dealt unfaithfully, and were like a deceitful bow, which
seemed likely to send the arrow to the mark, but, when it is drawn,
breaks, and drops the arrow at the archer's foot, or perhaps makes it
recoil in his face. There was no hold of them, nor any confidence to be
put in their promises or professions. They seemed sometimes devoted to
God, but they presently turned aside, and provoked him to anger with
their high places and their graven images. Idolatry was the sin that did
most easily beset them, and which, though they often professed their
repentance for, they as often relapsed into. It was spiritual adultery
either to worship idols or to worship God by images, as if he had been
an idol, and therefore by it they are said to move him to jealousy, [Deu
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#016), [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021).

IV\. The judgments God brought upon them for these sins. Their place in
Canaan would no more secure them in a sinful way than their descent from
Israel. You only have I known of all the families of the earth,
therefore I will punish you, [Amo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002).
Idolatry is winked at among the Gentiles, but not in Israel, 1. God was
displeased with them ([Psa 78:59](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#059)):
When God heard this, when he heard the cry of their iniquity, which came
up before him, he was wroth, he took it very heinously, as well he
might, and he greatly abhorred Israel, whom he had greatly loved and
delighted in. Those that had been the people of his choice became the
generation of his wrath. Presumptuous sins, idolatries especially,
render even Israelites odious to God's holiness and obnoxious to his
justice. 2. He deserted his tabernacle among them, and removed the
defence which was upon that glory, [Psa
78:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#060). God never leaves us till we
leave him, never withdraws till we have driven him from us. His name is
Jealous, and he is a jealous God; and therefore no marvel if a people
whom he had betrothed to himself be loathed and rejected, and he refuse
to cohabit with them any longer, when they have embraced the bosom of a
stranger. The tabernacle at Shiloh was the tent God had placed among
men, in which God would in very deed dwell with men upon the earth; but,
when his people treacherously forsook it, he justly forsook it, and then
all its glory departed. Israel has small joy of the tabernacle without
the presence of God in it. 3. He gave up all into the hands of the
enemy. Those whom God forsakes become an easy prey to the destroyer. The
Philistines are sworn enemies to the Israel of God, and no less so to
the God of Israel, and yet God will make use of them to be a scourge to
his people. (1.) God permits them to take the ark prisoner, and carry it
off as a trophy of their victory, to show that he had not only forsaken
the tabernacle, but even the ark itself, which shall now be no longer a
token of his presence ([Psa 78:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#061)): He
delivered his strength into captivity, as if it had been weakened and
overcome, and his glory fell under the disgrace of being abandoned into
the enemy's hand. We have the story [Sa1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#011). When the ark has become as a
stranger among Israelites, no marvel if it soon be made a prisoner among
Philistines. (2.) He suffers the armies of Israel to be routed by the
Philistines ([Psa 78:62](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#062), [Psa
78:63](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#063)): He gave his people over unto
the sword, to the sword of his own justice and of the enemy's rage, for
he was wroth with his inheritance; and that wrath of his was the fire
which consumed their young men, in the prime of their time, by the sword
or sickness, and made such a devastation of them that their maidens were
not praised, that is, were not given in marriage (which is honourable in
all), because there were no young men for them to be given to, and
because the distresses and calamities of Israel were so many and great
that the joys of marriage-solemnities were judged unseasonable, and it
was said, Blessed is the womb that beareth not. General destructions
produce a scarcity of men. [Isa 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#012),
I will make a man more precious than fine gold, so that seven women
shall take hold of one man, [Isa 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001);
[Isa 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#025). Yet this was not the worst:
(3.) Even their priests, who attended the ark, fell by the sword, Hophni
and Phinehas. Justly they fell, for they made themselves vile, and were
sinners before the Lord exceedingly; and their priesthood was so far
from being their protection that it aggravated their sin and hastened
their fall. Justly did they fall by the sword, because they exposed
themselves in the field of battle, without call or warrant. We throw
ourselves out of God's protection when we go out of our place and out of
the way of our duty. When the priests fell their widows made no
lamentation, [Psa 78:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#064). All the
ceremonies of mourning were lost and buried in substantial grief; the
widow of Phinehas, instead of lamenting her husband's death, died
herself, when she had called her son Ichabod, [Sa1
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#019), etc.

V. God's return, in mercy, to them, and his gracious appearances for
them after this. We read not of their repentance and return to God, but
God was grieved for the miseries of Israel ([Jdg
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#016)) and concerned for his own
honour, fearing the wrath of the enemy, lest they should behave
themselves strangely, [Deu 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#027). And
therefore then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep ([Psa
78:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#065)), and like a mighty man that
shouteth by reason of wine, not only like one that is raised out of
sleep and recovers himself from the slumber which by drinking he was
overcome with, who then regards that which before he seemed wholly to
neglect, but like one that is refreshed with sleep, and whose heart is
made glad by the sober and moderate use of wine, and is therefore the
more lively and vigorous, and fit for business. When God had delivered
the ark of his strength into captivity, as one jealous of his honour, he
soon put forth the arm of his strength to rescue it, stirred up his
strength to do great things for his people.

1\. He plagued the Philistines who held the ark in captivity, [Psa
78:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#066). He smote them with emerods in
the hinder parts, wounded them behind, as if they were fleeing from him,
even when they thought themselves more than conquerors. He put them to
reproach, and they themselves helped to make it a perpetual reproach by
the golden images of their emerods, which they returned with the ark for
a trespass-offering ([Sa1 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#005)), to
remain in perpetuam rei memoriam - as a perpetual memorial. Note, Sooner
or later God will glorify himself by putting disgrace upon his enemies,
even when they are most elevated with their successes.

2\. He provided a new settlement for his ark after it had been some
months in captivity and some years in obscurity. He did indeed refuse
the tabernacle of Joseph; he never sent it back to Shiloh, in the tribe
of Ephraim, [Psa 78:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067). The ruins of
that place were standing monuments of divine justice. God, see what I
did to Shiloh, [Jer 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012). But he did
not wholly take away the glory from Israel; the moving of the ark is not
the removing of it. Shiloh has lost it, but Israel has not. God will
have a church in the world, and a kingdom among men, though this or that
place may have its candlestick removed; nay, the rejection of Shiloh is
the election of Zion, as, long after, the fall of the Jews was the
riches of the Gentiles, [Rom 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012).
When God chose not the tribe of Ephraim, of which tribe Joshua was, he
chose the tribe of Judah ([Psa 78:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#068)),
because of that tribe Jesus was to be, who is greater than Joshua.
Kirjath-jearim, the place to which the ark was brought after its rescue
out of the hands of the Philistines, was in the tribe of Judah. There it
took possession of that tribe; but thence it was removed to Zion, the
Mount Zion which he loved ([Psa
78:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#068)), which was beautiful for
situation, the joy of the whole earth; there it was that he built his
sanctuary like high palaces and like the earth, [Psa
78:69](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#069). David indeed erected only a
tent for the ark, but a temple was then designed and prepared for, and
finished by his son; and that was, (1.) A very stately place. It was
built like the palaces of princes, and the great men of the earth, nay,
it excelled them all in splendour and magnificence. Solomon built it,
and yet here it is said God built its, for his father had taught him,
perhaps with reference to this undertaking, that except the Lord build
the house those labour in vain that build it, [Psa
127:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001), which is a psalm for Solomon.
(2.) A very stable place, like the earth, though not to continue as long
as the earth, yet while it was to continue it was as firm as the earth,
which God upholds by the word of his power, and it was not finally
destroyed till the gospel temple was erected, which is to continue as
long as the sun and moon endure ([Psa
89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036), [Psa
89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)) and against which the gates of
hell shall not prevail.

3\. He set a good government over them, a monarchy, and a monarch after
his own heart: He chose David his servant out of all the thousands of
Israel, and put the sceptre into his hand, out of whose loins Christ was
to come, and who was to be a type of him, [Psa
78:70](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#070). Concerning David observe here,
(1.) The meanness of his beginning. His extraction indeed was great, for
he descended from the prince of the tribe of Judah, but his education
was poor. He was bred not a scholar, not a soldier, but a shepherd. He
was taken from the sheep-folds, as Moses was; for God delights to put
honour upon the humble and diligent, to raise the poor out of the dust
and to set them among princes; and sometimes he finds those most fit for
public action that have spent the beginning of their time in solitude
and contemplation. The Son of David was upbraided with the obscurity of
his original: Is not this the carpenter? David was taken, he does not
say from leading the rams, but from following the ewes, especially those
great with young, which intimated that of all the good properties of a
shepherd he was most remarkable for his tenderness and compassion to
those of his flock that most needed his care. This temper of mind fitted
him for government, and made him a type of Christ, who, when he feeds
his flock like a shepherd, does with a particular care gently lead those
that are with young, [Isa 40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011). (2.)
The greatness of his advancement. God preferred him to feed Jacob his
people, [Psa 78:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#071). It was a great
honour that God put upon him, in advancing him to be a king, especially
to be king over Jacob and Israel, God's peculiar people, near and dear
to him; but withal it was a great trust reposed in him when he was
charged with the government of those that were God's own inheritance.
God advanced him to the throne that he might feed them, not that he
might feed himself, that he might do good, not that he might make his
family great. It is the charge given to all the under-shepherds, both
magistrates and ministers, that they feed the flock of God. (3.) The
happiness of his management. David, having so great a trust put into his
hands, obtained mercy of the Lord to be found both skilful and faithful
in the discharge of it ([Psa 78:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#072)):
So he fed them; he ruled them and taught them, guided and protected
them, \[1.\] Very honestly; he did it according to the integrity of his
heart, aiming at nothing but the glory of God and the good of the people
committed to his charge; the principles of his religion were the maxims
of his government, which he administered, not with carnal policy, but
with godly sincerity, by the grace of God. In every thing he did he
meant well and had no by-end in view. \[2.\] Very discreetly; he did it
by the skilfulness of his hands. He was not only very sincere in what he
designed, but very prudent in what he did, and chose out the most proper
means in pursuit of his end, for his God did instruct him to discretion.
Happy the people that are under such a government! With good reason does
the psalmist make this the finishing crowning instance of God's favour
to Israel, for David was a type of Christ the great and good Shepherd,
who was humbled first and then exalted, and of whom it was foretold that
he should be filled with the spirit of wisdom and understanding and
should judge and reprove with equity, [Isa
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003), [Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004). On the integrity of his heart
and the skilfulness of his hands all his subjects may entirely rely, and
of the increase of his government and people there shall be no end.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 79](psa079)

</div>
