<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa014)  [Next](psa016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 15:0</span></span>

The scope of this short but excellent psalm is to show us the way to
heaven, and to convince us that, if we would be happy, we must be holy
and honest. Christ, who is himself the way, and in whom we must walk as
our way, has also shown us the same way that is here prescribed, [Mat
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017). "If thou wilt enter into life,
keep the commandments." In this psalm, I. By the question ([Psa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001)) we are directed and excited to
enquire for the way. II. By the answer to that question, in the rest of
the psalm, we are directed to walk in that way ([Psa
15:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#002)). III. By the assurance given
in the close of the psalm of the safety and happiness of those who
answer these characters we are encouraged to walk in that way ([Psa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005)).

A psalm of David.

[Psalms 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 15:1</span></span>

Here is, I. A very serious and weighty question concerning the
characters of a citizen of Zion ([Psa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001)): "Lord, who shall abide in thy
tabernacle? Let me know who shall go to heaven." Not, who by name (in
this way the Lord only knows those that are his), but who by
description: "What kind of people are those whom thou wilt own and crown
with distinguishing and everlasting favours?" This supposes that it is a
great privilege to be a citizen of Zion, an unspeakable honour and
advantage, - that all are not thus privileged, but a remnant only, - and
that men are not entitled to this privilege by their birth and blood:
all shall not abide in God's tabernacle that have Abraham to their
father, but, according as men's hearts and lives are, so will their lot
be. It concerns us all to put this question to ourselves, Lord, what
shall I be, and do, that I may abide in thy tabernacle? [Luk
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#018); [Act
16:30](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#030). 1. Observe to whom this enquiry
is addressed - to God himself. Note, Those that would find the way to
heaven must look up to God, must take direction from his word and beg
direction from his Spirit. It is fit he himself should give laws to his
servants, and appoint the conditions of his favours, and tell who are
his and who not. 2. How it is expressed in Old Testament language. (1.)
By the tabernacle we may understand the church militant, typified by
Moses's tabernacle, fitted to a wilderness-state, mean and movable.
There God manifests himself, and there he meets his people, as of old in
the tabernacle of the testimony, the tabernacle of meeting. Who shall
dwell in this tabernacle? Who shall be accounted a true living member of
God's church, admitted among the spiritual priests to lodge in the
courts of this tabernacle? We are concerned to enquire this, because
many pretend to a place in this tabernacle who really have no part nor
lot in the matter. (2.) By the holy hill we may understand the church
triumphant, alluding to Mount Zion, on which the temple was to be built
by Solomon. It is the happiness of glorified saints that they dwell in
that holy hill; they are at home there: they shall be for ever there. It
concerns us to know who shall dwell there, that we may make it sure to
ourselves that we shall have a place among them, and may then take the
comfort of it, and rejoice in prospect of that holy hill.

II\. A very plain and particular answer to this question. Those that
desire to know their duty, with a resolution to do it, will find the
scripture a very faithful director and conscience a faithful monitor.
Let us see then the particular characters of a citizen of Zion.

1\. He is one that is sincere and entire in his religion: He walketh
uprightly, according to the condition of the covenant ([Gen
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)), "Walk before me, and be thou
perfect" (it is the same word that is here used) "and then thou shalt
find me a God all-sufficient." He is really what he professes to be, is
sound at heart, and can approve himself to God, in his integrity, in all
he does; his conversation is uniform, and he is of a piece with himself,
and endeavours to stand complete in all the will of God. His eye perhaps
is weak, but it is single; he has his spots indeed, but he does not
paint; he is an Israelite indeed in whom is no guile, [Joh
1:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047); [Co2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012). I know no religion but
sincerity.

2\. He is one that is conscientiously honest and just in all his
dealings, faithful and fair to all with whom he has to do: He worketh
righteousness; he walks in all the ordinances and commandments of the
Lord, and takes care to give all their due, is just both to God and man;
and, in speaking to both, he speaks that which is the truth in his
heart; his prayers, professions, and promises, to God, come not out of
feigned lips, nor dares he tell a lie, or so much as equivocate, in his
converse or commerce with men. He walks by the rules of righteousness
and truth, and scorns and abhors the gains of injustice and fraud. He
reckons that that cannot be a good bargain, nor a saving one, which is
made with a lie, and that he who wrongs his neighbour, though ever so
plausibly, will prove, in the end, to have done the greatest injury to
himself.

3\. He is one that contrives to do all the good he can to his
neighbours, but is very careful to do hurt to no man, and is, in a
particular manner, tender of his neighbour's reputation, [Psa
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#003). He does no evil at all to his
neighbour willingly or designedly, nothing to offend or grieve his
spirit, nothing to prejudice the health or ease of his body, nothing to
injure him in his estate or secular interests, in his family or
relations; but walks by that golden rule of equity, To do as he would be
done by. He is especially careful not to injure his neighbour in his
good name, though many, who would not otherwise wrong their neighbours,
make nothing of that. If any man, in this matter, bridles not his
tongue, his religion is vain. He knows the worth of a good name, and
therefore he backbites not, defames no man, speaks evil of no man, makes
not others' faults the subject of his common talk, much less of his
sport and ridicule, nor speaks of them with pleasure, nor at all but for
edification. He makes the best of every body, and the worst of nobody.
He does not take up a reproach, that is, he neither raises it nor
receives it; he gives no credit nor countenance to a calumny, but frowns
upon a backbiting tongue, and so silences it, [Pro
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#023). If an ill-natured character of
his neighbour be given him, or an ill-natured story be told him, he will
disprove it if he can; if not, it shall die with him and go no further.
His charity will cover a multitude of sins.

4\. He is one that values men by their virtue and piety, and not by the
figure they make in the world, [Psa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005). (1.) He thinks the better of no
man's wickedness for his pomp and grandeur: In his eyes a vile person is
contemned. Wicked people are vile people, worthless and good for nothing
(so the word signifies), as dross, as chaff, and as salt that has lost
its savour. They are vile in their choices ([Jer
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013)), in their practices, [Isa
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#006). For this wise and good men
contemn them, not denying them civil honour and respect as men, as men
in authority and power perhaps ([Pe1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017), [Rom
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007)), but, in their judgment of them,
agreeing with the word of God. They are so far from envying them that
they pity them, despising their gains ([Isa
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#015)), as turning to no account,
their dainties ([Psa 141:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#004)), their
pleasures ([Heb 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#024), [Heb
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#025)) as sapless and insipid. They
despise their society ([Psa 119:115](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#115);
[Kg2 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#014)); they despise their taunts
and threats, and are not moved by them, nor disturbed at them; they
despise the feeble efforts of their impotent malice ([Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001), [Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004)), and will shortly triumph in
their fall, [Psa 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006), [Psa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007). God despises them, and they are
of his mind. (2.) He thinks the worse of no man's piety for his poverty
and meanness, but he knows those that fear the Lord. He reckons that
serious piety, wherever it is found, puts an honour upon a man, and
makes his face to shine, more than wealth, or wit, or a great name among
men, does or can. He honours such, esteems them very highly in love,
desires their friendship and conversation and an interest in their
prayers, is glad of an opportunity to show them respect or do them a
good office, pleads their cause and speaks of them with veneration,
rejoices when they prosper, grieves when they are removed, and their
memory, when they are gone, is precious with him. By this we may judge
of ourselves in some measure. What rules do we go by in judging of
others?

5\. He is one that always prefers a good conscience before any secular
interest or advantage whatsoever; for, if he has promised upon oath to
do any thing, though afterwards it appear much to his damage and
prejudice in his worldly estate, yet he adheres to it and changes not,
[Psa 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004). See how weak-sighted and
short-sighted even wise and good men may be; they may swear to their own
hurt, which they were not aware of when they took the oath. But see how
strong the obligation of an oath is, that a man must rather suffer loss
to himself and his family than wrong his neighbour by breaking his oath.
An oath is a sacred thing, which we must not think to play fast and
loose with.

6\. He is one that will not increase his estate by any unjust practices,
[Psa 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005). (1.) Not by extortion: He
putteth not out his money to usury, that he may live at ease upon the
labours of others, while he is in a capacity for improving it by his own
industry. Not that it is any breach of the law of justice or charity for
the lender to share in the profit which the borrower makes of his money,
any more than for the owner of the land to demand rent from the
occupant, money being, by art and labour, as improvable as land. But a
citizen of Zion will freely lend to the poor, according to his ability,
and not be rigorous and severe in recovering his right from those that
are reduced by Providence. (2.) Not by bribery: He will not take a
reward against the innocent; if he be any way employed in the
administration of public justice, he will not, for any gain, or hope of
it, to himself, do any thing to the prejudice of a righteous cause.

III\. The psalm concludes with a ratification of this character of the
citizen of Zion. He is like Zion-hill itself, which cannot be moved, but
abides for ever, [Psa 125:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#001). Every
true living member of the church, like the church itself, is built upon
a rock, which the gates of hell cannot prevail against: He that doeth
these things shall never be moved; shall not be moved for ever, so the
word is. The grace of God shall always be sufficient for him, to
preserve him safe and blameless to the heavenly kingdom. Temptations
shall not overcome him, troubles shall not overwhelm him, nothing shall
rob him of his present peace nor his future bliss.

In singing this psalm we must teach and admonish ourselves, and one
another, to answer the characters here given of the citizen of Zion,
that we may never be moved from God's tabernacle on earth, and may
arrive, at last, at that holy hill where we shall be for ever out of the
reach of temptation and danger.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 16](psa016)

</div>
