<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa001)  [Next](psa003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 2:0</span></span>

As the foregoing psalm was moral, and showed us our duty, so this is
evangelical, and shows us our Saviour. Under the type of David's kingdom
(which was of divine appointment, met with much opposition, but
prevailed at last) the kingdom of the Messiah, the Son of David, is
prophesied of, which is the primary intention and scope of the psalm;
and I think there is less in it of the type, and more of the anti-type,
than in any of the gospel psalms, for there is nothing in it but what is
applicable to Christ, but some things that are not at all applicable to
David ([Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006), [Psa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)): "Thou art my Son" ([Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)), "I will give thee the uttermost
parts of the earth," and ([Psa 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012)),
"Kiss the Son." It is interpreted of Christ [Act
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#024); [Act
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033); [Heb
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005). The Holy Ghost here foretels, I.
The opposition that should be given to the kingdom of the Messiah ([Psa
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)). II. The baffling and
chastising of that opposition ([Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004), [Psa
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005)). III. The setting up of the
kingdom of Christ, notwithstanding that opposition ([Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006)). IV. The confirmation and
establishment of it ([Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)). V. A
promise of the enlargement and success of it ([Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008), [Psa
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)). VI. A call and exhortation to
kings and princes to yield themselves the willing subjects of this
kingdom, ([Psa 2:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010)). Or thus: We
have here, I. Threatenings denounced against the adversaries of Christ's
kingdom ([Psa 2:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)). II. Promises
made to Christ himself, the head of this kingdom ([Psa
2:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)). III. Counsel given to all to
espouse the interests of this kingdom ([Psa
2:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010)). This psalm, as the former,
is very fitly prefixed to this book of devotions, because, as it is
necessary to our acceptance with God that we should be subject to the
precepts of his law, so it is likewise that we should be subject to the
grace of his gospel, and come to him in the name of a Mediator.

[Psalms 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 2:1</span></span>

We have here a very great struggle about the kingdom of Christ, hell and
heaven contesting it; the seat of the war is this earth, where Satan has
long had a usurped kingdom and exercised dominion to such a degree that
he has been called the prince of the power of the very air we breathe in
and the god of the world we live in. He knows very well that, as the
Messiah's kingdom rises and gets ground, his falls and loses ground; and
therefore, though it will be set up certainly, it shall not be set up
tamely. Observe here,

I. The mighty opposition that would be given to the Messiah and his
kingdom, to his holy religion and all the interests of it, [Psa
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001). One would have expected that so
great a blessing to this world would be universally welcomed and
embraced, and that every sheaf would immediately bow to that of the
Messiah and all the crowns and sceptres on earth would be laid at his
feet; but it proves quite contrary. Never were the notions of any sect
of philosophers, though ever so absurd, nor the powers of any prince or
state, though ever so tyrannical, opposed with so much violence as the
doctrine and government of Christ - a sign that it was from heaven, for
the opposition was plainly from hell originally.

1\. We are here told who would appear as adversaries to Christ and the
devil's instruments in this opposition to his kingdom. Princes and
people, court and country, have sometimes separate interests, but here
they are united against Christ; not the mighty only, but the mob, the
heathen, the people, numbers of them, communities of them; though
usually fond of liberty, yet they were averse to the liberty Christ came
to procure and proclaim. Not the mob only, but the mighty (among whom
one might have expected more sense and consideration) appear violent
against Christ. Though his kingdom is not of this world, nor in the
least calculated to weaken their interests, but very likely, if they
pleased, to strengthen them, yet the kings of the earth and rulers are
up in arms immediately. See the effects of the old enmity in the seed of
the serpent against the seed of the woman, and how general and malignant
the corruption of mankind is. See how formidable the enemies of the
church are; they are numerous; they are potent. The unbelieving Jews are
here called heathen, so wretchedly had they degenerated from the faith
and holiness of their ancestors; they stirred up the heathen, the
Gentiles, to persecute the Christians. As the Philistines and their
lords, Saul and his courtiers, the disaffected party and their
ringleaders, opposed David's coming to the crown, so Herod and Pilate,
the Gentiles and the Jews, did their utmost against Christ and his
interest in men, [Act 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#027).

2\. Who it is that they quarrel with, and muster up all their forces
against; it is against the Lord and against his anointed, that is,
against all religion in general and the Christian religion in
particular. It is certain that all who are enemies to Christ, whatever
they pretend, are enemies to God himself; they have hated both me and my
Father, [Joh 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#024). The great author
of our holy religion is here called the Lord's anointed, or Messiah, or
Christ, in allusion to the anointing of David to be king. He is both
authorized and qualified to be the church's head and king, is duly
invested in the office and every way fitted for it; yet there are those
that are against him; nay, therefore they are against him, because they
are impatient of God's authority, envious at Christ's advancement, and
have a rooted enmity to the Spirit of holiness.

3\. The opposition they give is here described. (1.) It is a most
spiteful and malicious opposition. They rage and fret; they gnash their
teeth for vexation at the setting up of Christ's kingdom; it creates
them the utmost uneasiness, and fills them with indignation, so that
they have no enjoyment of themselves; see [Luk
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#014); [Joh
11:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#047); [Act
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#017), [Act
5:33](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#033); [Act
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#028). Idolaters raged at the
discovery of their folly, the chief priests and Pharisees at the
eclipsing of their glory and the shaking of their usurped dominion.
Those that did evil raged at the light. (2.) It is a deliberate and
politic opposition. They imagine or meditate, that is, they contrive
means to suppress the rising interests of Christ's kingdom and are very
confident of the success of their contrivances; they promise themselves
that they shall run down religion and carry the day. (3.) It is a
resolute and obstinate opposition. They set themselves, set their faces
as a flint and their hearts as an adamant, in defiance of reason, and
conscience, and all the terrors of the Lord; they are proud and daring,
like the Babel-builders, and will persist in their resolution, come what
will. (4.) It is a combined and confederate opposition. They take
counsel together, to assist and animate one another in this opposition;
they carry their resolutions nemine contradicente - unanimously, that
they will push on the unholy war against the Messiah with the utmost
vigour: and thereupon councils are called, cabals are formed, and all
their wits are at work to find out ways and means for the preventing of
the establishment of Christ's kingdom, [Psa
83:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#005).

4\. We are here told what it is they are exasperated at and what they
aim at in this opposition ([Psa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003)):
Let us break their bands asunder. They will not be under any government;
they are children of Belial, that cannot endure the yoke, at least the
yoke of the Lord and his anointed. They will be content to entertain
such notions of the kingdom of God and the Messiah as will serve them to
dispute of and to support their own dominion with: if the Lord and his
anointed will make them rich and great in the world, they will bid them
welcome; but if they will restrain their corrupt appetites and passions,
regulate and reform their hearts and lives, and bring them under the
government of a pure and heavenly religion, truly then they will not
have this man to reign over them, [Luk
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#014). Christ has bands and cords for
us; those that will be saved by him must be ruled by him; but they are
cords of a man, agreeable to right reason, and bands of love, conducive
to our true interest: and yet against those the quarrel is. Why do men
oppose religion but because they are impatient of its restraints and
obligations? They would break asunder the bands of conscience they are
under and the cords of God's commandments by which they are called to
tie themselves out from all sin and to themselves up to all duty; they
will not receive them, but cast them away as far from them as they can.

5\. They are here reasoned with concerning it, [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001). Why do they do this? (1.) They
can show no good cause for opposing so just, holy, and gracious a
government, which will not interfere with the secular powers, nor
introduce any dangerous principles hurtful to kings or provinces; but,
on the contrary, if universally received, would bring a heaven upon
earth. (2.) They can hope for no good success in opposing so powerful a
kingdom, with which they are utterly unable to contend. It is a vain
thing; when they have done their worst Christ will have a church in the
world and that church shall be glorious and triumphant. It is built upon
a rock, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. The moon
walks in brightness, though the dogs bark at it.

II\. The mighty conquest gained over all this threatening opposition. If
heaven and earth be the combatants, it is easy to foretel which will be
the conqueror. Those that make this mighty struggle are the people of
the earth, and the kings of the earth, who, being of the earth, are
earthy; but he whom they contest with is one that sits in the heavens,
[Psa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004). He is in the heaven, a place
of such a vast prospect that he can oversee them all and all their
projects; and such is his power that he can overcome them all and all
their attempts. He sits there, as one easy and at rest, out of the reach
of all their impotent menaces and attempts. There he sits as Judge in
all the affairs of the children of men, perfectly secure of the full
accomplishment of all his own purposes and designs, in spite of all
opposition, [Psa 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#010). The perfect
repose of the Eternal Mind may be our comfort under all the
disquietments of our mind. We are tossed on earth, and in the sea, but
he sits in the heavens, where he has prepared his throne for judgment;
and therefore,

1\. The attempts of Christ's enemies are easily ridiculed. God laughs at
them as a company of fools. He has them, and all their attempts, in
derision, and therefore the virgin, the daughter of Zion, has despised
them, [Isa 37:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#022). Sinners' follies are
the just sport of God's infinite wisdom and power; and those attempts of
the kingdom of Satan which in our eyes are formidable in his are
despicable. Sometimes God is said to awake, and arise, and stir up
himself, for the vanquishing of his enemies; here is said to sit still
and vanquish them; for the utmost operations of God's omnipotence create
no difficulty at all, nor the least disturbance to his eternal rest.

2\. They are justly punished, [Psa
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005). Though God despises them as
impotent, yet he does not therefore wink at them, but is justly
displeased with them as impudent and impious, and will make the most
daring sinners to know that he is so and to tremble before him. (1.)
Their sin is a provocation to him. He is wroth; he is sorely displeased.
We cannot expect that God should be reconciled to us, or well pleased in
us, but in and through the anointed; and therefore, if we affront and
reject him, we sin against the remedy and forfeit the benefit of his
interposition between us and God. (2.) His anger will be a vexation to
them; if he but speak to them in his wrath, even the breath of his mouth
will be their confusion, slaughter, and consumption, [Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004); [Th2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008). He speaks, and it is done; he
speaks in wrath, and sinners are undone. As a word made us, so a word
can unmake us again. Who knows the power of his anger? The enemies rage,
but cannot vex God. God sits still, and yet vexes them, puts them into a
consternation (as the word is), and brings them to their wits' end: his
setting up this kingdom of his Son, in spite of them, is the greatest
vexation to them that can be. They were vexatious to Christ's good
subjects; but the day is coming when vexation shall be recompensed to
them.

3\. They are certainly defeated, and all their counsels turned headlong
([Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006)): Yet have I set my king
upon my holy hill of Zion. David was advanced to the throne, and became
master of the strong-hold of Zion, notwithstanding the disturbance given
him by the malcontents in his kingdom, and particularly the affronts he
received from the garrison of Zion, who taunted him with their blind and
their lame, their maimed soldiers, [Sa2
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006). The Lord Jesus is exalted to the
right hand of the Father, has all power both in heaven and in earth, and
is head over all things to the church, notwithstanding the restless
endeavours of his enemies to hinder his advancement. (1.) Jesus Christ
is a King, and is invested by him who is the fountain of power with the
dignity and authority of a sovereign prince in the kingdom both of
providence and grace. (2.) God is pleased to call him his King, because
he is appointed by him, and entrusted for him with the sole
administration of government and judgment. He is his King, for he is
dear to the Father, and one in whom he is well pleased. (3.) Christ took
not this honour to himself, but was called to it, and he that called him
owns him: I have set him; his commandment, his commission, he received
from the Father. (4.) Being called to this honour, he was confirmed in
it; high places (we say) are slippery places, but Christ, being raised,
is fixed: "I have set him, I have settled him." (5.) He is set upon
Zion, the hill of God's holiness, a type of the gospel church, for on
that the temple was built, for the sake of which the whole mount was
called holy. Christ's throne is set up in his church, that is, in the
hearts of all believers and in the societies they form. The evangelical
law of Christ is said to go forth from Zion ([Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003), [Mic
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002)), and therefore that is spoken of
as the head-quarters of this general, the royal seat of this prince, in
whom the children of men shall be joyful.

We are to sing these verses with a holy exultation, triumphing over all
the enemies of Christ's kingdom (not doubting but they will all of them
be quickly made his footstool), and triumphing in Jesus Christ as the
great trustee of power; and we are to pray, in firm belief of the
assurance here given, "Father in heaven, Thy kingdom come; let thy Son's
kingdom come."

[Psalms 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 2:7</span></span>

We have heard what the kings of the earth have to say against Christ's
kingdom, and have heard it gainsaid by him that sits in heaven; let us
now hear what the Messiah himself has to say for his kingdom, to make
good his claims, and it is what all the powers on earth cannot gainsay.

I. The kingdom of the Messiah is founded upon a decree, an eternal
decree, of God the Father. It was not a sudden resolve, it was not the
trial of an experiment, but the result of the counsels of the divine
wisdom and the determinations of the divine will, before all worlds,
neither of which can be altered - the precept or statute (so some read
it), the covenant or compact (so others), the federal transactions
between the Father and the Son concerning man's redemption, represented
by the covenant of royalty made with David and his seed, [Psa
89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003). This our Lord Jesus often
referred to as that which, all along in his undertaking, he governed
himself by; This is the will of him that sent me, [Joh
6:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040). This commandment have I received
of my Father, [Joh 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018); [Joh
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#031).

II\. There is a declaration of that decree as far as is necessary for
the satisfaction of all those who are called and commanded to yield
themselves subjects to this king, and to leave those inexcusable who
will not have him to reign over them. The decree was secret; it was what
the Father said to the Son, when he possessed him in the beginning of
his way, before his works of old; but it is declared by a faithful
witness, who had lain in the bosom of the Father from eternity, and came
into the world as the prophet of the church, to declare him, [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018). The fountain of all being is,
without doubt, the fountain of all power; and it is by, from, and under
him, that the Messiah claims. He has his right to rule from what Jehovah
said to him, by whose word all things were made and are governed. Christ
here makes a tow-fold title to his kingdom: - 1. A title by inheritance
([Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)): Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee. This scripture the apostle quotes ([Heb
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005)) to prove that Christ has a more
excellent name than the angels, but that he obtained it by inheritance,
[Psa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004). He is the Son of God, not by
adoption, but his begotten Son, the only begotten of the Father, [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014). And the Father owns him, and
will have this declared to the world as the reason why he is constituted
King upon the holy hill of Zion; he is therefore unquestionably entitled
to, and perfectly qualified for, that great trust. He is the Son of God,
and therefore of the same nature with the Father, has in him all the
fulness of the godhead, infinite wisdom, power, and holiness. The
supreme government of the church is too high an honour and too hard an
undertaking for any mere creature; none can be fit for it but he who is
one with the Father and was from eternity by him as one brought up with
him, thoroughly apprized of all his counsels, [Pro
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#030). He is the Son of God, and
therefore dear to him, his beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased; and
upon this account we are to receive him as a King; for because the
Father loveth the Son he hath given all things into his hand, [Joh
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035); [Joh
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#020). Being a Son, he is heir of all
things, and, the Father having made the worlds by him, it is easy to
infer thence that by him also he governs them; for he is the eternal
Wisdom and the eternal Word. If God hath said unto him, "Thou art my
Son," it becomes each of us to say to him, "Thou art my Lord, my
sovereign." Further, to satisfy us that his kingdom is well-grounded
upon his sonship, we are here told what his sonship is grounded on: This
day have I begotten thee, which refers both to his eternal generation
itself, for it is quoted ([Heb 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005)) to
prove that he is the brightness of his Father's glory and the express
image of his person ([Psa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003)), and to
the evidence and demonstration given of it by his resurrection from the
dead, for to that also it is expressly applied by the apostle, [Act
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033). He hath raised up Jesus again,
as it is written, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. It was
by the resurrection from the dead, that sign of the prophet Jonas, which
was to be the most convincing of all, that he was declared to be the Son
of God with power, [Rom 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004). Christ is
said to be the first-begotten and first-born from the dead, [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005); [Col
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018). Immediately after his
resurrection he entered upon the administration of his mediatorial
kingdom; it was then that he said, All power is given unto me, and to
that especially he had an eye when he taught his disciples to pray, Thy
kingdom come. 2. A title by agreement, [Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008), [Psa
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009). The agreement is, in short, this:
the Son must undertake the office of an intercessor, and, upon that
condition, he shall have the honour and power of a universal monarch;
see [Isa 53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012), Therefore will I
divide him a portion with the great, because he made intercession for
the transgressors. He shall be a priest upon his throne, and the counsel
of peace shall be between them both, [Zac
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013). (1.) The Son must ask. This
supposes his putting himself voluntarily into a state of inferiority to
the Father, by taking upon him the human nature; for, as God, he was
equal in power and glory with the Father and had nothing to ask. It
supposes the making of a satisfaction by the virtue of which the
intercession must be made, and the paying of a price, on which this
large demand was to be grounded; see [Joh
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004), [Joh
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005). The Son, in asking the heathen
for his inheritance, aims, not only at his own honour, but at their
happiness in him; so that he intercedes for them, ever lives to do so,
and is therefore able to save to the uttermost. (2.) The Father will
grant more than to the half of the kingdom, even to the kingdom itself.
It is here promised him, \[1.\] That his government shall be universal:
he shall have the heathen for his inheritance, not the Jews only, to
whose nation the church had been long confined, but the Gentiles also.
Those in the uttermost parts of the earth (as this nation of ours) shall
be his possession, and he shall have multitudes of willing loyal
subjects among them. Baptized Christians are the possession of the Lord
Jesus; they are to him for a name and a praise. God the Father gives
them to him when by his Spirit and grave he works upon them to submit
their necks to the yoke of the Lord Jesus. This is in part fulfilled; a
great part of the Gentile world received the gospel when it was first
preached, and Christ's throne was set up there where Satan's seat had
long been. But it is to be yet further accomplished when the kingdoms of
this world shall become the kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015). Who shall live when God doeth
this? \[2.\] That it shall be victorious: Thou shalt break them (those
of them that oppose thy kingdom) with a rod of iron, [Psa
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009). This was in part fulfilled when
the nation of the Jews, those that persisted in unbelief and enmity to
Christ's gospel, were destroyed by the Roman power, which was
represented ([Dan 2:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#040)) by feet of
iron, as here by a rod of iron. It had a further accomplishment in the
destruction of the Pagan powers, when the Christian religion came to be
established; but it will not be completely fulfilled till all opposing
rule, principality, and power, shall be finally put down, [Co1
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024); [Psa
110:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005), [Psa
110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006). Observe, How powerful Christ is
and how weak the enemies of his kingdom are before him; he has a rod of
iron wherewith to crush those that will not submit to his golden
sceptre; they are but like a potter's vessel before him, suddenly,
easily, and irreparably dashed in pieces by him; see [Rev
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#027). "Thou shalt do it, that is, thou
shalt have leave to do it." Nations shall be ruined, rather than the
gospel church shall not be built and established. I have loved thee,
therefore will I give men for thee, [Isa
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#004). "Thou shalt have power to do it;
none shall be able to stand before thee; and thou shalt do it
effectually." Those that will not bow shall break.

In singing this, and praying it over, we must give glory to Christ as
the eternal Son of God and our rightful Lord, and must take comfort from
this promise, and plead it with God, that the kingdom of Christ shall be
enlarged and established and shall triumph over all opposition.

[Psalms 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 2:10</span></span>

We have here the practical application of this gospel doctrine
concerning the kingdom of the Messiah, by way of exhortation to the
kings and judges of the earth. They hear that it is in vain to oppose
Christ's government; let them therefore be so wise for themselves as to
submit to it. He that has power to destroy them shows that he has no
pleasure in their destruction, for he puts them into a way to make
themselves happy, [Psa 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010). Those
that would be wise must be instructed; and those are truly wise that
receive instruction from the word of God. Kings and judges stand upon a
level with common persons before God; and it is as necessary for them to
be religious as for any others. Those that give law and judgment to
others must receive law from Christ, and it will be their wisdom to do
so. What is said to them is said to all, and is required of every one of
us, only it is directed to kings and judges because of the influence
which their example will have upon their inferiors, and because they
were men of rank and power that opposed the setting up of Christ's
kingdom, [Psa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002). We are exhorted,

I. To reverence God and to stand in awe of him, [Psa
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011). This is the great duty of
natural religion. God is great, and infinitely above us, just and holy,
and provoked against us, and therefore we ought to fear him and tremble
before him; yet he is our Lord and Master, and we are bound to serve
him, our friend and benefactor, and we have reason to rejoice in him;
and these are very well consistent with each other, for, 1. We must
serve God in all ordinances of worship, and all instances of a godly
conversation, but with a holy fear, a jealousy over ourselves, and a
reverence of him. Even kings themselves, whom others serve and fear,
must serve and fear God; there is the same indefinite distance between
them and God that there is between the meanest of their subjects and
him. 2. We must rejoice in God, and, in subordination to him, we may
rejoice in other things, but still with a holy trembling, as those that
know what a glorious and jealous God he is, whose eye is always upon us.
Our salvation must be wrought out with fear and trembling, [Phi
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012). We ought to rejoice in the
setting up of the kingdom of Christ, but to rejoice with trembling, with
a holy awe of him, a holy fear for ourselves, lest we come short, and a
tender concern for the many precious souls to whom his gospel and
kingdom are a savour of death unto death. Whatever we rejoice in, in
this world, it must always be with trembling, lest we grow vain in our
joy and be puffed up with the things we rejoice in, and because of the
uncertainty of them and the damp which by a thousand accidents may soon
be cast upon our joy. To rejoice with trembling is to rejoice as though
we rejoiced not, [Co1 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#030).

II\. To welcome Jesus Christ and to submit to him, [Psa
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012). This is the great duty of the
Christian religion; it is that which is required of all, even kings and
judges, and it is our wisdom and interest to do it. Observe here,

1\. The command given to this purport: Kiss the Son. Christ is called
the Son because so he was declared ([Psa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)), Thou art my Son. He is the Son
of God by eternal generation, and, upon that account, he is to be adored
by us. He is the Son of man (that is, the Mediator, [Joh
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#027)), and, upon that account, to be
received and submitted to. He is called the Son, to include both, as God
is often called emphatically the Father, because he is the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and in him our Father, and we must have an eye to him
under both considerations. Our duty to Christ is here expressed
figuratively: Kiss the Son, not with a betraying kiss, as Judas kissed
him, and as all hypocrites, who pretend to honour him, but really
affront him; but with a believing kiss. (1.) With a kiss of agreement
and reconciliation. Kiss, and be friends, as Jacob and Esau; let the
quarrel between us and God terminate; let the acts of hostility cease,
and let us be at peace with God in Christ, who is our peace. (2.) With a
kiss of adoration and religious worship. Those that worshipped idols
kissed them, [Kg1 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018); [Hos
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#002). Let us study how to do honour to
the Lord Jesus, and to give unto him the glory due unto his name. He is
thy Lord, and worship thou him, [Psa
45:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011). We must worship the Lamb, as
well as him that sits on the throne, [Rev
5:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009). (3.) With a kiss of affection
and sincere love: "Kiss the Son; enter into a covenant of friendship
with him, and let him be very dear and precious to you; love him above
all, love him in sincerity, love him much, as she did to whom much was
forgiven, and, in token of it, kissed his feet," [Luk
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#038). (4.) With a kiss of allegiance
and loyalty, as Samuel kissed Saul, [Sa1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001). Swear fealty and homage to him,
submit to his government, take his yoke upon you, and give up yourselves
to be governed by his laws, disposed of by his providence, and entirely
devoted to his interest.

2\. The reasons to enforce this command; and they are taken from our own
interest, which God, in his gospel, shows a concern for. Consider,

(1.) The certain ruin we run upon if we refuse and reject Christ: "Kiss
the Son; for it is at your peril if you do not." \[1.\] "It will be a
great provocation to him. Do it, lest he be angry." The Father is angry
already; the Son is the Mediator that undertakes to make peace; if we
slight him, the Father's wrath abides upon us ([Joh
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036)), and not only so, but there is
an addition of the Son's wrath too, to whom nothing is more displeasing
than to have the offers of his grace slighted and the designs of it
frustrated. The Son can be angry, though a Lamb; he is the lion of the
tribe of Judah, and the wrath of this king, this King of kings, will be
as the roaring of a lion, and will drive even mighty men and chief
captains to seek in vain for shelter in rocks and mountains, [Rev
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#016). If the Son be angry, who shall
intercede for us? There remains no more sacrifice, no other name by
which we can be saved. Unbelief is a sin against the remedy. \[2.\] It
will be utter destruction to yourselves: Lest you perish from the way,
or in the way so some, in the way of your sins, and from the way of your
vain hopes; lest your way perish (as [Psa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006)), lest you prove to have missed
the way to happiness. Christ is the way; take heed lest you be cut off
from him as your way to God. It intimates that they were, or at least
thought themselves, in the way; but, by neglecting Christ, they perished
from it, which aggravates their ruin, that they go to hell from the way
to heaven, are not far from the kingdom of God and yet never arrive
there.

(2.) The happiness we are sure of if we yield ourselves to Christ. When
his wrath is kindled, though but a little, the least spark of that fire
is enough to make the proudest sinner miserable if it fasten upon his
conscience; for it will burn to the lowest hell: one would think it
should therefore follow, "When his wrath is kindled, woe be to those
that despise him;" but the Psalmist startles at the thought, deprecates
that dreadful doom and pronounces those blessed that escape it. Those
that trust in him, and so kiss him, are truly happy; but they will
especially appear to be so when the wrath of Christ is kindled against
others. Blessed will those be in the day of wrath, who, by trusting in
Christ, have made him their refuge and patron; when the hearts of others
fail them for fear they shall lift up their heads with joy; and then
those who now despise Christ and his followers will be forced to say, to
their own greater confusion, "Now we see that blessed are all those, and
those only, that trust in him."

In singing this, and praying it over, we should have our hearts filled
with a holy awe of God, but at the same time borne up with a cheerful
confidence in Christ, in whose mediation we may comfort and encourage
ourselves and one another. We are the circumcision, that rejoice in
Christ Jesus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 3](psa003)

</div>
