<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa053)  [Next](psa055) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 54](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 54:0</span></span>

The key of this psalm hangs at the door, for the title tells us upon
what occasion it was penned - when the inhabitants of Ziph, men of Judah
(types of Judas the traitor), betrayed David to Saul, by informing him
where he was and putting him in a way how to seize him. This they did
twice ([Sa1 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#019); [Sa1
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#001)), and it is upon record to their
everlasting infamy. The psalm is sweet; the former part of it, perhaps,
was meditated when he was in his distress and put into writing when the
danger was over, with the addition of the last two verses, which express
his thankfulness for the deliverance, which yet might be written in
faith, even when he was in the midst of his fright. Here, I. He
complains to God of the malice of his enemies, and prays for help
against them ([Psa 54:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001)). II. He
comforts himself with an assurance of the divine favour and protection,
and that, in due time, his enemies should be confounded and be delivered
([Psa 54:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#004)). What time we are in
distress we may comfortable sing this psalm.

To the chief musician on Neginoth, Maschil. A psalm of David, when the
Ziphim came and said to Saul, Doth not David hide himself with us?

[Psalms 54:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 54:1</span></span>

We may observe here, 1. The great distress that David was now in, which
the title gives an account of. The Ziphim came of their own accord, and
informed Saul where David was, with a promise to deliver him into his
hand. One would have thought that when David had retired into the
country he would not be pursued, into a desert country he would not be
discovered, and into his own country he would not be betrayed; and yet
it seems he was. Never let a good man expect to be safe an easy till he
comes to heaven. How treacherous, how officious, were these Ziphim! It
is well that God is faithful, for men are not to be trusted, [Mic
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#005). 2. His prayer to God for succour
and deliverance, [Psa 54:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001), [Psa
54:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#002). He appeals to God's strength, by
which he was able to help him, and to his name, by which he was engaged
to help him, and begs he would save him from his enemies and judge him,
that is, plead his cause and judge for him. David has no other plea to
depend upon than God's name, no other power to depend upon than God's
strength, and those he makes his refuge and confidence. This would be
the effectual answer of his prayers ([Psa
54:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#002)), which even in his flight, when
he had not opportunity for solemn address to God, he was ever and anon
lifting up to heaven: Hear my prayer, which comes from my heart, and
give ear to the words of my mouth. 3. His plea, which is taken from the
character of his enemies, [Psa 54:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#003).
(1.) They are strangers; such were the Ziphites, unworthy the name of
Israelites. "They have used me more basely and barbarously than the
Philistines themselves would have done." The worst treatment may be
expected from those who, having broken through the bonds of relation and
alliance, make themselves strangers. (2.) They are oppressors; such was
Saul, who, as a king, should have used his power for the protection of
all his good subjects, but abused it for their destruction. Nothing is
so grievous as oppression in the seat of judgment, [Ecc
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016). Paul's greatest perils were by
his own countrymen and by false brethren ([Co2
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#026)), and so were David's. (3.) They
were very formidable and threatening; they not only hated him and wished
him ill, but they rose up against him in a body, joining their power to
do him a mischief. (4.) They were very spiteful and malicious: They seek
after my soul; they hunt for the precious life; no less will satisfy
them. We may, in faith, pray that God would not by his providence give
success, lest it should look like giving countenance, to such cruel
bloody men. (5.) They were very profane and atheistical, and, for this
reason, he thought God was concerned in honour to appear against them:
They have not set God before them, that is, they have quite cast off the
thoughts of God; they do not consider that his eye is upon them, that,
in fighting against his people, they fight against him, nor have they
any dread of the certain fatal consequences of such an unequal
engagement. Note, From those who do not set God before them no good is
to be expected; nay, what wickedness will not such men be guilty of?
What bonds of nature, or friendship, or gratitude, or covenant, will
hold those that have broken through the fear of God? Selah - Mark this.
Let us all be sure to set God before us at all times; for, if we do not
we are in danger of becoming desperate.

[Psalms 54:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 54:4</span></span>

We have here the lively actings of David's faith in his prayer, by which
he was assured that the issue would be comfortable, though the attempt
upon him was formidable.

I. He was sure that he had God on his side, that God took his part ([Psa
54:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#004)); he speaks it with an air of
triumph and exultation, Behold, God is my helper. If we be for him, he
is for us; and, if he be for us, we shall have such help in him that we
need not fear any power engaged against us. Though men and devils aim to
be our destroyers, they shall not prevail while God is our helper: The
Lord is with those that uphold my soul. Compare [Psa
118:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#007), "The Lord taketh my part with
those that help me. There are some that uphold me, and God is one of
them; he is the principal one; none of them could help me if he did not
help them." Every creature is that to us (and no more) that God makes it
to be. He means, "The Lord is he that upholds my soul, and keeps me from
tiring in my work and sinking under my burdens." He that by his
providence upholds all things by his grace upholds the souls of his
people. God, who will in due time save his people, does, in the mean
time, sustain them and bear them up, so that the spirit he has made
shall not fail before him.

II\. God taking part with him, he doubted not but his enemies should
both flee and fall before him ([Psa
54:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#005)): "He shall reward evil unto my
enemies that observe me, seeking an opportunity to do me a mischief. The
evil they designed against me the righteous God will return upon their
own heads." David would not render evil to them, but he knew God would:
I as a deaf man heard not, for thou wilt hear. The enemies we forgive,
if they repent not, God will judge; and for this reason we must not
avenge ourselves, because God has said, Vengeance is mine. But he prays,
Cut them off in thy truth. This is not a prayer of malice, but a prayer
of faith; for it has an eye to the word of God, and only desires the
performance of that. There is truth in God's threatenings as well as in
his promises, and sinners that repent not will find it so to their cost.

III\. He promises to give thanks to God for all the experiences he had
had of his goodness to him ([Psa
54:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#006)): I will sacrifice unto thee.
Though sacrifices were expensive, yet, when God required that his
worshippers should in that way praise him, David would not only offer
them, but offer them freely and without grudging. All our spiritual
sacrifices must, in this sense, be free-will-offerings; for God loves a
cheerful giver. Yet he will not only bring his sacrifice, which was but
the shadow, the ceremony; he will mind the substance: I will praise thy
name. A thankful heart, and the calves of our lips giving thanks to his
name, are the sacrifices God will accept: "I will praise thy name, for
it is good. Thy name is not only great but good, and therefore to be
praised. To praise thy name is not only what we are bound to, but it is
good, it is pleasant, it is profitable; it is good for us ([Psa
92:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#001)); therefore I will praise thy
name."

IV\. He speaks of his deliverance as a thing done ([Psa
54:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#007)): I will praise thy name, and
say, "He has delivered me; this shall be my song then." That which he
rejoices in is a complete deliverance - He has delivered me from all
trouble; and a deliverance to his heart's content - My eye has seen its
desire upon my enemies, not seen them cut off and ruined, but forced to
retreat, tidings being brought to Saul that the Philistines were upon
him, [Sa1 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#027), [Sa1
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#028). All David desired was to be
himself safe; when he saw Saul draw off his forces he saw his desire. He
has delivered me from all trouble. Either, 1. With this thought David
comforted himself when he was in distress: "He has delivered me from all
trouble hitherto, and many a time I have gained my point, and seen my
desire on my enemies; therefore he will deliver me out of this trouble."
We should thus, in our greatest straits, encourage ourselves with our
past experiences. Or, 2. With this thought he magnified his present
deliverance when the fright was over, that it was an earnest of further
deliverance. He speaks of the completing of his deliverance as a thing
done, though he had as yet many troubles before him, because, having
God's promise for it, he was as sure of it as if it had been done
already. "He that has begun to deliver me from all troubles, and will at
length give me to see my desire upon my enemies." This may perhaps point
at Christ, of whom David was a type; God would deliver him out of all
the troubles of his state of humiliation, and he was perfectly sure of
it; and all things are said to be put under his feet; for, though we see
not yet all things put under him, yet we are sure he shall reign till
all his enemies be made his footstool, and he shall see his desire upon
them. However, it is an encouragement to all believers to make that use
of their particular deliverances which St. Paul does (like David here),
[Ti2 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017), [Ti2
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#018), He that delivered me from the
mouth of the lion shall deliver me from every evil work, and will
preserve me to his heavenly kingdom.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 55](psa055)

</div>
