<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa011)  [Next](psa013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 12:0</span></span>

It is supposed that David penned this psalm in Saul's reign, when there
was a general decay of honesty and piety both in court and country,
which he here complains of to God, and very feelingly, for he himself
suffered by the treachery of his false friends and the insolence of his
sworn enemies. I. He begs help of God, because there were none among men
whom he durst trust ([Psa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001), [Psa
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)). II. He foretels the destruction
of his proud and threatening enemies ([Psa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003), [Psa
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004)). III. He assures himself and
others that, how ill soever things went now ([Psa
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008)), God would preserve and secure
to himself his own people ([Psa 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005),
[Psa 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007)), and would certainly make
good his promises to them ([Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)).
Whether this psalm was penned in Saul's reign or no, it is certainly
calculated for a bad reign; and perhaps David, in spirit foresaw that
some of his successors would bring things to as bad a pass as is here
described, and treasured up this psalm for the use of the church then.
"O tempora, O mores! - Oh the times! Oh the manners!"

To the chief musician upon Sheminith. A psalm of David.

[Psalms 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 12:1</span></span>

This psalm furnishes us with good thoughts for bad times, in which,
though the prudent will keep silent ([Amo
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#013)) because a man may then be made
an offender for a word, yet we may comfort ourselves with such suitable
meditations and prayers as are here got ready to our hand.

I. Let us see here what it is that makes the times bad, and when they
may be said to be so. Ask the children of this world what it is in their
account that makes the times bad, and they will tell you, Scarcity of
money, decay of trade, and the desolations of war, make the times bad.
But the scripture lays the badness of the times upon causes of another
nature. [Ti2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001), Perilous times shall
come, for iniquity shall abound; and that is the thing David here
complains of.

1\. When there is a general decay of piety and honesty among men the
times are then truly bad ([Psa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)):
When the godly man ceases and the faithful fail. Observe how these two
characters are here put together, the godly and the faithful. As there
is no true policy, so there is no true piety, without honesty. Godly men
are faithful men, fast men, so they have sometimes been called; their
word is as confirming as their oath, as binding as their bond; they make
conscience of being true both to God and man. They are here said to
cease and fail, either by death or by desertion, or by both. Those that
were godly and faithful were taken away, and those that were left had
sadly degenerated and were not what they had been; so that there were
few or no good people that were Israelites indeed to be met with.
Perhaps he meant that there were no godly faithful men among Saul's
courtiers; if he meant there were few or none in Israel, we hope he was
under the same mistake that Elijah was, who thought he only was left
alone, when God had 7000 who kept their integrity ([Rom
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#003)); or he meant that there were few
in comparison; there was a general decay of religion and virtue (and the
times are bad, very bad, when it is so), not a man to be found that
executes judgment, [Jer 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#001).

2\. When dissimulation and flattery have corrupted and debauched all
conversation, then the times are very bad ([Psa
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)), when men are generally so
profligate that they make no conscience of a lie, are so spiteful as to
design against their neighbours the worst of mischiefs, and yet so base
as to cover the design with the most specious and plausible pretences
and professions of friendship. Thus they speak vanity (that is,
falsehood and a lie) every one to his neighbour, with flattering lips
and a double heart. They will kiss and kill (as Joab did Abner and Amasa
in David's own time), will smile in your face and cut your throat. This
is the devil's image complete, a complication of malice and falsehood.
The times are bad indeed when there is no such thing as sincerity to be
met with, when an honest man knows not whom to believe nor whom to
trust, nor dares put confidence in a friend, in a guide, [Mic
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#005), [Mic
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#006); [Jer
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#004), [Jer
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#005). Woe to those who help to make the
times thus perilous.

3\. When the enemies of God, and religion, and religious people, are
impudent and daring, and threaten to run down all that is just and
sacred, then the times are very bad, when proud sinners have arrived at
such a pitch of impiety as to say, "With our tongue will we prevail
against the cause of virtue; our lips are our own and we may say what we
will; who is lord over us, either to restrain us or to call us to an
account?" [Psa 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004). This bespeaks,
(1.) A proud conceit of themselves and confidence in themselves, as if
the point were indeed gained by eating forbidden fruit, and they were as
gods, independent and self-sufficient, infallible in their knowledge of
good and evil and therefore fit to be oracles, irresistible in their
power and therefore fit to be lawgivers, that could prevail with their
tongues, and, like God himself, speak and it is done. (2.) An insolent
contempt of God's dominion as if he had no propriety in them - Our lips
are our own (an unjust pretension, for who made man's mouth, in whose
hand is his breath, and whose is the air he breathes in?) and as if he
had no authority either to command them or to judge them: Who is Lord
over us? Like Pharaoh, [Exo 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001). This
is as absurd and unreasonable as the former; for he in whom we live, and
move, and have our being, must needs be, by an indisputable title, Lord
over us.

4\. When the poor and needy are oppressed, and abused, and puffed at,
then the times are very bad. This is implied ([Psa
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)) where God himself takes notice
of the oppression of the poor and the sighing of the needy; they are
oppressed because they are poor, have all manner of wrong done them
merely because they are not in a capacity to right themselves. Being
thus oppressed, they dare not speak for themselves, lest their defence
should be made their offence; but they sigh, secretly bemoaning their
calamities, and pouring out their souls in sighs before God. If their
oppressors be spoken to on their behalf, they puff at them, make light
of their own sin and the misery of the poor, and lay neither to heart;
see [Psa 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005).

5\. When wickedness abounds, and goes barefaced, under the protection
and countenance of those in authority, then the times are very bad, [Psa
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008). When the vilest men are exalted
to places of trust and power (who, instead of putting the laws in
execution against vice and injustice and punishing the wicked according
to their merits, patronise and protect them, give them countenance, and
support their reputation by their own example), then the wicked walk on
every side; they swarm in all places, and go up and down seeking to
deceive, debauch, and destroy others; they are neither afraid nor
ashamed to discover themselves; they declare their sin as Sodom and
there is none to check or control them. Bad men are base men, the vilest
of men, and they are so though they are ever so highly exalted in this
world. Antiochus the illustrious the scripture calls a vile person, [Dan
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#021). But it is bad with a kingdom
when such are preferred; no marvel if wickedness then grows impudent and
insolent. When the wicked bear rule the people mourn.

II\. Let us now see what good thoughts we are here furnished with for
such bad times; and what times we may yet be reserved for we cannot
tell. When times are thus bad it is comfortable to think,

1\. That we have a God to go to, from whom we may ask and expect the
redress of all our grievances. This he begins with ([Psa
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)): "Help, Lord, for the godly man
ceaseth. All other helps and helpers fail; even the godly and faithful,
who should lend a helping hand to support the dying cause of religion,
are gone, and therefore whither shall we seek but to thee?" Note, When
godly faithful people cease and fail it is time to cry, Help, Lord! The
abounding of iniquity threatens a deluge. "Help, Lord, help the
virtuous; few seek to hold fast their integrity, and to stand in the
gap; help to save thy own interest in the world from sinking. It is time
for thee, Lord, to work."

2\. That God will certainly reckon with false and proud men, and will
punish and restrain their insolence. They are above the control of men
and set them at defiance. Men cannot discover the falsehood of
flatterers, nor humble the haughtiness of those that speak proud things;
but the righteous God will cut off all flattering lips, that give the
traitor's kiss and speak words softer then oil when war is in the heart;
he will pluck out the tongue that speaks proud things against God and
religion, [Psa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003). Some translate it
as a prayer, "May God cut off those false and spiteful lips." Let lying
lips be put to silence.

3\. That God will, in due time, work deliverance for his oppressed
people, and shelter them from the malicious designs of their persecutors
([Psa 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)): Now, will I arise, saith
the Lord. This promise of God, which David here delivered by the spirit
of prophecy, is an answer to that petition which he put up to God by the
spirit of prayer. "Help, Lord," says he; "I will," says God; "here I am,
with seasonable and effectual help." (1.) It is seasonable, in the
fittest time. \[1.\] When the oppressors are in the height of their
pride and insolence - when they say, Who is lord over us? - then is
God's time to let them know, to their cost, that he is above them.
\[2.\] When the oppressed are in the depth of their distress and
despondency, when they are sighing like Israel in Egypt by reason of the
cruel bondage, then is God's time to appear for them, as for Israel when
they were most dejected and Pharaoh was most elevated. Now will I arise.
Note, There is a time fixed for the rescue of oppressed innocency; that
time will come, and we may be sure it is the fittest time, [Psa
102:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#013). (2.) It is effectual: I will
set him in safety, or in salvation, not only protect him, but restore
him to his former prosperity, will bring him out into a wealthy place
([Psa 66:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012)), so that, upon the whole,
he shall lose nothing by his sufferings.

4\. That, though men are false, God is faithful; though they are not to
be trusted, God is. They speak vanity and flattery, but the words of the
Lord are pure words ([Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)), not
only all true, but all pure, like silver tried in a furnace of earth or
a crucible. It denotes, (1.) The sincerity of God's word, every thing is
really as it is there represented and not otherwise; it does not jest
with us, not impose upon us, nor has it any other design towards us than
our own good. (2.) The preciousness of God's word; it is of great and
intrinsic value, like silver refined to the highest degree; it has
nothing in it to depreciate it. (3.) The many proofs that have been
given of its power and truth; it has been often tried, all the saints in
all ages have trusted it and so tried it, and it never deceived them nor
frustrated their expectation, but they have all set to their seal that
God's word is true, with an Experto crede - Trust one that has made
trial; they have found it so. Probably this refers especially to these
promises of succouring and relieving the poor and oppressed. Their
friends put them in hopes that they will do something for them, and yet
prove a broken reed; but the words of God are what we may rely upon; and
the less confidence is to be put in men's words let us with the more
assurance trust in God's word.

5\. That God will secure his chosen remnant to himself, how bad soever
the times are ([Psa 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007)): Thou shalt
preserve them from this generation for ever. This intimates that, as
long as the world stands, there will be a generation of proud and wicked
men in it, more or less, who will threaten by their wretched arts to
ruin religion, by wearing out the saints of the Most High, [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025). But let God alone to maintain
his own interest and to preserve his own people. He will keep them from
this generation, (1.) From being debauched by them and drawn away from
God, from mingling with them and learning their works. In times of
general apostasy the Lord knows those that are his, and they shall be
enabled to keep their integrity. (2.) From being destroyed and rooted
out by them. The church is built upon a rock, and so well fortified that
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. In the worst of times
God has his remnant, and in every age will reserve to himself a holy
seed and preserve that to his heavenly kingdom.

In singing this psalm, and praying it over, we must bewail the general
corruption of manners, thank God that things are not worse than they
are, but pray and hope that they will be better in God's due time.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 13](psa013)

</div>
