<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa029)  [Next](psa031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 30:0</span></span>

This is a psalm of thanksgiving for the great deliverances which God had
wrought for David, penned upon occasion of the dedicating of his house
of cedar, and sung in that pious solemnity, though there is not any
thing in it that has particular reference to that occasion. Some collect
from divers passages in the psalm itself that it was penned upon his
recovery from a dangerous fit of sickness, which might happen to be
about the time of the dedication of his house. I. He here praises God
for the deliverances he had wrought for him ([Psa
30:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001)). II. He calls upon others to
praise him too, and encourages them to trust in him ([Psa
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004), [Psa
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005)). III. He blames himself for his
former security ([Psa 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006), [Psa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007)). IV. He recollects the prayers
and complaints he had made in his distress ([Psa
30:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#008)). With them he stirs up
himself to be very thankful to God for the present comfortable change
([Psa 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011), [Psa
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#012)). In singing this psalm we ought
to remember with thankfulness any like deliverances wrought for us, for
which we must stir up our selves to praise him and by which we must be
engaged to depend upon him.

A psalm and song at the dedication of the house of David.

[Psalms 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 30:1</span></span>

It was the laudable practice of the pious Jews, and, though not
expressly appointed, yet allowed and accepted, when they had built a new
house, to dedicate it to God, [Deu
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#005). David did so when his house was
built, and he took possession of it ([Sa2
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#011)); for royal palaces do as much
need God's protection, and are as much bound to be at his service, as
ordinary houses. Note, The houses we dwell in should, at our first
entrance upon them, be dedicated to God, as little sanctuaries. We must
solemnly commit ourselves, our families, and all our family affairs, to
God's guidance and care, must pray for his presence and blessing, must
devote ourselves and all ours to his glory, and must resolve both that
we put away iniquity far from our tabernacles and that we and our houses
will serve the Lord both in the duties of family worship and in all
instances of gospel obedience. Some conjecture that this psalm was sung
at the re-dedication of David's house, after he had been driven out of
it by Absalom, who had defiled it with his incest, and that it is a
thanksgiving for the crushing of that dangerous rebellion. In these
verses,

I. David does himself give God thanks for the great deliverances he had
wrought for him ([Psa 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001)): "I will
extol thee, O Lord! I will exalt thy name, will praise thee as one high
and lifted up, I will do what I can to advance the interest of thy
kingdom among men. I will extol thee, for thou hast lifted me up, not
only up out of the pit in which I was sinking, but up to the throne of
Israel." He raiseth up the poor out of the dust. In consideration of the
great things God has done to exalt us, both by his providence and by his
grace, we are bound, in gratitude, to do all we can to extol his name,
though the most we can do is but little. Three thing magnify David's
deliverance: - 1. That it was the defeat of his enemies. They were not
suffered to triumph over him, as they would have done (though it is a
barbarous thing) if he had died of this sickness or perished in this
distress: see [Psa 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#011). 2. That it
was an answer to his prayers ([Psa
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#002)): I cried unto thee. All the
expressions of the sense we have of our troubles should be directed to
God, and every cry be a cry to him; and giving way, in this manner, to
our grief, will ease a burdened spirit. "I cried to thee, and thou hast
not only heard me, but healed me, healed the distempered body, healed
the disturbed and disquieted mind, healed the disordered distracted
affairs of the kingdom." This is what God glories in, I am the Lord that
healeth thee ([Exo 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#026)), and we must
give him the glory of it. 3. That it was the saving of his life; for he
was brought to the last extremity, dropping into the grave, and ready to
go down into the pit, and yet rescued and kept alive, [Psa
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003). The more imminent our dangers
have been, the more eminent our deliverances have been, the more
comfortable are they to ourselves and the more illustrious proofs of the
power and goodness of God. A life from the dead ought to be spent in
extolling the God of our life.

II\. He calls upon others to join with him in praise, not only for the
particular favours God has bestowed upon him, but for the general tokens
of his good-will to all his saints ([Psa
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004)): Sing unto the Lord, O you
saints of his! All that are truly saints he owns for his. There is a
remnant of such in this world, and from them it is expected that they
sing unto him; for they are created and sanctified, made and made
saints, that they may be to him for a name and a praise. His saints in
heaven sing to him; why should not those on earth be doing the same
work, as well as they can, in concert with them? 1. They believe him to
be a God of unspotted purity; and therefore let them sing to him; "Let
them give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness; let them praise his
holy name, for holiness is his memorial throughout all generations." God
is a holy God; his holiness is his glory; that is the attribute which
the holy angels, in their praises, fasten most upon, [Isa
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003); [Rev
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008). We ought to be much in the
mention and remembrance of God's holiness. It is a matter of joy to the
saints that God is a holy God; for then they hope he will make them
holy, more holy. None of all God's perfections carries in it more terror
to the wicked, nor more comfort to the godly, than his holiness. It is a
good sign that we are in some measure partakers of his holiness if we
can heartily rejoice and give thanks at the remembrance of it. 2. They
have experienced him to be a God gracious and merciful; and therefore
let them sing to him. (1.) We have found his frowns very short. Though
we have deserved that they should be everlasting, and that he should be
angry with us till he had consumed us, and should never be reconciled,
yet his anger endureth but for a moment, [Psa
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005). When we offend him he is angry;
but, as he is slow to anger and not soon provoked, so when he is angry,
upon our repentance and humiliation his anger is soon turned away and he
is willing to be at peace with us. If he hide his face from his own
children, and suspend the wonted tokens of his favour, it is but in a
little wrath, and for a small moment; but he will gather them with
everlasting kindness, [Isa 54:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#007), [Isa
54:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008). If weeping endureth for a night,
and it be a wearisome night, yet as sure as the light of the morning
returns after the darkness of the night, so sure will joy and comfort
return in a short time, in due time, to the people of God; for the
covenant of grace is as firm as the covenant of the day. This word has
often been fulfilled to us in the letter. Weeping has endured for a
night, but the grief has been soon over and the grievance gone. Observe,
As long as God's anger continues so long the saints' weeping continues;
but, if that be but for a moment, the affliction is but for a moment,
and when the light of God's countenance is restored the affliction is
easily pronounced light and momentary. (2.) We have found his smiles
very sweet; In his favour is life, that is, all good. The return of his
favour to an afflicted soul is as life from the dead; nothing can be
more reviving. Our happiness is bound up in God's favour; if we have
that, we have enough, whatever else we want. It is the life of the soul,
it is spiritual life, the earnest of life eternal.

[Psalms 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 30:6</span></span>

We have, in these verses, an account of three several states that David
was in successively, and of the workings of his heart towards God in
each of those states - what he said and did, and how his heart stood
affected; in the first of these we may see what we are too apt to be,
and in the other two what we should be.

I. He had long enjoyed prosperity, and then he grew secure and
over-confident of the continuance of it ([Psa
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006), [Psa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007)): "In my prosperity, when I was
in health of body and God had given me rest from all my enemies, I said
I shall never be moved; I never thought either of having my body
distempered or my government disturbed, not had any apprehensions of
danger upon any account." Such complete victories had he obtained over
those that opposed him, and such a confirmed interest had he in the
hearts of his people, such a firmness of mind and such a strong
constitution of body, that he thought his prosperity fixed like a
mountain; yet this he ascribes, not to his own wisdom or fortitude, but
to the divine goodness. Thou, through thy favour, hast made my mountain
to stand strong, [Psa 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007). He does
not look upon it as his heaven (as worldly people do, who make their
prosperity their felicity), only his mountain; it is earth still, only
raised a little higher than the common level. This he thought, by the
favour of God, would be perpetuated to him, imagining perhaps that,
having had so many troubles in the beginning of his days, he had had his
whole share and should have none in his latter end, or that God, who had
given him such tokens of his favour, would never frown upon him. Note,
1. We are very apt to dream, when things are well with us, that they
will always be so, and never otherwise. Tomorrow shall be as this day.
As if we should think, when the weather is once fair, that it will be
even fair; whereas nothing is more certain than that it will change. 2.
When we see ourselves deceived in our expectations, it becomes us to
reflect, with shame, upon our security, as our folly, as David does
here, that we may be wiser another time and may rejoice in our
prosperity as though we rejoiced not, because the fashion of it passes
away.

II\. On a sudden he fell into trouble, and then he prayed to God, and
pleaded earnestly for relief and succour.

1\. His mountain was shaken and he with it; it proved, when he grew
secure, that he was least safe: "Thou didst hide thy face and I was
troubled, in mind, body, or estate." In every change of his condition he
still kept his eye upon God, and, as he ascribed his prosperity to God's
favour, so in his adversity he observed the hiding of God's face, to be
the cause of it. If God hide his face, a good man is certainly troubled,
though no other calamity befal him; when the sun sets night certainly
follows, and the moon and all the stars cannot make day.

2\. When his mountain was shaken he lifted up his eyes above the hills.
Prayer is a salve for every sore; he made use of it accordingly. Is any
afflicted? Is any troubled? Let him pray. Though God hid his face from
him, yet he prayed. If God, in wisdom and justice, turn from us, yet it
will be in us the greatest folly and injustice imaginable if we turn
from him. No; let us learn to pray in the dark ([Psa
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#008)): I cried to thee, O Lord! It
seems God's withdrawings made his prayers the more vehement. We are here
told, for it seems he kept account of it,

(1.) What he pleaded, [Psa 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#009).
\[1.\] That God would be no gainer by his death: What profit is there in
my blood? implying that he would willingly die if he could thereby do
any real service to God or his country ([Phi
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017)), but he saw not what good could
be done by his dying in the bed of sickness, as might be if he had died
in the bed of honour. "Lord," says he, "wilt thou sell one of thy own
people for nought and not increase thy wealth by the price?" [Psa
44:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#012). Nay \[2.\] That, in his honour,
God would seem to be a loser by his death: Shall the dust praise thee?
The sanctified spirit, which returns to God, shall praise him, shall be
still praising him; but the dust, which returns to the earth, shall not
praise him, nor declare his truth. The services of God's house cannot be
performed by the dust; it cannot praise him; there is none of that
device or working in the grave, for it is the land of silence. The
promises of God's covenant cannot be performed to the dust. "Lord," says
David, "if I die now, what will become of the promise made to me? Who
shall declare the truth of that?" The best pleas in prayer are those
that are taken from God's honour; and then we ask aright for life when
we have that in view, that we may live and praise him.

(2.) What he prayed for, [Psa 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#010).
He prayed for mercy to pardon (Have mercy upon me), and for grace to
help in time of need - Lord, be thou my helper. On these two errands we
also may come boldly to the throne of grace, [Heb
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016).

III\. In due time God delivered him out of his troubles and restored him
to his former prosperity. His prayers were answered and his mourning was
turned into dancing, [Psa 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011). God's
anger now endured but for a moment, and David's weeping but for a night.
The sackcloth with which, in a humble compliance with the divine
Providence, he had clad himself, was loosed; his griefs were balanced;
his fears were silenced; his comforts returned; and he was girded with
gladness: joy was made his ornament, was made his strength, and seemed
to cleave to him, as the girdle cleaves to the loins of a man. As
David's plunge into trouble from the height of prosperity, and then when
he least expected it, teaches us to rejoice as though we rejoiced not,
because we know not how near trouble may be, so his sudden return to a
prosperous condition teaches us to weep as though we wept not, because
we know not how soon the storm may become a calm and the formidable
blast may become a favourable gale. But what temper of mind was he in
upon this happy change of the face of his affairs? What does he say now?
He tells us, [Psa 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#012). 1. His
complaints were turned into praises. He looked upon it that God girded
him with gladness to the end that he might be the sweet psalmist of
Israel ([Sa2 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001)), that his glory
might sing praise to God, that is, his tongue (for our tongue is our
glory, and never more so than when it is employed in praising God) or
his soul, for that is our glory above the beasts, that must be employed
in blessing the Lord, and with that we must make melody to him in
singing psalms. Those that are kept from being silent in the pit must
not be silent in the land of the living, but fervent, and constant, and
public, in praising God. 2. These praises were likely to be everlasting:
I will give thanks unto thee for ever. This bespeaks a gracious
resolution that he would persevere to the end in praising God and a
gracious hope that he should never want fresh matter for praise and that
he should shortly be where this would be the everlasting work. Blessed
are those that dwell in God's house; they will be still praising him.
Thus must we learn to accommodate ourselves to the various providences
of God that concern us, to want and to abound, to sing of mercy and
judgment, and to sing unto God for both.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 31](psa031)

</div>
