<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa000)  [Next](psa002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

This is a psalm of instruction concerning good and evil, setting before
us life and death, the blessing and the curse, that we may take the
right way which leads to happiness and avoid that which will certainly
end in our misery and ruin. The different character and condition of
godly people and wicked people, those that serve God and those that
serve him not, is here plainly stated in a few words; so that every man,
if he will be faithful to himself, may here see his own face and then
read his own doom. That division of the children of men into saints and
sinners, righteous and unrighteous, the children of God and the children
of the wicked one, as it is ancient, ever since the struggle began
between sin and grace, the seed of the woman and the seed of the
serpent, so it is lasting, and will survive all other divisions and
subdivisions of men into high and low, rich and poor, bond and free; for
by this men's everlasting state will be determined, and the distinction
will last as long as heaven and hell. This psalm shows us, I. The
holiness and happiness of a godly man ([Psa
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)). II. The sinfulness and misery
of a wicked man ([Psa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004), [Psa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005)). III. The ground and reason of
both ([Psa 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006)). Whoever collected the
psalms of David (probably it was Ezra) with good reason put this psalm
first, as a preface to the rest, because it is absolutely necessary to
the acceptance of our devotions that we be righteous before God (for it
is only the prayer of the upright that is his delight), and therefore
that we be right in our notions of blessedness and in our choice of the
way that leads to it. Those are not fit to put up good prayers who do
not walk in good ways.

[Psalms 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 1:1</span></span>

The psalmist begins with the character and condition of a godly man,
that those may first take the comfort of that to whom it belongs. Here
is,

I. A description of the godly man's spirit and way, by which we are to
try ourselves. The Lord knows those that are his by name, but we must
know them by their character; for that is agreeable to a state of
probation, that we may study to answer to the character, which is indeed
both the command of the law which we are bound in duty to obey and the
condition of the promise which we are bound in interest to fulfil. The
character of a good man is here given by the rules he chooses to walk by
and to take his measures from. What we take at our setting out, and at
every turn, for the guide of our conversation, whether the course of
this world or the word of God, is of material consequence. An error in
the choice of our standard and leader is original and fatal; but, if we
be right here, we are in a fair way to do well.

1\. A godly man, that he may avoid the evil, utterly renounces the
companionship of evil-doers, and will not be led by them ([Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)): He walks not in the council of
the ungodly, etc. This part of his character is put first, because those
that will keep the commandments of their God must say to evil-doers,
Depart from us ([Psa 119:115](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#115)), and
departing from evil is that in which wisdom begins. (1.) He sees
evil-doers round about him; the world is full of them; they walk on
every side. They are here described by three characters, ungodly,
sinners, and scornful. See by what steps men arrive at the height of
impiety. Nemo repente fit turpissimus - None reach the height of vice at
once. They are ungodly first, casting off the fear of God and living in
the neglect of their duty to him: but they rest not there. When the
services of religion are laid aside, they come to be sinners, that is,
they break out into open rebellion against God and engage in the service
of sin and Satan. Omissions make way for commissions, and by these the
heart is so hardened that at length they come to be scorners, that is,
they openly defy all that is sacred, scoff at religion, and make a jest
of sin. Thus is the way of iniquity down-hill; the bad grow worse,
sinners themselves become tempters to others and advocates for Baal. The
word which we translate ungodly signifies such as are unsettled, aim at
no certain end and walk by no certain rule, but are at the command of
every lust and at the beck of every temptation. The word for sinners
signifies such as are determined for the practice of sin and set it up
as their trade. The scornful are those that set their mouths against the
heavens. These the good man sees with a sad heart; they are a constant
vexation to his righteous soul. But, (2.) He shuns them wherever he sees
them. He does not do as they do; and, that he may not, he does not
converse familiarly with them. \[1.\] He does not walk in the counsel of
the ungodly. He is not present at their councils, nor does he advise
with them; though they are ever so witty, and subtle, and learned, if
they are ungodly, they shall not be the men of his counsel. He does not
consent to them, nor say as they say, [Luk
23:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#051). He does not take his measures
from their principles, nor act according to the advice which they give
and take. The ungodly are forward to give their advice against religion,
and it is managed so artfully that we have reason to think ourselves
happy if we escape being tainted and ensnared by it. \[2.\] He stands
not in the way of sinners; he avoids doing as they do; their way shall
not be his way; he will not come into it, much less will he continue in
it, as the sinner does, who sets himself in a way that is not good, [Psa
36:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#004). He avoids (as much as may be)
being where they are. That he may not imitate them, he will not
associate with them, nor choose them for his companions. He does not
stand in their way, to be picked up by them ([Pro
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#008)), but keeps as far from them as
from a place or person infected with the plague, for fear of the
contagion, [Pro 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#014), [Pro
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#015). He that would be kept from harm
must keep out of harm's way. \[3.\] He sits not in the seat of the
scornful; he does not repose himself with those that sit down secure in
their wickedness and please themselves with the searedness of their own
consciences. He does not associate with those that sit in close cabal to
find out ways and means for the support and advancement of the devil's
kingdom, or that sit in open judgment, magisterially to condemn the
generation of the righteous. The seat of the drunkards is the seat of
the scornful, [Psa 69:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#012). Happy is the
man that never sits in it, [Hos 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#005).

2\. A godly man, that he may do that which is good and cleave to it,
submits to the guidance of the word of God and makes that familiar to
him, [Psa 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002). This is that which
keeps him out of the way of the ungodly and fortifies him against their
temptations. By the words of thy lips I have kept me from the path of
the deceiver, [Psa 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#004). We need not
court the fellowship of sinners, either for pleasure or for improvement,
while we have fellowship with the word of God and with God himself in
and by his word. When thou awakest it shall talk with thee, [Pro
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#022). We may judge of our spiritual
state by asking, "What is the law of God to us? What account do we make
of it? What place has it in us?" See here, (1.) The entire affection
which a good man has for the law of God: His delight is in it. He
delights in it, though it be a law, a yoke, because it is the law of
God, which is holy, just, and good, which he freely consents to, and so
delights in, after the inner man, [Rom
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#016), [Rom
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022). All who are well pleased that
there is a God must be well pleased that there is a Bible, a revelation
of God, of his will, and of the only way to happiness in him. (2.) The
intimate acquaintance which a good man keeps up with the word of God: In
that law doth he meditate day and night; and by this it appears that his
delight is in it, for what we love we love to think of, [Psa
119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097). To meditate in God's word is
to discourse with ourselves concerning the great things contained in it,
with a close application of mind, a fixedness of thought, till we be
suitably affected with those things and experience the savour and power
of them in our hearts. This we must do day and night; we must have a
constant habitual regard to the word of God as the rule of our actions
and the spring of our comforts, and we must have it in our thoughts,
accordingly, upon every occasion that occurs, whether night or day. No
time is amiss for meditating on the word of God, nor is any time
unseasonable for those visits. We must not only set ourselves to
meditate on God's word morning and evening, at the entrance of the day
and of the night, but these thought should be interwoven with the
business and converse of every day and with the repose and slumbers of
every night. When I awake I am still with thee.

II\. An assurance given of the godly man's happiness, with which we
should encourage ourselves to answer the character of such. 1. In
general, he is blessed, [Psa 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#001). God
blesses him, and that blessing will make him happy. Blessednesses are to
him, blessings of all kinds, of the upper and nether springs, enough to
make him completely happy; none of the ingredients of happiness shall be
wanting to him. When the psalmist undertakes to describe a blessed man,
he describes a good man; for, after all, those only are happy, truly
happy, that are holy, truly holy; and we are more concerned to know the
way to blessedness than to know wherein that blessedness will consist.
Nay, goodness and holiness are not only the way to happiness ([Rev
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#014)) but happiness itself; supposing
there were not another life after this, yet that man is a happy man that
keeps in the way of his duty. 2. His blessedness is here illustrated by
a similitude ([Psa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003)): He shall be
like a tree, fruitful and flourishing. This is the effect, (1.) Of his
pious practice; he meditates in the law of God, turns that in succum et
sanguinem - into juice and blood, and that makes him like a tree. The
more we converse with the word of God the better furnished we are for
every good word and work. Or, (2.) Of the promised blessing; he is
blessed of the Lord, and therefore he shall be like a tree. The divine
blessing produces real effects. It is the happiness of a godly man,
\[1.\] That he is planted by the grace of God. These trees were by
nature wild olives, and will continue so till they are grafted anew, and
so planted by a power from above. Never any good tree grew of itself; it
is the planting of the Lord, and therefore he must in it be glorified.
[Isa 61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003), The trees of the Lord are
full of sap. \[2.\] That he is placed by the means of grace, here called
the rivers of water, those rivers which make glad the city of our God
([Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)); from these a good man
receives supplies of strength and vigour, but in secret undiscerned
ways. \[3.\] That his practices shall be fruit, abounding to a good
account, [Phi 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#017). To those whom God
first blessed he said, Be fruitful ([Gen
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#022)), and still the comfort and
honour of fruitfulness are a recompense for the labour of it. It is
expected from those who enjoy the mercies of grace that, both in the
temper of their minds and in the tenour of their lives, they comply with
the intentions of that grace, and then they bring forth fruit. And, be
it observed to the praise of the great dresser of the vineyard, they
bring forth their fruit (that which is required of them) in due season,
when it is most beautiful and most useful, improving every opportunity
of doing good and doing it in its proper time. \[4.\] That his
profession shall be preserved from blemish and decay: His leaf also
shall not wither. As to those who bring forth only the leaves of
profession, without any good fruit, even their leaf will wither and they
shall be as much ashamed of their profession as ever they were proud of
it; but, if the word of God rule in the heart, that will keep the
profession green, both to our comfort and to our credit; the laurels
thus won shall never wither. \[5.\] That prosperity shall attend him
wherever he goes, soul-prosperity. Whatever he does, in conformity to
the law, it shall prosper and succeed to his mind, or above his hope.

In singing these verses, being duly affected with the malignant and
dangerous nature of sin, the transcendent excellencies of the divine
law, and the power and efficacy of God's grace, from which our fruit is
found, we must teach and admonish ourselves, and one another, to watch
against sin and all approaches towards it, to converse much with the
word of God, and abound in the fruit of righteousness; and, in praying
over them, we must seek to God for his grace both to fortify us against
every evil word and work and to furnish us for every good word and work.

[Psalms 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 1:4</span></span>

Here is, I. The description of the ungodly given, [Psa
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004). 1. In general, they are the
reverse of the righteous, both in character and condition: They are not
so. The Septuagint emphatically repeats this: Not so the ungodly; they
are not so; they are led by the counsel of the wicked, in the way of
sinners, to the seat of the scornful; they have no delight in the law of
God, nor ever think of it; they bring forth no fruit but grapes of
Sodom; they cumber the ground. 2. In particular, whereas the righteous
are like valuable, useful, fruitful trees, they are like the chaff which
the wind drives away, the very lightest of the chaff, the dust which the
owner of the floor desires to have driven away, as not capable of being
put to any use. Would you value them? Would you weigh them? They are
like chaff, of no worth at all in God's account, how highly soever they
may value themselves. Would you know the temper of their minds? They are
light and vain; they have no substance in them, no solidity; they are
easily driven to and fro by every wind and temptation, and have no
stedfastness. Would you know their end? The wrath of God will drive them
away in their wickedness, as the wind does the chaff, which is never
gathered nor looked after more. The chaff may be, for a while, among the
wheat; but he is coming whose fan is in his hand and who will thoroughly
purge his floor. Those that by their own sin and folly make themselves
as chaff will be found so before the whirlwind and fire of divine wrath
([Psa 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#005)), so unable to stand before
it or to escape it, [Isa 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#013).

II\. The doom of the ungodly read, [Psa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005). 1. They will be cast, upon their
trial, as traitors convicted: They shall not stand in the judgment, that
is, they shall be found guilty, shall hang down the head with shame and
confusion, and all their pleas and excuses will be overruled as
frivolous. There is a judgment to come, in which every man's present
character and work, though ever so artfully concealed and disguised,
shall be truly and perfectly discovered, and appear in their own
colours, and accordingly every man's future state will be, by an
irreversible sentence, determined for eternity. The ungodly must appear
in that judgment, to receive according to the things done in the body.
They may hope to come off, nay, to come off with honour, but their hope
will deceive them: They shall not stand in the judgment, so plain will
the evidence be against them and so just and impartial will the judgment
be upon it. 2. They will be for ever shut out from the society of the
blessed. They shall not stand in the congregation of the righteous, that
is, in the judgment (so some), that court wherein the saints, as
assessors with Christ, shall judge the world, those holy myriads with
which he shall come to execute judgment upon all, [Jde
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014); [Co1
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002). Or in heaven. There will be seen,
shortly, a general assembly of the church of the first-born, a
congregation of the righteous, of all the saints, and none but saints,
and saints made perfect, such a congregation of them as never was in
this world, [Th2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001). The wicked shall
not have a place in that congregation. Into the new Jerusalem none
unclean nor unsanctified shall enter; they shall see the righteous enter
into the kingdom, and themselves, to their everlasting vexation, thrust
out, [Luk 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#027). The wicked and
profane, in this world, ridiculed the righteous and their congregation,
despised them, and cared not for their company; justly therefore will
they be for ever separated from them. Hypocrites in this world, under
the disguise of a plausible profession, may thrust themselves into the
congregation of the righteous and remain undisturbed and undiscovered
there; but Christ cannot be imposed upon, though his ministers may; the
day is coming when he will separate between the sheep and the goats, the
tares and the wheat; see [Mat 13:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041),
[Mat 13:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#049). That great day (so the
Chaldee here calls it) will be a day of discovery, a day of distinction,
and a day of final division. Then you shall return and discern between
the righteous and the wicked, which here it is sometimes hard to do,
[Mal 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#018).

III\. The reason rendered of this different state of the godly and
wicked, [Psa 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006). 1. God must have all
the glory of the prosperity and happiness of the righteous. They are
blessed because the Lord knows their way; he chose them into it,
inclined them to choose it, leads and guides them in it, and orders all
their steps. 2. Sinners must bear all the blame of their own
destruction. Therefore the ungodly perish, because the very way in which
they have chosen and resolved to walk leads directly to destruction; it
naturally tends towards ruin and therefore must necessarily end in it.
Or we may take it thus, The Lord approves and is well pleased with the
way of the righteous, and therefore, under the influence of his gracious
smiles, it shall prosper and end well; but he is angry at the way of the
wicked, all they do is offensive to him, and therefore it shall perish,
and they in it. It is certain that every man's judgment proceeds from
the Lord, and it is well or ill with us, and is likely to be so to all
eternity, accordingly as we are or are not accepted of God. Let this
support the drooping spirits of the righteous, that the Lord knows their
way, knows their hearts ([Jer 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#003)),
knows their secret devotions ([Mat
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006)), knows their character, how much
soever it is blackened and blemished by the reproaches of men, and will
shortly make them and their way manifest before the world, to their
immortal joy and honour. Let this cast a damp upon the security and
jollity of sinners, that their way, though pleasant now, will perish at
last.

In singing these verses, and praying over them, let us possess ourselves
with a holy dread of the wicked man's portion, and deprecate it with a
firm and lively expectation of the judgment to come, and stir up
ourselves to prepare for it, and with a holy care to approve ourselves
to God in every thing, entreating his favour with our whole hearts.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 2](psa002)

</div>
