<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa070)  [Next](psa072) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 71](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 71:0</span></span>

David penned this psalm in his old age, as appears by several passages
in it, which makes many think that it was penned at the time of
Absalom's rebellion; for that was the great trouble of his later days.
It might be occasioned by Sheba's insurrection, or some trouble that
happened to him in that part of his life of which it was foretold that
the sword should not depart from his house. But he is not
over-particular in representing his case, because he intended it for the
general use of God's people in their afflictions, especially those they
meet with in their declining years; for this psalm, above any other, is
fitted for the use of the old disciples of Jesus Christ. I. He begins
the psalm with believing prayers, with prayers that God would deliver
him and save him ([Psa 71:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#002), [Psa
71:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#004)), and not cast him off ([Psa
71:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#009)) or be far from him ([Psa
71:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#012)), and that his enemies might be
put to shame ([Psa 71:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#013)). He pleads
his confidence in God ([Psa 71:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#001), [Psa
71:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#003), [Psa
71:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#005), [Psa
71:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#007)), the experience he had had of
help from God ([Psa 71:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#006)), and the
malice of his enemies against him ([Psa
71:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#010), [Psa
71:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#011)). II. He concludes the psalm
with believing praises ([Psa 71:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#014),
etc.). Never was his hope more established ([Psa
71:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#016), [Psa
71:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#018), [Psa
71:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#020), [Psa
71:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#021)). Never were his joys and
thanksgivings more enlarged ([Psa
71:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#015), [Psa
71:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#019), [Psa
71:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#022)). He is in an ecstasy of
joyful praise; and, in the singing of it, we too should have our faith
in God encouraged and our hearts raised in blessing his holy name.

[Psalms 71:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 71:1</span></span>

Two things in general David here prays for - that he might not be
confounded and that his enemies and persecutors might be confounded.

I. He prays that he might never be made ashamed of his dependence upon
God nor disappointed in his believing expectations from him. With this
petition every true believer may come boldly to the throne of grace; for
God will never disappoint the hope that is of his own raising. Now
observe here,

1\. How David professes his confidence in God, and with what pleasure
and grateful variety of expression he repeats his profession of that
confidence, still presenting the profession of it to God and pleading it
with him. We praise God, and so please him, by telling him (if it be
indeed true) what an entire confidence we have in him ([Psa
71:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#001)): "In thee, O Lord! and in thee
only, do I put my trust. Whatever others do, I choose the God of Jacob
for my help." Those that are entirely satisfied with God's
all-sufficiency and the truth of his promise, and in dependence upon
that, as sufficient to make them amends, are freely willing to do and
suffer, to lose and venture, for him, may truly say, In thee, O Lord! do
I put my trust. Those that will deal with God must deal upon trust; if
we are shy of dealing with him, it is a sign we do not trust him. Thou
art my rock and my fortress ([Psa
71:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#003)); and again, "Thou art my refuge,
my strong refuge" ([Psa 71:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#007)); that
is, "I fly to thee, and am sure to be safe in thee, and under thy
protection. If thou secure me, none can hurt me. Thou art my hope and my
trust" ([Psa 71:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#005)); that is, "thou
hast proposed thyself to me in thy word as the proper object of my hope
and trust; I have hoped in thee, and never found it in vain to do so."

2\. How his confidence in God is supported and encouraged by his
experiences ([Psa 71:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#005), [Psa
71:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#006)): "Thou hast been my trust from
my youth; ever since I was capable of discerning between my right hand
and my left, I stayed myself upon thee, and saw a great deal of reason
to do so; for by thee have I been holden up from the womb." Ever since
he had the use of his reason he had been a dependent upon God's
goodness, because ever since he had had a being he had been a monument
of it. Note, The consideration of the gracious care which the divine
Providence took of us in our birth and infancy should engage us to an
early piety and constant devotedness to his honour. He that was our help
from our birth ought to be our hope from our youth. If we received so
much mercy from God before we were capable of doing him any service, we
should lose no time when we are capable. This comes in here as a support
to the psalmist in his present distress; not only that God had given him
his life and being, bringing him out of his mother's bowels into the
world, and providing that he should not die from the womb, nor give up
the ghost when he came out of the belly, but that he had betimes made
him one of his family: "Thou art he that took me out of my mother's
bowels into the arms of thy grace, under the shadow of thy wings, into
the bond of thy covenant; thou tookest me into thy church, as a son of
thy handmaid, and born in thy house, [Psa
116:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016). And therefore," (1.) "I have
reason to hope that thou wilt protect me; thou that hast held me up
hitherto wilt not let me fall now; thou that madest me wilt not forsake
the work of thy own hands; thou that helpedst me when I could not help
myself wilt not abandon me now that I am as helpless as I was then."
(2.) "Therefore I have reason to resolve that I will devote myself unto
thee: My praise shall therefore be continually of thee;" that is, "I
will make it my business every day to praise thee and will take all
occasions to do it."

3\. What his requests to God are, in this confidence.

(1.) That he might never be put to confusion ([Psa
71:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#001)), that he might not be
disappointed of the mercy he expected and so made ashamed of his
expectation. Thus we may all pray in faith that our confidence in God
may not be our confusion. Hope of the glory of God is hope that makes
not ashamed.

(2.) That he might be delivered out of the hand of his enemies ([Psa
71:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#002)): "Deliver me in thy
righteousness. As thou art the righteous Judge of the world, pleading
the cause of the injured and punishing the injurious, cause me in some
way or other to escape" (God will, with the temptation, make a way to
escape, [Co1 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)): "Incline thy ear
unto my prayers, and, in answer to them, save me out of my troubles,
[Psa 71:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#004). Deliver me, O my God! out
of the hands of those that are ready to pull me in pieces." Three things
he pleads for deliverance: - \[1.\] The encouragement God had given him
to expect it: Thou hast given commandment to save me ([Psa
71:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#003)); that is, thou hast promised to
do it, and such efficacy is there in God's promises that they are often
spoken of as commands, like that, Let there be light, and there was
light. He speaks, and it is done. \[2.\] The character of his enemies;
they are wicked, unrighteous, cruel men, and it will be for the honour
of God to appear against them ([Psa
71:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#004)), for he is a holy, just, and
good God. \[3.\] The many eyes that were upon him ([Psa
71:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#007)): "I am as a wonder unto many;
every one waits to see what will be the issue of such extraordinary
troubles as I have fallen into and such extraordinary confidence as I
profess to have in God." Or, "I am looked upon as a monster, am one whom
every body shuns, and therefore am undone if the Lord be not my refuge.
Men abandon me, but God will not."

(3.) That he might always find rest and safety in God ([Psa
71:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#003)): Be thou my strong habitation;
by thou to me a rock of repose, whereto I may continually resort. Those
that are at home in God, that live a life of communion with him and
confidence in him, that continually resort unto him by faith and prayer,
having their eyes ever towards him, may promise themselves a strong
habitation in him, such as will never fall of itself nor can ever be
broken through by any invading power; and they shall be welcome to
resort to him continually upon all occasions, and not be upbraided as
coming too often.

(4.) That he might have continual matter for thanksgiving to God, and
might be continually employed in that pleasant work ([Psa
71:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#008)): "Let my mouth be filled with
thy praise, as now it is with my complaints, and then I shall not be
ashamed of my hope, but my enemies will be ashamed of their insolence."
Those that love God love to be praising him, and desire to be doing it
all the day, not only in their morning and evening devotions, not only
seven times a day ([Psa 119:164](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#164)), but
all the day, to intermix with all they say something or other that may
redound to the honour and praise of God. They resolve to do it while
they live; they hope to be doing it eternally in a better world.

(5.) That he might not be neglected now in his declining years ([Psa
71:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#009)): Cast me not off now in the time
of my old gage; forsake me not when my strength fails. Observe here,
\[1.\] The natural sense he had of the infirmities of age: My strength
fails. Where there was strength of body and vigour of mind, strong
sight, a strong voice, strong limbs, alas! in old age they fail; the
life is continued, but the strength is gone, or that which is his labour
and sorrow, [Psa 90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010). \[2.\] The
gracious desire he had of the continuance of God's presence with him
under these infirmities: Lord, cast me not off; do not then forsake me.
This intimates that he should look upon himself as undone if God should
abandon him. To be cast off and forsaken of God is a thing to be dreaded
at any time, especially in the time of old age and when our strength
fails us; for it is God that is the strength of our heart. But it
intimates that he had reason to hope God would not desert him; the
faithful servants of God may be comfortably assured that he will not
cast them off in old age, nor forsake them when their strength fails
them. He is a Master that is not wont to cast off old servants. In this
confidence David here prays again ([Psa
71:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#012)): "O God! be not far from me;
let me not be under the apprehension of thy withdrawings, for then I am
miserable. I my God! a God in covenant with me, make haste for my help,
lest I perish before help come."

II\. He prays that his enemies might be made ashamed of their designs
against him. Observe, 1. What it was which they unjustly said against
him, [Psa 71:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#010), [Psa
71:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#011). Their plot was deep and
desperate; it was against his life: They lay wait for my soul ([Psa
71:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#010)), and are adversaries to that,
[Psa 71:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#013). Their powers and policies
were combined: They take counsel together. And very insolent they were
in their deportment: They say, God has forsaken him; persecute and take
him. Here their premises are utterly false, that because a good man was
in great trouble and had continued long in it, and was not so soon
delivered as perhaps he expected, therefore God had forsaken him and
would have no more to do with him. All are not forsaken of God who think
themselves so or whom others think to be so. And, as their premises were
false, so their inference was barbarous. If God has forsaken him, then
persecute and take him, and doubt not but to make a prey of him. This is
talking to the grief of one whom God has smitten, [Psa
69:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#026). But thus they endeavour to
discourage David, as Sennacherib endeavoured to intimidate Hezekiah by
suggesting that God was his enemy and fought against him. Have I now
come up without the Lord against this city, to destroy it? [Isa
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#010). It is true, if God has forsaken
a man, there is none to deliver him; but therefore to insult over him
ill becomes those who are conscious to themselves that they deserve to
be for ever forsaken of God. But rejoice not against me, O my enemy!
though I fall, I shall rise. He that seems to forsake for a small moment
will gather with everlasting kindness. 2. What it was which he justly
prayed for, from a spirit of prophecy, not a spirit of passion ([Psa
71:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#013)): "Let them be confounded and
consumed that are adversaries to my soul. If they will not be confounded
by repentance, and so saved, let them be confounded with everlasting
dishonour, and so ruined." God will turn into shame the glory of those
who turn into shame the glory of God and his people.

[Psalms 71:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 71:14</span></span>

David is here in a holy transport of joy and praise, arising from his
faith and hope in God; we have both together [Psa
71:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#014), where there is a sudden and
remarkable change of his voice; his fears are all silenced, his hopes
raised, and his prayers turned into thanksgivings. "Let my enemies say
what they will, to drive me to despair, I will hope continually, hope in
all conditions, in the most cloudy and dark day; I will live upon hope
and will hope to the end." Since we hope in one that will never fail us,
let not our hope in him fail us, and then we shall praise him yet more
and more. "The more they reproach me the more closely will I cleave to
thee; I will praise thee more and better than ever I have done yet." The
longer we live the more expert we should grow in praising God and the
more we should abound in it. I will add over and above all thy praise,
all the praise I have hitherto offered, for it is all too little. When
we have said all we can, to the glory of God's grace, there is still
more to be said; it is a subject that can never be exhausted, and
therefore we should never grow weary of it. Now observe, in these
verses,

I. How his heart is established in faith and hope; and it is a good
thing that the heart be so established. Observe,

1\. What he hopes in, [Psa 71:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#016). (1.)
In the power of God: "I will go in the strength of the Lord God, not sit
down in despair, but stir up myself to and exert myself in my work and
warfare, will go forth and go on, not in any strength of my own, but in
God's strength - disclaiming my own sufficiency and depending on him
only as all-sufficient - in the strength of his providence and in the
strength of his grace." We must always go about God's work in his
strength, having our eyes up unto him to work in us both to will and to
do. (2.) In the promise of God: "I will make mention of thy
righteousness, that is, thy faithfulness to every word which thou hast
spoken, the equity of thy disposals, and thy kindness to thy people that
trust in thee. This I will make mention of as my plea in prayer for thy
mercy." We may very fitly apply it to the righteousness of Christ, which
is called the righteousness of God by faith, and which is witnessed by
the law and the prophets; we must depend upon God's strength for
assistance and upon Christ's righteousness for acceptance. In the Lord
have I righteousness and strength, [Isa
45:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#024).

2\. What he hopes for.

(1.) He hopes that God will not leave him in his old age, but will be
the same to him to the end that he had been all along, [Psa
71:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#017), [Psa
71:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#018). Observe here, \[1.\] What God
had done for him when he was young: Thou hast taught me from my youth.
The good education and good instructions which his parents gave him when
he was young he owns himself obliged to give God thanks for as a great
favour. It is a blessed thing to be taught of God from our youth, from
our childhood to know the holy scriptures, and it is what we have reason
to bless God for. \[2.\] What he had done for God when he was
middle-aged: He had declared all God's wondrous works. Those that have
not good when they are young must be doing good when they are grown up,
and must continue to communicate what they have received. We must own
that all the works of God's goodness to us are wondrous works, admiring
he should do so much for us who are so undeserving, and we must make it
our business to declare them, to the glory of God and the good of
others. \[3.\] What he desired of God now that he was old: Now that I am
old and gray-headed, dying to this world and hastening to another, O
God! forsake me not. This is what he earnestly desires and confidently
hopes for. Those that have been taught of God from their youth, and have
made it the business of their lives to honour him, may be sure that he
will not leave them when they are old and gray-headed, will not leave
them helpless and comfortless, but will make the evil days of old age
their best days, and such as they shall have occasion to say they have
pleasure in. \[4.\] What he designed to do for God in his old age: "I
will not only show thy strength, by my own experience of it, to this
generation, but I will leave my observations upon record for the benefit
of posterity, and so who it to every one that is to come." As long as we
live we should be endeavouring to glorify God and edify one another; and
those that have had the largest and longest experience of the goodness
of God to them should improve their experiences for the good of their
friends. It is a debt which the old disciples of Christ owe to the
succeeding generations to leave behind them a solemn testimony to the
power, pleasure, and advantage of religion, and the truth of God's
promises.

(2.) He hopes that God would revive him and raise him up out of his
present low and disconsolate condition ([Psa
71:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#020)): Thou who hast made me to see
and feel great and sore troubles, above most men, shalt quicken me
again. Note, \[1.\] The best of God's saints and servants are sometimes
exercised with great and sore troubles in this world. \[2.\] God's hand
is to be eyed in all the troubles of the saints, and that will help to
extenuate them and make them seem light. He does not say, "Thou hast
burdened me with those troubles," but "shown them to me," as the tender
father shows the child the rod to keep him in awe. \[3.\] Though God's
people be brought ever so low he can revive them and raise them up. Are
they dead? he can quicken them again. See [Co2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#009). Are they buried, as dead men out
of mind? he can bring them up again from the depths of the earth, can
cheer the most drooping spirit and raise the most sinking interest.
\[4.\] If we have a due regard to the hand of God in our troubles, we
may promise ourselves, in due time, a deliverance out of them. Our
present troubles, though great and sore, shall be no hindrance to our
joyful resurrection from the depths of the earth, witness our great
Master, to whom this may have some reference; his Father showed him
great and sore troubles, but quickened him and brought him up from the
grave.

(3.) He hopes that God would not only deliver him out of his troubles,
but would advance his honour and joy more than ever ([Psa
71:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#021)): "Thou shalt not only restore
me to my greatness again, but shalt increase it, and give me a better
interest, after this shock, than before; thou shalt not only comfort me,
but comfort me on every side, so that I shall see nothing black or
threatening on any side." Note, Sometimes God makes his people's
troubles contribute to the increase of their greatness, and their sun
shines the brighter for having been under a cloud. If he make them
contribute to the increase of their goodness, that will prove in the end
the increase of their greatness, their glory; and if he comfort them on
every side, according to the time and degree wherein he has afflicted
them on every side, they will have no reason to complain. When our Lord
Jesus was quickened again, and brought back from the depths of the
earth, his greatness was increased, and he entered on the joy set before
him.

(4.) He hopes that all his enemies would be put to confusion, [Psa
71:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#024). He speaks of it with the
greatest assurance as a thing done, and triumphs in it accordingly: They
are confounded, they are brought to shame, that seek my hurt. His honour
would be their disgrace and his comfort their vexation.

II\. Let us now see how his heart is enlarged in joy and praises, how he
rejoices in hope, and sings in hope for we are saved by hope.

1\. He will speak of God's righteousness and his salvation, as great
things, things which he was well acquainted with, and much affected
with, which he desired God might have the glory of and others might have
the comfortable knowledge of ([Psa
71:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#015)): My mouth shall show forth thy
righteousness and thy salvation; and again ([Psa
71:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#024)), My tongue shall talk of thy
righteousness, and this all the day. God's righteousness, which David
seems here to be in a particular manner affected with, includes a great
deal: the rectitude of his nature, the equity of his providential
disposals, the righteous laws he has given us to be ruled by, the
righteous promises he has given us to depend upon, and the everlasting
righteousness which his Son has brought in for our justification. God's
righteousness and his salvation are here joined together; let no man
think to put them asunder, nor expect salvation without righteousness,
[Psa 50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023). If these two are made the
objects of our desire, let them be made the subjects of our discourse
all the day, for they are subjects that can never be exhausted.

2\. He will speak of them with wonder and admiration, as one astonished
at the dimensions of divine love and grace, the height and depth, the
length and breadth, of it: "I know not the numbers thereof, [Psa
71:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#015). Though I cannot give a
particular account of thy favours to me, they are so many, so great (if
I would count them, they are more in number than the sand, [Psa
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005)), yet, knowing them to be
numberless, I will be still speaking of them, for in them I shall find
new matter," [Psa 71:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#019). The
righteousness that is in God is very high; that which is done by him for
his people is very great: put both together, and we shall say, O God!
who is like unto thee? This is praising God, acknowledging his
perfections and performances to be, (1.) Above our conception; they are
very high and great, so high that we cannot apprehend them, so great
that we cannot comprehend them. (2.) Without any parallel; no being like
him, no works like his: O God! who is like unto thee? None in heaven,
none on earth, no angel, no king. God is a non-such; we do not rightly
praise him if we do not own him to be so.

3\. He will speak of them with all the expressions of joy and
exultation, [Psa 71:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#022), [Psa
71:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#023). Observe,

(1.) How he would eye God in praising him. \[1.\] As a faithful God: I
will praise thee, even thy truth. God is made known by his word; if we
praise that, and the truth of that, we praise him. By faith we set to
our seal that God is true; and so we praise his truth. \[2.\] As a God
in covenant with him: "O my God! whom I have consented to and avouched
for mine." As in our prayers, so in our praises, we must look up to God
as our God, and give him the glory of our interest in him and relation
to him. \[3.\] As the Holy One of Israel, Israel's God in a peculiar
manner, glorious in his holiness among that people and faithful to his
covenant with them. It is God's honour that he is a Holy One; it is his
people's honour that he is the Holy One of Israel.

(2.) How he will express his joy and exultation. \[1.\] With his hand,
in sacred music - with the psaltery, with the harp; at these David
excelled, and the best of his skill shall be employed in setting forth
God's praises to such advantage as might affect others. \[2.\] With his
lips, in sacred songs: "Unto thee will I sing, to thy honour, and with a
desire to be accepted of thee. My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing
unto thee, knowing they cannot be better employed." \[3.\] In both with
his heart: "My soul shall rejoice which thou hast redeemed." Note,
First, Holy joy is the very heart and life of thankful praise. Secondly,
We do not make melody to the Lord, in singing his praises, if we do not
do it with our hearts. My lips shall rejoice, but that is nothing;
lip-labour, though ever so well laboured, if that be all, is but lost
labour in serving God; the soul must be at work, and with all that is
within us we must bless his holy name, else all about us is worth
little. Thirdly, Redeemed souls ought to be joyful thankful souls. The
work of redemption ought, above all God's works, to be celebrated by us
in our praises. The Lamb that was slain, and has redeemed us to God,
must therefore be counted worthy of all blessing and praise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 72](psa072)

</div>
