<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa092)  [Next](psa094) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 93](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 93:0</span></span>

This short psalm sets forth the honour of the kingdom of God among men,
to his glory, the terror of his enemies, and the comfort of all his
loving subjects. It relates both to the kingdom of his providence, by
which he upholds and governs the world, and especially to the kingdom of
his grace, by which he secures the church, sanctifies and preserves it.
The administration of both these kingdoms is put into the hands of the
Messiah, and to him, doubtless, the prophet here hears witness, and to
his kingdom, speaking of it as present, because sure; and because, as
the eternal Word, even before his incarnation he was Lord of all.
Concerning God's kingdom glorious things are here spoken. I. Have other
kings their royal robes? So has he ([Psa
93:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001)). II. Have they their thrones? So
has he ([Psa 93:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#002)). III. Have they
their enemies whom they subdue and triumph over? So has he ([Psa
93:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#003), [Psa
93:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#004)). IV. Is it their honour to be
faithful and holy? So it is his ([Psa
93:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#005)). In singing this psalm we forget
ourselves if we forget Christ, to whom the Father has given all power
both in heaven and in earth.

[Psalms 93:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 93:1</span></span>

Next to the being of God there is nothing that we are more concerned to
believe and consider than God's dominion, that Jehovah is God, and that
this God reigns ([Psa 93:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001)), not only
that he is King of right, and is the owner and proprietor of all persons
and things, but that he is King in fact, and does direct and dispose of
all the creatures and all their actions according to the counsel of his
own will. This is celebrated here, and in many other psalms: The Lord
reigns. It is the song of the gospel church, of the glorified church
([Rev 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006)), Hallelujah; the Lord God
omnipotent reigns. Here we are told how he reigns.

I. The Lord reigns gloriously: He is clothed with majesty. The majesty
of earthly princes, compared with God's terrible majesty, is but like
the glimmerings of a glow-worm compared with the brightness of the sun
when he goes forth in his strength. Are the enemies of God's kingdom
great and formidable? Yet let us not fear them, for God's majesty will
eclipse theirs.

II\. He reigns powerfully. He is not only clothed with majesty, as a
prince in his court, but he is clothed with strength, as a general in
the camp. He has wherewithal to support his greatness and to make it
truly formidable. See him not only clad in robes, but clad in armour.
Both strength and honour are his clothing. He can do every thing, and
with him nothing is impossible. 1. With this power he has girded
himself; it is not derived from any other, nor does the executing of it
depend upon any other, but he has it of himself and with it does
whatsoever he pleases. Let us not fear the power of man, which is
borrowed and bounded, but fear him who has power to kill and cast into
hell. 2. To this power it is owing that the world stands to this day.
The world also is established; it was so at first, by the creating power
of God, when he founded it upon the seas; it is so still, by that
providence which upholds all things and is a continued creation; it is
so established that though he has hanged the earth upon nothing ([Job
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#007)) yet it cannot be moved; all
things continue to this day, according to his ordinance. Note, The
preserving of the powers of nature and the course of nature is what the
God of nature must have the glory of; and we who have the benefit
thereof daily are very careless and ungrateful if we give him not the
glory of it. Though God clothes himself with majesty, yet he condescends
to take care of this lower world and to settle its affairs; and, if he
established the world, much more will he establish his church, that it
cannot be moved.

III\. He reigns eternally ([Psa 93:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#002)):
Thy throne is established of old. 1. God's right to rule the world is
founded in his making it; he that gave being to it, no doubt, may give
law to it, and so his title to the government is incontestable: Thy
throne is established; it is a title without a flaw in it. And it is
ancient: it is established of old, from the beginning of time, before
any other rule, principality, or power was erected, as it will continue
when all other rule, principality, and power shall be put down, [Co1
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024). 2. The whole administration of
his government was settled in his eternal counsels before all worlds;
for he does all according to the purpose which he purposed in himself;
The chariots of Providence came down from between the mountains of
brass, from those decrees which are fixed as the everlasting mountains
([Zac 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001)): Thou art from everlasting,
and therefore thy throne is established of old; because God himself was
from everlasting, his throne and all the determinations of it were so
too; for in an eternal mind there could not but be eternal thoughts.

IV\. He reigns triumphantly, [Psa
93:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#003), [Psa
93:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#004). We have here, 1. A threatening
storm supposed: The floods have lifted up, O Lord! (to God himself the
remonstrance is made) the floods have lifted up their voice, which
speaks terror; nay, they have lifted up their waves, which speaks real
danger. It alludes to a tempestuous sea, such as the wicked are compared
to, [Isa 57:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#020). The heathen rage ([Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)) and think to ruin the church, to
overwhelm it like a deluge, to sink it like a ship at sea. The church is
said to be tossed with tempests ([Isa
54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011)), and the floods of ungodly men
make the saints afraid, [Psa 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#004). We
may apply it to the tumults that are sometimes in our own bosoms,
through prevailing passions and frights, which put the soul into
disorder, and are ready to overthrow its graces and comforts; but, if
the Lord reign there, even the winds and seas shall obey him. 2. An
immovable anchor cast in this storm ([Psa
93:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#004)): The Lord himself is mightier.
Let this keep our minds fixed, (1.) That God is on high, above them,
which denotes his safety (they cannot reach him, [Psa
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#010)) and his sovereignty; they are
ruled by him, they are overruled, and, wherein they rebel, overcome,
[Exo 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#011). (2.) That he is mightier,
does more wondrous things than the noise of many waters; they cannot
disturb his rest or rule; they cannot defeat his designs and purposes.
Observe, The power of the church's enemies is but as the noise of many
waters; there is more of sound than substance in it. Pharaoh king of
Egypt is but a noise, [Jer 46:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#017). The
church's friends are commonly more frightened than hurt. God is mightier
than this noise; he is mighty to preserve his people's interests from
being ruined by these many waters and his people's spirits from being
terrified by the noise of them. He can, when he pleases, command peace
to the church ([Psa 65:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#007)), peace in
the soul, [Isa 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#003). Note, The
unlimited sovereignty and irresistible power of the great Jehovah are
very encouraging to the people of God, in reference to all the noises
and hurries they meet with in this world, [Psa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001), [Psa
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002).

V. He reigns in truth and holiness, [Psa
93:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#005). 1. All his promises are
inviolably faithful: Thy testimonies are very sure. As God is able to
protect his church, so he is true to the promises he has made of its
safety and victory. His word is passed, and all the saints may rely upon
it. Whatever was foretold concerning the kingdom of the Messiah would
certainly have its accomplishment in due time. Those testimonies upon
which the faith and hope of the Old Testament saints were built were
very sure, and would not fail them. 2. All his people ought to be
conscientiously pure: Holiness becomes thy house, O Lord! for ever.
God's church is his house; it is a holy house, cleansed from sin,
consecrated by God, and employed in his service. The holiness of it is
its beauty (nothing better becomes the saints than conformity to God's
image and an entire devotedness to his honour), and it is its strength
and safety; it is the holiness of God's house that secures it against
the many waters and their noise. Where there is purity there shall be
peace. Fashions change, and that which is becoming at one time is not so
at another; but holiness always becomes God's house and family, and
those who belong to it; it is perpetually decent; and nothing so ill
becomes the worshippers of the holy God as unholiness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 94](psa094)

</div>
