<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa036)  [Next](psa038) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 37](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 37:0</span></span>

This psalm is a sermon, and an excellent useful sermon it is, calculated
not (as most of the psalms) for our devotion, but for our conversation;
there is nothing in it of prayer or praise, but it is all instruction;
it is "Maschil - a teaching psalm;" it is an exposition of some of the
hardest chapters in the book of Providence, the advancement of the
wicked and the disgrace of the righteous, a solution of the difficulties
that arise thereupon, and an exhortation to conduct ourselves as becomes
us under such dark dispensations. The work of the prophets (and David
was one) was to explain the law. Now the law of Moses had promised
temporal blessings to the obedient, and denounced temporal miseries
against the disobedient, which principally referred to the body of the
people, the nation as a nation; for, when they came to be applied to
particular persons, many instances occurred of sinners in prosperity and
saints in adversity; to reconcile those instances with the word that God
had spoken is the scope of the prophet in this psalm, in which, I. He
forbids us to fret at the prosperity of the wicked in their wicked ways
([Psa 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001), [Psa
37:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#007), [Psa
37:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#008)). II. He gives very good reasons
why we should not fret at it. 1. Because of the scandalous character of
the wicked ([Psa 37:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#012), [Psa
37:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#014), [Psa
37:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#021), [Psa
37:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#032)) notwithstanding their
prosperity, and the honourable character of the righteous ([Psa
37:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#021), [Psa
37:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#026), [Psa
37:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#030), [Psa
37:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#031)). 2. Because of the destruction
and ruin which the wicked are nigh to ([Psa
37:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#002), [Psa
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#009), [Psa
37:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#010), [Psa
37:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020), [Psa
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035), [Psa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#036), [Psa
37:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#038)) and the salvation and
protection which the righteous are sure of from all the malicious
designs of the wicked ([Psa 37:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#013),
[Psa 37:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#015), [Psa
37:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#017), [Psa
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#028), [Psa
37:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#033), [Psa
37:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#039), [Psa
37:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#040)). 3. Because of the particular
mercy God has in store for all good people and the favour he shows them
([Psa 37:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#011), [Psa
37:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#016), [Psa
37:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#018), [Psa
37:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#019), [Psa
37:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#022), [Psa
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#028), [Psa
37:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#029), [Psa
37:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#037)). III. He prescribes very good
remedies against this sin of envying the prosperity of the wicked, and
great encouragement to use those remedies ([Psa
37:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#003), [Psa
37:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#027), [Psa
37:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#034)). In singing this psalm we must
teach and admonish one another rightly to understand the providence of
God and to accommodate ourselves to it, at all times carefully to do our
duty and then patiently to leave the event with God and to believe that,
how black soever things may look for the present, it shall be "well with
those that fear God, that fear before him."

A psalm of David.

[Psalms 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 37:1</span></span>

The instructions here given are very plain; much need not be said for
the exposition of them, but there is a great deal to be done for the
reducing of them to practice, and there they will look best.

I. We are here cautioned against discontent at the prosperity and
success of evil-doers ([Psa 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001), [Psa
37:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#002)): Fret not thyself, neither be
thou envious. We may suppose that David speaks this to himself first,
and preaches it to his own heart (in his communing with that upon his
bed), for the suppressing of those corrupt passions which he found
working there, and then leaves it in writing for instruction to others
that might be in similar temptation. That is preached best, and with
most probability of success, to others, which is first preached to
ourselves. Now, 1. When we look abroad we see the world full of
evil-doers and workers of iniquity, that flourish and prosper, that have
what they will and do what they will, that live in ease and pomp
themselves and have power in their hands to do mischief to those about
them. So it was in David's time; and therefore, if it is so still, let
us not marvel at the matter, as though it were some new or strange
thing. 2. When we look within we find ourselves tempted to fret at this,
and to be envious against these scandals and burdens, these blemishes
and common nuisances, of this earth. We are apt to fret at God, as if he
were unkind to the world and unkind to his church in permitting such men
to live, and prosper, and prevail, as they do. We are apt to fret
ourselves with vexation at their success in their evil projects. We are
apt to envy them the liberty they take in getting wealth, and perhaps by
unlawful means, and in the indulgence of their lusts, and to wish that
we could shake off the restraints of conscience and do so too. We are
tempted to think them the only happy people, and to incline to imitate
them, and to join ourselves with them, that we may share in their gains
and eat of their dainties; and this is that which we are warned against:
Fret not thyself, neither be thou envious. Fretfulness and envy are sins
that are their own punishments; they are the uneasiness of the spirit
and the rottenness of the bones; it is therefore in kindness to
ourselves that we are warned against them. Yet that is not all; for, 3.
When we look forward with an eye of faith we shall see no reason to envy
wicked people their prosperity, for their ruin is at the door and they
are ripening apace for it, [Psa 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#002).
They flourish, but as the grass, and as the green herb, which nobody
envies nor frets at. The flourishing of a godly man is like that of a
fruitful tree ([Psa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003)), but that of
the wicked man is like grass and herbs, which are very short-lived. (1.)
They will soon wither of themselves. Outward prosperity is a fading
thing, and so is the life itself to which it is confined. (2.) They will
sooner be cut down by the judgments of God. Their triumphing is short,
but their weeping and wailing will be everlasting.

II\. We are here counselled to live a life on confidence and complacency
in God, and that will keep us from fretting at the prosperity of
evil-doers; if we do well for our own souls, we shall see little reason
to envy those that do so ill for theirs. Here are three excellent
precepts, which we are to be ruled by, and, to enforce them, three
precious promises, which we may rely upon.

1\. We must make God our hope in the way of duty and then we shall have
a comfortable subsistence in this world, [Psa
37:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#003). (1.) It is required that we
trust in the Lord and do good, that we confide in God and conform to
him. The life of religion lies much in a believing reliance on God, his
favour, his providence, his promise, his grace, and a diligent care to
serve him and our generation, according to his will. We must not think
to trust in God and then live as we list. No; it is not trusting God,
but tempting him, if we do not make conscience of our duty to him. Nor
must we think to do good, and then to trust to ourselves, and our own
righteousness and strength. No; we must both trust in the Lord and do
good. And then, (2.) It is promised that we shall be well provided for
in this world: So shalt thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be
fed. He does not say, "So shalt thou get preferment, dwell in a palace,
and be feasted." This is not necessary; a man's life consists not in the
abundance of these things; but, "Thou shalt have a place to live in, and
that in the land, in Canaan, the valley of vision, and thou shalt have
food convenient for thee." This is more than we deserve; it is as much
as a good man will stipulate for ([Gen
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020)) and it is enough for one that
is going to heaven. "Thou shalt have a settlement, a quiet settlement,
and a maintenance, a comfortable maintenance: Verily thou shalt be fed."
Some read it, Thou shalt be fed by faith, as the just are said to live
by faith, and it is good living, good feeding, upon the promises.
"Verily thou shalt be fed, as Elijah in the famine, with what is needful
for thee." God himself is a shepherd, a feeder, to all those that trust
in him, [Psa 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001).

2\. We must make God our heart's delight and then we shall have our
heart's desire, [Psa 37:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004). We must not
only depend upon God, but solace ourselves in him. We must be well
pleased that there is a God, that he is such a one as he has revealed
himself to be, and that he is our God in covenant. We must delight
ourselves in his beauty, bounty, and benignity; our souls must return to
him, and repose in him, as their rest, and their portion for ever. Being
satisfied of his loving-kindness, we must be satisfied with it, and make
that our exceeding joy, [Psa 43:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004). We
were commanded ([Psa 37:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#003)) to do good,
and then follows this command to delight in God, which is as much a
privilege as a duty. If we make conscience of obedience to God, we may
then take the comfort of a complacency in him. And even this pleasant
duty of delighting in God has a promise annexed to it, which is very
full and precious, enough to recompense the hardest services: He shall
give thee the desires of thy heart. He has not promised to gratify all
the appetites of the body and the humours of the fancy, but to grant all
the desires of the heart, all the cravings of the renewed sanctified
soul. What is the desire of the heart of a good man? It is this, to
know, and love, and live to God, to please him and to be pleased in him.

3\. We must make God our guide, and submit in every thing to his
guidance and disposal; and then all our affairs, even those that seem
most intricate and perplexed, shall be made to issue well and to our
satisfaction, [Psa 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005), [Psa
37:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#006). (1.) The duty is very easy; and,
if we do it aright, it will make us easy: Commit thy way unto the Lord;
roll thy way upon the Lord (so the margin reads it), [Pro
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#003); [Psa
55:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022). Cast thy burden upon the Lord,
the burden of thy care, [Pe1 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#007). We
must roll it off ourselves, so as not to afflict and perplex ourselves
with thoughts about future events ([Mat
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025)), not to cumber and trouble
ourselves either with the contrivance of the means or with expectation
of the end, but refer it to God, leave it to him by his wise and good
providence to order and dispose of all our concerns as he pleases.
Retreat thy way unto the Lord (so the Septuagint), that is, "By prayer
spread thy case, and all thy cares about it, before the Lord" (as
Jephthah uttered all his words before the Lord in Mizpeh, [Jdg
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#011)), "and then trust in him to
bring it to a good issue, with a full satisfaction that all is well that
God does." We must do our duty (that must be our care) and then leave
the event with God. Sit still, and see how the matter will fall, [Rut
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#018). We must follow Providence, and
not force it, subscribe to Infinite Wisdom and not prescribe. (2.) The
promise is very sweet. \[1.\] In general, "He shall bring that to pass,
whatever it is, which thou hast committed to him, if not to thy
contrivance, yet to thy content. He will find means to extricate thee
out of thy straits, to prevent thy fears, and bring about thy purposes,
to thy satisfaction." \[2.\] In particular, "He will take care of thy
reputation, and bring thee out of thy difficulties, not only with
comfort, but with credit and honour: He shall bring forth thy
righteousness as the light and thy judgment as the noon-day." ([Psa
37:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#006)), that is, "he shall make it to
appear that thou art an honest man, and that is honour enough." First,
It is implied that the righteousness and judgment of good people may,
for a time, be clouded and eclipsed, either by remarkable rebukes of
Providence (Job's great afflictions darkened his righteousness) or by
the malicious censures and reproaches of men, who give them bad names
which they no way deserve, and lay to their charge things which they
know not. Secondly, It is promised that God will, in due time, roll away
the reproach they are under, clear up their innocency, and bring forth
their righteousness, to their honour, perhaps in this world, at furthest
in the great day, [Mat 13:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043). Note, If
we take care to keep a good conscience, we may leave it to God to take
care of our good name.

[Psalms 37:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 37:7</span></span>

In these verses we have,

I. The foregoing precepts inculcated; for we are so apt to disquiet
ourselves with needless fruitless discontents and distrusts that it is
necessary there should be precept upon precept, and line upon line, to
suppress them and arm us against them. 1. Let us compose ourselves by
believing in God: "Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him ([Psa
37:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#007)), that is, be well reconciled to
all he does and acquiesce in it, for that is best that is, because it is
what God has appointed; and be well satisfied that he will still make
all to work for good to us, though we know not how or which way." Be
silent to the Lord (so the word is), not with a sullen, but a submissive
silence. A patient bearing of what is laid upon us, with a patient
expectation of what is further appointed for us, is as much our interest
as it is our duty, for it will make us always easy; and there is a great
deal of reason for it, for it is making a virtue of necessity. 2. Let us
not discompose ourselves at what we see in this world: "Fret not thyself
because of him who prospers in his wicked way, who, though he is a bad
man, yet thrives and grows rich and great in the world; no, nor because
of him who does mischief with his power and wealth, and brings wicked
devices to pass against those that are virtuous and good, who seems to
have gained his point and to have run them down. If thy heart begins to
rise at it, stroke down thy folly, and cease from anger ([Psa
37:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#008)), check the first stirrings of
discontent and envy, and do not harbour any hard thoughts of God and his
providence upon this account. Be not angry at any thing that God does,
but forsake that wrath; it is the worst kind of wrath that can be. Fret
not thyself in any wise to do evil; do not envy them their prosperity,
lest thou be tempted to fall in with them and to take the same evil
course that they take to enrich and advance themselves or some desperate
course to avoid them and their power." Note, A fretful discontented
spirit lies open to many temptations; and those that indulge it are in
danger of doing evil.

II\. The foregoing reasons, taken from the approaching ruin of the
wicked notwithstanding their prosperity, and the real happiness of the
righteous notwithstanding their troubles, are here much enlarged upon
and the same things repeated in a pleasing variety of expression. We
were cautioned ([Psa 37:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#007)) not to envy
the wicked either worldly prosperity or the success of their plots
against the righteous, and the reasons here given respect these two
temptations severally: -

1\. Good people have no reason to envy the worldly prosperity of wicked
people, nor to grieve or be uneasy at it, (1.) Because the prosperity of
the wicked will soon be at an end ([Psa
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#009)): Evil-doers shall be cut off by
some sudden stroke of divine justice in the midst of their prosperity;
what they have got by sin will not only flow away from them ([Job
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#028)), but they shall be carried away
with it. See the end of these men ([Psa
73:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017)), how dear their ill-got gain
will cost them, and you will be far from envying them or from being
willing to espouse their lot, for better, for worse. Their ruin is sure,
and it is very near ([Psa 37:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#010)): Yet
a little while, and the wicked shall not be what they now are; they are
brought into desolation in a moment, [Psa
73:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#019). Have a little patience, for the
Judge stands before the door, [Jam
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#008), [Jam
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#009). Moderate your passion, for the
Lord is at hand, [Phi 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005). And when
their ruin comes it will be an utter ruin; he and his shall be
extirpated; the day that comes shall leave him neither root nor branch
([Mal 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001)): Thou shalt diligently
consider his place, where but the other day he made a mighty figure, but
it shall not be, you will not find it; he shall leave nothing valuable,
nothing honourable, behind. him. To the same purport ([Psa
37:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020)), The wicked shall perish; their
death is their perdition, because it is the termination of all their joy
and a passage to endless misery. Blessed are the dead that die in the
Lord; but undone, for ever undone, are the dead that die in their sins.
The wicked are the enemies of the Lord; such those make themselves who
will not have him to reign over them, and as such he will reckon with
them: They shall consume as the fat of lambs, they shall consume into
smoke. Their prosperity, which gratifies their sensuality, is like the
fat of lambs, not solid or substantial, but loose and washy; and, when
their ruin comes, they shall fall as sacrifices to the justice of God
and be consumed as the fat of the sacrifices was upon the altar, whence
it ascended in smoke. The day of God's vengeance on the wicked is
represented as a sacrifice of the fat of the kidneys of rams ([Isa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006)); for he will be honoured by the
ruin of his enemies, as he was by the sacrifices. Damned sinners are
sacrifices, [Mar 9:49](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#049). This is a good
reason why we should not envy them their prosperity; while they are fed
to the full, they are but in the fattening for the day of sacrifice,
like a lamb in a large place ([Hos
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#016)), and the more they prosper the
more will God be glorified in their ruin. (2.) Because the condition of
the righteous, even in this life, is every way better and more desirable
than that of the wicked, [Psa 37:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#016).
In general, a little that a righteous man has of the honour, wealth, and
pleasure of this world, is better than the riches of many wicked.
Observe, \[1.\] The wealth of the world is so dispensed by the divine
Providence that it is often the lot of good people to have but a little
of it, and of wicked people to have abundance of it; for thus God would
show us that the things of this world are not the best things, for, if
they were, those would have most that are best and dearest to God.
\[2.\] That a godly man's little is really better than a wicked man's
estate, though ever so much; for it comes from a better hand, from a
hand of special love and not merely from a hand of common providence, -
it is enjoyed by a better title (God gives it to them by promise, [Gal
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#018)), - it is theirs by virtue of
their relation to Christ, who is the heir of all things, - and it is put
to better use; it is sanctified to them by the blessing of God. Unto the
pure all things are pure, [Tit 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015). A
little wherewith God is served and honoured is better than a great deal
prepared for Baal or for a base lust. The promises here made to the
righteous secure them such a happiness that they need not envy the
prosperity of evil-doers. Let them know to their comfort, First, That
they shall inherit the earth, as much of it as Infinite Wisdom sees good
for them; they have the promise of the life that now is, [Ti1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008). If all the earth were necessary
to make them happy, they should have it. All is theirs, even the world,
and things present, as well as things to come, [Co1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#021), [Co1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#022). They have it by inheritance, a
safe and honourable title, not by permission only and connivance. When
evil-doers are cut off the righteous sometimes inherit what they
gathered. The wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just, [Job
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#017); [Pro
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#022). This promise is here made, 1.
To those that live a life of faith ([Psa
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#009)); Those that wait upon the Lord,
as dependents on him, expectants from him, and suppliants to him, shall
inherit the earth, as a token of his present favour to them and an
earnest of better things intended for them in the other world. God is a
good Master, that provides plentifully and well, not only for his
working servants, but for his waiting servants. 2. To those that live a
quiet and peaceable life ([Psa 37:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#011)):
The meek shall inherit the earth. They are in least danger of being
injured and disturbed in the possession of what they have and they have
most satisfaction in themselves and consequently the sweetest relish of
their creature-comforts. Our Saviour has made this a gospel promise, and
a confirmation of the blessings he pronounced on the meek, [Mat
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005). Secondly, That they shall delight
themselves in the abundance of peace, [Psa
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#011). Perhaps they have not abundance
of wealth to delight in; but they have that which is better, abundance
of peace, inward peace and tranquility of mind, peace with God, and then
peace in God, that great peace which those have that love God's law,
whom nothing shall offend ([Psa
119:165](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#165)), that abundance of peace
which is in the kingdom of Christ ([Psa
72:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#007)), that peace which the world
cannot give ([Joh 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)), and which
the wicked cannot have, [Isa 57:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#021).
This they shall delight themselves in, and in it they shall have a
continual feast; while those that have abundance of wealth do but cumber
and perplex themselves with it and have little delight in it. Thirdly,
That God knows their days, [Psa 37:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#018).
He takes particular notice of them, of all they do and of all that
happens to them. He keeps account of the days of their service, and not
one day's work shall go unrewarded, and of the days of their suffering,
that for those also they may receive a recompence. He knows their bright
days, and has pleasure in their prosperity; he knows their cloudy and
dark days, the days of their affliction, and as the day is so shall the
strength be. Fourthly, That their inheritance shall be for ever; not
their inheritance in the earth, but that incorruptible indefeasible one
which is laid up for them in heaven. Those that are sure of an
everlasting inheritance in the other world have no reason to envy the
wicked their transitory possessions and pleasures in this world.
Fifthly, That in the worst of times it shall go well with them ([Psa
37:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#019)): They shall not be ashamed of
their hope and confidence in God, nor of the profession they have made
of religion; for the comfort of that will stand them in stead, and be a
real support to them, in evil times. When others droop they shall lift
up their heads with joy and confidence: Even in the days of famine, when
others are dying for hunger round about them, they shall be satisfied,
as Elijah was; in some way or other God will provide food convenient for
them, or give them hearts to be satisfied and content without it, so
that, if they should be hardly bestead and hungry, they shall not (as
the wicked do) fret themselves and curse their king and their God ([Isa
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#021)), but rejoice in God as the God
of their salvation even when the fig-tree does not blossom, [Hab
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017), [Hab
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#018).

2\. Good people have no reason to fret at the occasional success of the
designs of the wicked against the just. Though they do bring some of
their wicked devices to pass, which makes us fear they will gain their
point and bring them all to pass, yet let us cease from anger, and not
fret ourselves so as to think of giving up the cause. For,

(1.) Their plots will be their shame, [Psa
37:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#012), [Psa
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#013). It is true the wicked plotteth
against the just; there is a rooted enmity in the seed of the wicked one
against the righteous seed; their aim is, if they can, to destroy their
righteousness, or, if that fail, then to destroy them. With this end in
view they have acted with a great deal both of cursed policy and
contrivance (they plot, they practice, against the just), and of cursed
zeal and fury - they gnash upon them with their teeth, so desirous are
they, if they could get it into their power, to eat them up, and so full
of rage and indignation are they because it is not in their power; but
by all this they do but make themselves ridiculous. The Lord shall laugh
at them, [Psa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004), [Psa
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005). They are proud and insolent, but
God shall pour contempt upon them. he is not only displeased with them,
but he despises them and all their attempts as vain and ineffectual, and
their malice as impotent and in a chain; for he sees that his day is
coming, that is, \[1.\] The day of God's reckoning, the day of the
revelation of his righteousness, which now seems clouded and eclipsed.
Men have their day now. This is your hour, [Luk
22:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#053). But God will have his day
shortly, a day of recompences, a day which will set all to rights, and
render that ridiculous which now passes for glorious. It is a small
thing to be judged of man's judgment, [Co1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003). God's day will give a decisive
judgment. \[2.\] The day of their ruin. The wicked man's day, the day
set for his fall, that day is coming, which denotes delay; it has not
yet come, but certainly it will come. The believing prospect of that day
will enable the virgin, the daughter of Zion, to despise the rage of her
enemies and laugh them to scorn, [Isa
37:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#022).

(2.) Their attempts will be their destruction, [Psa
37:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#014), [Psa
37:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#015). See here, \[1.\] How cruel they
are in their designs against good people. They prepare instruments of
death, the sword and the bow, no less will serve; they hunt for the
precious life. That which they design is to cast down and slay; it is
the blood of the saints they thirst after. They carry on the design very
far, and it is near to be put in execution: They have drawn the sword,
and bent the bow; and all these military preparations are made against
the helpless, the poor and needy (which proves them to be very
cowardly), and against the guiltless, such as are of upright
conversation, that never gave them any provocation, nor offered injury
to them or any other person, which proves them to be very wicked.
Uprightness itself will be no fence against their malice. But, \[2.\]
How justly their malice recoils upon themselves: Their sword shall turn
into their own heart, which implies the preservation of the righteous
from their malice and the filling up of the measure of their own
iniquity by it. Sometimes that very thing proves to be their own
destruction which they projected against their harmless neighbours;
however, God's sword, which their provocations have drawn against them,
will give them their death's wound.

(3.) Those that are not suddenly cut off shall yet be so disabled for
doing any further mischief that the interests of the church shall be
effectually secured: Their bows shall be broken ([Psa
37:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#015)); the instruments of their
cruelty shall fail them and they shall lose those whom they had made
tools of to serve their bloody purposes with; nay, their arms shall be
broken, so that they shall not be able to go on with their enterprises,
[Psa 37:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#017). But the Lord upholds the
righteous, so that they neither sink under the weight of their
afflictions nor are crushed by the violence of their enemies. He upholds
them both in their integrity and in their prosperity; and those that are
so upheld by the rock of ages have no reason to envy the wicked the
support of their broken reeds.

[Psalms 37:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 37:21</span></span>

These verses are much to the same purport with the foregoing verses of
this psalm, for it is a subject worthy to be dwelt upon. Observe here,

I. What is required of us as the way to our happiness, which we may
learn both from the characters here laid down and from the directions
here given. If we would be blessed of God, 1. We must make conscience of
giving every body his own; for the wicked borrows and pays not again,
[Psa 37:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#021). It is the first thing
which the Lord our God requires of us, that we do justly, and render to
all their due. It is not only a shameful paltry thing, but a sinful
wicked thing, not to repay what we have borrowed. Some make this an
instance, not so much of the wickedness of the wicked as of the misery
and poverty to which they are reduced by the just judgment of God, that
they shall be necessitated to borrow for their supply and then be in no
capacity to repay it again, and so lie at the mercy of their creditors.
Whatever some men seem to think of it, as it is a great sin for those
that are able to deny the payment of their just debts, so it is a great
misery not to be able to pay them. 2. We must be ready to all acts of
charity and beneficence; for, as it is an instance of God's goodness to
the righteous that he puts it into the power of his hand to be kind and
to do good (and so some understand it, God's blessing increases his
little to such a degree that he has abundance to spare for the relief of
others), so it is an instance of the goodness of the righteous man that
he has a heart proportionable to his estate: He shows mercy, and gives,
[Psa 37:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#021). He is ever merciful, or
every day, or all the day, merciful, and lends, and sometimes there is
as true charity in lending as in giving; and giving and lending are
acceptable to God when they proceed from a merciful disposition in the
heart, which, if it be sincere, will be constant, and will keep us from
being weary of well-doing. he that is truly merciful will be ever
merciful. 3. We must leave our sins, and engage in the practice of
serious godliness ([Psa 37:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#027)): Depart
from evil and do good. Cease to do evil and abhor it; learn to do well
and cleave to it; this is true religion. 4. We must abound in good
discourse, and with our tongues must glorify God and edify others. It is
part of the character of a righteous man ([Psa
37:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#030)) that his mouth speaketh wisdom;
not only he speaks wisely, but he speaks wisdom, like Solomon himself,
for the instruction of those about him. His tongue talks not of things
idle and impertinent, but of judgment, that is, of the word and
providence of God and the rules of wisdom for the right ordering of the
conversation. Out of the abundance of a good heart will the mouth speak
that which is good and to the use of edifying. 5. We must have our wills
brought into an entire subjection to the will and word of God ([Psa
37:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#031)): The law of God, of his God, is
in his heart; and in vain do we pretend that God is our God if we do not
receive his law into our hearts and resign ourselves to the government
of it. It is but a jest and a mockery to speak wisdom, and to talk of
judgment ([Psa 37:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#030)), unless we have
the law in our hearts, and we think as we speak. The law of God must be
a commanding ruling principle in the heart; it must be a light there, a
spring there, and then the conversation will be regular and uniform:
None of his steps will slide; it will effectually prevent backsliding
into sin, and the uneasiness that follows from it.

II\. What is assured to us, as instances of our happiness and comfort,
upon these conditions.

1\. That we shall have the blessing of God, and that blessing shall be
the spring, and sweetness, and security of all our temporal comforts and
enjoyments ([Psa 37:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#022)): Such as are
blessed of God, as all the righteous are, with a Father's blessing, by
virtue of that shall inherit the earth, or the land (for so the same
word is translated, [Psa 37:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#029)), the
land of Canaan, that glory of all lands. Our creature-comforts are
comforts indeed to us when we see them flowing from the blessing of God,
we are sure not to want any thing that is good for us in this world. The
earth shall yield us her increase if God, as our own God, give us his
blessing, [Psa 67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006). And as those whom
God blesses are thus blessed indeed (for they shall inherit the land),
so those whom he curses are cursed indeed; they shall be cut off and
rooted out, and their extirpation by the divine curse will set off the
establishment of the righteous by the divine blessing and be a foil to
it.

2\. That God will direct and dispose of our actions and affairs so as
may be most for his glory ([Psa
37:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#023)): The steps of a good man are
ordered by the Lord. By his grace and Holy Spirit he directs the
thoughts, affections, and designs of good men. He has all hearts in his
hand, but theirs by their own consent. By his providence he overrules
the events that concern them, so as to make their way plain before them,
both what they should do and what they may expect. Observe, God orders
the steps of a good man; not only his way in general, by his written
word, but his particular steps, by the whispers of conscience, saying,
This is the way, walk in it. He does not always show him his way at a
distance, but leads him step by step, as children are led, and so keeps
him in a continual dependence upon his guidance; and this, (1.) Because
he delights in his way, and is well pleased with the paths of
righteousness wherein he walks. The Lord knows the way of the righteous
([Psa 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006)), knows it with favour, and
therefore directs it. (2.) That he may delight in his way. Because God
orders his way according to his own will, therefore he delights in it;
for, as he loves his own image upon us, so he is well pleased with what
we do under his guidance.

3\. That God will keep us from being ruined by our falls either into sin
or into trouble ([Psa 37:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#024)): Though
he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down. (1.) A good man may be
overtaken in a fault, but the grace of God shall recover him to
repentance, so that he shall not be utterly cast down. Though he may,
for a time, lose the joys of God's salvation, yet they shall be restored
to him; for God shall uphold him with his hand, uphold him with his free
Spirit. The root shall be kept alive, though the leaf wither; and there
will come a spring after the winter. (2.) A good man may be in distress,
his affairs embarrassed, his spirits sunk, but he shall not be utterly
cast down; God will be the strength of his heart when his flesh and
heart fail, and will uphold him with his comforts, so that the spirit he
has made shall not fail before him.

4\. That we shall not want the necessary supports of this life ([Psa
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#025)): "I have been young and now am
old, and, among all the changes I have seen in men's outward condition
and the observations I have made upon them, I never saw the righteous
forsaken of God and man, as I have sometimes seen wicked people
abandoned both by heaven and earth; nor do I ever remember to have seen
the seed of the righteous reduced to such an extremity as to beg their
bread." David had himself begged his bread of Abimelech the priest, but
it was when Saul hunted him; and our Saviour has taught us to except the
case of persecution for righteousness' sake out of all the temporal
promises ([Mar 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030)), because that
has such peculiar honours and comforts attending it as make it rather a
gift (as the apostle reckons it, [Phi
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#029)) than a loss or grievance. But
there are very few instances of good men, or their families, that are
reduced to such extreme poverty as many wicked people bring themselves
to by their wickedness. He had not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his
seed begging their bread. Forsaken (so some expound it); if they do want
God will raise them up friends to supply them, without a scandalous
exposing of themselves to the reproach of common beggars; or, if they go
from door to door for meat, it shall not be with despair, as the wicked
man that wanders abroad for bread, saying, Where is it? [Job
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#023). Nor shall he be denied, as the
prodigal, that would fain have filled his belly, but no man gave unto
him, [Luk 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#016). Nor shall he grudge
if he be not satisfied, as David's enemies, when they wandered up and
down for meat, [Psa 59:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#015). Some make
this promise relate especially to those that are charitable and liberal
to the poor, and to intimate that David never observed any that brought
themselves to poverty by their charity. It is withholding more than is
meet that tends to poverty, [Pro
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#024).

5\. That God will not desert us, but graciously protect us in our
difficulties and straits ([Psa 37:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#028)):
The Lord loves judgment; he delights in doing justice himself and he
delights in those that do justice; and therefore he forsakes not his
saints in affliction when others make themselves strange to them and
become shy of them, but he takes care that they be preserved for ever,
that is, that the saint in every age be taken under his protection, that
the succession be preserved to the end of time, and that particular
saints be preserved from all the temptations and through all the trials
of this present time, to that happiness which shall be for ever. He will
preserve them to his heavenly kingdom; that is a preservation for ever,
[Ti2 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#018); [Psa
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007).

6\. That we shall have a comfortable settlement in this world, and in a
better when we leave this. That we shall dwell for evermore ([Psa
37:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#027)), and not be cut off as the seed
of the wicked, [Psa 37:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#028). Those shall
not be tossed that make God their rest and are at home in him. But on
this earth there is no dwelling for ever, no continuing city; it is in
heaven only, that city which has foundations, that the righteous shall
dwell for ever; that will be their everlasting habitation.

7\. That we shall not become a prey to our adversaries, who seek our
ruin, [Psa 37:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#032), [Psa
37:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#033). There is an adversary that
takes all opportunities to do us a mischief, a wicked one that watches
the righteous (as a roaring lion watches his prey) and seeks to slay
him. There are wicked men that do so, that are very subtle (they watch
the righteous, that they may have an opportunity to do them a mischief
effectually and may have a pretence wherewith to justify themselves in
the doing of it), and very spiteful, for they seek to slay him. But it
may very well be applied to the wicked one, the devil, that old serpent,
who has his wiles to entrap the righteous, his devices which we should
not be ignorant of, - that great red dragon, who seeks to slay them, -
that roaring lion, who goes about continually, restless and raging, and
seeking whom he may devour. But it is here promised that he shall not
prevail, neither Satan nor his instruments. (1.) He shall not prevail as
a field-adversary: The Lord will not leave him in his hand; he will not
permit Satan to do what he would, nor will he withdraw his strength and
grace from his people, but will enable them to resist and overcome him,
and their faith shall not fail, [Luk
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031), [Luk
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032). A good man may fall into the
hands of a messenger of Satan, and be sorely buffeted, but God will not
leave him in his hands, [Co1 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013).
(2.) He shall not prevail as a law-adversary: God will not condemn him
when he is judged, though urged to do it by the accuser of the brethren,
who accuses them before our God day and night. His false accusations
will be thrown out, as those exhibited against Joshua ([Zac
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001), [Zac
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#002)), The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan!
It is God that justifies, and then who shall lay any thing to the charge
of God's elect?

[Psalms 37:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 37:34</span></span>

The psalmist's conclusion of this sermon (for that is the nature of this
poem) is of the same purport with the whole, and inculcates the same
things.

I. The duty here pressed upon us is still the same ([Psa
37:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#034)): Wait on the Lord and keep his
way. Duty is ours, and we must mind it and make conscience of it, keep
God's way and never turn out of it nor loiter in it, keep close, keep
going; but events are God's and we must refer ourselves to him for the
disposal of them; we must wait on the Lord, attend the motions of his
providence, carefully observe them, and conscientiously accommodate
ourselves to them. If we make conscience of keeping God's way, we may
with cheerfulness wait on him and commit to him our way; and we shall
find him a good Master both to his working servants and to his waiting
servants.

II\. The reasons to enforce this duty are much the same too, taken from
the certain destruction of the wicked and the certain salvation of the
righteous. This good man, being tempted to envy the prosperity of the
wicked, that he might fortify himself against the temptation, goes into
the sanctuary of God and leads us thither ([Psa
73:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017)); there he understands their
end, and thence gives us to understand it, and, by comparing that with
the end of the righteous, baffles the temptation and puts it to silence.
Observe,

1\. The misery of the wicked at last, however they may prosper awhile:
The end of the wicked shall be cut off ([Psa
37:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#038)); and that cannot be well that
will undoubtedly end so ill. The wicked, in their end, will be cut off
from all good and all hopes of it; a final period will be put to all
their joys, and they will be for ever separated from the fountain of
life to all evil. (1.) Some instances of the remarkable ruin of wicked
people David had himself observed in this world - that the pomp and
prosperity of sinners would not secure them from the judgments of God
when their day should come to fall ([Psa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#036), [Psa
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035)): I have seen a wicked man (the
word is singular), suppose Saul or Ahithophel (for David was an old man
when he penned this psalm), in great power, formidable (so some render
it), the terror of the mighty in the land of the living, carrying all
before him with a high hand, and seeming to be firmly fixed and finely
flourishing, spreading himself like a green bay-tree, which produces all
leaves and no fruit; like a native home-born Israelite (so Dr. Hammond),
likely to take root. But what became of him? Eliphaz, long before, had
learned, when he saw the foolish taking root, to curse his habitation,
[Job 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#003). And David saw cause for it;
for this bay-tree withered away as soon as the fig-tree. Christ cursed:
He passed away as a dream, as a shadow, such was he and all the pomp and
power he was so proud of. He was gone in an instant: He was not; I
sought him with wonder, but he could not be found. He had acted his part
and then quitted the stage, and there was no miss of him. (2.) The total
and final ruin of sinners, of all sinners, will shortly be made as much
a spectacle to the saints as they are now sometimes made a spectacle to
the world ([Psa 37:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#034)): When the
wicked are cut off (and cut off they certainly will be) thou shalt see
it, with awful adorations of the divine justice. The transgressors shall
be destroyed together, [Psa 37:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#038). In
this world God singles out here one sinner and there another, out of
many, to be made an example in terrorem - as a warning; but in the day
of judgment there will be a general destruction of all the
transgressors, and not one shall escape. Those that have sinned together
shall be damned together. Bind them in bundles, to burn them.

2\. The blessedness of the righteous, at last. Let us see what will be
the end of God's poor despised people. (1.) Preferment. There have been
times the iniquity of which has been such that men's piety has hindered
their preferment in this world, and put them quite out of the way of
raising estates; but those that keep God's way may be assured that in
due time he will exalt them, to inherit the land ([Psa
37:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#034)); he will advance them to a
place in the heavenly mansions, to dignity, and honour, and true wealth,
in the New Jerusalem, to inherit that good land, that land of promise,
of which Canaan was a type; he will exalt them above all contempt and
danger. (2.) Peace, [Psa 37:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#037). Let
all people mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; take notice of
him to admire him and imitate him, keep your eye upon him to observe
what comes of him, and you will find that the end of that man is peace.
Sometimes the latter end of his days proves more comfortable to him than
the beginning was; the storms blow over, and he is comforted again,
after the time that he was afflicted. However, if all his days continue
dark and cloudy, perhaps his dying day may prove comfortable to him and
his sun may set in brightness; or, if it should set under a cloud, yet
his future state will be peace, everlasting peace. Those that walk in
their uprightness while they live shall enter into peace when they die,
[Isa 57:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#002). A peaceful death has
concluded the troublesome life of many a good man; and all is well that
thus ends everlastingly well. Balaam himself wished that his death and
his last end might be like that of the righteous [Num
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010). (3.) Salvation, [Psa
37:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#039), [Psa
37:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#040). The salvation of the righteous
(which may be applied to the great salvation of which the prophets
enquired and searched diligently, [Pe1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010)) is of the Lord; it will be the
Lord's doing. The eternal salvation, that salvation of God which those
shall see that order their conversation aright ([Psa
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023)), is likewise of the Lord. And
he that intends Christ and heaven for them will be a God all-sufficient
to them: He is their strength in time of trouble, to support them under
it and carry them through it. He shall help them and deliver them, help
them to do their duties, to bear their burdens, and to maintain their
spiritual conflicts, help them to bear their troubles well and get good
by them, and, in due time, shall deliver them out of their troubles. He
shall deliver them from the wicked that would overwhelm them and swallow
them up, shall secure them there, where the wicked cease from troubling.
He shall save them, not only keep them safe, but make them happy,
because they trust in him, not because they have merited it from him,
but because they have committed themselves to him and reposed a
confidence in him, and have thereby honoured him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 38](psa038)

</div>
