<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa078)  [Next](psa080) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 79](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 79:0</span></span>

This psalm, if penned with any particular event in view, is with most
probability made to refer to the destruction of Jerusalem and the
temple, and the woeful havoc made of the Jewish nation by the Chaldeans
under Nebuchadnezzar. It is set to the same tune, as I may say, with the
Lamentations of Jeremiah, and that weeping prophet borrows two verses
out of it ([Psa 79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006), [Psa
79:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#007)) and makes use of them in his
prayer, [Jer 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025). Some think it was
penned long before by the spirit of prophecy, prepared for the use of
the church in that cloudy and dark day. Others think that it was penned
then by the spirit of prayer, either by a prophet named Asaph or by some
other prophet for the sons of Asaph. Whatever the particular occasion
was, we have here, I. A representation of the very deplorable condition
that the people of God were in at this time ([Psa
79:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#001)). II. A petition to God for
succour and relief, that their enemies might be reckoned with ([Psa
79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006), [Psa
79:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#007), [Psa
79:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#010), [Psa
79:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#012)), that their sins might be
pardoned ([Psa 79:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#008), [Psa
79:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#009)), and that they might be
delivered ([Psa 79:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#011)). III. A plea
taken from the readiness of his people to praise him ([Psa
79:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#013)). In times of the church's peace
and prosperity this psalm may, in the singing of it, give us occasion to
bless God that we are not thus trampled on and insulted. But it is
especially seasonable in a day of treading down and perplexity, for the
exciting of our desires towards God and the encouragement of our faith
in him as the church's patron.

A psalm of Asaph.

[Psalms 79:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 79:1</span></span>

We have here a sad complaint exhibited in the court of heaven. The world
is full of complaints, and so is the church too, for it suffers, not
only with it, but from it, as a lily among thorns. God is complained to;
whither should children go with their grievances, but to their father,
to such a father as is able and willing to help? The heathen are
complained of, who, being themselves aliens from the commonwealth of
Israel, were sworn enemies to it. Though they knew not God, nor owned
him, yet, God having them in chain, the church very fitly appeals to him
against them; for he is King of nations, to overrule them, to judge
among the heathen, and King of saints, to favour and protect them.

I. They complain here of the anger of their enemies and the outrageous
fury of the oppressor, exerted,

1\. Against places, [Psa 79:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#001). They
did all the mischief they could, (1.) To the holy land; they invaded
that, and made inroads into it: "The heathen have come into thy
inheritance, to plunder that, and lay it waste." Canaan was dearer to
the pious Israelites as it was God's inheritance than as it was their
own, as it was the land in which God was known and his name was great
rather than as it was the land in which they were bred and born and
which they and their ancestors had been long in possession of. note,
Injuries done to religion should grieve us more than even those done to
common right, nay, to our own right. We should better bear to see our
own inheritance wasted than God's inheritance. This psalmist had
mentioned it in the foregoing psalm as an instance of God's great favour
to Israel that he had cast out the heathen before them, [Psa
78:55](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#055). But see what a change sin made;
now the heathen are suffered to pour in upon them. (2.) To the holy
city: They have laid Jerusalem on heaps, heaps of rubbish, such heaps as
are raised over graves, so some. The inhabitants were buried in the
ruins of their own houses, and their dwelling places became their
sepulchres, their long homes. (3.) To the holy house. That sanctuary
which God had built like high palaces, and which was thought to be
established as the earth, was now laid level with the ground: They holy
temple have they defiled, by entering into it and laying it waste. God's
own people had defiled it by their sins, and therefore God suffered
their enemies to defile it by their insolence.

2\. Against persons, against the bodies of God's people; and further
their malice could not reach. (1.) They were prodigal of their blood,
and killed them without mercy; their eye did not spare, nor did they
give any quarter ([Psa 79:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#003)): Their
blood have they shed like water, wherever they met with them, round
about Jerusalem, in all the avenues to the city; whoever went out or
came in was waited for of the sword. Abundance of human blood was shed,
so that the channels of water ran with blood. And they shed it with no
more reluctancy or regret than if they had spilt so much water, little
thinking that every drop of it will be reckoned for in the day when God
shall make inquisition for blood. (2.) They were abusive to their dead
bodies. When they had killed them they would let none bury them. Nay,
those that were buried, even the dead bodies of God's servants, the
flesh of his saints, whose names and memories they had a particular
spite at, they dug up again, and gave them to be meat to the fowls of
the heaven and to the beasts of the earth; or, at least, they left those
so exposed whom they slew; they hung them in chains, which was in a
particular manner grievous to the Jews to see, because God had given
them an express law against this, as a barbarous thing, [Deu
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023). This inhuman usage of Christ's
witnesses is foretold ([Rev 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#009)), and
thus even the dead bodies were witnesses against their persecutors. This
is mentioned (says Austin, De Civitate Dei, lib. 1 cap. 12) not as an
instance of the misery of the persecuted (for the bodies of the saints
shall rise in glory, however they became meat to the birds and the
fowls), but of the malice of the persecutors.

3\. Against their names ([Psa 79:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#004)):
"We that survive have become a reproach to our neighbours; they all
study to abuse us and load us with contempt, and represent us as
ridiculous, or odious, or both, upbraiding us with our sins and with our
sufferings, or giving the lie to our relation to God and expectations
from him; so that we have become a scorn and derision to those that are
round about us." If God's professing people degenerate from what
themselves and their fathers were, they must expect to be told of it;
and it is well if a just reproach will help to bring us to a true
repentance. But it has been the lot of the gospel-Israel to be made
unjustly a reproach and derision; the apostles themselves were counted
as the offscouring of all things.

II\. They wonder more at God's anger, [Psa
79:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#005). This they discern in the anger
of their neighbours, and this they complain most of: How long, Lord,
wilt thou be angry? Shall it be for ever? This intimates that they
desired no more than that God would be reconciled to them, that his
anger might be turned away, and then the remainder of men's wrath would
be restrained. Note, Those who desire God's favour as better than life
cannot but dread and deprecate his wrath as worse than death.

[Psalms 79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 79:6</span></span>

The petitions here put up to God are very suitable to the present
distresses of the church, and they have pleas to enforce them,
interwoven with them, taken mostly from God's honour.

I. They pray that God would so turn away his anger from them as to turn
it upon those that persecuted and abused them ([Psa
79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006)): "Pour out thy wrath, the full
vials of it, upon the heathen; let them wring out the dregs of it, and
drink them." This prayer is in effect a prophecy, in which the wrath of
God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness
of men. Observe here, 1. The character of those he prays against; they
are such as have not known God, nor called upon his name. The reason why
men do not call upon God is because they do not know him, how able and
willing he is to help them. Those that persist in ignorance of God, and
neglect of prayer, are the ungodly, who live without God in the world.
There are kingdoms that know not God and obey not the gospel, but
neither their multitude nor their force united will secure them from his
just judgments. 2. Their crime: They have devoured Jacob, [Psa
79:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#007). That is crime enough in the
account of him who reckons that those who touch his people touch the
apple of his eye. They have not only disturbed, but devoured, Jacob, not
only encroached upon his dwelling place, the land of Canaan, but laid it
waste by plundering and depopulating it. (3.) Their condemnation: "Pour
out thy wrath upon them; do not only restrain them from doing further
mischief, but reckon with them for the mischief they have done."

II\. They pray for the pardon of sin, which they own to be the procuring
cause of all their calamities. How unrighteous soever men were, God was
righteous in permitting them to do what they did. They pray, 1. That God
would not remember against them their former iniquities ([Psa
79:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#008)), either their own former
iniquities, that now, when they were old, they might not be made to
possess the iniquities of their youth, or the former iniquities of their
people, the sins of their ancestors. In the captivity of Babylon former
iniquities were brought to account; but God promises not again to do so
([Jer 31:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#029), [Jer
31:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#030)), and so they pray, "Remember
not against us our first sins," which some make to look as far back as
the golden calf, because God said, In the day when I visit I will visit
for this sin of theirs upon them, [Exo
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034). If the children by repentance
and reformation cut off the entail of the parents' sin, they may in
faith pray that God will not remember them against them. When God
pardons sin he blots it out and remembers it no more. 2. That he would
purge away the sins they had been lately guilty of, by the guilt of
which their minds and consciences had been defiled: Deliver us, and
purge away our sins, [Psa 79:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#009). Then
deliverances from trouble are granted in love, and are mercies indeed,
when they are grounded upon the pardon of sin and flow from that; we
should therefore be more earnest with God in prayer for the removal of
our sins than for the removal of our afflictions, and the pardon of them
is the foundation and sweetness of our deliverances.

III\. They pray that God would work deliverance for them, and bring
their troubles to a good end and that speedily: Let thy tender mercies
speedily prevent us, [Psa 79:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#008). They
had no hopes but from God's mercies, his tender mercies; their case was
so deplorable that they looked upon themselves as the proper objects of
divine compassion, and so near to desperate that, unless divine mercy
did speedily interpose to prevent their ruin, they were undone. This
whets their importunity: "Lord, help us; Lord, deliver us; help us under
our troubles, that we may bear them well; help us out of our troubles,
that the spirit may not fail. Deliver us from sin, from sinking." Three
things they plead: - 1. The great distress they were reduced to: "We are
brought very low, and, being low, shall be lost if thou help us not."
The lower we are brought the more need we have of help from heaven and
the more will divine power be magnified in raising us up. 2. Their
dependence upon him: "Thou art the God of our salvation, who alone canst
help. Salvation belongs to the Lord, from whom we expect help; for in
the Lord alone is the salvation of his people." Those who make God the
God of their salvation shall find him so. 3. The interest of his own
honour in their case. They plead no merit of theirs; they pretend to
none; but, "Help us for the glory of thy name; pardon us for thy name's
sake." The best encouragements in prayer are those that are taken from
God only, and those things whereby he has made himself known. Two things
are insinuated in this plea: - (1.) That God's name and honour would be
greatly injured if he did not deliver them; for those that derided them
blasphemed God, as if he were weak and could not help them, or had
withdrawn and would not; therefore they plead ([Psa
79:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#010)), "Wherefore should the heathen
say, Where is their God? He has forsaken them, and forgotten them; and
this they get by worshipping a God whom they cannot see." (Nil praeter
nubes et coeli numen adorant. Juv. - They adore no other divinity than
the clouds and the sky.) That which was their praise (that they served a
God that is every where) was now turned to their reproach and his too,
as if they served a God that is nowhere. "Lord," say they, "Make it to
appear that thou art by making it to appear that thou art with us and
for us, that when we are asked, Where is your God? we may be able to
say, He is nigh unto us in all that which we call upon him for, and you
see he is so by what he does for us." (2.) That God's name and honour
would be greatly advanced if he did deliver them; his mercy would be
glorified in delivering those that were so miserable and helpless. By
making bare his everlasting arm on their behalf he would make unto
himself an everlasting name; and their deliverance would be a type and
figure of the great salvation, which in the fulness of time Messiah the
Prince would work out, to the glory of God's name.

IV\. They pray that God would avenge them on their adversaries, 1. For
their cruelty and barbarity ([Psa
79:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#010)): "Let the avenging of our
blood" (according to the ancient law, [Gen
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006)) "be known among the heathen; let
them be made sensible that what judgments are brought upon them are
punishments of the wrong they have done to us; let this be in our sight,
and by this means let God be known among the heathen as the God to whom
vengeance belongs ([Psa 94:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#001)) and the
God that espouses his people's cause." Those that have intoxicated
themselves with the blood of the saints shall have blood given them to
drink, for they are worthy. 2. For their insolence and scorn ([Psa
79:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#012)): "Render to them their
reproach. The indignities which by word and deed they have done to the
people of God himself and his name let them be repaid to them with
interest." The reproach wherewith men have reproached us only we must
leave it to God whether he will render to them or no, and must pray that
he would forgive them; but the reproach wherewith they have blasphemed
God himself we may in faith pray that God would render seven-fold into
their bosoms, so as to strike at their hearts, to humble them, and bring
them to repentance. This prayer is a prophecy, of the same import with
that of Enoch, that God will convince sinners of all their hard speeches
which they have spoken against him ([Jde
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015)) and will return them into their
own bosoms by everlasting terrors at the remembrance of them.

V. They pray that God would find out a way for the rescue of his poor
prisoners, especially the condemned prisoners, [Psa
79:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#011). The case of their brethren who
had fallen into the hands of the enemy was very sad; they were kept
close prisoners, and, because they durst not be heard to bemoan
themselves, they vented their griefs in deep and silent sighs. All their
breathing was sighing, and so was their praying. They were appointed to
die, as sheep for the slaughter, and had received the sentence of death
within themselves. This deplorable case the psalmist recommends, 1. To
the divine pity: "Let their sighs come up before thee, and be thou
pleased to take cognizance of their moans." 2. To the divine power:
"According to the greatness of thy arm, which no creature can contest
with, preserve thou those that are appointed to die from the death to
which they are appointed." Man's extremity is God's opportunity to
appear for his people. See [Co2
1:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008).

Lastly, They promise the returns of praise for the answers of prayer
([Psa 79:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#013)): So we will give thee
thanks for ever. Observe, 1. How they please themselves with their
relation to God. "Though we are oppressed and brought low, yet we are
the sheep of thy pasture, not disowned and cast off by thee for all
this: We are thine; save us." 2. How they promise themselves an
opportunity of praising God for their deliverance, which they therefore
desired, and would bid welcome, because it would furnish them with
matter for thanksgiving and put their hearts in tune for that excellent
work, the work of heaven. 3. How they oblige themselves not only to give
God thanks at present, but to show forth his praise unto all
generations, that is, to do all they could both to perpetuate the
remembrance of God's favours to them and to engage their posterity to
keep up the work of praise. 4. How they plead this with God: "Lord,
appear for us against our enemies; for, if they get the better, they
will blaspheme thee ([Psa 79:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#012)); but,
if we be delivered, we will praise thee. Lord, we are that people of
thine which thou hast formed for thyself, to show forth thy praise; if
we be cut off, whence shall that rent, that tribute, be raised?" Note,
Those lives that are entirely devoted to God's praise are assuredly
taken under his protection.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 80](psa080)

</div>
