<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa063)  [Next](psa065.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 64](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 64:0</span></span>

This whole psalm has reference to David's enemies, persecutors, and
slanderers; many such there were, and a great deal of trouble they gave
him, almost all his days, so that we need not guess at any particular
occasion of penning this psalm. I. He prays to God to preserve him from
their malicious designs against him ([Psa
64:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001.md), [Psa
64:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#002).md). II. He gives a very bad
character of them, as men marked for ruin by their own wickedness ([Psa
64:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#003).md). III. By the spirit of
prophecy he foretels their destruction, which would redound to the glory
of God and the encouragement of his people ([Psa
64:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#007).md). In singing this psalm we
must observe the effect of the old enmity that is in the seed of the
woman against the seed of the serpent, and assure ourselves that the
serpent's head will be broken, at last, to the honour and joy of the
holy seed.

To the chief musician. A psalm of David.

[Psalms 64:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 64:1</span></span>

David, in these verses, puts in before God a representation of his own
danger and of his enemies' character, to enforce his petition that God
would protect him and punish them.

I. He earnestly begs of God to preserve him ([Psa
64:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001.md), [Psa
64:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#002).md): Hear my voice, O God! in my
prayer; that is, grant me the thing I pray for, and this is it, Lord,
preserve my life from fear of the enemy, that is, fro the enemy that I
am in fear of. He makes request for his life, which is, in a particular
manner, dear to him, because he knows it is designed to be very
serviceable to God and his generation. When his life is struck at it
cannot be thought he should altogether hold his peace, [Est
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#002.md), [Est
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#004.md). And, if he plead his fear of the
enemy, it is no disparagement to his courage; his father Jacob, that
prince with God, did so before him. [Gen
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#011.md), Deliver me from the hand of
Esau, for I fear him. Preserve my life from fear, not only from the
thing itself which I fear, but from the disquieting fear of it; this is,
in effect, the preservation of the life, for fear has torment,
particularly the fear of death, by reason of which some are all their
life-time subject to bondage. He prays, "Hide me from the secret counsel
of the wicked, from the mischief which they secretly consult among
themselves to do against me, and from the insurrection of the workers of
iniquity, who join forces, as they join counsels, to do me a mischief."
Observe, The secret counsel ends in an insurrection; treasonable
practices begin in treasonable confederacies and conspiracies. "Hide me
from them, that they may not find me, that they may not reach me. Let me
be safe under thy protection."

II\. He complains of the great malice and wickedness of his enemies:
"Lord, hide me from them, for they are the worst of men, not fit to be
connived at; they are dangerous men, that will stick at nothing; so that
I am undone if thou do not take my part."

1\. They are very spiteful in their calumnies and reproaches, [Psa
64:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#003.md), [Psa
64:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#004.md). They are described as military
men, with their sword and bow, archers that take aim exactly, secretly,
and suddenly, and shoot at the harmless bird that apprehends not herself
in any danger. But, (1.) Their tongues are their swords, flaming swords,
two-edged swords, drawn swords, drawn in anger, with which they cut, and
wound, and kill, the good name of their neighbours. The tongue is a
little member, but, like the sword, it boasts great things, [Jam
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#005). It is a dangerous weapon. (2..md)
Bitter words are their arrows - scurrilous reflections, opprobrious
nicknames, false representations, slanders, and calumnies, the fiery
darts of the wicked one, set on fire to hell. For these their malice
bends their bows, to send out these arrows with so much the more force.
(3.) The upright man is their mark; against him their spleen is, and
they cannot speak peaceably either of him or to him. The better any man
is the more he is envied by those that are themselves bad, and the more
ill is said of him. (4.) They manage it with a great deal of art and
subtlety. They shoot in secret, that those they shoot at may not
discover them and avoid the danger, for in vain is the net spread in the
sight of any bird. And suddenly do they shoot, without giving a man
lawful warning or any opportunity to defend himself. Cursed be he that
thus smites his neighbour secretly in his reputation, [Deu
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#024.md). There is no guard against a
pass made by a false tongue. (5.) Herein they fear not, that is, they
are confident of their success, and doubt not but by these methods they
shall gain the point which their malice aims at. Or, rather, they fear
not the wrath of God, which they will be the portion of a false tongue.
They are impudent and daring in the mischief they do to good people, as
if they must never be called to an account for it.

2\. They are very close and very resolute in their malicious projects,
[Psa 64:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#005). (1..md) They strengthen and
corroborate themselves and one another in this evil matter, and by
joining together in it they make one another the more bitter and the
more bold. Fortiter calumniari, aliquid adhaerebit - Lay on an abundance
of reproach; part will be sure to stick. It is bad to do a wrong thing,
but worse to encourage ourselves and one another in doing it; this is
doing the devil's work for him. It is a sign that the heart is hardened
to the highest degree when it is thus fully set to do evil and fears no
colours. It is the office of conscience to discourage men in an evil
matter, but, when that is baffled, the case is desperate. (2.) They
consult with themselves and one another how to do the most mischief and
most effectually: They commune of laying snares privily. All their
communion is in sin and all their communication is how to sin securely.
They hold councils of war for finding out the most effectual expedients
to do mischief; every snare they lay was talked of before, and was laid
with all the contrivance of their wicked wits combined. (3.) They please
themselves with an atheistical conceit that God himself takes no notice
of their wicked practices: They say, Who shall see them? A practical
disbelief of God's omniscience is at the bottom of all the wickedness of
the wicked.

3\. They are very industrious in putting their projects in execution
([Psa 64:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#006).md): "They search out
iniquity; they take a great deal of pains to find out some iniquity or
other to lay to my charge; they dig deep, and look far back, and put
things to the utmost stretch, that they may have something to accuse me
of;" or, "They are industrious to find out new arts of doing mischief to
me; in this they accomplish a diligent search; they go through with it,
and spare neither cost nor labour." Evil men dig up mischief. Half the
pains that many take to damn their souls would serve to save them. They
are masters of all the arts of mischief and destruction, for the inward
thought of every one of them, and the heart, are keep, deep as hell,
desperately wicked, who can know it? By the unaccountable wickedness of
their wit and of their will, they show themselves to be, both in
subtlety and malignity, the genuine offspring of the old serpent.

[Psalms 64:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 64:7</span></span>

We may observe here,

I. The judgments of God which should certainly come upon these malicious
persecutors of David. Though they encouraged themselves in their
wickedness, here is that which, if they would believe and consider it,
was enough to discourage them. And it is observable how the punishment
answers the sin. 1. They shot at David secretly and suddenly, to wound
him; but God shall shoot at them, for the ordains his arrows against the
persecutors ([Psa 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#013).md), against the
face of them, [Psa 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#012.md). And God's
arrows will hit surer, and fly swifter, and pierce deeper, than theirs
do or can. They have many arrows, but they are only bitter words, and
words are but wind: the curse causeless shall not come. But God has one
arrow that will be their death, his curse which is never causeless, and
therefore shall come; with it they shall be suddenly wounded, that is,
their wound by it will be a surprise upon them, because they were secure
and not apprehensive of any danger. 2. Their tongues fell upon him, but
God shall make their tongues to fall upon themselves. They do it by the
desert of their sin; God does it by the justice of his wrath, [Psa
64:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#008.md). When God deals with men
according to the desert of their tongue-sins, and brings those mischiefs
upon them which they have passionately and maliciously imprecated upon
others, then he makes their own tongues to fall upon them; and it is
weight enough to sink a man to the lowest hell, like a talent of lead.
Many have cut their own throats, and many more have damned their own
souls, with their tongues, and it will be an aggravation of their
condemnation. O Israel! thou hast destroyed thyself, art snared in the
words of thy mouth. If thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it. Those
that love cursing, it shall come unto them. Sometimes men's secret
wickedness is brought to light by their own confession, and then their
own tongue falls upon them.

II\. The influence which these judgments should have upon others; for it
is done in the open sight of all, [Job
34:26](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#026.md).

1\. Their neighbours shall shun them and shift for their own safety.
They shall flee away, as the men of Israel did from the tents of Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, [Num 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#027.md). Some
think this was fulfilled in the death of Saul, when not only his army
was dispersed, but the inhabitants of the neighbouring country were so
terrified with the fall, not only of their king but of his three sons,
that they quitted their cities and fled, [Sa1
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#007.md).

2\. Spectators shall reverence the providence of God therein, [Psa
64:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#009). (1..md) They shall understand and
observe God's hand in all (and, unless we do so, we are not likely to
profit by the dispensations of Providence, [Hos
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009).md): They shall wisely consider his
doing. There is need of consideration and serious thought rightly to
apprehend the matter of fact, and need of wisdom to put a true
interpretation upon it. God's doing is well worth our considering ([Ecc
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#013).md), but it must be considered
wisely, that we put not a corrupt gloss upon a pure text. (2.) They
shall be affected with a holy awe of God upon the consideration of it.
All men (all that have any thing of the reason of a man in them) shall
fear and tremble because of God's judgments, [Psa
119:120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120.md). They shall fear to do the
like, fear being found persecutors of God's people. Smite the scorner
and the simple shall beware. (3.) They shall declare the work of God.
They shall speak to one another and to all about them of the justice of
God in punishing persecutors. What we wisely consider ourselves we
should wisely declare to others, for their edification and the glory of
God. This is the finger of God.

3\. Good people shall in a special manner take notice of it, and it
shall affect them with a holy pleasure, [Psa
64:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#010). (1..md) It shall increase their
joy: The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, not glad of the misery and
ruin of their fellow-creatures, but glad that God is glorified, and his
word fulfilled, and the cause of injured innocency pleaded effectually.
(2.) It shall encourage their faith. They shall commit themselves to him
in the way of duty and be willing to venture for him with an entire
confidence in him. (3.) Their joy and faith shall both express
themselves in a holy boasting: All the upright in heart, that keep a
good conscience and approve themselves to God, shall glory, not in
themselves, but in the favour of God, in his righteousness and goodness,
their relation to him and interest in him. Let him that glories glory in
the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 65](psa065.md)

</div>
