<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa068)  [Next](psa070) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 69](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 69:0</span></span>

David penned this psalm when he was in affliction; and in it, I. He
complains of the great distress and trouble he was in and earnestly begs
of God to relieve and succour him (v. 1-21). II. He imprecates the
judgments of God upon his persecutors ([Psa
69:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022)). III. He concludes with the
voice of joy and praise, in an assurance that God would help and succour
him, and would do well for the church ([Psa
69:30-36](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#030)). Now, in this, David was a
type of Christ, and divers passages in this psalm are applied to Christ
in the new Testament and are said to have their accomplishment in him
([Psa 69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004), [Psa
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009), [Psa
69:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021)), and [Psa
69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022) refers to the enemies of Christ.
So that (like the twenty-second psalm) it begins with the humiliation
and ends with the exaltation of Christ, one branch of which was the
destruction of the Jewish nation for persecuting him, which the
imprecations here are predictions of. In singing this psalm we must have
an eye to the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that followed, not
forgetting the sufferings of Christians too, and the glory that shall
follow them; for it may lead us to think of the ruin reserved for the
persecutors and the rest reserved for the persecuted.

To the chief musician upon Shoshannim. A psalm of David.

[Psalms 69:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 69:1</span></span>

In these verses David complains of his troubles, intermixing with those
complaints some requests for relief.

I. His complaints are very sad, and he pours them out before the Lord,
as one that hoped thus to ease himself of a burden that lay very heaven
upon him.

1\. He complains of the deep impressions that his troubles made upon his
spirit ([Psa 69:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001), [Psa
69:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002)): "The waters of affliction,
those bitter waters, have come unto my soul, not only threaten my life,
but disquiet my mind; they fill my head with perplexing cares and my
heart with oppressive grief, so that I cannot enjoy God and myself as I
used to do." We shall bear up under our troubles if we can but keep them
from our hearts; but, when they put us out of the possession of our own
souls, our case is bad. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity;
but what shall we do when the spirit is wounded? That was David's case
here. His thoughts sought for something to confide in, and with which to
support his hope, but he found nothing: He sunk in keep mire, where
there was no standing, no firm footing; the considerations that used to
support and encourage him now failed him, or were out of the way, and he
was ready to give himself up for gone. He sought for something to
comfort himself with, but found himself in deep waters that overflowed
him, overwhelmed him; he was like a sinking drowning man, in such
confusion and consternation. This points at Christ's sufferings in his
soul, and the inward agony he was in when he said, Now is my soul
troubled; and, My soul is exceedingly sorrowful; for it was his soul
that he made an offering for sin. And it instructs us, when we are in
affliction, to commit the keeping of our souls to God, that we may be
neither soured with discontent nor sink into despair.

2\. He complains of the long continuance of his troubles ([Psa
69:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#003)): I am weary of my crying. Though
he could not keep his head above water, yet he cried to his God, and the
more death was in his view the more life was in his prayers; yet he had
not immediately an answer of peace given in, no, nor so much of that
support and comfort in praying which God's people used to have; so that
he was almost weary of crying, grew hoarse, and his throat so dried that
he could cry no more. Nor had he his wonted satisfaction in believing,
hoping, and expecting relief: My eyes fail while I wait for my God; he
had almost looked his eyes out, in expectation of deliverance. Yet his
pleading this with God is an indication that he is resolved not to give
up believing and praying. His throat is dried, but his heart is not; his
eyes fail, but his faith does not. Thus our Lord Jesus, on the cross,
cried out, Why hast thou forsaken me? yet, at the same time, he kept
hold of his relation to him: My God, my God.

3\. He complains of the malice and multitude of his enemies, their
injustice and cruelty, and the hardships they put upon him, [Psa
69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004). They hated him, they would
destroy him, for hatred aims at the destruction of the person hated; but
what was his iniquity, what was his sin, what provocation had he given
them, that they were so spiteful towards him? None at all: "They hate me
without a cause; I never did them the least injury, that they should
bear me such ill-will." Our Saviour applies this to himself ([Joh
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#025)): They hated me without a cause.
We are apt to use this in justification of our passion against those
that hate us, that we never gave them cause to hate us. But it is rather
an argument why we should bear it patiently, because then we suffer as
Christ did, and may then expect that God will give us redress. "They are
my enemies wrongfully, for I have been no enemy to them." In a world
where unrighteousness reigns so much we must not wonder if we meet with
those that are our enemies wrongfully. Let us take care that we never do
wrong and then we may the better bear it if we receive wrong. These
enemies were not to be despised, but were very formidable both for their
number - They are more than the hairs of my head (Christ's enemies were
numerous; those that came to seize him were a great multitude; how were
those increased that troubled him!) and for their strength - They are
mighty in authority and power. We are weak, but our enemies are strong;
for we wrestle against principalities and powers. Then I restored that
which I took not away. Applying this to David, it was what his enemies
compelled him to (they made him suffer for that offence which he had
never been guilty of); and it was what he consented to, that, if
possible, he might pacify them and make them to be at peace with him. He
might have insisted upon the laws of justice and honour, the former not
requiring and the latter commonly thought to forbid the restoring of
that which we took not away, for that is to wrong ourselves both in our
wealth and in our reputation. Yet the case may be such sometimes that it
may become our duty. Blessed Paul, though free from all men, yet, for
the honour of Christ and the edification of the church, made himself a
servant to all. But, applying it to Christ, it is an observable
description of the satisfaction which he made to God for our sin by his
blood: Then he restored that which he took not away; he underwent the
punishment that was due to us, paid our debt, suffered for our offence.
God's glory, in some instances of it, was taken away by the sin of man;
man's honour, and peace, and happiness, were taken away; it was not he
that took them away, and yet by the merit of his death he restored them.

4\. He complains of the unkindness of his friends and relations, and
this is a grievance which with an ingenuous mind cuts as deeply as any
([Psa 69:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#008)): "I have become a stranger
to my brethren; they make themselves strange to me and use me as a
stranger, are shy of conversing with me and ashamed to own me." This was
fulfilled in Christ, whose brethren did not believe on him ([Joh
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#005)), who came to his own and his own
received him not ([Joh 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011)), and who
was forsaken by his disciples, whom he had been free with as his
brethren.

5\. He complains of the contempt that was put upon him and the reproach
with which he was continually loaded. And in this especially his
complaint points at Christ, who for our sakes submitted to the greatest
disgrace and made himself of no reputation. We having by sin injured God
in his honour, Christ made him satisfaction, not only by divesting
himself of the honours due to an incarnate deity, but by submitting to
the greatest dishonours that could be done to any man. Two things David
here takes notice of as aggravations of the indignities done him: - (1.)
The ground and matter of the reproach, [Psa
69:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#010), [Psa
69:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#011). They ridiculed him for that by
which he both humbled himself and honoured God. When men lift up
themselves in pride and vain glory they are justly laughed at for their
folly; but David chastened his soul, and clothed himself with sackcloth,
and from his abasing himself they took occasion to trample upon him.
When men dishonour God it is just that their so doing should turn to
their dishonour; but when David, purely in devotion to God and to
testify his respect to him, wept, and chastened his soul with fasting,
and made sackcloth his garment, as humble penitents used to do, instead
of commending his devotion and recommending it as a great example of
piety, they did all they could both to discourage him in it and to
prevent others from following his good example; for that was to his
reproach. They laughed at him as a fool for mortifying himself thus; and
even for this he became a proverb to them; they made him the common
subject of their banter. We must not think it strange if we be ill
spoken of for that which is well done, and in which we have reason to
hope that we are accepted of God. Our Lord Jesus was stoned for his good
works ([Joh 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#032)), and when he cried,
Eli, Eli - My God, my God, was bantered, as if he called for Elias. (2.)
The persons that reproached him, [Psa
69:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#012). \[1.\] Even the gravest and the
most honourable, from whom better was expected: Those that sit in the
gate speak against me, and their reproaches pass for the dictates of
senators and the decrees of judges, and are credited accordingly. \[2.\]
The meanest, and the most despicable, the abjects ([Psa
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015)), and scum of the country, the
children of fools, yea, the children of base men, [Job
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#008). Such drunkards as these make
themselves vile, and he was the song of the drunkards; they made
themselves and their companions merry with him. See the bad consequences
of the sin of drunkenness; it makes men despisers of those that are
good, [Ti2 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#003). When the king was made
sick with bottles of wine he stretched out his hand with scorners, [Hos
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#005). The bench of the drunkards is the
seat of the scornful. See what is commonly the lot of the best of men:
those that are the praise of the wise are the song of fools. But it is
easy to those that rightly judge of things to despise being thus
despised.

II\. His confessions of sin are very serious ([Psa
69:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#005)): "O God! thou knowest my
foolishness, what is and what is not; my sins that I am guilty of are
not hidden from thee, and therefore thou knowest how innocent I am of
those crimes which they charge upon me." Note, Even when, as to men's
unjust accusations, we plead Not guilty, yet, before God, we must
acknowledge ourselves to have deserved all that is brought upon us, and
much worse. This is the genuine confession of a penitent, who knows that
he cannot prosper in covering his sin, and that therefore it is his
wisdom to acknowledge it, because it is naked and open before God. 1. He
knows the corruption of our nature: Thou knowest the foolishness that is
bound up in my heart. All our sins take rise from our foolishness. 2. He
knows the transgressions of our lives; they are not hidden from him, no,
not our heart-sins, no, not those that are committed most secretly. They
are all done in his sight, and are never cast behind his back till they
are repented of and pardoned. This may aptly be applied to Christ, for
he knew no sin, yet he was made sin for us; and God knew it, nor was it
hidden from him, when it pleased the Lord to bruise him and put him to
grief.

III\. His supplications are very earnest. 1. For himself ([Psa
69:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001)): "Save me, O God! save me from
sinking, from despairing." Thus Christ was heard in that he feared, for
he was saved from letting fall his undertaking, [Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007). 2. For his friends ([Psa
69:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#006)): Let not those that wait on
thee, O Lord God of hosts! and that seek thee, O God of Israel! (under
these two characters we ought to seek God, and in seeking him to wait on
him, as the God of hosts, who has all power to help, and as the God of
Israel in covenant with his people, whom therefore he is engaged in
honour and truth to help) be ashamed and confounded for my sake. This
intimates his fear that if God did not appear for him it would be a
discouragement to all other good people and would give their enemies
occasion to triumph over them, and his earnest desire that whatever
became of him all that seek God, and wait upon him, might be kept in
heart and kept in countenance, and might neither be discouraged in
themselves nor exposed to contempt from others. If Jesus Christ had not
been owned and accepted of his Father in his sufferings, all that seek
God, and wait for him, would have been ashamed and confounded; but they
have confidence towards God, and in his name come boldly to the throne
of grace.

IV\. His plea is very powerful, [Psa
69:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#007), [Psa
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009). Reproach was one of the greatest
of his burdens: "Lord, roll away the reproach, and plead my cause, for,
1. It is for thee that I am reproached, for serving thee and trusting in
thee: For thy sake I have borne reproach." Those that are evil spoken of
for well-doing may with a humble confidence leave it to God to bring
forth their righteousness as the light. 2. "It is with thee that I am
reproached: The zeal of thy house has eaten me up, that is, has made me
forget myself, and do that which they wickedly turn to my reproach.
Those that hate thee and thy house for that reason hate me, because they
know how zealously affected I am to it. It is this that has made them
ready to eat me up and has eaten up all the love and respect I had among
them." Those that blasphemed God, and spoke ill of his word and ways,
did therefore reproach David for believing in his word and walking in
his ways. Or it may be construed as an instance of David's zeal for
God's house, that he resented all the indignities done to God's name as
if they had been done to his own name. He laid to heart all the
dishonour done to God and the contempt cast upon religion; these he laid
nearer to his heart than any outward troubles of his own. And therefore
he had reason to hope God would interest himself in the reproaches cast
upon him, because he had always interested himself in the reproaches
cast upon God. Both the parts of this verse are applied to Christ. (1.)
It was an instance of his love to his Father that the zeal of his house
did even eat him up when he whipped the buyers and sellers out of the
temple, which reminded his disciples of this text, [Joh
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017). (2.) It was an instance of his
self-denial, and that he pleased not himself, that the reproaches of
those that reproached God fell upon him ([Rom
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003)), and therein he set us an
example.

[Psalms 69:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 69:13</span></span>

David had been speaking before of the spiteful reproaches which his
enemies cast upon him; here he adds, But, as for me, my prayer is unto
thee. They spoke ill of him for his fasting and praying, and for that he
was made the song of the drunkards; but, notwithstanding that, he
resolves to continue praying. Note, Though we may be jeered for
well-doing, we must never be jeered out of it. Those can bear but little
for God, and their confessing his name before men, that cannot bear a
scoff and a hard word rather than quit their duty. David's enemies were
very abusive to him, but this was his comfort, that he had a God to go
to, with whom he would lodge his cause. "They think to carry their cause
by insolence and calumny; but I use other methods. Whatever they do, As
for me, my prayer is unto thee, O Lord!" And it was in an acceptable
time, not the less acceptable for being a time of affliction. God will
not drive us from him, though it is need that drives us to him; nay, it
is the more acceptable, because the misery and distress of God's people
make them so much the more the objects of his pity: it is seasonable for
him to help them when all other helps fail, and they are undone, and
feel that they are undone, if he do not help them. We find this
expression used concerning Christ. [Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008), In an acceptable time have I
heard thee. Now observe,

I. What his requests are. 1. That he might have a gracious audience
given to his complaints, the cry of his affliction, and the desire of
his heart. Hear me ([Psa 69:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#013)), and
again, Hear me, O Lord! ([Psa 69:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#016)),
Hear me speedily ([Psa 69:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#017)), not
only hear what I say, but grant what I ask. Christ knew that the Father
heard him always, [Joh 11:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#042). 2. That
he might be rescued out of his troubles, might be saved from sinking
under the load of grief (Deliver me out of the mire; let me not stick in
it, so some, but help me out, and set my feet on a rock, [Psa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#002)), might be saved from his
enemies, that they might not swallow him up, nor have their will against
him: "Let me be delivered from those that hate me, as a lamb from the
paw of a lion, [Psa 69:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#014). Though I
have come into keep waters ([Psa
69:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002)), where I am ready to conclude
that the floods will overflow me, yet let my fears be prevented and
silenced; let not the waterflood, though it flow upon me, overflow me,
[Psa 69:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#015). Let me not fall into the
gulf of despair; let not that deep swallow me up; let not that pit shut
her mouth upon me, for then I am undone." He gave himself up for lost in
the beginning of the psalm; yet now he has his head above water, and is
not so weary of crying as he thought himself. 3. That God would turn to
him ([Psa 69:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#016)), that he would smile
upon him, and not hide his face from him, [Psa
69:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#017). The tokens of God's favour to
us, and the light of his countenance shining upon us, are enough to keep
our spirits from sinking in the deepest mire of outward troubles, nor
need we desire any more to make us safe and easy, [Psa
69:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#018). "Draw nigh to my soul, to
manifest thyself to it, and that shall redeem it."

II\. What his pleas are to enforce these petitions. 1. He pleads God's
mercy and truth ([Psa 69:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#013)): In the
multitude of thy mercy hear me. There is mercy in God, a multitude of
mercies, all kinds of mercy, inexhaustible mercy, mercy enough for all,
enough for each; and hence we must take our encouragement in praying.
The truth also of his salvation (the truth of all those promises of
salvation which he has made to those that trust in him) is a further
encouragement. He repeats his argument taken from the mercy of God:
"Hear me, for thy lovingkindness of good. It is so in itself; it is rich
and plentiful and abundant. It is so in the account of all the saints;
it is very precious to them, it is their life, their joy, their all. O
let me have the benefit of it! Turn to me, according to the multitude of
thy tender mercies," [Psa 69:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#016). See
how highly he speaks of the goodness of God: in him there are mercies,
tender mercies, and a multitude of them. If we think well of God, and
continue to do so under the greatest hardships, we need not fear but God
will do well for us; for he takes pleasure in those that hope in his
mercy, [Psa 147:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#011). 2. He pleads his
own distress and affliction: "Hide not thy face from me, for I am in
trouble ([Psa 69:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#017)), and therefore
need thy favour; therefore it will come seasonably, and therefore I
shall know how to value it." He pleads particularly the reproach he was
under and the indignities that were done him ([Psa
69:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#019)): Thou hast known my reproach,
my shame, and my dishonour. See what a stress is laid upon this; for, in
the sufferings of Christ for us, perhaps nothing contributed more to the
satisfaction he made for sin, which had been so injurious to God in his
honour, than the reproach, and shame, and dishonour he underwent, which
God took notice of, and accepted as more than an equivalent for the
everlasting shame and contempt which our sins had deserved, and
therefore we must by repentance take shame to ourselves and bear the
reproach of our youth. And if at any time we be called out to suffer
reproach, and shame, and dishonour, for his sake, this may be our
comfort, that he knows it, and, as he is before-hand with us, so he will
not be behind-hand with us. The Psalmist speaks the language of an
ingenuous nature when he says ([Psa
69:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#020)): Reproach has broken my heart;
I am full of heaviness; for it bears hard upon one that knows the worth
of a good name to be put under a bad character; but when we consider
what an honour it is to be dishonoured for God, and what a favour to be
counted worthy to suffer shame for his name (as they deemed it, [Act
5:41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041)), we shall see there is no reason
at all why it should sit so heavily or be any heart-breaking to us. 3.
He pleads the insolence and cruelty of his enemies ([Psa
69:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#018)): Deliver me because of my
enemies, because they were such as he had before described them, [Psa
69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004). "My adversaries are all before
thee ([Psa 69:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#019)); thou knowest what
sort of men they are, what danger I am in from them, what enemies they
are to thee, and how much thou art reflected upon in what they do and
design against me." One instance of their barbarity is given ([Psa
69:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021)): They gave me gall for my meat
(the word signifies a bitter herb, and is often joined with wormwood)
and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. This was literally
fulfilled in Christ, and did so directly point to him that he would not
say It is finished till this was fulfilled; and, in order that his
enemies might have occasion to fulfil it, he said, I thirst, [Joh
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028), [Joh
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029). Some think that the hyssop
which they put to his mouth with the vinegar was the bitter herb which
they gave him with the vinegar for his meat. See how particularly the
sufferings of Christ were foretold, which proves the scripture to be the
word of God, and how exactly the predictions were fulfilled in Jesus
Christ, which proves him to be the true Messiah. This is he that should
come, and we are to look for no other. 4. He pleads the unkindness of
his friends and his disappointment in them ([Psa
69:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#020)): I looked for some to take
pity, but there was none; they all failed him like the brooks in summer.
This was fulfilled in Christ, for in his sufferings all his disciples
forsook him and fled. We cannot expect too little from men (miserable
comforters are they all); nor can we expect too much from God, for he is
the Father of mercy and the God of all comfort and consolation.

[Psalms 69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 69:22</span></span>

These imprecations are not David's prayers against his enemies, but
prophecies of the destruction of Christ's persecutors, especially the
Jewish nation, which our Lord himself foretold with tears, and which was
accomplished about forty years after the death of Christ. The first two
verses of this paragraph are expressly applied to the judgments of God
upon the unbelieving Jews by the apostle ([Rom
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#009), [Rom
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#010)), and therefore the whole must
look that way. The rejection of the Jews for rejecting Christ, as it was
a signal instance of God's justice and an earnest of the vengeance which
God will at last take on all that are obstinate in their infidelity, so
it was, and continues to be, a convincing proof of the truth of the
Christian religion. One great objection against it, at first, was, that
it set aside the ceremonial law; but its doing so was effectually
justified, and that objection removed, when God so remarkably set it
aside by the utter destruction of the temple, and the sinking of those,
with the Mosaic economy, that obstinately adhered to it in opposition to
the gospel of Christ. Let us observe here,

I. What the judgments are which should come upon the crucifiers of
Christ; not upon all of them, for there were those who had a hand in his
death and yet repented and found mercy ([Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023); [Act
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#014), [Act
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015)), but upon those of them and
their successors who justified it by an obstinate infidelity and
rejection of his gospel, and by an inveterate enmity to his disciples
and followers. See [Th1 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#015), [Th1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#016). It is here foretold,

1\. That their sacrifices and offerings should be a mischief and
prejudice to them ([Psa 69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022)): Let
their table become a snare. This may be understood of the altar of the
Lord, which is called his table and theirs because in feasting upon the
sacrifices they were partakers of the altar. This should have been for
their welfare or peace (for they were peace-offerings), but it became a
snare and a trap to them; for by their affection and adherence to the
altar they were held fast in their infidelity and hardened in their
prejudices against Christ, that altar which those had no right to eat of
who continued to serve the tabernacle, [Heb
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#010). Or it may be understood of
their common creature-comforts, even their necessary food; they had
given Christ gall and vinegar, and therefore justly shall their meat and
drink be made gall and vinegar to them. When the supports of life and
delights of sense, through the corruption of our nature, become an
occasion of sin to us, and are made the food and fuel of our sensuality,
then our table is a snare, which is a good reason why we should never
feed ourselves without fear, [Jde
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#012).

2\. That they should never have the comfort either of that knowledge or
of that peace which believers are blessed with in the gospel of Christ
([Psa 69:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#023)), that they should be
given up, (1.) To a judicial blindness: Let their eyes be darkened, that
they see not the glory of God in the face of Christ. Their sin was that
they would not see, but shut their eyes against the light, loving
darkness rather; their punishment was that they should not see, but be
given up to their own hearts' lusts, which were hardening, and the god
of this world should be permitted to blind their minds, [Co2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004). This was foretold concerning them
([Isa 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)), and Christ ratified it,
[Mat 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014), [Mat
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#015); [Joh
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#040). (2.) To a judicial terror.
There is a gracious terror, which opens the way to comfort, such as that
of Paul ([Act 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#006)); he trembled and
was astonished. But this is a terror that shall never end in peace, but
shall make their loins continually to shake, through horror of
conscience, as Belshazzar, when the joints of his loins were loosed.
"Let them be driven to despair, and filled with constant confusion."
This was fulfilled in the desperate counsels of the Jews when the Romans
came upon them.

3\. That they should fall and lie under God's anger and fiery
indignation ([Psa 69:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#024)): Pour out thy
indignation upon them. Note, Those who reject God's great salvation
proffered to them may justly fear that his indignation will be poured
out upon them; for those that submit not to the Son of his love will
certainly be made the generation of his wrath. It is the doom passed on
those who believe not in Christ that the wrath of God abideth on them
([Joh 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036)); it takes hold of them,
and will never let them go. Salvation itself will not save those that
are not willing to be ruled by it. Behold the goodness and severity of
God!

4\. That their place and nation should be utterly taken away, the very
thing they were afraid of, and to prevent which, as they pretended, they
persecuted Christ ([Joh 11:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048)): Let
their habitation be desolate ([Psa
69:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#025)), which was fulfilled when their
country was laid waste by the Romans, and Zion, for their sakes, was
ploughed as a field, [Mic 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012). The
temple was the house which they were in a particular manner proud of,
but this was left unto them desolate, [Mat
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038). Yet that is not all; it ought
to be some satisfaction to us, if we be cut off from the enjoyment of
our possessions, that others will have the benefit of them when we are
dislodged: but it is here added, Let none dwell in their tents, which
was remarkably fulfilled in Judah and Jerusalem, for after the
destruction of the Jews it was long ere the country was inhabited to any
purpose. But this is applied particularly to Judas, by St. Peter, [Act
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020). For, he being felo de se - a
suicide, we may suppose his estate was confiscated, so that his
habitation was desolate and no man of his own kindred dwelt therein.

5\. That their way to ruin should be downhill, and nothing should stop
them, nor interpose to prevent it ([Psa
69:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#027)): "Lord, leave them to
themselves, to add iniquity to iniquity." Those that are bad, if they be
given up to their own hearts' lusts, will certainly be worse; they will
add sin to sin, nay, they will add rebellion to their sin, [Job
34:37](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#037). It is said of the Jews that
they filled up their sin always, [Th1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#016). Add the punishment of iniquity
to their iniquity (so some read it), for the same word signifies both
sin and punishment, so close is their connexion. If men will sin, God
will reckon for it. But those that have multiplied to sin may yet find
mercy, for God multiplies to pardon, through the righteousness of the
Mediator; and therefore, that they might be precluded from all hopes of
mercy, he adds, Let them not come into thy righteousness, to receive the
benefit of the righteousness of God, which is by faith in a Mediator,
[Phi 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#009). Not that God shuts out any
from that righteousness, for the gospel excludes none that do not by
their unbelief exclude themselves; but let them be left to take their
own course and they will never come into this government; for being
ignorant of the demands of God's righteousness, and going about to
establish the merit of their own, they have not submitted themselves to
the righteousness of God, [Rom 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003).
And those that are so proud and self-willed that they will not come into
God's righteousness shall have their doom accordingly; they themselves
have decided it: they shall not come into his righteousness. Let not
those expect any benefit by it that are not willing and glad to be
beholden to it.

6\. That they should be cut off from all hopes of happiness ([Psa
69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028)): Let them be blotted out of the
book of the living; let them not be suffered to live any longer, since,
the longer they live, the more mischief they do. Multitudes of the
unbelieving Jews fell by sword and famine, and none of those who had
embraced the Christian faith perished among them; the nation, as a
nation, was blotted out, and became not a people. Many understand it of
their rejection from God's covenant and all the privileges of it; that
is the book of the living: "Let the commonwealth of Israel itself,
Israel according to the flesh, now become alienated from that covenant
of promise which hitherto it has had the monopoly of. Let it appear that
they were never written in the Lamb's book of life, but reprobate silver
let men call them, because the Lord has rejected them. Let them not be
written with the righteous; that is, let them not have a place in the
congregation of the saints when they shall all be gathered in the
general assembly of those whose names are written in heaven," [Psa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005).

II\. What the sin is for which these dreadful judgments should be
brought upon them ([Psa 69:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#026)): They
persecute him whom thou hast smitten, and talk to the grief of thy
wounded. 1. Christ was he whom God had smitten, for it pleased the Lord
to bruise him, and he was esteemed stricken, smitten of God, and
afflicted, and therefore men hid their faces from him, [Isa
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003), [Isa
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004), [Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010). They persecuted him with a rage
reaching up to heaven; they cried, Crucify him, crucify him. Compare
that of St. Peter with this, [Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023). Though he was delivered by the
counsel and foreknowledge of God, it was with wicked hands that they
crucified and slew him. They talked to the grief of the Lord Jesus when
he was upon the cross, saying, He trusted in God, let him deliver him,
than which nothing could be said more grieving. 2. The suffering saints
were God's wounded, wounded in his cause and for his sake, and them they
persecuted, and talked to their grief. For these things wrath came upon
them to the uttermost, [Th1 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#016); and
see [Mat 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#034), etc. This may be
understood more generally, and it teaches us that nothing is more
provoking to God than to insult over those whom he has smitten, and to
add affliction to the afflicted, upon which it justly follows here, Add
iniquity to iniquity; see [Zac 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015).
Those that are of a wounded spirit, under trouble and fear about their
spiritual state, ought to be very tenderly dealt with, and care must be
taken not to talk to their grief and not to make the heart of the
righteous sad.

III\. What the psalmist thinks of himself in the midst of all ([Psa
69:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#029)): "But I am poor and sorrowful;
that is the worst of my case, under outward afflictions, yet written
among the righteous, and not under God's indignation as they are." It is
better to be poor and sorrowful, with the blessing of God, than rich and
jovial and under his curse. For those who come into God's righteousness
shall soon see an end of their poverty and sorrow, and his salvation
shall set them up on high, which is the thing that David here prays for,
[Isa 61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010). This may be applied to
Christ. He was, in his humiliation, poor and sorrowful, a man of
sorrows, and that had not where to lay his head. But God highly exalted
him; the salvation wrought for him, the salvation wrought by him, set
him up on high, far above all principalities and powers.

[Psalms 69:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 69:30</span></span>

The psalmist here, both as a type of Christ and as an example to
Christians, concludes a psalm with holy joy and praise which he began
with complaints and remonstrances of his griefs.

I. He resolves to praise God himself, not doubting but that therein he
should be accepted of him ([Psa 69:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#030),
[Psa 69:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#031)): "I will praise the name
of God, not only with my heart, but with my song, and magnify him with
thanksgiving;" for he is pleased to reckon himself magnified by the
thankful praises of his people. It is intimated that all Christians
ought to glorify God with their praises, in psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs. And this shall please the Lord, through Christ the
Mediator of our praises as well as of our prayers, better than the most
valuable of the legal sacrifices ([Psa
69:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#031)), an ox or bullock. This is a
plain intimation that in the days of the Messiah an end should be put,
not only to the sacrifices of atonement, but to those of praise and
acknowledgment which were instituted by the ceremonial law; and, instead
of them, spiritual sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving are accepted -
the calves of our lips, not the calves of the stall, [Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015). It is a great comfort to us
that humble and thankful praises are more pleasing to God than the most
costly pompous sacrifices are or ever were.

II\. He encourages other good people to rejoice in God and continue
seeking him ([Psa 69:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#032), [Psa
69:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#033)): The humble shall see this and
be glad. They shall observe, to their comfort, 1. The experiences of the
saints. They shall see how ready God is to hear the poor when they cry
to him, and to give them that which they call upon him for, how far he
is from despising his prisoners; though men despise them, he favours
them with his gracious visits and will find a time to enlarge them. The
humble shall see this and be glad, not only because when one member is
honoured all the members rejoice with it, but because it is an
encouragement to them in their straits and difficulties to trust in God.
It shall revive the hearts of those who seek God to see more seals and
subscriptions to this truth, that Jacob's God never said to Jacob's
seed, Seek you me in vain. 2. The exaltation of the Saviour, for of him
the psalmist had been speaking, and of himself as a type of him. When
his sorrows are over, and he enters into the joy that was set before
him, when he is heard and discharged from his imprisonment in the grave,
the humble shall look upon it and be glad, and those that seek God
through Christ shall live and be comforted, concluding that, if they
suffer with him, they shall also reign with him.

III\. He calls upon all the creatures to praise God, the heaven, and
earth, and sea, and the inhabitants of each, [Psa
69:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#034). Heaven and earth, and the hosts
of both, were made by him, and therefore let heaven and earth praise
him. Angels in heaven, and saints on earth, may each of them in their
respective habitations furnish themselves with matter enough for
constant praise. Let the fishes of the sea, though mute to a proverb,
praise the Lord, for the sea is his, and he made it. The praises of the
world must be offered for God's favours to his church, [Psa
69:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#035), [Psa
69:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#036). For God will save Zion, the
holy mountain, where his service was kept up. He will save all that are
sanctified and set apart to him, all that employ themselves in his
worship, and all those over whom Christ reigns; for he was King upon the
holy hill of Zion. He has mercy in store for the cities of Judah, of
which tribe Christ was. God will do great things for the gospel church,
in which let all that wish well to it rejoice. For, 1. It shall be
peopled and inhabited. There shall be added to it such as shall be
saved. The cities of Judah shall be built, particular churches shall be
formed and incorporated according to the gospel model, that there may be
a remnant to dwell there and to have it in possession, to enjoy the
privileges conferred upon it and to pay the tributes and services
required from it. Those that love his name, that have a kindness for
religion in general, shall embrace the Christian religion, and take
their place in the Christian church; they shall dwell therein, as
citizens, and of the household of God 2. It shall be perpetuated and
inherited. Christianity was not to be res unius aetatis - a transitory
thin. No: The seed of his servants shall inherit it. God will secure and
raise up for himself a seed to serve him, and they shall inherit the
privileges of their fathers; for the promise is to you and your
children, as it was of old. I will be a God to thee, and thy seed after
thee. The land of promise shall never be lost for want of heirs, for God
can out of stones raise up children unto Abraham and will do so rather
than the entail shall be cut off. David shall never want a man to stand
before him. The Redeemer shall see his seed, and prolong his days in
them, till the mystery of God shall be finished and the mystical body
completed. And since the holy seed is the substance of the world, and if
that were all gathered in the world would be at an end quickly, it is
just that for this assurance of the preservation of it heaven and earth
should praise him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 70](psa070)

</div>
