<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa095)  [Next](psa097) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 96](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 96:0</span></span>

This psalm is part of that which was delivered into the hand of Asaph
and his brethren ([Ch1 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#007)), by which
it appears both that David was the penman of it and that it has
reference to the bringing up of the ark to the city of David; whether
that long psalm was made first, and this afterwards taken out of it, or
this made first and afterwards borrowed to make up that, is not certain.
But this is certain, that, though it was sung at the translation of the
ark, it looks further, to the kingdom of Christ, and is designed to
celebrate the glories of that kingdom, especially the accession of the
Gentiles to it. Here is, I. A call given to all people to praise God, to
worship him, and give glory to him, as a great and glorious God ([Psa
96:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001)). II. Notice given to all
people of God's universal government and judgment, which ought to be the
matter of universal joy ([Psa
96:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#010)). In singing this psalm we
ought to have our hearts filed with great and high thoughts of the glory
of God and the grace of the gospel, and with an entire satisfaction in
Christ's sovereign dominion and in the expectation of the judgment to
come.

[Psalms 96:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 96:1</span></span>

These verses will be best expounded by pious and devout affections
working in our souls towards God, with a high veneration for his majesty
and transcendent excellency. The call here given us to praise God is
very lively, the expressions are raised and repeated, to all which the
echo of a thankful heart should make agreeable returns.

I. We are here required to honour God,

1\. With songs, [Psa 96:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001), [Psa
96:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#002). Three times we are here called
to sing unto the Lord; sing to the Father, to the Son, to the Holy
Ghost, as it was in the beginning, when the morning stars sang together,
is now, in the church militant, and ever shall be, in the church
triumphant. We have reason to do it often, and we have need to be often
reminded of it, and stirred up to it. Sing unto the Lord, that is,
"Bless his name, speak well of him, that you may bring others to think
well of him." (1.) Sing a new song, an excellent song, the product of
new affections, clothed with new expressions. We speak of nothing more
despicable than "an old song," but the newness of a song recommends it;
for there we expect something surprising. A new song is a song for new
favours, for those compassions which are new every morning. A new song
is New Testament song, a song of praise for the new covenant and the
precious privileges of that covenant. A new song is a song that shall be
ever new, and shall never wax old nor vanish away; it is an everlasting
song, that shall never be antiquated or out of date. (2.) Let all the
earth sing this song, not the Jews only, to whom hitherto the service of
God had been appropriated, who could not sing the Lord's song in (would
not sing it to) a strange land; but let all the earth, all that are
redeemed from the earth, learn and sing this new song, [Rev
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#003). This is a prophecy of the
calling of the Gentiles; all the earth shall have this new song put into
their mouths, shall have both cause and call to sing it. (3.) Let the
subject-matter of this song be his salvation, the great salvation which
was to be wrought out by the Lord Jesus; that must be shown forth as the
cause of this joy and praise. (4.) Let this song be sung constantly, not
only in the times appointed for the solemn feasts, but from day to day;
it is a subject that can never be exhausted. Let day unto day utter this
speech, that, under the influence of gospel devotions, we may daily
exemplify a gospel conversation.

2\. With sermons ([Psa 96:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#003)): Declare
his glory among the heathen, even his wonders among all people. (1.)
Salvation by Christ is here spoken of as a work of wonder, and that in
which the glory of God shines very brightly; in showing forth that
salvation we declare God's glory as it shines in the face of Christ.
(2.) This salvation was, in the Old Testament times, as heaven's
happiness is now, a glory to be revealed; but in the fulness of time it
was declared, and a full discovery made of that, even to babes, which
prophets and kings desired and wished to see and might not. (3.) What
was then discovered was declared only among the Jews, but it is now
declared among the heathen, among all people; the nations which long sat
in darkness now see this great light. The apostles' commission to preach
the gospel to every creature is copied from this: Declare his glory
among the heathen.

3\. With religious services, [Psa
96:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#007). Hitherto, though in every
nation those that feared God and wrought righteousness were accepted of
him, yet instituted ordinances were the peculiarities of the Jewish
religion; but, in gospel-times, the kindreds of the people shall be
invited and admitted into the service of God and be as welcome as ever
the Jews were. The court of the Gentiles shall no longer be an outward
court, but shall be laid in common with the court of Israel. All the
earth is here summoned to fear before the Lord, to worship him according
to his appointment. In every place incense shall be offered to his name,
[Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011); [Zac
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#017); [Isa
66:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023). This indeed spoke mortification
to the Jews, but, withal, it gave a prospect of that which would redound
very much to the glory of God and to the happiness of mankind. Now
observe how the acts of devotion to God are here described. (1.) We must
give unto the Lord; not as if God needed any thing, or could receive any
thing, from us or any creature, which was not his own before, much less
be benefited by it; but we must in our best affections, adorations, and
services, return to him what we have received from him, and do it
freely, as what we give; for God loves a cheerful giver. It is debt, it
is rent, it is tribute, it is what must be paid, and, if not, will be
recovered, and yet, if it come from holy love, God is pleased to accept
it as a gift. (2.) We must acknowledge God to be the sovereign Lord and
pay homage to him accordingly ([Psa
96:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#007)): Give unto the Lord glory and
strength, glory and empire, or dominion, so some. As a king, he is
clothed with robes of glory and girt with the girdle of power, and we
must subscribe to both. Thine is the kingdom, and therefore thine is the
power and the glory. "Give the glory to God; do not take it to
yourselves, nor give it to any creature." (3.) We must give unto the
Lord the glory due unto his name, that is, to the discovery he has been
pleased to make of himself to the children of men. In all the acts of
religious worship this is that which we must aim at, to honour God, to
pay him some of that reverence which we owe him as the best of beings
and the fountain of our being. (4.) We must bring an offering into his
courts. We must bring ourselves, in the first place, the offering up of
the Gentiles, [Rom 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016). We must
offer up the sacrifices of praise continually ([Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015)), must often appear before God
in public worship and never appear before him empty. (5.) We must
worship him in the beauty of holiness, in the solemn assembly where
divine institutions are religiously observed, the beauty of which is
their holiness, that is, their conformity to the rule. We must worship
him with holy hearts, sanctified by the grace of God, devoted to the
glory of God, and purified from the pollutions of sin. (6.) We must fear
before him; all the acts of worship must be performed from a principle
of the fear of God and with a holy awe and reverence.

II\. In the midst of these calls to praise God and give glory to him
glorious things are here said of him, both as motives to praise and
matter of praise: The Lord is great, and therefore greatly to be praised
([Psa 96:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#004)) and to be feared, great
and honourable to his attendants, great and terrible to his adversaries.
Even the new song proclaims God great as well as good; for his goodness
is his glory; and, when the everlasting gospel is preached, it is this,
Fear God, and give glory to him, [Rev
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006), [Rev
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#007). 1. He is great in his
sovereignty over all that pretend to be deities; none dare vie with him:
He is to be feared above all gods - all princes, who were often deified
after their deaths, and even while they lived were adored as petty gods
- or rather all idols, the gods of the nations [Psa
96:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005). All the earth being called to
sing the new song, they must be convinced that the Lord Jehovah, to
whose honour they must sing it, is the one only living and true God,
infinitely above all rivals and pretenders; he is great, and they are
little; he is all, and they are nothing; so the word used for idols
signifies, for we know that an idol is nothing in the world, [Co1
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004). 2. He is great in his right, even
to the noblest part of the creation; for it is his own work and derives
its being from him: The Lord made the heavens and all their hosts; they
are the work of his fingers ([Psa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003)), so nicely, so curiously, are
they made. The gods of the nations were all made - gods, the creatures
of men's fancies; but our God is the Creator of the sun, moon, and
stars, those lights of heaven, which they imagined to be gods and
worshipped as such. 3. He is great in the manifestation of his glory
both in the upper and lower world, among his angels in heaven and his
saints on earth ([Psa 96:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#006)): Splendour
and majesty are before him, in his immediate presence above, where the
angels cover their faces, as unable to bear the dazzling lustre of his
glory. Strength and beauty are in his sanctuary, both that above and
this below. In God there is every thing that is awful and yet every
thing that is amiable. If we attend him in his sanctuary, we shall
behold his beauty, for God is love, and experience his strength, for he
is our rock. Let us therefore go forth in his strength, enamoured with
his beauty.

[Psalms 96:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 96:10</span></span>

We have here instructions given to those who were to preach the gospel
to the nations what to preach, or to those who had themselves received
the gospel what account to give of it to their neighbours, what to say
among the heathen; and it is an illustrious prophecy of the setting up
of the kingdom of Christ upon the ruins of the devil's kingdom, which
began immediately after his ascension and will continue in the doing
till the mystery of God be finished.

I. Let it be told that the Lord reigns, the Lord Christ reigns, that
King whom God determined to set upon his holy hill of Zion. See how this
was first said among the heathen by Peter, [Act
10:42](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#042). Some of the ancients added a
gloss to this, which by degrees crept into the text, The Lord reigneth
from the tree (so Justin Martyr, Austin, and others, quote it), meaning
the cross, when he had this title written over him, The King of the
Jews. It was because he became obedient to death, even the death of the
cross, that God exalted him, and gave him a name above every name, a
throne above every throne. Some of the heathen came betimes to enquire
after him that was born King of the Jews, [Mat
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#002). Now let them know that he has
come and his kingdom is set up.

II\. Let it be told that Christ's government will be the world's happy
settlement. The world also shall be established, that it shall not be
moved. The natural world shall be established. The standing of the
world, and its stability, are owing to the mediation of Christ. Sin had
given it a shock, and still threatens it; but Christ, as Redeemer,
upholds all things, and preserves the course of nature. The world of
mankind shall be established, shall be preserved, till all that belong
to the election of grace are called in, though a guilty provoking world.
The Christian religion, as far as it is embraced, shall establish states
and kingdoms, and preserve good order among men. The church in the world
shall be established (so some), that it cannot be moved; for it is built
upon a rock, and the gates of hell shall never prevail against it; it is
a kingdom that cannot be shaken.

III\. Let them be told that Christ's government will be incontestably
just and righteous: He shall judge the people righteously ([Psa
96:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#010)), judge the world with
righteousness, and with his truth, [Psa
96:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#013). Judging is here put for ruling;
and though this may be extended to the general judgment of the world at
the last day, which will be in righteousness ([Act
17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)), yet it refers more immediately
to Christ's first coming, and the setting up of his kingdom in the world
by the gospel. He says himself, For judgment have I come into this world
([Joh 9:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039); [Joh
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031)), and declares that all judgment
was committed to him, [Joh 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022), [Joh
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#027). His ruling and judging with
righteousness and truth signify, 1. That all the laws and ordinances of
his kingdom shall be consonant to the rules and principles of eternal
truth and equity, that is, to the rectitude and purity of the divine
nature and will. 2. That all his administrations of government shall be
just and faithful, and according to what he has said. 3. That he shall
rule in the hearts and consciences of men by the commanding power of
truth and the Spirit of righteousness and sanctification. When Pilate
asked our Saviour, Art thou a king? he answered, For this cause came I
into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth ([Joh
18:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037)); for he rules by truth,
commands men's wills by informing their judgments aright.

IV\. Let them be told that his coming draws nigh, that this King, this
Judge, standeth before the door; for he cometh, for he cometh. Enoch,
the seventh from Adam, said so. Behold, the Lord cometh, [Jde
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014). Between this and his first
coming the revolutions of many ages intervened, and yet he came at the
set time, and so sure will his second coming be; though it is now long
since it was said, Behold, he comes in the clouds ([Rev
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007)) and he has not yet come. See [Pe2
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004), etc.

V. Let them be called upon to rejoice in this honour that is put upon
the Messiah, and this great trust that is to be lodged in his hand ([Psa
96:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#011), [Psa
96:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#012)): Let heaven and earth rejoice,
the sea, the field, and all the trees of the wood. The dialect here is
poetical; the meaning is, 1. That the days of the Messiah will be joyful
days, and, as far as his grace and government are submitted to, will
bring joy along with them. We have reason to give that place, that soul,
joy into which Christ is admitted. See an instance of both, Acts 8. When
Samaria received the gospel there was great joy in that city ([Psa
96:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#008)), and, when the eunuch was
baptized, he went on his way rejoicing, v. 39. 2. That it is the duty of
every one of us to bid Christ and his kingdom welcome; for, though he
comes conquering and to conquer, yet he comes peaceably. Hosanna,
Blessed is he that cometh; and again, Hosanna, Blessed be the kingdom of
our father David ([Mar 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#009), [Mar
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#010)); not only let the daughter of
Zion rejoice that her King comes ([Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)), but let all rejoice. 3. That the
whole creation will have reason to rejoice in the setting up of Christ's
kingdom, even the sea and the field; for, as by the sin of the first
Adam the whole creation was made subject to vanity, so by the grace of
the second Adam it shall, some way or other, first or last, be delivered
from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children
of God, [Rom 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#020), [Rom
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021). 4. That there will, in the first
place, be joy in heaven, joy in the presence of the angels of God; for,
when the First-begotten was brought into the world, they sang their
anthems to his praise, [Luk 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014). 5.
That God will graciously accept the holy joy and praises of all the
hearty well-wishers to the kingdom of Christ, be their capacity ever so
mean. The sea can but roar, and how the trees of the wood can show that
they rejoice I know not; but he that searches the heart knows what is
the mind of the Spirit, and understands the language, the broken
language, of the weakest.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 97](psa097)

</div>
