<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa136)  [Next](psa138) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 137](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 137:0</span></span>

There are divers psalms which are thought to have been penned in the
latter days of the Jewish church, when prophecy was near expiring and
the canon of the Old Testament ready to be closed up, but none of them
appears so plainly to be of a late date as this, which was penned when
the people of God were captives in Babylon, and there insulted over by
these proud oppressors; probably it was towards the latter end of their
captivity; for now they saw the destruction of Babylon hastening on
apace ([Psa 137:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#008)), which would be
their discharge. It is a mournful psalm, a lamentation; and the
Septuagint makes it one of the lamentations of Jeremiah, naming him for
the author of it. Here I. The melancholy captives cannot enjoy
themselves ([Psa 137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001), [Psa
137:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#002)). II. They cannot humour their
proud oppressors ([Psa 137:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#003), [Psa
137:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#004)). III. They cannot forget
Jerusalem ([Psa 137:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#005), [Psa
137:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#006)). IV. They cannot forgive Edom
and Babylon ([Psa 137:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007)). In singing
this psalm we must be much affected with the concernments of the church,
especially that part of it that is in affliction, laying the sorrows of
God's people near our hearts, comforting ourselves in the prospect of
the deliverance of the church and the ruin of its enemies, in due time,
but carefully avoiding all personal animosities, and not mixing the
leaven of malice with our sacrifices.

[Psalms 137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 137:1</span></span>

We have here the daughter of Zion covered with a cloud, and dwelling
with the daughter of Babylon; the people of God in tears, but sowing in
tears. Observe,

I. The mournful posture they were in as to their affairs and as to their
spirits. 1. They were posted by the rivers of Babylon, in a strange
land, a great way from their own country, whence they were brought as
prisoners of war. The land of Babylon was now a house of bondage to that
people, as Egypt had been in their beginning. Their conquerors quartered
them by the rivers, with design to employ them there, and keep them to
work in their galleys; or perhaps they chose it as the most melancholy
place, and therefore most suitable to their sorrowful spirits. If they
must build houses there ([Jer 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#005)),
it shall not be in the cities, the places of concourse, but by the
rivers, the places of solitude, where they might mingle their tears with
the streams. We find some of them by the river Chebar ([Eze
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003)), others by the river Ulai, [Dan
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002). 2. There they sat down to indulge
their grief by poring on their miseries. Jeremiah had taught them under
this yoke to sit alone, and keep silence, and put their mouths in the
dust, [Lam 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#028), [Lam
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#029). "We sat down, as those that
expected to stay, and were content, since it was the will of God that it
must be so." 3. Thoughts of Zion drew tears from their eyes; and it was
not a sudden passion of weeping, such as we are sometimes put into by a
trouble that surprises us, but they were deliberate tears (we sat down
and wept), tears with consideration - we wept when we remembered Zion,
the holy hill on which the temple was built. Their affection to God's
house swallowed up their concern for their own houses. They remembered
Zion's former glory and the satisfaction they had had in Zion's courts,
[Lam 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#007). Jerusalem remembered, in the
days of her misery, all her pleasant things which she had in the days of
old, [Psa 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004). They remembered Zion's
present desolations, and favoured the dust thereof, which was a good
sign that the time for God to favour it was not far off, [Psa
102:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#013), [Psa
102:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#014). 4. They laid by their
instruments of music ([Psa 137:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#002)): We
hung our harps upon the willows. (1.) The harps they used for their own
diversion and entertainment. These they laid aside, both because it was
their judgment that they ought not to use them now that God called to
weeping and mourning ([Isa 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#012)), and
their spirits were so sad that they had no hearts to use them; they
brought their harps with them, designing perhaps to use them for the
alleviating of their grief, but it proved so great that it would not
admit the experiment. Music makes some people melancholy. As vinegar
upon nitre, so is he that sings songs to a heavy heart. (2.) The harps
they used in God's worship, the Levites' harps. These they did not throw
away, hoping they might yet again have occasion to use them, but they
laid them aside because they had no present use for them; God had cut
them out other work by turning their feasting into mourning and their
songs into lamentations, [Amo 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#010).
Every thing is beautiful in its season. They did not hide their harps in
the bushes, or the hollows of the rocks; but hung them up in view, that
the sight of them might affect them with this deplorable change. Yet
perhaps they were faulty in doing this; for praising God is never out of
season; it is his will that we should in every thing give thanks, [Isa
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#015), [Isa
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#016).

II\. The abuses which their enemies put upon them when they were in this
melancholy condition, [Psa 137:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#003). They
had carried them away captive from their own land and then wasted them
in the land of their captivity, took what little they had from them. But
this was not enough; to complete their woes they insulted over them:
They required of us mirth and a song. Now, 1. This was very barbarous
and inhuman; even an enemy, in misery, is to be pitied and not trampled
upon. It argues a base and sordid spirit to upbraid those that are in
distress either with their former joys or with their present griefs, or
to challenge those to be merry who, we know, are out of tune for it.
This is adding affliction to the afflicted. 2. It was very profane and
impious. No songs would serve them but the songs of Zion, with which God
had been honoured; so that in this demand they reflected upon God
himself as Belshazzar, when he drank wine in temple-bowls. Their enemies
mocked at their sabbaths, [Lam 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#007).

III\. The patience wherewith they bore these abuses, [Psa
137:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#004). They had laid by their harps,
and would not resume them, no, not to ingratiate themselves with those
at whose mercy they lay; they would not answer those fools according to
their folly. Profane scoffers are not to be humoured, nor pearls cast
before swine. David prudently kept silence even from good when the
wicked were before him, who, he knew, would ridicule what he said and
make a jest of it, [Psa 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001), [Psa
39:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#002). The reason they gave is very
mild and pious: How shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange land?
They do not say, "How shall we sing when we are so much in sorrow?" If
that had been all, they might perhaps have put a force upon themselves
so far as to oblige their masters with a song; but "It is the Lord's
song; it is a sacred thing; it is peculiar to the temple-service, and
therefore we dare not sing it in the land of a stranger, among
idolaters." We must not serve common mirth, much less profane mirth,
with any thing that is appropriated to God, who is sometimes to be
honoured by a religious silence as well as by religious speaking.

IV\. The constant affection they retained for Jerusalem, the city of
their solemnities, even now that they were in Babylon. Though their
enemies banter them for talking so much of Jerusalem, and even doting
upon it, their love to it is not in the least abated; it is what they
may be jeered for, but will never be jeered out of, [Psa
137:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#005), [Psa
137:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#006). Observe,

1\. How these pious captives stood affected to Jerusalem. (1.) Their
heads were full of it. It was always in their minds; they remembered it;
they did not forget it, though they had been long absent from it; many
of them had never seen it, nor knew any thing of it but by report, and
by what they had read in the scripture, yet it was graven upon the palms
of their hands, and even its ruins were continually before them, which
was ann evidence of their faith in the promise of its restoration in due
time. In their daily prayers they opened their windows towards
Jerusalem; and how then could they forget it? (2.) Their hearts were
full of it. They preferred it above their chief joy, and therefore they
remembered it and could not forget it. What we love we love to think of.
Those that rejoice in God do, for his sake, make Jerusalem their joy,
and prefer it before that, whatever it is, which is the head of their
joy, which is dearest to them in this world. A godly man will prefer a
public good before any private satisfaction or gratification whatsoever.

2\. How stedfastly they resolved to keep up this affection, which they
express by a solemn imprecation of mischief to themselves if they should
let it fall: "Let me be for ever disabled either to sing or play on the
harp if I so far forget the religion of my country as to make use of my
songs and harps for the pleasing of Babylon's sons or the praising of
Babylon's gods. Let my right hand forget her art" (which the hand of an
expert musician never can, unless it be withered), "nay, let my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I have not a good word to say for
Jerusalem wherever I am." Though they dare not sing Zion's songs among
the Babylonians, yet they cannot forget them, but, as soon as ever the
present restraint is taken off, they will sing them as readily as ever,
notwithstanding the long disuse.

[Psalms 137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 137:7</span></span>

The pious Jews in Babylon, having afflicted themselves with the thoughts
of the ruins of Jerusalem, here please themselves with the prospect of
the ruin of her impenitent implacable enemies; but this not from a
spirit of revenge, but from a holy zeal for the glory of God and the
honour of his kingdom.

I. The Edomites will certainly be reckoned with, and all others that
were accessaries to the destruction of Jerusalem, that were aiding and
abetting, that helped forward the affliction ([Zac
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015)) and triumphed in it, that said,
in the day of Jerusalem, the day of her judgment, "Rase it, rase it to
the foundations; down with it, down with it; do not leave one stone upon
another." Thus they made the Chaldean army more furious, who were
already so enraged that they needed no spur. Thus they put shame upon
Israel, who would be looked upon as a people worthy to be cut off when
their next neighbours had such an ill-will to them. And all this was a
fruit of the old enmity of Esau against Jacob, because he got the
birthright and the blessing, and a branch of that more ancient enmity
between the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent: Lord,
remember them, says the psalmist, which is an appeal to his justice
against them. Far be it from us to avenge ourselves, if ever it should
be in our power, but we will leave it to him who has said, Vengeance is
mine. Note, Those that are glad at calamities, especially the calamities
of Jerusalem, shall not go unpunished. Those that are confederate with
the persecutors of good people, and stir them up, and set them on, and
are pleased with what they do, shall certainly be called to an account
for it against another day, and God will remember it against them.

II\. Babylon is the principal, and it will come to her turn too to drink
of the cup of tremblings, the very dregs of it ([Psa
137:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#008), [Psa
137:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#009)): O daughter of Babylon! proud
and secure as thou art, we know well, by the scriptures of truth, thou
art to be destroyed, or (as Dr. Hammond reads it) who art the destroyer.
The destroyers shall be destroyed, [Rev
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010). And perhaps it is with
reference to this that the man of sin, the head of the New Testament
Babylon, is called a son of perdition, [Th2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003). The destruction of Babylon being
foreseen as a sure destruction (thou art to be destroyed), it is spoken
of, 1. As a just destruction. She shall be paid in her own coin: "Thou
shalt be served as thou hast served us, as barbarously used by the
destroyers as we have been by thee," See [Rev
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006). Let not those expect to find
mercy who, when they had power, did not show mercy. 2. As an utter
destruction. The very little ones of Babylon, when it is taken by storm,
and all in it are put to the sword, shall be dashed to pieces by the
enraged and merciless conqueror. None escape if these little ones
perish. Those are the seed of another generation; so that, if they be
cut off, the ruin will be not only total, as Jerusalem's was, but final.
It is sunk like a millstone into the sea, never to rise. 3. As a
destruction which should reflect honour upon the instruments of it.
Happy shall those be that do it; for they are fulfilling God's counsels;
and therefore he calls Cyrus, who did it, his servant, his shepherd, his
anointed ([Isa 44:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#028); [Isa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001)), and the soldiers that were
employed in it his sanctified ones, [Isa
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#003). They are making way for the
enlargement of God's Israel, and happy are those who are in any way
serviceable to that. The fall of the New Testament Babylon will be the
triumph of all the saints, [Rev 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 138](psa138)

</div>
