<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa120)  [Next](psa122) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 121](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 121:0</span></span>

Some call this the soldier's psalm, and think it was penned in the camp,
when David was hazarding his life in the high places of the field, and
thus trusted God to cover his head in the day of battle. Others call it
the traveller's psalm (for there is nothing in it of military dangers)
and think David penned it when he was going abroad, and designed it pro
vehiculo - for the carriage, for a good man's convoy and companion in a
journey or voyage. But we need not thus appropriate it; wherever we are,
at home or abroad, we are exposed to danger more than we are aware of;
and this psalm directs and encourages us to repose ourselves and our
confidence in God, and by faith to put ourselves under his protection
and commit ourselves to his care, which we must do, with an entire
resignation and satisfaction, in singing this psalm. I. David here
assures himself of help from God ([Psa
121:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#001), [Psa
121:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#002)). II. He assures others of it
([Psa 121:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#003)).

A song of degrees.

[Psalms 121:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 121:1</span></span>

This psalm teaches us,

I. To stay ourselves upon God as a God of power and a God all-sufficient
for us. David did so and found the benefit of it. 1. We must not rely
upon creatures, upon men and means, instruments and second causes, nor
make flesh our arm: "Shall I lift up my eyes to the hills?" - so some
read it. "Does my help come thence? Shall I depend upon the powers of
the earth, upon the strength of the hills, upon princes and great men,
who, like hills, fill the earth, and hold up their heads towards heaven?
No; in vain is salvation hoped for from hills and mountains, [Jer
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#023). I never expect help to come from
them; my confidence is in God only." We must lift up our eyes above the
hills (so some read it); we must look beyond instruments to God, who
makes them that to us which they are. 2. We must see all our help laid
up in God, in his power and goodness, his providence and grace; and from
him we must expect it to come: "My help comes from the Lord; the help I
desire is what he sends, and from him I expect it in his own way and
time. If he do not help, no creature can help; if he do, no creature can
hinder, can hurt." 3. We must fetch in help from God, by faith in his
promises, and a due regard to all his institutions: "I will lift up my
eyes to the hills" (probably he meant the hills on which the temple was
built, Mount Moriah, and the holy hill of Zion, where the ark of the
covenant, the oracle, and the altars were); "I will have an eye to the
special presence of God in his church, and with his people (his presence
by promise) and not only to his common presence." When he was at a
distance he would look towards the sanctuary ([Psa
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#002); [Psa
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#006)); thence comes our help, from the
word and prayer, from the secret of his tabernacle. My help cometh from
the Lord (so the word is, [Psa 121:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#002)),
from before the Lord, or from the sight and presence of the Lord. "This
(says Dr. Hammond) may refer to Christ incarnate, with whose humanity
the Deity being inseparably united, God is always present with him, and,
through him, with us, for whom, sitting at God's right hand, he
constantly maketh intercession." Christ is called the angel of his
presence, that saved his people, [Isa
63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009). 4. We must encourage our
confidence in God with this that he made heaven and earth, and he who
did that can do any thing. He made the world out of nothing, himself
alone, by a word's speaking, in a little time, and all very good, very
excellent and beautiful; and therefore, how great soever our straits and
difficulties are, he has power sufficient for our succour and relief. He
that made heaven and earth is sovereign Lord of all the hosts of both,
and can make use of them as he pleases for the help of his people, and
restrain them when he pleases from hurting his people.

II\. To comfort ourselves in God when our difficulties and dangers are
greatest. It is here promised that if we put our trust in God, and keep
in the way of our duty, we shall be safe under his protection, so that
no real evil, no mere evil, shall happen to us, nor any affliction but
what God sees good for us and will do us good by. 1. God himself has
undertaken to be our protector: The Lord is thy keeper, [Psa
121:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#005). Whatever charge he gives his
angels to keep his people, he has not thereby discharged himself, so
that, whether every particular saint has an angel for his guardian or
no, we are sure he has God himself for his guardian. It is infinite
wisdom that contrives, and infinite power that works, the safety of
those that have put themselves under God's protection. Those must needs
be well kept that have the Lord for their keeper. If, by affliction,
they be made his prisoners, yet still he is their keeper. 2. The same
that is the protector of the church in general is engaged for the
preservation of every particular believer, the same wisdom, the same
power, the same promises. He that keepeth Israel ([Psa
121:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#004)) is thy keeper, [Psa
121:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#005). The shepherd of the flock is
the shepherd of every sheep, and will take care that not one, even of
the little ones, shall perish. 3. He is a wakeful watchful keeper: "He
that keepeth Israel, that keepeth thee, O Israelite! shall neither
slumber nor sleep; he never did, nor ever will, for he is never weary;
he not only does not sleep, but he does not so much as slumber; he has
not the least inclination to sleep." 4. He not only protects those whom
he is the keeper of, but he refreshes them: He is their shade. The
comparison has a great deal of gracious condescension in it; the eternal
Being who is infinite substance is what he is in order that he may speak
sensible comfort to his people, promises to be their umbra - their
shadow, to keep as close to them as the shadow does to the body, and to
shelter them from the scorching heat, as the shadow of a great rock in a
weary land, [Isa 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002). Under this
shadow they may sit with delight and assurance, [Sol
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#003). 5. He is always near to his
people for their protection and refreshment, and never at a distance; he
is their keeper and shade on their right hand; so that he is never far
to seek. The right hand is the working hand; let them but turn
themselves dexterously to their duty, and they shall find God ready to
them, to assist them and give them success, [Psa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008). 6. He is not only at their right
hand, but he will also keep the feet of his saints, [Sa1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#009). He will have an eye upon them in
their motions: He will not suffer thy foot to be moved. God will provide
that his people shall not be tempted above what they are able, shall not
fall into sin, though they may be very near it ([Psa
73:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002), [Psa
73:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#023)), shall not fall into trouble,
though there be many endeavouring to undermine them by fraud or over
throw them by force. He will keep them from being frightened, as we are
when we slip or stumble and are ready to fall. 7. He will protect them
from all the malignant influences of the heavenly bodies ([Psa
121:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#006)): The sun shall not smite thee
with his heat by day nor the moon with her cold and moisture by night.
The sun and moon are great blessings to mankind, and yet (such a sad
change has sin made in the creation) even the sun and moon, though
worshipped by a great part of mankind, are often instruments of hurt and
distemper to human bodies; God by them often smites us; but his favour
shall interpose so that they shall not damage his people. He will keep
them night and day ([Isa 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#003)), as he
kept Israel in the wilderness by a pillar of cloud by day, which
screened them from the heat of the sun, and of fire by night, which
probably diffused a genial warmth over the whole camp, that they might
not be prejudiced by the cold and damp of the night, their father Jacob
having complained ([Gen 31:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#040)) that by
day the drought consumed him and the frost by night. It may be
understood figuratively: "Thou shalt not be hurt either by the open
assaults of thy enemies, which are as visible as the scorching beams of
the sun, or by their secret treacherous attempts, which are like the
insensible insinuations of the cold by night." 8. His protection will
make them safe in every respect: "The Lord shall preserve thee from all
evil, the evil of sin and the evil of trouble. He shall prevent the evil
thou fearest, and shall sanctify, remove, or lighten, the evil thou
feelest. He will keep thee from doing evil ([Co2
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#007)), and so far from suffering evil
that whatever affliction happens to thee there shall be no evil in it.
Even that which kills shall not hurt." 9. It is the spiritual life,
especially, that God will take under his protection: He shall preserve
thy soul. All souls are his; and the soul is the man, and therefore he
will with a peculiar care preserve them, that they be not defiled by sin
and disturbed by affliction. He will keep them by keeping us in the
possession of them; and he will preserve them from perishing eternally.
10. He will keep us in all our ways: "He shall preserve thy going out
and thy coming in. Thou shalt be under his protection in all thy
journeys and voyages, outward-bound or homeward-bound, as he kept Israel
in the wilderness, in their removes and rests. He will prosper thee in
all thy affairs at home and abroad, in the beginning and in the
conclusion of them. He will keep thee in life and death, thy going out
and going on while thou livest and thy coming in when thou diest, going
out to thy labour in the morning of thy days and coming home to thy rest
when the evening of old age calls thee in," [Psa
104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023). 11. He will continue his care
over us from this time forth and even for evermore. It is a protection
for life, never out of date. "He will be thy guide even unto death, and
will then hide thee in the grave, hide thee in heaven. He will preserve
thee in his heavenly kingdom." God will protect his church and his
saints always, even to the end of the world. The Spirit, who is their
preserver and comforter, shall abide with them for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 122](psa122)

</div>
