<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa112)  [Next](psa114.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 113](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 113:0</span></span>

This psalm begins and ends with "Hallelujah;" for, as many others, it is
designed to promote the great and good work of praising God. I. We are
here called upon and urged to praise God ([Psa
113:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001).md). II. We are here furnished
with matter for praise, and words are put into our mouths, in singing
which we must with holy fear and love give to God the glory of, 1. The
elevations of his glory and greatness ([Psa
113:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#004.md), [Psa
113:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#005).md). 2. The condescensions of his
grace and goodness ([Psa 113:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#006).md),
which very much illustrate one another, that we may be duly affected
with both.

[Psalms 113:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 113:1</span></span>

In this psalm,

I. We are extorted to give glory to God, to give him the glory due to
his name.

1\. The invitation is very pressing: praise you the Lord, and again and
again, Praise him, praise him; blessed be his name, for it is to be
praised, [Psa 113:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001.md). This intimates,
(1.) That it is a necessary and most excellent duty, greatly pleasing to
God, and has a large room in religion. (2.) That it is a duty we should
much abound in, in which we should be frequently employed and greatly
enlarged. (3.) That it is work which we are very backward to, and which
we need to be engaged and excited to by precept upon precept and line
upon line. (4.) That those who are much in praising God themselves will
court others to it, both because they find the weight of the work, and
that there is need of all the help they can fetch in (there is
employment for all hearts, all hands, and all little enough), and
because they find the pleasure of it, which they wish all their friends
may share in.

2\. The invitation is very extensive. Observe, (1.) From whom God has
praise - from his own people; they are here called upon to praise God,
as those that will answer the call: Praise, O you servants of the Lord!
They have most reason to praise him; for those that attend him as his
servants know him best and receive most of his favours. And it is their
business to praise him; that is the work required of them as his
servants: it is easy pleasant work to speak well of their Master, and do
him what honour they can; if they do not, who should? Some understand it
of the Levites; but, if so, all Christians are a royal priesthood, to
show forth the praises of him that has called them, [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md). The angels are the servants of
the Lord; they need not be called upon by us to praise God, yet it is a
comfort to us that they do praise him, and that they praise him better
than we can. (2.) From whom he ought to have praise. \[1.\] From all
ages ([Psa 113:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#002).md) - from this time
forth for evermore. Let not this work die with us, but let us be doing
it in a better world, and let those that come after us be doing it in
this. Let not our seed degenerate, but let God be praised through all
the generations of time, and not in this only. We must bless the Lord in
our day, by saying, with the psalmist, Blessed be his name now and
always. \[2.\] From all places - from the rising of the sun to the going
down of the same, that is, throughout the habitable world. Let all that
enjoy the benefit of the sun rising (and those that do so must count
upon it that the sun will set) give thanks for that light to the Father
of lights. God's name is to be praised; it ought to be praised by all
nations; for in every place, from east to west, there appear the
manifest proofs and products of his wisdom, power, and goodness; and it
is to be lamented that so great a part of mankind are ignorant of him,
and give that praise to others which is due to him alone. But perhaps
there is more in it; as the former verse gave us a glimpse of the
kingdom of glory, intimating that God's name shall be blessed for ever
(when time shall be no more that praise shall be the work of heaven), so
this verse gives us a glimpse of the kingdom of grace in the
gospel-dispensation of it. When the church shall no longer be confined
to the Jewish nation, but shall spread itself all the world over, when
in every place spiritual incense shall be offered to our God ([Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011).md), then from the rising to the
setting of the sun the Lord's name shall be praised by some in all
countries.

II\. We are here directed what to give him the glory of.

1\. Let us look up with an eye of faith, and see how high his glory is
in the upper world, and mention that to his praise, [Psa
113:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#004.md), [Psa
113:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#005.md). We are, in our praises, to
exalt his name, for he is high, his glory is high. (1.) High above all
nations, their kings though ever so pompous, their people though ever so
numerous. Whether it be true of an earthly king or no that though he is
major singulis - greater than individuals, he is minor universis - less
than the whole, we will not dispute; but we are sure it is not true of
the King of kings. Put all the nations together, and he is above them
all; they are before him as the drop of the bucket and the small dust of
the balance, [Isa 60:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#015.md), [Isa
60:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#017.md). Let all nations think and speak
highly of God, for he is high above them all. (2.) High above the
heavens; the throne of his glory is in the highest heavens, which should
raise our hearts in praising him, [Lam
3:41](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#041.md). His glory is above the heavens,
that is, above the angels; he is above what they are, for their
brightness is nothing to his, - above what they do, for they are under
his command and do his pleasure, - and above what even they can speak
him to be. He is exalted above all blessing and praise, not only all
ours, but all theirs. We must therefore say, with holy admiration, Who
is like unto the Lord our God? who of all the princes and potentates of
the earth? who of all the bright and blessed spirits above? None can
equal him, none dare compare with him. God is to be praised as
transcendently, incomparably, and infinitely great; for he dwells on
high, and from on high sees all, and rules all, and justly attracts all
praise to himself.

2\. Let us look around with an eye of observation, and see how extensive
his goodness is in the lower world, and mention that to his praise. He
is a God who exalts himself to dwell, who humbles himself in heaven, and
in earth. Some think there is a transposition, He exalts himself to
dwell in heaven, he humbles himself to behold on earth; but the sense is
plain enough as we take it, only observe, God is said to exalt himself
and to humble himself, both are his own act and deed; as he is
self-existent, so he is both the fountain of his own honour and the
spring of his own grace; God's condescending goodness appears,

(1.) In the cognizance he takes of the world below him. His glory is
above the nations and above the heavens, and yet neither is neglected by
him. God is great, yet he despises not any, [Job
36:5](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#005.md). He humbles himself to behold all
his creatures, all his subjects, though he is infinitely above them.
Considering the infinite perfection, sufficiency, and felicity of the
divine nature, it must be acknowledged as an act of wonderful
condescension that God is pleased to take into the thoughts of his
eternal counsel, and into the hand of his universal Providence, both the
armies of heaven and the inhabitants of the earth ([Dan
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#035).md); even in this dominion he
humbles himself. \[1.\] It is condescension in him to behold the things
in heaven, to support the beings, direct the motions, and accept the
praises and services, of the angels themselves; for he needs them not,
nor is benefited by them. \[2.\] Much more is it condescension in him to
behold the things that are in the earth, to visit the sons of men, and
regard them, to order and overrule their affairs, and to take notice of
what they say and do, that he may fill the earth with his goodness, and
so set us an example of stooping to do good, of taking notice of, and
concerning ourselves about, our inferiors. If it be such condescension
for God to behold things in heaven and earth, what an amazing
condescension was it for the Son of God to come from heaven to earth and
take our nature upon him, that he might seek and save those that were
lost! Herein indeed he humbled himself.

(2.) In the particular favour he sometimes shows to the least and lowest
of the inhabitants of this meaner lower world. He not only beholds the
great things in the earth, but the meanest, and those things which great
men commonly overlook. Not does he merely behold them, but does wonders
for them, and things that are very surprising, out of the common road of
providence and chain of causes, which shows that the world is governed,
not by a course of nature, for that would always run in the same
channel, but by a God of nature, who delights in doing things we looked
not for. \[1.\] Those that have been long despicable are sometimes, on a
sudden, made honourable ([Psa 113:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007.md),
[Psa 113:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#008).md): He raises up the poor out
of the dust, that he may set him with princes. First, Thus God does
sometimes magnify himself, and his own wisdom, power, and sovereignty.
When he has some great work to do he chooses to employ those in it that
were least likely, and least thought of for it by themselves or others,
to the highest post of honour: Gideon is fetched from threshing, Saul
from seeking the asses, and David from keeping the sheep; the apostles
are sent from fishing to be fishers of men. The treasure of the gospel
is put into earthen vessels, and the weak and foolish ones of the world
are pitched upon to be preachers of it, to confound the wise and mighty
([Co1 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027.md), [Co1
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#028).md), that the excellency of the
power may be of God, and all may see that promotion comes from him.
Secondly, Thus God does sometimes reward the eminent piety and patience
of his people who have long groaned under the burden of poverty and
disgrace. When Joseph's virtue was tried and manifested he was raised
from the prison-dust and set with princes. Those that are wise will
observe such returns of Providence, and will understand by them the
loving-kindness of the Lord. Some have applied this to the work of
redemption by Jesus Christ, and not unfitly; for through him poor fallen
men are raised out of the dust (one of the Jewish rabbies applies it to
the resurrection of the dead), nay, out of the dunghill of sin, and set
among princes, among angels, those princes of his people. Hannah had
sung to this purport, [Sa1 2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006.md).
\[2.\] Those that have been long barren are sometimes, on a sudden, made
fruitful, [Psa 113:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#009.md). This may look
back to Sarah and Rebecca, Rachel, Hannah, and Samson's mother, or
forward to Elizabeth; and many such instances there have been, in which
God has looked on the affliction of his handmaids and taken away their
reproach. He makes the barren woman to keep house, not only builds up
the family, but thereby finds the heads of the family something to do.
Note, Those that have the comfort of a family must take the care of it;
bearing children and guiding the house are put together, [Ti1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014.md). When God sets the barren in a
family he expects that she should look well to the ways of her
household, [Pro 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#027.md). She is said to
be a joyful mother of children, not only because, even in common cases,
the pain is forgotten, for joy that a man-child is born into the world,
but there is particular joy when a child is born to those that have been
long childless (as [Luk 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#014).md) and
therefore there ought to be particular thanksgiving. Praise you the
Lord. Yet, in this case, rejoice with trembling; for, though the
sorrowful mother be made joyful, the joyful mother may be made sorrowful
again, if the children be either removed from her or embittered to her.
This, therefore, may be applied to the gospel-church among the Gentiles
(the building of which is illustrated by this similitude, [Isa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001.md), Sing, O barren! thou that didst
not bear, and [Gal 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#027).md), for which
we, who, being sinners of the Gentiles, are children of the desolate,
have reason to say, Praise you the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 114](psa114.md)

</div>
