<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa133)  [Next](psa135) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 134](../../../bib/kjv/psa134.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 134:0</span></span>

This is the last of the fifteen songs of degrees; and, if they were at
any time sung all together in the temple-service, it is fitly made the
conclusion of them, for the design of it is to stir up the ministers to
go on with their work in the night, when the solemnities of the day were
over. Some make this psalm to be a dialogue. I. In the first two verses,
the priests or Levites who sat up all night to keep the watch of the
house of the Lord are called upon to spend their time while they were
upon the guard, not in idle talk, but in the acts of devotion. II. In
the last verse those who were thus called upon to praise God pray for
him that gave them the exhortation, either the high priest or the
captain of the guard. Or thus: those who did that service did mutually
exhort one another and pray for one another. In singing this psalm we
must both stir up ourselves to give glory to God and encourage ourselves
to hope for mercy and grace from him.

A song of degrees.

[Psalms 134:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa134.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 134:1</span></span>

This psalm instructs us concerning a two-fold blessing: -

I. Our blessing God, that is, speaking well of him, which here we are
taught to do, [Psa 134:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa134.htm#001), [Psa
134:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa134.htm#002). 1. It is a call to the Levites
to do it. They were the servants of the Lord by office, appointed to
minister in holy things; they attended the sanctuary, and kept the
charge of the house of the Lord, [Num
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#006), etc. Some of them did by night
stand in the house of the Lord, to guard the holy things of the temple,
that they might not be profaned, and the rich things of the temple, that
they might not be plundered. While the ark was in curtains there was the
more need of guards upon it. They attended likewise to see that neither
the fire on the altar nor the lamps in the candlestick went out.
Probably it was usual for some devout and pious Israelites to sit up
with them; we read of one that departed not from the temple night or
day, [Luk 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#037). Now these are here
called upon to blesss the Lord. Thus they must keep themselves awake by
keeping themselves employed. Thus they must redeem time for holy
exercises; and how can we spend our time better than in praising God? It
would be an excellent piece of husbandry to fill up the vacancies of
time with pious meditations and ejaculations; and surely it is a very
modest and reasonable to converse with God when we have nothing else to
do. Those who stood in the house of the Lord must remember where they
were, and that holiness and holy work became that house. Let them
therefore bless the Lord; let them all do it in concert, or each by
himself; let them lift up their hands in the doing of it, in token of
the lifting up of their hearts. Let them lift up their hands in holiness
(so Dr. Hammond reads it) or in sanctification, as it is fit when they
lift them up in the sanctuary; and let them remember that when they were
appointed to wash before they went in to minister they were thereby
taught to lift up holy hands in prayer and praise. 2. It is a call to us
to do it, who, as Christians, are made priests to our God, and Levites,
[Isa 66:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021). We are the servants of the
Lord; we have a place and a name in his house, in his sanctuary; we
stand before him to minister to him. Even by night we are under his eye
and have access to him. Let us therefore bless the Lord, and again bless
him; think and speak of his glory and goodness. Let us lift up our hands
in prayer, in praise, in vows; let us do our work with diligence and
cheerfulness, and an elevation of mind. This exhortation is ushered in
with Behold! a note commanding attention. Look about you, Sirs, when you
are in God's presence, and conduct yourselves accordingly.

II\. God's blessing us, and that is doing well for us, which we are here
taught to desire, [Psa 134:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa134.htm#003). Whether
it is the watchmen's blessing their captain, or the Levites' blessing
the high priest, or whoever was their chief (as many take it, because it
is in the singular number, The Lord bless thee), or whether the blessing
is pronounced by one upon many ("The Lord bless thee, each of you in
particular, thee and thee; you that are blessing God, the Lord bless
you"), is not material. We may learn, 1. That we need desire no more to
make us happy than to be blessed of the Lord, for those whom he blesses
are blessed indeed. 2. That blessings out of Zion, spiritual blessings,
the blessings of the covenant, and of communion with God, are the best
blessings, which we should be most earnest for. 3. It is a great
encouragement to us, when we come to God for a blessing, that it is he
who made heaven and earth, and therefore has all the blessings of both
at his disposal, the upper and nether springs. 4. We ought to beg these
blessings, not only for ourselves, but for others also; not only, The
Lord bless me, but, The Lord bless thee, thus testifying our belief of
the fulness of divine blessings, that there is enough for others as well
as for us, and our good-will also to others. We must pray for those that
exhort us. Though the less is blessed of the greater ([Heb
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#007)), yet the greater must be prayed
for by the less.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 135](psa135)

</div>
