<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa128)  [Next](psa130) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 129](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 129:0</span></span>

This psalm relates to the public concerns of God's Israel. It is not
certain when it was penned, probably when they were in captivity in
Babylon, or about the time of their return. I. They look back with
thankfulness for the former deliverances God had wrought for them and
their fathers out of the many distresses they had been in from time to
time ([Psa 129:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#001)). II. They look
forward with a believing prayer for and a prospect of the destruction of
all the enemies of Zion ([Psa
129:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#005)). In singing this psalm we may
apply it both ways to the Gospel-Israel, which, like the Old Testament
Israel, has weathered many a storm and is still threatened by many
enemies.

A song of degrees.

[Psalms 129:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 129:1</span></span>

The church of God, in its several ages, is here spoken of, or, rather,
here speaks, as one single person, now old and gray-headed, but calling
to remembrance the former days, and reflecting upon the times of old.
And, upon the review, it is found, 1. That the church has been often
greatly distressed by its enemies on earth: Israel may now say, "I am
the people that has been oppressed more than any people, that has been
as a speckled bird, pecked at by all the birds round about," [Jer
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#009). It is true, they brought their
troubles upon themselves by their sins; it was for them that God
punished them; but it was for the peculiarity of their covenant, and the
singularities of their religion, that their neighbours hated and
persecuted them. "For these many a time have they afflicted me from my
youth." Note, God's people have always had many enemies, and the state
of the church, from its infancy, has frequently been an afflicted state.
Israel's youth was in Egypt, or in the times of the Judges; then they
were afflicted, and thenceforward more or less. The gospel-church, ever
since it had a being, has been at times afflicted; and it bore this yoke
most of all in its youth, witness the ten persecutions which the
primitive church groaned under. The ploughers ploughed upon my back,
[Psa 129:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#003). We read ([Psa
125:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#003)) of the rod of the wicked upon
the lot of the righteous, where we rather expected the plough, to mark
it out for themselves; here we read of the plough of the wicked upon the
back of the righteous, where we rather expected to find the rod. But the
metaphors in these places may be said to be crossed; the sense however
of both is the same, and is too plain, that the enemies of God's people
have all along used them very barbarously. They tore them, as the
husbandman tears the ground with his plough-share, to pull them to
pieces and get all they could out of them, and so to wear out the saints
of the Most High, as the ground is worn out that has been long tilled,
tilled (as we say) quite out of heart. When God permitted them to plough
thus he intended it for his people's good, that, their fallow ground
being thus broken up, he might sow the seeds of his grace upon them, and
reap a harvest of good fruit from them: howbeit, the enemies meant not
so, neither did their hearts think so ([Isa
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007)); they made long their furrows,
never knew when to have done, aiming at nothing less than the
destruction of the church. Many by the furrows they made on the backs of
God's people understand the stripes they gave them. The cutters cut upon
my back, so they read it. The saints have often had trials of cruel
scourgings (probably the captives had) and cruel mockings (for we read
of the scourge or lash of the tongue, [Heb
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#036)), and so it was fulfilled in
Christ, who gave his back to the smiters, [Isa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006). Or it may refer to the
desolations they made of the cities of Israel. Zion shall, for your
sake, be ploughed as a field, [Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012). 2. That the church has been
always graciously delivered by her friend in heaven. (1.) The enemies'
projects have been defeated. They have afflicted the church, in hopes to
ruin it, but they have not gained their point. Many a storm it has
weathered; many a shock, and many a brunt, it has borne; and yet it is
in being: They have not prevailed against me. One would wonder how this
ship has lived at sea, when it has been tossed with tempests, and all
the waves and billows have gone over it. Christ has built his church
upon a rock, and the gates of hell have not prevailed against it, nor
ever shall. (2.) The enemies' power has been broken: God has cut asunder
the cords of the wicked, has cut their gears, their traces, and so
spoiled their ploughing, has cut their scourges, and so spoiled their
lashing, has cut the bands of union by which they were combined
together, has cut the bands of captivity in which they held God's
people. God has many ways of disabling wicked men to do the mischief
they design against his church and shaming their counsels. These words,
The Lord is righteous, may refer either to the distresses or to the
deliverances of the church. \[1.\] The Lord is righteous in suffering
Israel to be afflicted. This the people of God were always ready to own,
that, how unjust soever their enemies were, God was just in all that was
brought upon them, [Neh 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#033). \[2.\]
The Lord is righteous in not suffering Israel to be ruined; for he has
promised to preserve it a people to himself, and he will be as good as
his word. He is righteous in reckoning with their persecutors, and
rendering to them a recompence, [Th2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006).

[Psalms 129:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 129:5</span></span>

The psalmist, having triumphed in the defeat of the many designs that
had been laid as deep as hell to ruin the church, here concludes his
psalm as Deborah did her song, So let all thy enemies perish, O Lord!
[Jdg 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#031).

I. There are many that hate Zion, that hate Zion's God, his worship, and
his worshippers, that have an antipathy to religion and religious
people, that seek the ruin of both, and do what they can that God may
not have a church in the world.

II\. We ought to pray that all their attempts against the church may be
frustrated, that in them they may be confounded and turned back with
shame, as those that have not been able to bring to pass their
enterprise and expectation: Let them all be confounded is as much as,
They shall be all confounded. The confusion imprecated and predicted is
illustrated by a similitude; while God's people shall flourish as the
loaded palm-tree, or the green and fruitful olive, their enemies shall
wither as the grass upon the house-top. As men they are not to be
feared, for they shall be made as grass, [Isa
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#012). But as they are enemies to Zion
they are so certainly marked for ruin that they may be looked upon with
as much contempt as the grass on the house-tops, which is little, and
short, and sour, and good for nothing. 1. It perishes quickly: It
withers before it grows up to any maturity, having no root; and the
higher its place is, which perhaps is its pride, the more it is exposed
to the scorching heat of the sun, and consequently the sooner does it
wither. It withers before it is plucked up, so some read it. The enemies
of God's church wither of themselves, and stay not till they are rooted
out by the judgments of God. 2. It is of no use to any body; nor are
they any thing but the unprofitable burdens of the earth, nor will their
attempts against Zion ever ripen or come to any head, nor, whatever they
promise themselves, will they get any more by them than the husbandman
does by the grass on his house-top. Their harvest will be a heap in the
day of grief, [Isa 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#011).

III\. No wise man will pray God to bless the mowers or reapers, [Psa
129:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#008). Observe, 1. It has been an
ancient and laudable custom not only to salute and wish a good day to
strangers and travellers, but particularly to pray for the prosperity of
harvest-labourers. Thus Boas prayed for his reapers. [Rut
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#004), The Lord be with you. We must
thus acknowledge God's providence, testify our good-will to our
neighbours, and commend their industry, and it will be accepted of God
as a pious ejaculation if it come from a devout and upright heart. 2.
Religious expressions, being sacred things, must never be made use of in
light and ludicrous actions. Mowing the grass on the house-top would be
a jest, and therefore those that have a reverence for the name of God
will not prostitute to it the usual forms of salutation, which savoured
of devotion; for holy things must not be jested with. 3. It is a
dangerous thing to let the church's enemies have our good wishes in
their designs against the church. If we wish them God speed, we are
partakers of their evil deeds, [Jo2
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#011). When it is said, None will bless
them, and show them respect, more is implied, namely, that all wise and
good people will cry out shame on them, and beg of God to defeat them;
and woe to those that have the prayers of the saints against them. I
cursed his habitation, [Job 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#003).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 130](psa130)

</div>
