<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa140)  [Next](psa142) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 141](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 141:0</span></span>

David was in distress when he penned this psalm, pursued, it is most
likely, by Saul, that violent man. Is any distressed? Let him pray;
David did so, and had the comfort of it. I. He prays for God's
favourable acceptance ([Psa 141:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#001),
[Psa 141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002)). II. For his powerful
assistance ([Psa 141:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#003), [Psa
141:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#004)). III. That others might be
instrumental of good to his soul, as he hoped to be to the souls of
others ([Psa 141:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005), [Psa
141:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#006)). IV. That he and his friends
being now brought to the last extremity God would graciously appear for
their relief and rescue ([Psa
141:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#007)). The mercy and grace of God
are as necessary to us as they were to him, and therefore we should be
humbly earnest for them in singing this psalm.

A psalm of David.

[Psalms 141:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 141:1</span></span>

Mercy to accept what we do well, and grace to keep us from doing ill,
are the two things which we are here taught by David's example to pray
to God for.

I. David loved prayer, and he begs of God that his prayers might be
heard and answered, [Psa 141:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#001), [Psa
141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002). David cried unto God. His
crying denotes fervency in prayer; he prayed as one in earnest. His
crying to God denotes faith and fixedness in prayer. And what did he
desire as the success of his prayer? 1. That God would take cognizance
of it: "Give ear to my voice; let me have a gracious audience." Those
that cry in prayer may hope to be heard in prayer, not for their
loudness, but their liveliness. 2. That he would visit him upon it: Make
haste unto me. Those that know how to value God's gracious presence will
be importunate for it and humbly impatient of delays. He that believes
does not make haste, but he that prays may be earnest with God to make
haste. 3. That he would be well pleased with him in it, well pleased
with his praying and the lifting up of his hands in prayer, which
denotes both the elevation and enlargement of his desire and the
out-goings of his hope and expectation, the lifting up of the hand
signifying the lifting up of the heart, and being used instead of
lifting up the sacrifices which were heaved and waved before the Lord.
Prayer is a spiritual sacrifice; it is the offering up of the soul, and
its best affections, to God. Now he prays that this may be set forth and
directed before God as the incense which was daily burnt upon the golden
altar, and as the evening sacrifice, which he mentions rather than the
morning sacrifice, perhaps because this was an evening prayer, or with
an eye to Christ, who, in the evening of the world and in the evening of
the day, was to offer up himself a sacrifice of atonement, and establish
the spiritual sacrifices of acknowledgement, having abolished all the
carnal ordinances of the law. Those that pray in faith may expect it
will please God better than an ox or bullock. David was now banished
from God's court, and could not attend the sacrifice and incense, and
therefore begs that his prayer might be instead of them. Note, Prayer is
of a sweet-smelling savour to God, as incense, which yet has no savour
without fire; nor has prayer without the fire of holy love and fervour.

II\. David was in fear of sin, and he begs of God that he might be kept
from sin, knowing that his prayers would not be accepted unless he took
care to watch against sin. We must be as earnest for God's grace in us
as for his favour towards us. 1. He prays that he might not be surprised
into any sinful words ([Psa 141:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#003)):
"Set a watch, O Lord! before my mouth, and, nature having made my lips
to be a door to my words, let grace keep that door, that no word may be
suffered to go out which may in any way tend to the dishonour of God or
the hurt of others." Good men know the evil of tongue-sins, and how
prone they are to them (when enemies are provoking we are in danger of
carrying our resentment too far, and of speaking unadvisedly, as Moses
did, though the meekest of men), and therefore they are earnest with God
to prevent their speaking amiss, as knowing that no watchfulness or
resolution of their own is sufficient for the governing of their
tongues, much less of their hearts, without the special grace of God. We
must keep our mouths as with a bridle; but that will not serve: we must
pray to God to keep them. Nehemiah prayed to the Lord when he set a
watch, and so must we, for without him the watchman walketh but in vain.
2. That he might not be inclined to any sinful practices ([Psa
141:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#004)): "Incline not my heart to any
evil thing; whatever inclination there is in me to sin, let it be not
only restrained, but mortified, by divine grace." The example of those
about us, and the provocations of those against us, are apt to stir up
and draw out corrupt inclinations. We are ready to do as others do, and
to think that if we have received injuries we may return them; and
therefore we have need to pray that we may never be left to ourselves to
practise any wicked work, either in confederacy with or in opposition to
the men that work iniquity. While we live in such an evil world, and
carry about with us such evil hearts, we have need to pray that we may
neither be drawn in by any allurement nor driven on by any provocation
to do any sinful thing. 3. That he might not be ensnared by any sinful
pleasures: "Let me not eat of their dainties. Let me not join with them
in their feasts and sports, lest thereby I be inveigled into their
sins." Better is a dinner of herbs, out of the way of temptation, than a
stalled ox in it. Sinners pretend to find dainties in sin. Stolen waters
are sweet; forbidden fruit is pleasant to the eye. But those that
consider how soon the dainties of sin will turn into wormwood and gall,
how certainly it will, at last, bite like a serpent and sting like an
adder, will dread those dainties, and pray to God by his providence to
take them out of their sight, and by his grace to turn them against
them. Good men will pray even against the sweets of sin.

[Psalms 141:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 141:5</span></span>

Here, I. David desires to be told of his faults. His enemies reproached
him with that which was false, which he could not but complain of; yet,
at the same time, he desired his friends would reprove him for that
which was really amiss in him, particularly if there was any thing that
gave the least colour to those reproaches ([Psa
141:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005)): let the righteous smite me; it
shall be a kindness. The righteous God (so some); "I will welcome the
rebukes of his providence, and be so far from quarrelling with them that
I will receive them as tokens of love and improve them as means of
grace, and will pray for those that are the instruments of my trouble."
But it is commonly taken for the reproofs given by righteous men; and it
best becomes those that are themselves righteous to reprove the
unrighteousness of others, and from them reproof will be best taken. But
if the reproof be just, though the reprover be not so, we must make a
good use of it and learn obedience by it. We are here taught how to
receive the reproofs of the righteous and wise. 1. We must desire to be
reproved for whatever is amiss in us, or is done amiss by us: "Lord, put
it into the heart of the righteous to smite me and reprove me. If my own
heart does not smite me, as it ought, let my friend do it; let me never
fall under that dreadful judgment of being let alone in sin." 2. We must
account it a piece of friendship. We must not only bear it patiently,
but take it as a kindness; for reproofs of instruction are the way of
life ([Pro 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#023)), are means of good to
us, to bring us to repentance for the sins we have committed, and to
prevent relapses into sin. Though reproofs cut, it is in order to a
cure, and therefore they are much more desirable than the kisses of an
enemy ([Pro 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#006)) or the song of
fools, [Ecc 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#005). David blessed God for
Abigail's seasonable admonition, [Sa1
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#032). 3. We must reckon ourselves
helped and healed by it: It shall be as an excellent oil to a wound, to
mollify it and close it up; it shall not break my head, as some reckon
it to do, who could as well bear to have their heads broken as to be
told of their faults; but, says David, "I am not of that mind; it is my
sin that has broken my head, that has broken my bones, [Psa
51:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#008). The reproof is an excellent oil,
to cure the bruises sin has given me. It shall not break my head, if it
may but help to break my heart." 4. We must requite the kindness of
those that deal thus faithfully, thus friendly with us, at least by our
prayers for them in their calamities, and hereby we must show that we
take it kindly. Dr. Hammond gives quite another reading of this verse:
"Reproach will bruise me that am righteous, and rebuke me; but that
poisonous oil shall not break my head (shall not destroy me, shall not
do me the mischief intended), for yet my prayer shall be in their
mischiefs, that God would preserve me from them, and my prayer shall not
be in vain."

II\. David hopes his persecutors will, some time or other, bear to be
told of their faults, as he was willing to be told of his ([Psa
141:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#006)): "When their judges" (Saul and
his officers who judged and condemned David, and would themselves be
sole judges) "are overthrown in stony places, among the rocks in the
wilderness, then they shall hear my words, for they are sweet." Some
think this refers to the relentings that were in Saul's breast when he
said, with tears, Is this thy voice, my son David? [Sa1
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#016); [Sa1
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#021). Or we may take it more
generally: even judges, great as they are, may come to be overthrown.
Those that make the greatest figure in this world do not always meet
with level smooth ways through it. And those that slighted the word of
God before will relish it, and be glad of it, when they are in
affliction, for that opens the ear to instruction. When the world is
bitter the word is sweet. Oppressed innocency cannot gain a hearing with
those that live in pomp and pleasure, but when they come to be
overthrown themselves they will have more compassionate thoughts of the
afflicted.

III\. David complains of the great extremity to which he and his friends
were reduced ([Psa 141:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#007)): Our bones
are scattered at the grave's mouth, out of which they are thrown up, so
long have we been dead, or into which they are ready to be thrown, so
near are we to the pit; and they are as little regarded as chips among
the hewers of wood, which are thrown in neglected heaps: As one that
cuts and cleaves the earth (so some read it), alluding to the ploughman
who tears the earth in pieces with his plough-share, [Psa
129:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#003). Can these dry bones live?

IV\. David casts himself upon God, and depends upon him for deliverance:
"But my eyes are unto thee ([Psa
141:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#008)); for, when the case is ever so
deplorable, thou canst redress all the grievances. From thee I expect
relief, bad as things are, and in thee is my trust." Those that have
their eye towards God may have their hopes in him.

V. He prays that God would succour and relieve him as his necessity
required. 1. That he would comfort him: "Leave not my soul desolate and
destitute; still let me see where my help is." 2. That he would prevent
the designs of his enemies against him ([Psa
141:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#009)): "Keep me from being taken in
the snare they have laid for me; give me to discover it and to evade
it." Be the gin placed with ever so much subtlety, God can and will
secure his people from being taken in it. 3. That God would, in justice,
turn the designs of his enemies upon themselves, and, in mercy, deliver
him from being ruined by them ([Psa
141:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#010)): let the wicked fall into
their own net, the net which, intentionally, they procured for me, but
which, meritoriously, they prepared for themselves. Nec lex est justioir
ulla quam necis artifices arte perire sua - No law can be more just than
that the architects of destruction should perish by their own
contrivances. All that are bound over to God's justice are held in the
cords of their own iniquity. But let me at the same time obtain a
discharge. The entangling and ensnaring of the wicked sometimes prove
the escape and enlargement of the righteous.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 142](psa142)

</div>
