<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa149)  [Next](pro000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 150](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 150:0</span></span>

The first and last of the psalms have both the same number of verses,
are both short, and very memorable. But the scope of them is very
different: the first psalm is an elaborate instruction in our duty, to
prepare us for the comforts of our devotion; this is all rapture and
transport, and perhaps was penned on purpose to be the conclusion of
these sacred songs, to show what is the design of them all, and that is
to assist us in praising God. The psalmist had been himself full of the
praises of God, and here he would fain fill all the world with them:
again and again he calls, "Praise the Lord, praise him, praise him," no
less than thirteen times in these six short verses. He shows, I. For
what, and upon what account, God is to be praised ([Psa
150:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001), [Psa
150:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002)), II. How, and with what
expressions of joy, God is to be praised ([Psa
150:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003)). III. Who must praise the
Lord; it is every one's business ([Psa
150:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#006)). In singing this psalm we
should endeavour to get our hearts much affected with the perfections of
God and the praises with which he is and shall be for ever attended,
throughout all ages, world without end.

[Psalms 150:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 150:1</span></span>

We are here, with the greatest earnestness imaginable, excited to praise
God; if, as some suppose, this psalm was primarily intended for the
Levites, to stir them up to do their office in the house of the Lord, as
singers and players on instruments, yet we must take it as speaking to
us, who are made to our God spiritual priests. And the repeated
inculcating of the call thus intimates that it is a great and necessary
duty, a duty which we should be much employed and much enlarged in, but
which we are naturally backward to and cold in, and therefore need to be
brought to, and held to, by precept upon precept, and line upon line.
Observe here,

I. Whence this tribute of praise arises, and out of what part of his
dominion it especially issues. It comes, 1. From his sanctuary; praise
him there. Let his priests, let his people, that attend there, attend
him with their praises. Where should he be praised, but there where he
does, in a special manner, both manifest his glory and communicate his
grace? Praise God upon the account of his sanctuary, and the privileges
which we enjoy by having that among us, [Eze
37:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#026). Praise God in his holy ones (so
some read it); we must take notice of the image of God as it appears on
those that are sanctified, and love them for the sake of that image; and
when we praise them we must praise God in them. 2. From the firmament of
his power. Praise him because of his power and glory which appear in the
firmament, its vastness, its brightness, and its splendid furniture; and
because of the powerful influences it has upon this earth. Let those
that have their dwelling in the firmament of his power, even the holy
angels, lead in this good work. Some, by the sanctuary, as well as by
the firmament of his power, understand the highest heavens, the
residence of his glory; that is indeed his sanctuary, his holy temple,
and there he is praised continually, in a far better manner than we can
praise him. And it is a comfort to us, when we find we do it so poorly,
that it is so well done there.

II\. Upon what account this tribute of praise is due, upon many
accounts, particularly, 1. The works of his power ([Psa
150:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002)): Praise him for his mighty
acts; for his mightinesses (so the word is), for all the instances of
his might, the power of his providence, the power of his grace, what he
has done in the creation, government, and redemption of the world, for
the children of men in general, for his own church and children in
particular. 2. The glory and majesty of his being: Praise him according
to his excellent greatness, according to the multitude of his
magnificence (so Dr. Hammond reads it); not that our praises can bear
any proportion to God's greatness, for it is infinite, but, since he is
greater than we can express or conceive, we must raise our conceptions
and expressions to the highest degree we can attain to. Be not afraid of
saying too much in the praises of God, as we often do in praising even
great and good men. Deus non patitur hyperbolum - We cannot speak
hyperbolically of God; all the danger is of saying too little and
therefore, when we have done our utmost, we must own that though we have
praised him in consideration of, yet not in proportion to, his excellent
greatness.

III\. In what manner this tribute must be paid, with all the kinds of
musical instruments that were then used in the temple-service, [Psa
150:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003). It is well that we are not
concerned to enquire what sort of instruments these were; it is enough
that they were well known then. Our concern is to know, 1. That hereby
is intimated how full the psalmist's heart was of the praises of God and
how desirous he was that this good work might go on. 2. That in serving
God we should spare no cost nor pains. 3. That the best music in God's
ears is devout and pious affections, non musica chordula, sed cor - not
a melodious string, but a melodious heart. Praise God with a strong
faith; praise him with holy love and delight; praise him with an entire
confidence in Christ; praise him with a believing triumph over the
powers of darkness; praise him with an earnest desire towards him and a
full satisfaction in him; praise him by a universal respect to all his
commands; praise him by a cheerful submission to all his disposals;
praise him by rejoicing in his love and solacing yourselves in his great
goodness; praise him by promoting the interests of the kingdom of his
grace; praise him by a lively hope and expectation of the kingdom of his
glory. 4. That, various instruments being used in praising God, it
should yet be done with an exact and perfect harmony; they must not
hinder, but help one another. The New Testament concert, instead of
this, is with one mind and one mouth to glorify God, [Rom
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#006).

IV\. Who must pay this tribute ([Psa
150:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#006)): Let every thing that has
breath praise the Lord. He began with a call to those that had a place
in his sanctuary and were employed in the temple-service; but he
concludes with a call to all the children of men, in prospect of the
time when the Gentiles should be taken into the church, and in every
place, as acceptably as at Jerusalem, this incense should be offered,
[Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011). Some think that in every
thing that has breath here we must include the inferior creatures (as
[Gen 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#022)), all in whose nostrils was
the breath of life. They praise God according to their capacity. The
singing of birds is a sort of praising God. The brutes do in effect say
to man, "We would praise God if we could; do you do it for us." John in
vision heard a song of praise from every creature which is in heaven,
and on the earth, and under the earth, [Rev
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013). Others think that only the
children of men are meant; for into them God has in a more peculiar
manner breathed the breath of life, and they have become living souls,
[Gen 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007). Now that the gospel is
ordered to be preached to every creature, to every human creature, it is
required that every human creature praise the Lord. What have we our
breath, our spirit, for, but to spend it in praising God; and how can we
spend it better? Prayers are called our breathings, [Lam
3:56](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#056). Let every one that breathes
towards God in prayer, finding the benefit of that, breathe forth his
praises too. Having breath, let the praises of God perfume our breath;
let us be in this work as in our element; let it be to us as the air we
breathe in, which we could not live without. Having our breath in our
nostrils, let us consider that it is still going forth, and will shortly
go and not return. Since therefore we must shortly breathe our last,
while we have breath let us praise the Lord, and then we shall breathe
our last with comfort, and, when death runs us out of breath, we shall
remove to a better state to breathe God's praises in a freer better air.

The first three of the five books of psalms (according to the Hebrew
division) concluded with Amen and Amen, the fourth with Amen,
Hallelujah, but the last, and in it the whole book, concludes with only
Hallelujah, because the last six psalms are wholly taken up in praising
God and there is not a word of complaint or petition in them. The nearer
good Christians come to their end the fuller they should be of the
praises of God. Some think that this last psalm is designed to represent
to us the work of glorified saints in heaven, who are there continually
praising God, and that the musical instruments here said to be used are
no more to be understood literally than the gold, and pearls, and
precious stones, which are said to adorn the New Jerusalem, [Rev
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018), [Rev
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019). But, as those intimate that the
glories of heaven are the most excellent glories, so these intimate that
the praises the saints offer there are the most excellent praises.
Prayers will there be swallowed up in everlasting praises; there will be
no intermission in praising God, and yet no weariness - hallelujahs for
ever repeated, and yet still new songs. Let us often take a pleasure in
thinking what glorified saints are doing in heaven, what those are doing
whom we have been acquainted with on earth, but who have gone before us
thither; and let it not only make us long to be among them, but quicken
us to do this part of the will of God on earth as those do it that are
in heaven. And let us spend as much of our time as may be in this good
work because in it we hope to spend a joyful eternity. Hallelujah is the
word there ([Rev 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001), [Rev
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#003)); let us echo to it now, as those
that hope to join in it shortly. Hallelujah, praise you the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Introduction](pro000)

</div>
