<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev016)  [Next](rev018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 17:0</span></span>

This chapter contains another representation of those things that had
been revealed before concerning the wickedness and ruin of antichrist.
This antichrist had been before represented as a beast, and is now
described as a great whore. And here, I. The apostle is invited to see
this vile woman ([Rev 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001.md), [Rev
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#002).md). II. He tells us what an
appearance she made ([Rev 17:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003).md).
III. The mystery of it is explained to him ([Rev
17:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#007).md). And, IV. Her ruin foretold
([Rev 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#013), etc..md).

[Revelation 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 17:1</span></span>

Here we have a new vision, not as to the matter of it, for that is
contemporary with what came under the three last vials; but as to the
manner of description, etc. Observe, 1. The invitation given to the
apostle to take a view of what was here to be represented: Come hither,
and I will show thee the judgment of the great whore, etc., [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001.md). This is a name of great infamy.
A whore \[in this passage\] is one that is married, and has been false
to her husband's bed, has forsaken the guide of her youth, and broken
the covenant of God. She had been a prostitute to the kings of the
earth, whom she had intoxicated with the wine of her fornication. 2. The
appearance she made: it was gay and gaudy, like such sort of creatures:
She was arrayed in purple, and scarlet colour, and decked with gold, and
precious stones, and pearls, [Rev
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004.md). Here were all the allurements of
worldly honour and riches, pomp and pride, suited to sensual and worldly
minds. 3. Her principal seat and residence - upon the beast that had
seven heads and ten horns; that is to say, Rome, the city on seven
hills, infamous for idolatry, tyranny, and blasphemy. 4. Her name, which
was written on her forehead. It was the custom of impudent harlots to
hang out signs, with their names, that all might know what they were.
Now in this observe, (1.) She is named from her place of residence -
Babylon the great. But, that we might not take it for the old Babylon
literally so called, we are told there is a mystery in the name; it is
some other great city resembling the old Babylon. (2.) She is named from
her infamous way and practice; not only a harlot, but a mother of
harlots, breeding up harlots, and nursing and training them up to
idolatry, and all sorts of lewdness and wickedness - the parent and
nurse of all false religion and filthy conversation. 5. Her diet: she
satiated herself with the blood of the saints and martyrs of Jesus. She
drank their blood with such greediness that she intoxicated herself with
it; it was so pleasant to her that she could not tell when she had had
enough of it: she was satiated, but never satisfied.

[Revelation 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 17:7</span></span>

Here we have the mystery of this vision explained. The apostle wonders
at the sight of this woman: the angel undertakes to open this vision to
him, it being the key of the former visions; and he tells the apostle
what was meant by the beast on which the woman sat; but it is so
explained as still to need further explanation. 1. This beast was, and
is not, and yet is; that is, it was a seat of idolatry and persecution;
and is not, that is, not in the ancient form, which was pagan; and yet
it is, it is truly the seat of idolatry and tyranny, though of another
sort and form. It ascends out of the bottomless pit (idolatry and
cruelty are the issue and product of hell), and it shall return thither
and go into perdition. 2. This beast has seven heads, which have a
double signification. (1.) Seven mountains - the seven hills on which
Rome stands; and (2.) Seven kings - seven sorts of government. Rome was
governed by kings, consuls, tribunes, decemviri, dictators, emperors who
were pagan, and emperors who were Christian. Five of these were extinct
when this prophecy was written; one was then in being, that is, the
pagan emperor; and the other, that is, the Christian emperor, was yet to
come, [Rev 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010.md). This beast, the
papacy, makes an eighth governor, and sets up idolatry again. 3. This
beast had ten horns; which are said to be ten kings which have as yet
received no kingdoms; as yet, that is, as some, shall not rise up till
the Roman empire be broken in pieces; or, as others, shall not rise up
till near the end of antichrist's reign, and so shall reign but as it
were one hour with her, but shall for that time be very unanimous and
very zealous in that interest, and entirely devoted to it, divesting
themselves of their prerogatives and revenues (things so dear to
princes), out of an unaccountable fondness for the papacy.

[Revelation 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 17:14</span></span>

Here we have some account of the downfall of Babylon, to be more fully
described in the following chapter.

I. Here is a war begun between the beast and his followers, and the Lamb
and his followers. The beast and his army, to an eye of sense, appear
much stronger than the Lamb and his army: one would think an army with a
lamb at the head of them could not stand before the great red dragon.
But,

II\. Here is a victory gained by the Lamb: The Lamb shall overcome.
Christ must reign till all enemies be put under his feet; he will be
sure to meet with many enemies, and much opposition, but he will also be
sure to gain the victory.

III\. Here is the ground or reason of the victory assigned; and this is
taken, 1. From the character of the Lamb: He is King of kings and Lord
of lords. He has, both by nature and by office, supreme dominion and
power over all things; all the powers of earth and hell are subject to
his check and control. 2. From the character of his followers: They are
called, and chosen, and faithful. They are called out by commission to
this warfare; they are chosen and fitted for it, and they will be
faithful in it. Such an army, under such a commander, will at length
carry all the world before them.

IV\. The victory is justly aggrandized. 1. By the vast multitude who
paid obedience and subjection to the beast and to the whore. She sat
upon (that is, presided over) many waters; and these waters were so many
multitudes of people, and nations, of all languages; yea, she reigned
not only over kingdoms, but over the kings, and they were her
tributaries and vassals, [Rev 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015.md),
[Rev 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018.md). 2. By the powerful
influence which God hereby showed he had over the minds of great men.
Their hearts were in his hand, and he turned them as he pleased; for,
(1.) It was of God, and to fulfil his will, that these kings agreed to
give their kingdom unto the beast; they were judicially blinded and
hardened to do so. And, (2.) It was of God that afterwards their hearts
were turned against the whore, to hate her, and to make her desolate and
naked, and to eat her flesh, and burn her with fire; they shall at
length see their folly, and how they have been bewitched and enslaved by
the papacy, and, out of a just resentment, shall not only fall off from
Rome, but shall be made the instruments of God's providence in her
destruction.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 18](rev018.md)

</div>
