<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev017)  [Next](rev019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 18:0</span></span>

We have here, I. An angel proclaiming the fall of Babylon ([Rev
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001), [Rev
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002)). II. Assigning the reasons of
her fall ([Rev 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003)). III. Giving
warning to all who belonged to God to come out of her ([Rev
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004), [Rev
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#005)), and to assist in her
destruction ([Rev 18:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006)). IV. The
great lamentation made for her by those who had been large sharers in
her sinful pleasures and profits ([Rev
18:9-19](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009)). V. The great joy that there
would be among others at the sight of her irrecoverable ruin ([Rev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020), etc.).

[Revelation 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 18:1</span></span>

The downfall and destruction of Babylon form an event so fully
determined in the counsels of God, and of such consequence to his
interests and glory, that the visions and predictions concerning it are
repeated. 1. Here is another angel sent from heaven, attended with great
power and lustre, [Rev 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001). He had
not only light in himself, to discern the truth of his own prediction,
but to inform and enlighten the world about that great event; and not
only light to discern it, but power to accomplish it. 2. This angel
publishes the fall of Babylon, as a thing already come to pass; and this
he does with a mighty strong voice, that all might hear the cry, and
might see how well this angel was pleased to be the messenger of such
tidings. Here seems to be an allusion to the prediction of the fall of
pagan Babylon ([Isa 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#009)), where the
word is repeated as it is here: has fallen, has fallen. Some have
thought a double fall is hereby intended, first her apostasy, and then
her ruin; and they think the words immediately following favour their
opinion; She has become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every
foul spirit, and the cage of every unclean and hateful bird, [Rev
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002). But this is also borrowed from
[Isa 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#009), and seems to describe not
so much her sin of entertaining idols (which are truly called devils) as
her punishment, it being a common notion that unclean spirits, as well
as ominous and hateful birds, used to haunt a city or house that lay in
its ruins. 3. The reason of this ruin is declared ([Rev
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003)); for, though God is not obliged
to give any account of his matters, yet he is pleased to do so,
especially in those dispensations of providence that are most awful and
tremendous. The wickedness of Babylon had been very great; for she had
not only forsaken the true God herself, and set up idols, but had with
great art and industry drawn all sorts of men into the spiritual
adultery, and by her wealth and luxury had retained them in her
interest. 4. Fair warning is given to all that expect mercy from God,
that they should not only come out of her, but be assisting in her
destruction, [Rev 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004), [Rev
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#005). Here observe, (1.) God may have
a people even in Babylon, some who belong to the election of grace. (2.)
God's people shall be called out of Babylon, and called effectually.
(3.) Those that are resolved to partake with wicked men in their sins
must receive of their plagues. (4.) When the sins of a people reach up
to heaven, the wrath of God will reach down to the earth. (5.) Though
private revenge is forbidden, yet God will have his people act under
him, when called to it, in pulling down his and their inveterate and
implacable enemies, [Rev 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006). (6.)
God will proportion the punishment of sinners to the measure of their
wickedness, pride, and security, [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007). (7.) When destruction comes on a
people suddenly, the surprise is a great aggravation of their misery,
[Rev 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008).

[Revelation 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 18:9</span></span>

Here we have,

I. A doleful lamentation made by Babylon's friends for her fall; and
here observe,

1\. Who are the mourners, namely, those who had been bewitched by her
fornication, those who had been sharers in her sensual pleasures, and
those who had been gainers by her wealth and trade - the kings and the
merchants of the earth: the kings of the earth, whom she had flattered
into idolatry by allowing them to be arbitrary and tyrannical over their
subjects, while they were obsequious to her; and the merchants, that is,
those who trafficked with her for indulgences, pardons, dispensations,
and preferments; these will mourn, because by this craft they got their
wealth.

2\. What was the manner of their mourning. (1.) They stood afar off,
they durst not come nigh her. Even Babylon's friends will stand at a
distance from her fall. Though they had been partakers with her in her
sins, and in her sinful pleasures and profits, they were not willing to
bear a share in her plagues. (2.) They made a grievous outcry: Alas!
alas! that great city, Babylon, that mighty city! (3.) They wept, and
cast dust upon their heads, [Rev
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#019). The pleasures of sin are but
for a season, and they will end in dismal sorrow. All those who rejoice
in the success of the church's enemies will share with them in their
downfall; and those who have most indulged themselves in pride and
pleasure are the least able to bear calamities; their sorrows will be as
excessive as their pleasure and jollity were before.

3\. What was the cause of their mourning; not their sin, but their
punishment. They did not lament their fall into idolatry, and luxury,
and persecution, but their fall into ruin - the loss of their traffic
and of their wealth and power. The spirit of antichrist is a worldly
spirit, and their sorrow is a mere worldly sorrow; they did not lament
for the anger of God, that had now fallen upon them, but for the loss of
their outward comfort. We have a large schedule and inventory of the
wealth and merchandise of this city, all which was suddenly lost ([Rev
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012), [Rev
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013)), and lost irrecoverably ([Rev
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#014)): All things which were dainty
and goodly have departed from thee, and thou shalt find them no more at
all. The church of God may fall for a time, but she shall rise again;
but the fall of Babylon will be an utter overthrow, like that of Sodom
and Gomorrah. Godly sorrow is some support under affliction, but mere
worldly sorrow adds to the calamity.

II\. An account of the joy and triumph there was both in heaven and
earth at the irrecoverable fall of Babylon: while her own people were
bewailing her, the servants of God were called to rejoice over her, [Rev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020). Here observe, 1. How universal
this joy would be: heaven and earth, angels and saints, would join in
it; that which is matter of rejoicing to the servants of God in this
world is matter of rejoicing to the angels in heaven. 2. How just and
reasonable; and that, (1.) Because the fall of Babylon was an act of
God's vindictive justice. God was then avenging his people's cause. They
had committed their cause to him to whom vengeance belongs, and now the
year of recompence had come for the controversies of Zion; and, though
they did not take pleasure in the miseries of any, yet they had reason
to rejoice in the discoveries of the glorious justice of God. (2.)
Because it was an irrecoverable ruin. This enemy should never molest
them any more, and of this they were assured by a remarkable token ([Rev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021)): An angel from heaven took up a
stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, "Thus
shall Babylon be thrown down with violence, and be found no more at all;
the place shall be no longer habitable by man, no work shall be done
there, no comfort enjoyed, no light seen there, but utter darkness and
desolation, as the reward of her great wickedness, first in deceiving
the nations with her sorceries, and secondly in destroying and murdering
those whom she could not deceive," [Rev
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#024). Such abominable sins deserved
so great a ruin.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 19](rev019)

</div>
