<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev011)  [Next](rev013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 12:0</span></span>

It is generally agreed by the most learned expositors that the narrative
we have in this and the two following chapters, from the sounding of the
seventh trumpet to the opening of the vials, is not a prediction of
things to come, but rather a recapitulation and representation of things
past, which, as God would have the apostle to foresee while future, he
would have him to review now that they were past, that he might have a
more perfect idea of them in his mind, and might observe the agreement
between the prophecy and that Providence that is always fulfilling the
scriptures. In this chapter we have an account of the contest between
the church and antichrist, the seed of the woman and the seed of the
serpent. I. As it was begun in heaven ([Rev
12:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)). II. As it was carried on in
the wilderness ([Rev 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012), etc.).

[Revelation 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 12:1</span></span>

Here we see that early prophecy eminently fulfilled in which God said he
would put enmity between the seed of the woman and the seed of the
serpent, [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015). You will observe,

I. The attempts of Satan and his agents to prevent the increase of the
church, by devouring her offspring as soon as it was born; of this we
have a very lively description in the most proper images.

1\. We see how the church is represented in this vision. (1.) As a
woman, the weaker part of the world, but the spouse of Christ, and the
mother of the saints. (2.) As clothed with the sun, the imputed
righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ. Having put on Christ, who is the
Sun of righteousness, she, by her relation to Christ, is invested with
honourable rights and privileges, and shines in his rays. (3.) As having
the moon under her feet (that is, the world); she stands upon it, but
lives above it; her heart and hope are not set upon sublunary things,
but on the things that are in heaven, where her head is. (4.) As having
on her head a crown of twelve stars, that is, the doctrine of the gospel
preached by the twelve apostles, which is a crown of glory to all true
believers. (5.) As in travail, crying out, and pained to be delivered.
She was pregnant, and now in pain to bring forth a holy progeny to
Christ, desirous that what was begun in the conviction of sinners might
end in their conversion, that when the children were brought to the
birth there might be strength to bring forth, and that she might see of
the travail of her soul.

2\. How the grand enemy of the church is represented. (1.) As a great
red dragon - a dragon for strength and terror - a red dragon for
fierceness and cruelty. (2.) As having seven heads, that is, placed on
seven hills, as Rome was; and therefore it is probable that pagan Rome
is here meant. (3.) As having ten horns, divided into ten provinces, as
the Roman empire was by Augustus Caesar. (4.) As having seven crowns
upon his head, which is afterwards expounded to be seven kings, [Rev
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010). (5.) As drawing with his tail a
third part of the stars in heaven, and casting them down to the earth,
turning the ministers and professors of the Christian religion out of
their places and privileges and making them as weak and useless as he
could. (6.) As standing before the woman, to devour her child as soon as
it should be born, very vigilant to crush the Christian religion in its
birth and entirely to prevent the growth and continuance of it in the
world.

II\. The unsuccessfulness of these attempts against the church; for, 1.
She was safely delivered of a man-child ([Rev
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#005)), by which some understand
Christ, others Constantine, but others, with greater propriety, a race
of true believers, strong and united, resembling Christ, and designed,
under him, to rule the nations with a rod of iron; that is, to judge the
world by their doctrine and lives now, and as assessors with Christ at
the great day. 2. Care was taken of this child: it was caught up to God,
and to his throne; that is, taken into his special, powerful, and
immediate protection. The Christian religion has been from its infancy
the special care of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ. 3. Care
was taken of the mother as well as of the child, [Rev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006). She fled into the wilderness, a
place prepared both for her safety and her sustenance. The church was in
an obscure state, dispersed; and this proved her security, through the
care of divine Providence. This her obscure and private state was for a
limited time, not to continue always.

III\. The attempts of the dragon not only proved unsuccessful against
the church, but fatal to his own interests; for, upon his endeavour to
devour the man-child, he engaged all the powers of heaven against him
([Rev 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007)): There was war in heaven.
Heaven will espouse the quarrel of the church. Here observe,

1\. The seat of this war - in heaven, in the church, which is the
kingdom of heaven on earth, under the care of heaven and in the same
interest.

2\. The parties - Michael and his angels on one side, and the dragon and
his angels on the other: Christ, the great Angel of the covenant, and
his faithful followers; and Satan and all his instruments. This latter
party would be much superior in number and outward strength to the
other; but the strength of the church lies in having the Lord Jesus for
the captain of their salvation.

3\. The success of the battle: The dragon and his angels fought and
prevailed not; there was a great struggle on both sides, but the victory
fell to Christ and his church, and the dragon and his angels were not
only conquered, but cast out; the pagan idolatry, which was a
worshipping of devils, was extirpated out of the empire in the time of
Constantine.

4\. The triumphant song that was composed and used on this occasion,
[Rev 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010), [Rev
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#011). Here observe, (1.) How the
conqueror is adored: Now have come salvation, strength, and the kingdom
of our God, and the power of his Christ. Now God has shown himself to be
a mighty God; now Christ has shown himself to be a strong and mighty
Saviour; his own arm has brought salvation, and now his kingdom will be
greatly enlarged and established. The salvation and strength of the
church are all to be ascribed to the king and head of the church. (2.)
How the conquered enemy is described. \[1.\] By his malice; he was the
accuser of the brethren, and accused them before their God night and
day; he appeared before God as an adversary to the church, continually
bringing in indictments and accusations against them, whether true or
false; thus he accused Job, and thus he accused Joshua the high priest,
[Zac 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001). Though he hates the presence
of God, yet he is willing to appear there to accuse the people of God.
Let us therefore take heed that we give him no cause of accusation
against us; and that, when we have sinned, we presently go in before the
Lord, and accuse and condemn ourselves, and commit our cause to Christ
as our Advocate. \[2.\] By his disappointment and defeat: he and all his
accusations are cast out, the indictments quashed, and the accuser
turned out of the court with just indignation. (3.) How the victory was
gained. The servants of God overcame Satan, \[1.\] By the blood of the
Lamb, as the meritorious cause. Christ by dying destroyed him that hath
the power of death, that is, the devil. \[2.\] By the word of their
testimony, as the great instrument of war, the sword of the Spirit,
which is the word of God, - by a resolute powerful preaching of the
everlasting gospel, which is mighty, through God, to pull down
strongholds, - and by their courage and patience in sufferings; they
loved not their lives unto the death, when the love of life stood in
competition with their loyalty to Christ; they loved not their lives so
well but they could give them up to death, could lay them down in
Christ's cause; their love to their own lives was overcome by stronger
affections of another nature; and this their courage and zeal helped to
confound their enemies, to convince many of the spectators, to confirm
the souls of the faithful, and so contributed greatly to this victory.

[Revelation 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 12:12</span></span>

We have here an account of this war, so happily finished in heaven, or
in the church, as it was again renewed and carried on in the wilderness,
the place to which the church had fled, and where she had been for some
time secured by the special care of her God and Saviour. Observe,

I. The warning given of the distress and calamity that should fall upon
the inhabitants of the world in general, through the wrath and rage of
the devil. For, though his malice is chiefly bent against the servants
of God, yet he is an enemy and hater of mankind as such; and, being
defeated in his designs against the church, he is resolved to give all
the disturbance he can to the world in general: Woe to the inhabitants
of the earth, and the sea, [Rev 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012).
The rage of Satan grows so much the greater as he is limited both in
place and time; when he was confined to the wilderness, and had but a
short time to reign there, he comes with the greater wrath.

II\. His second attempt upon the church now in the wilderness: He
persecuted the woman who brought forth the man-child, [Rev
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#013). Observe, 1. The care that God
had taken of his church. He had conveyed her as on eagles' wings, into a
place of safety provided for her, where she was to continue for a
certain space of time, couched in prophetic characters, taken from [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025). 2. The continual malice of the
dragon against the church. Her obscurity could not altogether protect
her; the old subtle serpent, which at first lurked in paradise, now
follows the church into the wilderness, and casts out a flood of water
after her, to carry her away. This is thought to be meant of a flood of
error and heresy, which was breathed by Arius, Nestorius, Pelagius, and
many more, by which the church of God was in danger of being overwhelmed
and carried away. The church of God is in more danger from heretics than
from persecutors; and heresies are as certainly from the devil as open
force and violence. 3. The seasonable help provided for the church in
this dangerous juncture: The earth helped the woman, and opened her
mouth, and swallowed up the flood, [Rev
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#016). Some think we are to understand
the swarms of Goths and Vandals that invaded the Roman empire, and found
work for the Arian rulers, who otherwise would have been as furious
persecutors as the pagan had been, and had exercised great cruelties
already; but God opened a breach of war, and the flood was in a manner
swallowed up thereby, and the church enjoyed some respite. God often
sends the sword to avenge the quarrel of his covenant; and, when men
choose new gods, then there is danger of war in the gates; intestine
broils and contentions often end in the invasions of a common enemy. 4.
The devil, being thus defeated in his designs upon the universal church,
now turns his rage against particular persons and places; his malice
against the woman pushes him on to make war with the remnant of her
seed. Some think hereby are meant the Albigenses, who were first by
Dioclesian driven up into barren and mountainous places, and afterwards
cruelly murdered by popish rage and power, for several generations; and
for no other reason than because they kept the commandments of God and
held the testimony of Jesus Christ. Their fidelity to God and Christ, in
doctrine, worship, and practice, was that which exposed them to the rage
of Satan and his instruments; and such fidelity will expose men still,
less or more, to the end of the world, when the last enemy shall be
destroyed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 13](rev013)

</div>
