<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev018)  [Next](rev020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 19:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. A further account of the triumphant song of
angels and saints for the fall of Babylon ([Rev
19:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001)). II. The marriage between
Christ and the church proclaimed and perfected ([Rev
19:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#005)). III. Another warlike
expedition of the glorious head and husband of the church, with the
success of it ([Rev 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010), etc.).

[Revelation 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 19:1</span></span>

The fall of Babylon being fixed, finished, and declared to be
irrecoverable in the foregoing chapter, this begins with a holy triumph
over her, in pursuance of the order given forth: Rejoice over her, thou
heaven, and you holy apostles and prophets, [Rev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020). They now gladly answer the
call; and here you have, 1. The form of their thanksgiving, in that
heavenly and most comprehensive word, Alleluia, praise you the Lord:
with this they begin, with this they go on, and with this they end ([Rev
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#004)); their prayers are now turned
into praises, their hosannas end in halleluias. 2. The matter of their
thanksgiving: they praise him for the truth of his word, and the
righteousness of his providential conduct, especially in this great
event - the ruin of Babylon, which had been a mother, nurse, and nest of
idolatry, lewdness, and cruelty ([Rev
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#002)), for which signal example of
divine justice they ascribe salvation, and glory, and honour, and power,
unto our God. 3. The effect of these their praises: when the angels and
saints cried Alleluia, her fire burned more fiercely and her smoke
ascended for ever and ever, [Rev 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#003).
The surest way to have our deliverances continued and completed is to
give God the glory of what he has done for us. Praising God for what we
have is praying in the most effectual manner for what is yet further to
be done for us; the praises of the saints blow up the fire of God's
wrath against the common enemy. 4. The blessed harmony between the
angels and the saints in this triumphant song, [Rev
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#004). The churches and their ministers
take the melodious sound from the angels, and repeat it; falling down,
and worshipping God, they cry, Amen, Alleluia.

[Revelation 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 19:5</span></span>

The triumphant song being ended, and epithalamium, or marriage-song,
begins, [Rev 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006). Here observe,

I. The concert of heavenly music. The chorus was large and loud, as the
voice of many waters and of mighty thunderings. God is fearful in
praises. There is no discord in heaven; the morning stars sing together;
no jarring string, nor key untuned, but pure and perfect melody.

II\. The occasion of this song; and that is the reign and dominion of
that omnipotent God who has redeemed his church by his own blood, and is
now in a more public manner betrothing her to himself: The marriage of
the Lamb has come, [Rev 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007). Some
think this refers to the conversion of the Jews, which they suppose will
succeed the fall of Babylon; others, to the general resurrection: the
former seems more probable. Now, 1. You have here a description of the
bride, how she appeared; not in the gay and gaudy dress of the mother of
harlots, but in fine linen, clean and white, which is the righteousness
of saints; in the robes of Christ's righteousness, both imputed for
justification and imparted for sanctification - the stola, the white
robe of absolution, adoption, and enfranchisement, and the white robe of
purity and universal holiness. She had washed her robes and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb; and these her nuptial ornaments she did
not purchase by any price of her own, but received them as the gift and
grant of her blessed Lord. 2. The marriage-feast, which, though not
particularly described (as [Mat 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#004)),
yet is declared to be such as would make all those happy who were called
to it, so called as to accept the invitation, a feast made up of the
promises of the gospel, the true sayings of God, [Rev
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#009). These promises, opened, applied,
sealed, and earnested by the Spirit of God, in holy eucharistical
ordinances, are the marriage-feast; and the whole collective body of all
those who partake of this feast is the bride, the Lamb's wife; they eat
into one body, and drink into one Spirit, and are not mere spectators or
guests, but coalesce into the espoused party, the mystical body of
Christ. 3. The transport of joy which the apostle felt in himself at
this vision. He fell down at the feet of the angel, to worship him,
supposing him to be more than a creature, or having his thoughts at the
present overpowered by the vehemency of his affections. Here observe,
(1.) What honour he offered to the angel: He fell at his feet, to
worship him; this prostration was a part of external worship, it was a
posture of proper adoration. (2.) How the angel refused it, and this was
with some resentment: "See thou do it not; have a care what thou doest,
thou art doing a wrong thing." (3.) He gave a very good reason for his
refusal: "I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren which have the
testimony of Jesus - I am a creature, thine equal in office, though not
in nature; I, as an angel and messenger of God, have the testimony of
Jesus, a charge to be a witness for him and to testify concerning him,
and thou, as an apostle, having the Spirit of prophecy, hast the same
testimony to give in; and therefore we are in this brethren and
fellow-servants." (4.) He directs him to the true and only object of
religious worship; namely, God: "Worship God, and him alone." This fully
condemns both the practice of the papists in worshipping the elements of
bread and wine, and saints, and angels, and the practice of those
Socinians and Arians who do not believe that Christ is truly and by
nature God, and yet pay him religious worship; and this shows what
wretched fig-leaves all their evasions and excuses are which they offer
in their own vindication: they stand hereby convicted of idolatry by a
messenger from heaven.

[Revelation 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 19:11</span></span>

No sooner was the marriage solemnized between Christ and his church by
the conversion of the Jews than the glorious head and husband of the
church is called out to a new expedition, which seems to be the great
battle that was to be fought at Armageddon, foretold [Rev
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#016). And here observe,

I. The description of the great Commander, 1. By the seat of his empire;
and that is heaven; his throne is there, and his power and authority are
heavenly and divine. 2. His equipage: he is again described as sitting
on a white horse, to show the equity of the cause, and certainty of
success. 3. His attributes: he is faithful and true to his covenant and
promise, he is righteous in all his judicial and military proceedings,
he has a penetrating insight into all the strength and stratagems of his
enemies, he has a large and extensive dominion, many crowns, for he is
King of kings, and Lord of lords. 4. His armour; and that is a vesture
dipped in blood, either his own blood, by which he purchased this
mediatorial power, or the blood of his enemies, over whom he has always
prevailed. 5. His name: The Word of God, a name that none fully knows
but himself, only this we know, that this Word was God manifest in the
flesh; but his perfections are incomprehensible by any creature.

II\. The army which he commands ([Rev
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#014)), a very large one, made up of
many armies; angels and saints followed his conduct, and resembled him
in their equipage, and in their armour of purity and righteousness -
chosen, and called, and faithful.

III\. The weapons of his warfare - A sharp sword proceeding from his
mouth ([Rev 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015)), with which he
smites the nations, either the threatenings of the written word, which
now he is going to execute, or rather his word of command calling on his
followers to take a just revenge on his and their enemies, who are now
put into the wine-press of the wrath of God, to be trodden under foot by
him.

IV\. The ensigns of his authority, his coat of arms - a name written on
his vesture and thigh, King of kings, and Lord of lords, asserting his
authority and power, and the cause of the quarrel, [Rev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016).

V. An invitation given to the fowls of heaven, that they should come and
see the battle, and share in the spoil and pillage of the field ([Rev
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017), [Rev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#018)), intimating that this great
decisive engagement should leave the enemies of the church a feast for
the birds of prey, and that all the world should have cause to rejoice
in the issue of it.

VI\. The battle joined. The enemy falls on with great fury, headed by
the beast, and the kings of the earth; the powers of earth and hell
gathered, to make their utmost effort, [Rev
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#019).

VII\. The victory gained by the great and glorious head of the church:
The beast and the false prophet, the leaders of the army, are taken
prisoners, both he who led them by power and he who led them by policy
and falsehood; these are taken and cast into the burning lake, made
incapable of molesting the church of God any more; and their followers,
whether officers or common soldiers, are given up to military execution,
and made a feast for the fowls of heaven. Though the divine vengeance
will chiefly fall upon the beast, and the false prophet, yet it will be
no excuse to those who fight under their banner that they only followed
their leaders and obeyed their command; since they would fight for them,
they must fall and perish with them. Be wise now therefore, O you kings,
be instructed, you rulers of the earth; kiss the Son, lest he be angry,
and you perish from the way, [Psa
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010), [Psa
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 20](rev020)

</div>
