<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom013)  [Next](rom015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001.md)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 14:0</span></span>

The apostle having, in the former chapter, directed our conduct one
towards another in civil things, and prescribed the sacred laws of
justice, peaceableness, and order, to be observed by us as members of
the commonwealth, comes in this and part of the following chapter in
like manner to direct our demeanour one towards another in sacred
things, which pertain more immediately to conscience and religion, and
which we observe as members of the church. Particularly, he gives rules
how to manage our different apprehensions about indifferent things, in
the management of which, it seems, there was something amiss among the
Roman Christians, to whom he wrote, which he here labours to redress.
But the rules are general, and of standing use in the church, for the
preservation of that Christian love which he had so earnestly pressed in
the foregoing chapter as the fulfilling of the law. It is certain that
nothing is more threatening, nor more often fatal, to Christian
societies, than the contentions and divisions of their members. By these
wounds the life and soul of religion expire. Now in this chapter we are
furnished with the sovereign balm of Gilead; the blessed apostle
prescribes like a wise physician. "Why then is not the hurt of the
daughter of my people recovered," but because his directions are not
followed? This chapter, rightly understood, made use of, and lived up
to, would set things to rights, and heal us all.

[Romans 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 14:1</span></span>

We have in this chapter,

I. An account of the unhappy contention which had broken out in the
Christian church. Our Master had foretold that offences would come; and,
it seems, so they did, for want of that wisdom and love which would have
prevented discord, and kept up union among them.

1\. There was a difference among them about the distinction of meats and
days; these are the two things specified. There might be other similar
occasions of difference, while these made the most noise, and were most
taken notice of. The case was this: The members of the Christian church
at Rome were some of them originally Gentiles, and others of them Jews.
We find Jews at Rome believing, [Act
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#024.md). Now those that had been Jews
were trained up in the observance of the ceremonial appointments
touching meats and days. This, which had been bred in the bone with
them, could hardly be got out of the flesh, even after they turned
Christians; especially with some of them, who were not easily weaned
from what they had long been wedded to. They were not well instructed
touching the cancelling of the ceremonial law by the death of Christ,
and therefore retained the ceremonial institutions, and practised
accordingly; while other Christians that understood themselves better,
and knew their Christian liberty, made no such difference. (1.)
Concerning meats ([Rom 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002).md): One
believeth that he may eat all things - he is well satisfied that the
ceremonial distinction of meats into clean and unclean is no longer in
force, but that every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused; nothing unclean of itself, [Rom
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014.md). This he was assured of, not
only from the general tenour and scope of the gospel, but particularly
from the revelation which Peter, the apostle of the circumcision (and
therefore more immediately concerned in it), had to this purport, [Act
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#015.md), [Act
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#028.md). This the strong Christian is
clear in, and practises accordingly, eating what is set before him, and
asking no question for conscience' sake, [Co1
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#027.md). On the other hand, another, who
is weak, is dissatisfied in this point, is not clear in his Christian
liberty, but rather inclines to think that the meats forbidden by the
law remain still unclean; and therefore, to keep at a distance from
them, he will eat no flesh at all, but eateth herbs, contenting himself
with only the fruits of the earth. See to what degrees of mortification
and self-denial a tender conscience will submit. None know but those
that experience it how great both the restraining and the constraining
power of conscience is. (2.) Concerning days, [Rom
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005.md). Those who thought themselves
still under some kind of obligation to the ceremonial law esteemed one
day above another - kept up a respect to the times of the passover,
pentecost, new moons, and feasts of tabernacles; thought those days
better than other days, and solemnized them accordingly with particular
observances, binding themselves to some religious rest and exercise on
those days. Those who knew that all these things were abolished and done
away by Christ's coming esteemed every day alike. We must understand it
with an exception of the Lord's day, which all Christians unanimously
observed; but they made no account, took no notice, of those antiquated
festivals of the Jews. Here the apostle speaks of the distinction of
meats and days as a thing indifferent, when it went no further than the
opinion and practice of some particular persons, who had been trained up
all their days to such observances, and therefore were the more
excusable if they with difficulty parted with them. But in the epistle
to the Galatians, where he deals with those that were originally
Gentiles, but were influenced by some judaizing teachers, not only to
believe such a distinction and to practise accordingly, but to lay a
stress upon it as necessary to salvation, and to make the observance of
the Jewish festivals public and congregational, here the case was
altered, and it is charged upon them as the frustrating of the design of
the gospel, falling from grace, [Gal
4:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009.md). The Romans did it out of
weakness, the Galatians did it out of wilfulness and wickedness; and
therefore the apostle handles them thus differently. This epistle is
supposed to have been written some time before that to the Galatians.
The apostle seems willing to let the ceremonial law wither by degrees,
and to let it have an honourable burial; now these weak Romans seem to
be only following it weeping to its grave, but those Galatians were
raking it out of its ashes.

2\. It was not so much the difference itself that did the mischief as
the mismanagement of the difference, making it a bone of contention.
(1.) Those who were strong, and knew their Christian liberty, and made
use of it, despised the weak, who did not. Whereas they should have
pitied them, and helped them, and afforded them meek and friendly
instruction, they trampled upon them as silly, and humoursome, and
superstitious, for scrupling those things which they knew to be lawful:
so apt are those who have knowledge to be puffed up with it, and to look
disdainfully and scornfully upon their brethren. (2.) Those who were
weak, and durst not use their Christian liberty, judged and censured the
strong, who did, as if they were loose Christians, carnal professors,
that cared not what they did, but walked at all adventures, and stuck at
nothing. They judged them as breakers of the law, contemners of God's
ordinance, and the like. Such censures as these discovered a great deal
of rashness and uncharitableness, and would doubtless tend much to the
alienating of affection. Well, this was the disease, and we see it
remaining in the church to this day; the like differences, in like
manner mismanaged, are still the disturbers of the church's peace. But,

II\. We have proper directions and suggestions laid down for allaying
this contention, and preventing the ill consequences of it. The apostle,
as a wise physician, prescribes proper remedies for the disease, which
are made up of rules and reasons. Such gentle methods does he take, with
such cords of a man does he draw them together; not by excommunicating,
suspending, and silencing either side, but by persuading them both to a
mutual forbearance: and as a faithful daysman he lays his hand upon them
both, reasoning the case with the strong that they should not be so
scornful, and with the weak that they should not be so censorious. If
the contending parties will but submit to this fair arbitration, each
abate of his rigour, and sacrifice their differences to their graces,
all will be well quickly. Let us observe the rules he gives, some to the
strong and some to the weak, and some to both, for they are interwoven;
and reduce the reasons to their proper rules.

1\. Those who are weak must be received, but not to doubtful
disputations, [Rom 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001.md). Take this for
a general rule; spend your zeal in those things wherein you and all the
people of God are agreed, and do not dispute about matters that are
doubtful. Receive him, proslambanesthe - take him to you, bid him
welcome, receive him with the greatest affection and tenderness;
porrigite manum (so the Syriac): lend him your hand, to help him, to
fetch him to you, to encourage him. Receive him into your company, and
converse, and communion, entertain him with readiness and condescension,
and treat him with all possible endearments. Receive him: not to quarrel
with him, and to argue about uncertain points that are in controversy,
which will but confound him, and fill his head with empty notions,
perplex him, and shake his faith. Let not your Christian friendship and
fellowship be disturbed with such vain janglings and strifes of words. -
Not to judge his doubtful thoughts (so the margin), "not to pump out his
weak sentiments concerning those things which he is in doubt about, that
you may censure and condemn him." Receive him, not to expose him, but to
instruct and strengthen him. See [Co1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010.md); [Phi
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015.md), [Phi
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#016.md).

2\. Those who are strong must by no means despise the weak; nor those
who are weak judge the strong, [Rom
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003.md). This is levelled directly
against the fault of each party. It is seldom that any such contention
exists but there is a fault on both sides, and both must mend. He argues
against both these jointly: we must not despise nor judge our brethren.
Why so?

(1.) Because God hath received them; and we reflect upon him if we
reject those whom he hath received. God never cast off any one that had
true grace, though he was but weak in it; never broke the bruised reed.
Strong believers and weak believers, those that eat and those that eat
not, if they be true believers, are accepted of God. It will be good for
us to put this question to ourselves, when we are tempted to behave
scornfully towards our brethren, to disdain and censure them: "Hast not
God owned them; and, if he has, dare I disown them?" "Nay, God doth not
only receive him, but hold him up, [Rom
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004.md). You think that he who eateth
will fall by his presumption, or that he who eateth not will sink under
the weight of his own fears and scruples; but if they have true faith,
and an eye to God, the one in the intelligent use of his Christian
liberty and the other in the conscientious forbearance of it, they shall
be held up - the one in his integrity, and the other in his comfort.
This hope is built upon the power of God, for God is able to make him
stand; and, being able, no doubt he is willing to exert that power for
the preservation of those that are his own." In reference to spiritual
difficulties and dangers (our own and others), much of our hope and
comfort are grounded upon the divine power, [Pe1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005.md); [Jde
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#024.md).

(2.) Because they are servants to their own master ([Rom
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004).md): Who art thou that judgest
another man's servant? We reckon it a piece of ill manners to meddle
with other people's servants, and to find fault with them and censure
them. Weak and strong Christians are indeed our brethren, but they are
not our servants. This rash judging is reproved, [Jam
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#001.md), under the notion of being many
masters. We make ourselves our brethren's masters, and do in effect
usurp the throne of God, when we take upon us thus to judge them,
especially to judge their thoughts and intentions, which are out of our
view, to judge their persons and state, concerning which it is hard to
conclude by those few indications which fall within our cognizance. God
sees not as man sees; and he is their master, and not we. In judging and
censuring our brethren, we meddle with that which does not belong to us:
we have work enough to do at home; and, if we must needs be judging, let
us exercise our faculty upon our own hearts and ways. - To his own
master he stands or falls; that is, his doom will be according to his
master's sentence, and not according to ours. How well for us is it that
we are not to stand nor fall by the judgment one of another, but by the
righteous and unerring judgment of God, which is according to truth!
"While thy brother's cause is before thy judgment, it is coram non
judice - before one who is not the judge; the court of heaven is the
proper court for trial, where, and where only, the sentence is
definitive and conclusive; and to this, if his heart be upright, he may
comfortably appeal from thy rash censure."

(3.) Because both the one and the other, if they be true believers, and
are right in the main, have an eye to God, and do approve themselves to
God in what they do, [Rom 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#006.md). He
that regards the day - that makes conscience of the observance of the
Jewish fasts and festivals, not imposing it upon others, nor laying a
stress upon it, but willing to be as he thinks on the surer side, as
thinking there is no harm in resting from worldly labours, and
worshipping God on those days - it is well. We have reason to think,
because in other things he conducts himself like a good Christian, that
in this also his eye is single, and that he regardeth it unto the Lord;
and God will accept of his honest intention, though he be under a
mistake about the observance of days; for the sincerity and uprightness
of the heart were never rejected for the weakness and infirmity of the
head: so good a master do we serve. On the other hand, he that regards
not the day - that does not make a difference between one day and
another, does not call one day holy and another profane, one day lucky
and another unlucky, but esteems every day alike - he does not do it out
of a spirit of opposition, contradiction, or contempt of his brother. If
he be a good Christian, he does not, he dares not, do it from such a
principle; and therefore we charitably conclude that to the Lord he does
not regard it. he makes no such difference of days only because he knows
God hath made none; and therefore intends his honour in endeavouring to
dedicate ever day to him. So for the other instance: He that eateth
whatever is set before him, though it be blood, though it be swine's
flesh, if it be food convenient for him, he eateth to the Lord. He
understands the liberty that God has granted him, and uses it to the
glory of God, with an eye to his wisdom and goodness in enlarging our
allowance now under the gospel, and taking off the yoke of legal
restraints; and he giveth God thanks for the variety of food he has, and
the liberty he has to eat it, and that in those things his conscience is
not fettered. On the other hand, he that eatest not those meats which
were forbidden by the ceremonial law, to the Lord he eateth not. It is
for God's sake, because he is afraid of offending God by eating that
which he is sure was once prohibited; and he giveth God thanks too that
there is enough besides. If he conscientiously deny himself that which
he takes to be forbidden fruit, yet he blesses God that of other trees
in the garden he may freely eat. Thus, while both have an eye to God in
what they do, and approve themselves to him in their integrity, why
should either of them be judged or despised? Observe, Whether we eat
flesh, or eat herbs, it is a thankful regard to God, the author and
giver of all our mercies, that sanctifies and sweetens it. Bishop
Sanderson, in his 34th sermon, upon [Ti1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004.md), justly makes this observation: It
appears by this that saying grace (as we commonly call it, perhaps from
[Co1 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#030).md) before and after meat was
the common known practice of the church, among Christians of all sorts,
weak and strong: an ancient, commendable, apostolical, Christian
practice, derived down from Christ's example through all the ages of the
church, [Mat 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#019.md); [Mat
15:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#036.md); [Luk
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#016.md); [Joh
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#011.md); [Mat
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026.md), [Mat
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#027.md); [Act
27:35](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#035.md). Blessing the creatures in the
name of God before we use them, and blessing the name of God for them
after, are both included; for eulogein and eucharistein are used
promiscuously. To clear this argument against rash judging and
despising, he shows how essential it is to true Christianity to have a
regard to God and not to ourselves, which therefore, unless the contrary
do manifestly appear, we must presume concerning those that in minor
things differ from us. Observe his description of true Christians, taken
from their end and aim ([Rom 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#007.md),
[Rom 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#008).md), and the ground of it, [Rom
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009.md).

\[1.\] Our end and aim: not self, but the Lord. As the particular end
specifies the action, so the general scope and tendency specify the
state. if we would know what way we walk in, we must enquire what end we
walk towards. First, Not to self. We have learned to deny ourselves;
this was our first lesson: None of us liveth to himself. This is a thing
in which all the people of God are one, however they differ in other
things; though some are weak and others are strong, yet both agree in
this, not to live to themselves. Not one that hath given up his name to
Christ is allowedly a self-seeker; it is contrary to the foundation of
true Christianity. We neither live to ourselves nor die to ourselves. We
are not our own masters, nor our own proprietors - we are not at our own
disposal. The business of our lives is not to please ourselves, but to
please God. The business of our deaths, to which we are every day
exposed and delivered, is not to make ourselves talked of; we run not
such hazards out of vain-glory, while we are dying daily. When we come
to die actually, neither is that to ourselves; it is not barely that we
would be unclothed, and eased of the burden of the flesh, but it is to
the Lord, that we may depart and be with Christ, may be present with the
Lord. Secondly, But to the Lord ([Rom
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#008).md), to the Lord Christ, to whom all
power and judgment are committed, and in whose name we are taught, as
Christians, to do every thing we do ([Col
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#017).md), with an eye to the will of
Christ as our rule, to the glory of Christ as our end, [Phi
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#021.md). Christ is the gain we aim at,
living and dying. We live to glorify him in all the actions and affairs
of life; we die, whether a natural or a violent death, to glorify him,
and to go to be glorified with him. Christ is the centre, in which all
the lines of life and death do meet. This is true Christianity, which
makes Christ all in all. So that, whether we live or die, we are the
Lord's, devoted to him, depending on him, designed and designing for
him. Though some Christians are weak and others strong, - though of
different sizes, capacities, apprehensions, and practices, in minor
things, yet they are all the Lord's - all eying, and serving, and
approving themselves to Christ, and are accordingly owned and accepted
of him. Is it for us then to judge or despise them, as if we were their
masters, and they were to make it their business to please us, and to
stand or fall by our dooms?

\[2.\] The ground of this, [Rom 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009.md).
It is grounded upon Christ's absolute sovereignty and dominion, which
were the fruit and end of his death and resurrection. To this end he
both died, and rose, and revived (he, having risen, entered upon a
heavenly life, the glory which he had before) that he might be Lord both
of dead and living - that he might be universal monarch, Lord of all
([Act 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#036).md), all the animate and
inanimate creatures; for he is head over all things to the church. He is
Lord of those that are living to rule them, of those that are dead to
receive them and raise them up. This was that name above every name
which God gave him as the reward of his humiliation, [Phi
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008.md), [Phi
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009.md). It was after he had died and
risen that he said, All power is given unto me ([Mat
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018).md), and presently he exerts that
power in issuing out commissions, [Rom
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#019.md), [Rom
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#020.md). Now if Christ paid so dearly
for his dominion over souls and consciences, and has such a just and
undisputed right to exercise that dominion, we must not so much as seem
to invade it, nor intrench upon it, by judging the consciences of our
brethren, and arraigning them at our bar. When we are ready to reproach
and reflect upon the name and memory of those that are dead and gone,
and to pass a censure upon them (which some the rather do, because such
judgments of the dead are more likely to pass uncontrolled and
uncontradicted), we must consider that Christ is Lord of the dead, as
well as of the living. If they are dead, they have already given up
their account, and let that suffice. And this leads to another reason
against judging and despising,

(4.) Because both the one and the other must shortly give an account,
[Rom 14:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010.md). A believing regard to
the judgment of the great day would silence all these rash judgings: Why
dost thou that art weak judge thy brother that is strong? And why dost
thou that art strong set at nought thy brother that is weak? Why is all
this clashing, and contradicting, and censuring, among Christians? We
shall all stand before the judgment-seat of Christ, [Co2
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010.md). Christ will be the judge, and he
has both authority and ability to determine men's eternal state
according to their works, and before him we shall stand as persons to be
tried, and to give up an account, expecting our final doom from him,
which will be eternally conclusive. To illustrate this ([Rom
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011).md), he quotes a passage out of the
Old Testament, which speaks of Christ's universal sovereignty and
dominion, and that established with an oath: As I live (saith the Lord),
every knee shall bow to me. It is quoted from [Isa
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023.md). There it is, I have sworn by
myself; here it is, As I live. So that whenever God saith As I live, it
is to be interpreted as swearing by himself; for it is God's prerogative
to have life in himself: there is a further ratification of it there,
The word is gone out of my mouth. It is a prophecy, in general, of
Christ's dominion; and here very fully applied to the judgment of the
great day, which will be the highest and most illustrious exercise of
that dominion. Here is a proof of Christ's Godhead: he is the Lord and
he is God, equal with the Father. Divine honour is due to him, and must
be paid. It is paid to God through him as Mediator. God will judge the
world by him, [Act 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031.md). The bowing
of the knee to him, and the confession made with the tongue, are but
outward expressions of inward adoration and praise. Every knee and every
tongue, either freely or by force.

\[1.\] All his friends do it freely, are made willing in the day of his
power. Grace is the soul's cheerful, entire, and avowed subjection to
Jesus Christ. First, Bowing to him - the understanding bowed to his
truths, the will to his laws, the whole man to his authority; and this
expressed by the bowing of the knee, the posture of adoration and
prayer. It is proclaimed before our Joseph, Bow the knee, [Gen
41:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#043.md). Though bodily exercise alone
profits little, yet, as it is guided by inward fear and reverence, it is
accepted. Secondly, Confessing to him - acknowledging his glory, grace,
and greatness - acknowledging our own meanness and vileness, confessing
our sins to him; so some understand it.

\[2.\] All his foes shall be constrained to do it, whether they will or
no. When he shall come in the clouds, and every eye shall see him, then,
and not till then, will all those promises which speak of his victories
over his enemies and their subjection to him have their full and
complete accomplishment; then his foes shall be his footstool, and all
his enemies shall lick the dust. hence he concludes ([Rom
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#012).md), Every one of us shall give
account of himself to God. We must not give account for others, nor they
for us; but every one for himself. We must give account how we have
spent our time, how we have improved our opportunities, what we have
done and how we have done it. And therefore, First, We have little to do
to judge others, for they are not accountable to us, nor are we
accountable for them ([Gal 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006).md):
Whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter to me, God accepteth no man's
person. Whatever they are, and whatever they do, they must give account
to their own master, and not to us; if we can in any thing be helpers of
their joy, it is well; but we have not dominion over their faith. And,
Secondly, We have the more to do to judge ourselves. We have an account
of our own to make up, and that is enough for us; let every man prove
his own work ([Gal 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#004).md), state his own
accounts, search his own heart and life; let this take up his thoughts,
and he that is strict in judging himself and abasing himself will not be
apt to judge and despise his brother. let all these differences be
referred to the arbitration of Christ at the great day.

(5.) Because the stress of Christianity is not to be laid upon these
things, nor are they at all essential to religion, either on the one
side or on the other. This is his reason ([Rom
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017.md), [Rom
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#018).md), which is reducible to this
branch of exhortation. Why should you spend your zeal either for or
against those things which are so minute and inconsiderable in religion?
Some make it a reason why, in case of offence likely to be taken, we
should refrain the use of our Christian liberty; but it seems directed
in general against that heat about those things which he observed on
both sides. The kingdom of God is not meat, etc. Observe here,

\[1.\] The nature of true Christianity, what it is: it is here called,
The kingdom of God; it is a religion intended to rule us, a kingdom: it
stands in a true and hearty subjection to God's power and dominion. The
gospel dispensation is in a special manner called the kingdom of God, in
distinction from the legal dispensation, [Mat
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002.md); [Mat
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#017.md). First, It is not meat and drink:
it does not consist either in using or in abstaining from such and such
meats and drinks. Christianity gives no rule in that case, either in one
way or another. The Jewish religion consisted much in meats and drinks
([Heb 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010).md), abstaining from some
meats religiously ([Lev 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#002).md), eating
other meats religiously, as in several of the sacrifices, part of which
were to be eaten before the Lord: but all those appointments are now
abolished and are no more, [Col 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#021.md),
[Col 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#022.md). The matter is left at
large. Every creature of God is good, [Ti1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004.md). So, as to other things, it is
neither circumcision nor uncircumcision ([Gal
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006.md); [Gal
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015.md); [Co1
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#019).md), it is not being of this party
and persuasion, of this or the other opinion in minor things, that will
recommend us to God. It will not be asked at the great day, "Who ate
flesh, and who ate herbs?" "Who kept holy days, and who did not?" Nor
will it be asked, "Who was conformist and who was non-conformist?" But
it will be asked, "Who feared God and worked righteousness, and who did
not?" Nothing more destructive to true Christianity than placing it in
modes, and forms, and circumstantials, which eat out the essentials.
Secondly, It is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.
These are some of the essentials of Christianity, things in which all
the people of God are agreed, in the pursuit of which we must spend our
zeal, and which we must mind with an excelling care. Righteousness,
peace, and joy, are very comprehensive words; and each of them includes
much, both of the foundation and the superstructure of religion. Might I
limit the sense of them, it should be thus: - As to God, our great
concern is righteousness - to appear before him justified by the merit
of Christ's death, sanctified by the Spirit of his grace; for the
righteous Lord loveth righteousness. As to our brethren, it is peace -
to live in peace and love, and charity with them, following peace with
all men: Christ came into the world to be the great peace-maker. As to
ourselves, it is joy in the Holy Ghost - that spiritual joy which is
wrought by the blessed Spirit in the hearts of believers, which respects
God as their reconciled Father and heaven as their expected home. Next
to our compliance with God, the life of religion consists in our
complacency in him; to delight ourselves always in the Lord. Surely we
serve a good Master, who makes peace and joy so essential to our
religion. Then and then only we may expect peace and joy in the Holy
Ghost when the foundation is laid in righteousness, [Isa
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#017.md). Thirdly, It is in these things
to serve Christ ([Rom 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#018).md), to do
all this out of respect to Christ himself as our Master, to his will as
our rule and to his glory as our end. That which puts an acceptableness
upon all our good duties is a regard to Christ in the doing of them. We
are to serve his interests and designs in the world, which are in the
first place to reconcile us one to another. What is Christianity but the
serving of Christ? And we may well afford to serve him who for us and
for our salvation took upon him the form of a servant.

\[2.\] The advantages of it. He that duly observeth these things, First,
Is acceptable to God. God is well pleased with such a one, though he be
not in every thing just of our length. He has the love and favour of
God; his person, his performances, are accepted of God, and we need no
more to make us happy. If God now accepts thy works, thou mayest eat thy
bread with joy. Those are most pleasing to God that are best pleased
with him; and they are those that abound most in peace and joy in the
Holy Ghost. Secondly, He is approved of men - of all wise and good men,
and the opinion of others is not to be regarded. The persons and things
which are acceptable to God should be approved of us. Should not we be
pleased with that which God is pleased with? What is it to be
sanctified, but to be of God's mind? Observe, The approbation of men is
not to be slighted; for we must provide things honest in the sight of
all men, and study those things that are lovely and of good report: but
the acceptance of God is to be desired and aimed at in the first place,
because, sooner or later, God will bring all the world to be of his
mind.

3\. Another rule here given is this, that in these doubtful things every
one not only may, but must, walk according to the light that God hath
given him. This is laid down [Rom
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005.md), Let every man be fully persuaded
in his own mind; that is, "Practise according to your own judgment in
these things, and leave others to do so too. Do not censure the practice
of others; let them enjoy their own opinion; if they be persuaded in
their own mind that they ought to do so and so, do not condemn them,
but, if your sober sentiments be otherwise, do not make their practice a
rule to you, any more than you must prescribe yours as a rule to them.
Take heed of acting contrary to the dictates of a doubting conscience.
First be persuaded that what you do is lawful, before you venture to do
it." In doubtful things, it is good keeping on the sure side of the
hedge. If a weak Christian doubts whether it be lawful to eat flesh,
while he remains under that doubt he had best forbear, till he be fully
persuaded in his own mind. We must not pin our faith upon any one's
sleeve, nor make the practice of others our rule; but follow the
dictates of our own understanding. To this purport he argues, [Rom
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014.md) and [Rom
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023.md), which two verses explain this,
and give us a rule not to act against the dictates,

(1.) Of a mistaken conscience, [Rom
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014.md). If a thing be indifferent, so
that it is not in itself a sin not to do it, if we really think it a sin
to do it it is to us a sin, though not to others, because we act against
our consciences, though mistaken and misinformed. He specifies the case
in hand, concerning the difference of meats. Observe,

\[1.\] His own clearness in this matter. "I know and am persuaded - I am
fully persuaded, I am acquainted with my Christian liberty, and am
satisfied in it, without any doubt or scruple, that there is nothing
unclean of itself, that is, no kind of meat that lies under any
ceremonial uncleanness, nor is forbidden to be eaten, if it be food
proper for human bodies." Several kinds of meat were forbidden to the
Jews, that in that, as in other things, they might be a peculiar and
separate people, [Lev 11:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#044.md); [Deu
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#002.md), [Deu
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#003.md). Sin had brought a curse upon the
whole creation: Cursed is the ground for thy sake; the use of the
creatures and dominion over them were forfeited, so that to man they
were all unclean ([Tit 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015).md), in token
of which God in the ceremonial law prohibited the use of some, to show
what he might have done concerning all; but now that Christ has removed
the curse the matter is set at large again, and that prohibition is
taken away. Therefore Paul says that he was persuaded by the Lord Jesus,
not only as the author of that persuasion, but as the ground of it; it
was built upon the efficacy of Christ's death, which removed the curse,
took off the forfeiture, and restored our right to the creature in
general, and consequently put a period to that particular distinguishing
prohibition. So that now there is nothing unclean of itself, every
creature of God is good; nothing common: so the margin, ouden koinon;
nothing which is common to others to eat, from the use of which the
professors of religion are restrained: nothing profane; in this sense
the Jews used the word common. It is explained by the word akatharton,
[Act 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#014.md), nothing common or unclean.
It was not only from the revelation made to Peter in this matter, but
from the tenour and tendency of the whole gospel, and from the manifest
design of Christ's death in general, that Paul learned to count nothing
common or unclean. This was Paul's own clearness, and he practised
accordingly.

\[2.\] But here is a caution he gives to those who had not that
clearness in this matter which he had: To him that esteemeth any thing
to be unclean, though it be his error, yet to him it is unclean. This
particular case, thus determined, gives a general rule, That he who does
a thing which he verily believes to be unlawful, however the thing be in
itself, to him it is a sin. This arises from that unchangeable law of
our creation, which is, that our wills, in all their choices, motions,
and directions, should follow the dictates of our understandings. This
is the order of nature, which order is broken if the understanding
(though misguided) tell us that such a thing is a sin, and yet we will
do it. This is a will to do evil; for, if it appears to us to be sin,
there is the same pravity and corruption of the will in the doing of it
as if really it were a sin; and therefore we ought not to do it. Not
that it is in the power of any man's conscience to alter the nature of
the action in itself, but only as to himself. It must be understood
likewise with this proviso, though men's judgments and opinions may make
that which is good in itself to become evil to them, yet they cannot
make that which is evil in itself to become good, either in itself or to
them. If a man were verily persuaded (it is Dr. Sanderson's instance,
sermon on [Rom 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023).md) that it were
evil to ask his father's blessing, that mispersuasion would make it
become evil to him: but, if he should be as verily persuaded that it
were good to curse his father, this would not make it become good. The
Pharisees taught people to plead conscience, when they made corban an
excuse for denying relief to their parents, [Mat
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#005.md), [Mat
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#006.md). But this would not serve any
more than Paul's erroneous conscience would justify his rage against
Christianity ([Act 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#009).md), or theirs,
[Joh 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002.md).

(2.) Nor must we act against the dictates of a doubting conscience. In
those indifferent things which we are sure it is no sin not to do, and
yet are not clear that it is lawful to do them, we must not do them
while we continue under those doubts; for he that doubteth is damned if
he eat ([Rom 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023).md), that is, it turns
into sin to him; he is damned, katakekritai - he is condemned of his own
conscience, because he eateth not of faith, because he does that which
he is not fully persuaded he may lawfully do. He is not clear that it is
lawful for him to eat swine's flesh (suppose), and yet is drawn,
notwithstanding his doubts, to eat it, because he sees others do it,
because he would gratify his appetite with it, or because he would not
be reproached for his singularity. Here his own heart cannot but condemn
him as a transgressor. our rule is, to walk as far as we have attained,
not further, [Phi 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015.md), [Phi
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#016.md). - For whatsoever is not of faith
is sin. Taking it in general, it is the same with that of the apostle
([Heb 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006).md), Without faith it is
impossible to please God. Whatever we do in religion, it will not turn
to any good account, except we do it from a principle of faith, with a
believing regard to the will of Christ as our rule, to the glory of
Christ as our end, and to the righteousness of Christ as our plea. Here
it seems to be taken more strictly; whatever is not of faith (that is,
whatever is done while we are not clearly persuaded of the lawfulness of
it), is a sin against conscience. He that will venture to do that which
his own conscience suggests to him to be unlawful, when it is not so in
itself, will by a like temptation be brought to do that which his
conscience tells him is unlawful when it is really so. The spirit of a
man is the candle of the Lord, and it is a dangerous thing to debauch
and put a force upon conscience, though it be under a mistake. This
seems to be the meaning of that aphorism, which sounds somewhat darkly
([Rom 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#022).md), Happy is he that
condemns not himself in that thing which he allows. Many a one allows
himself in practice to do that which yet in his judgment and conscience
he condemns himself for - allows it for the sake of the pleasure,
profit, or credit of it - allows it in conformity to the custom; and yet
whilst he does it, and pleas for it, his own heart gives him the lie,
and his conscience condemns him for it. Now, happy is the man who so
orders his conversation as not in any action to expose himself to the
challenges and reproaches of his own conscience - that does not make his
own heart his adversary, as he must needs do who does that which he is
not clear he may lawfully do. He is happy that has peace and quietness
within, for the testimony of conscience will be a special cordial in
troublesome times. Though men condemn us, it is well enough if our own
hearts condemn us not, [Jo1 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#021.md).

4\. Another rule here prescribed is to those who are clear in these
matters, and know their Christian liberty, yet to take heed of using it
so as to give offence to a weak brother. This is laid down [Rom
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#013.md), Let us not judge one another
any more. "Let it suffice that you have hitherto continued in this
uncharitable practice, and do so no more." The better to insinuate the
exhortation, he puts himself in; Let us not; as if he had said, "It is
what I have resolved against, therefore do you leave it: but judge this
rather, instead of censuring the practice of others, let us look to our
own, that no man put a stumbling-block, or an occasion to fall, in his
brother's way," - proskomma ē skandalon. We must take heed of saying or
doing any thing which may occasion our brother to stumble or fall; the
one signifies a less, the other a greater degree of mischief and offence
- that which may be an occasion,

(1.) Of grief to our brother, "One that is weak, and thinks it unlawful
to eat such and such meats, will be greatly troubled to see thee eat
them, out of a concern for the honour of the law which he thinks forbids
them, and for the good of thy soul which he thinks is wronged by them,
especially when thou dost it wilfully and with a seeming presumption,
and not with that tenderness and that care to give satisfaction to thy
weak brother which would become thee." Christians should take heed of
grieving one another, and of saddening the hearts of Christ's little
ones. See [Mat 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#006.md), [Mat
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010.md).

(2.) Of guilt to our brother. The former is a stumbling-block, that
gives our brother a great shake, and is a hindrance and discouragement
to him; but this is an occasion to fall. "If thy weak brother, purely by
thy example and influence, without any satisfaction received concerning
his Christian liberty, be drawn to act against his conscience and to
walk contrary to the light he has, and so to contract guilt upon his
soul, though the thing were lawful to thee, yet not being so to him (he
having not yet thereto attained), thou art to be blamed for giving the
occasion." See this case explained, [Co1
8:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#009.md). To the same purport ([Rom
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#021).md) he recommends it to our care
not to give offence to any one by the use of lawful things: It is good
neither to eat flesh nor to drink wine; these are things lawful indeed
and comfortable, but not necessary to the support of human life, and
therefore we may, and must, deny ourselves in them, rather than give
offence. It is good - pleasing to God, profitable to our brother, and no
harm to ourselves. Daniel and his fellows were in better liking with
pulse and water than those were who ate the portion of the king's meat.
It is a generous piece of self-denial, for which we have Paul's example
([Co1 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#013).md), If meat make my brother
to offend; he does not say, I will eat no meat, that is to destroy
himself; but I will eat no flesh, that is to deny himself, while the
world stands. This is to be extended to all such indifferent things
whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, is involved either in sin
or in trouble: or is made weak - his graces weakened, his comforts
weakened, his resolutions weakened. Is made weak, that is, takes
occasion to show his weakness by his censures and scruples. We must not
weaken those that are weak; that is to quench the smoking flax and to
break the bruised reed. Observe the motives to enforce this caution.

\[1.\] Consider the royal law of Christian love and charity, which is
hereby broken (v. 15): If thy brother be grieved with thy meat - be
troubled to see thee eat those things which the law of Moses did forbid,
which yet thou mayest lawfully do; possibly thou art ready to say, "Now
he talks foolishly and weakly, and it is no great matter what he says."
We are apt, in such a case, to lay all the blame on that side. But the
reproof is here given to the stronger and more knowing Christian: Now
walkest thou not charitably. Thus the apostle takes part with the
weakest, and condemns the defect in love on the one side more than the
defect in knowledge on the other side; agreeably to his principles
elsewhere, that the way of love is the more excellent way, [Co1
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031.md). Knowledge puffeth up, but
charity edifieth, [Co1 8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md). Now
walkest thou not charitably. Charity to the souls of our brethren is the
best charity. True love would make us tender of their peace and purity,
and beget a regard to their consciences as well as to our own. Christ
deals gently with those that have true grace, though they are weak in
it.

\[2.\] Consider the design of Christ's death: Destroy not him with thy
meat for whom Christ died, [Rom 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#015.md).
First, Drawing a soul to sin threatens the destruction of that soul. By
shaking his faith, provoking his passion, and tempting him to act
against the light of his own conscience, thou dost, as much as in thee
lies, destroy him, giving him an occasion to return to Judaism. Mē
apollue. It denotes an utter destruction. The beginning of sin is as the
letting forth of water; we are not sure that it will stop any where on
this side of eternal destruction. Secondly, The consideration of the
love of Christ in dying for souls should make us very tender of the
happiness and salvation of souls, and careful not to do any thing which
may obstruct and hinder them. Did Christ quit a life for souls, such a
life, and shall not we quit a morsel of meat for them? Shall we despise
those whom Christ valued at so high a rate? Did he think it worth while
to deny himself so much for them as to die for them, and shall not we
think it worth while to deny ourselves so little for them as abstaining
from flesh comes to? - with thy meat. Thou pleadest that it is thy own
meat, and thou mayest do what thou wilt with it; but remember that,
though the meat is thine, the brother offended by it is Christ's, and a
part of his purchase. While thou destroyest thy brother thou art helping
forward the devil's design, for he is the great destroyer; and, as much
as in thee lies, thou art crossing the design of Christ, for he is the
great Saviour, and dost not only offend thy brother, but offend Christ;
for the work of salvation is that which his heart is upon. But are any
destroyed for whom Christ died? If we understand it of the sufficiency
and general intendment of Christ's death, which was to save all upon
gospel terms, no doubt but multitudes are. If of the particular
determination of the efficacy of his death to the elect, then, though
none that were given to Christ shall perish ([Joh
6:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039).md), yet thou mayest, as much as is
in thy power, destroy such. No thanks to thee if they be not destroyed;
by doing that which has a tendency to it, thou dost manifest a great
opposition to Christ. Nay, and thou mayest utterly destroy some whose
profession may be so justifiable that thou art bound to believe, in a
judgment of charity, that Christ died for them. Compare this with [Co1
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#010.md), [Co1
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#011.md).

\[3.\] Consider the work of God ([Rom
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#020).md): "For meat destroy not the work
of God - the work of grace, particularly the work of faith in thy
brother's soul." The works of peace and comfort are destroyed by such an
offence given; take heed of it therefore; do not undo that which God
hath done. You should work together with God, do not countermine his
work. First, The work of grace and peace is the work of God; it is
wrought by him, it is wrought for him; it is a good work of his
beginning, [Phi 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006.md). Observe, The same
for whom Christ died ([Rom 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#015).md) are
here called the work of God; besides the work that is wrought for us
there is a work to be wrought in us, in order to our salvation. Every
saint is God's workmanship, his husbandry, his building, [Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010.md); [Co1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009.md). Secondly, We must be very careful
to do nothing which tends to the destruction of this work, either in
ourselves or others. We must deny ourselves in our appetites,
inclinations, and in the use of Christian liberty, rather than obstruct
and prejudice our own or others' grace and peace. Many do for meat and
drink destroy the work of God in themselves (nothing more destructive to
eh soul than pampering and pleasing the flesh, and fulfilling the lusts
of it), so likewise in others, by wilful offence given. Think what thou
destroyest - the work of God, whose work is honourable and glorious;
think for what thou destroyest it - for meat, which was but for the
belly, and the belly for it.

\[4.\] Consider the evil of giving offence, and what an abuse it is of
our Christian liberty. He grants that all things indeed are pure. We may
lawfully eat flesh, even those meats which were prohibited by the
ceremonial law; but, if we abuse this liberty, it turns into sin to us:
It is evil to him that eats with offence. Lawful things may be done
unlawfully. - Eats with offence, either carelessly or designedly giving
offence to his brethren. It is observable that the apostle directs his
reproof most against those who gave the offence; not as if those were
not to be blamed who causelessly and weakly took the offence from their
ignorance of Christian liberty, and the want of that charity which is
not easily provoked and which thinketh no evil (he several times tacitly
reflects upon them), but he directs his speech to the strong, because
they were better able to bear the reproof, and to begin the reformation.
For the further pressing of this rule, we may here observe two
directions which have relation to it: - First, Let not then your good be
evil spoken of ([Rom 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#016).md) - take
heed of doing any thing which may give occasion to others to speak evil,
either of the Christian religion in general, or of your Christian
liberty in particular. The gospel is your good; the liberties and
franchises, the privileges and immunities, granted by it, are your good;
your knowledge and strength of grace to discern and use your liberty in
things disputed are your good, a good which the weak brother hath not.
Now let not this be evil spoken of. It is true we cannot hinder loose
and ungoverned tongues from speaking evil of us, and of the best things
we have; but we must not (if we can help it) give them any occasion to
do it. Let not the reproach arise from any default of ours; as [Ti1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012.md), Let no man despise thee, that
is, do not make thyself despicable. So here, Do not use your knowledge
and strength in such a manner as to give occasion to people to call it
presumption and loose walking, and disobedience to God's law. We must
deny ourselves in many cases for the preservation of our credit and
reputation, forbearing to do that which we rightly know we may lawfully
do, when our doing it may be a prejudice to our good name; as, when it
is suspicious and has the appearance of evil, or when it becomes
scandalous among good people, or has any way a brand upon it. In such a
case we must rather cross ourselves than shame ourselves. Though it be
but a little folly, it may be like a dead fly, very prejudicial to one
that is in reputation for wisdom and honour, [Ecc
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#001.md). We may apply it more generally.
We should manage all our good duties in such a manner that they may not
be evil spoken of. That which for the matter of it is good and
unexceptionable may sometimes, by mismanagement, be rendered liable to a
great deal of censure and reproach. Good praying, preaching, and
discourse, may often, for want of prudence in ordering the time, the
expression, and other circumstances to edification, be evil spoken of.
It is indeed their sin who do speak evil of that which is good for the
sake of any such circumstantial errors, but it is our folly if we give
any occasion to do so. As we tender the reputation of the good we
profess and practise, let us so order it that it may not be evil spoken
of. Secondly, Hast thou faith? Have it to thyself before God, [Rom
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#022.md). It is not meant of justifying
faith (that must not be hid, but manifested by our works), but of a
knowledge and persuasion of our Christian liberty in things disputed.
"Hast thou clearness in such a particular? Art thou satisfied that thou
mayest eat all meats, and observe all days (except the Lord's day)
alike? Have it to thyself, that is, enjoy the comfort of it in thy own
bosom, and do not trouble others by the imprudent use of it, when it
might give offence, and cause thy weak brother to stumble and fall." In
these indifferent things, though we must never contradict our
persuasion, yet we may sometimes conceal it, when the avowing of it will
do more hurt than good. Have it to thyself - a rule to thyself (not to
be imposed upon others, or made a rule to them), or a rejoicing to
thyself. Clearness in doubtful matters contributes very much to our
comfortable walking, as it frees us from those scruples, jealousies, and
suspicions, which those who have not such clearness are entangled in
endlessly. Compare [Gal 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#004.md), Let every
man prove his own work, that is, bring it to the touchstone of the word
and try it by that so exactly as to be well satisfied in what he does;
and then he shall have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.
Paul had faith in these things: I am persuaded that there is nothing
unclean of itself; but he had it to himself, so as not to use his
liberty to the offence of others. How happy were it for the church if
those that have a clearness in disputable things would be satisfied to
have it to themselves before God, and not impose those things upon
others, and make them terms of communions, than which nothing is more
opposite to Christian liberty, nor more destructive both to the peace of
churches and the peace of consciences. That healing method is not the
less excellent for being common: in things necessary let there be unity,
things unnecessary let there be liberty, and in both let there be
charity, then all will be well quickly. - Have it to thyself before God.
The end of such knowledge is that, being satisfied in our liberty, we
may have a conscience void of offence towards God, and let that content
us. That is the true comfort which we have before God. Those are right
indeed that are so in God's sight.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 15](rom015.md)

</div>
