<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom000)  [Next](rom002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

In this chapter we may observe, I. The preface and introduction to the
whole epistle, to [Rom 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016). II. A
description of the deplorable condition of the Gentile world, which
begins the proof of the doctrine of justification by faith, here laid
down at [Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017). The first is
according to the then usual formality of a letter, but intermixed with
very excellent and savoury expressions.

[Romans 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 1:1</span></span>

In this paragraph we have,

I. The person who writes the epistle described ([Rom
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)): Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ;
this is his title of honour, which he glories in, not as the Jewish
teachers, Rabbi, Rabbi; but a servant, a more immediate attendant, a
steward in the house. Called to be an apostle. Some think he alludes to
his old name Saul, which signifies one called for, or enquired after:
Christ sought him to make an apostle of him, [Act
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015). He here builds his authority
upon his call; he did not run without sending, as the false apostles
did; klētos apostolos - called an apostle, as if this were the name he
would be called by, though he acknowledged himself not meet to be called
so, [Co1 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009). Separated to the gospel
of God. The Pharisees had their name from separation, because they
separated themselves to the study of the law, and might be called
aphōrismenoi eis ton nomon; such a one Paul had formerly been; but now
he had changed his studies, was aphōrismenos eis to Euangelion, a gospel
Pharisee, separated by the counsel of God ([Gal
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015)), separated from his mother's
womb, by an immediate direction of the Spirit, and a regular ordination
according to that direction ([Act
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002), [Act
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#003)), by a dedication of himself to
this work. He was an entire devotee to the gospel of God, the gospel
which has God for its author, the origin and extraction of it divine and
heavenly.

II\. Having mentioned the gospel of God, he digresses, to give us an
encomium of it.

1\. The antiquity of it. It was promised before ([Rom
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#002)); it was no novel upstart
doctrine, but of ancient standing in the promises and prophecies of the
old Testament, which did all unanimously point at the gospel, the
morning-beams that ushered in the sun of righteousness; this not by word
of mouth only, but in the scriptures.

2\. The subject-matter of it: it is concerning Christ, [Rom
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003), [Rom
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004). The prophets and apostles all
bear witness to him; he is the true treasure hid in the field of the
scriptures. Observe, When Paul mentions Christ, how he heaps up his
names and titles, his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, as one that took a
pleasure in speaking of him; and, having mentioned him, he cannot go on
in his discourse without some expression of love and honour, as here,
where in one person he shows us his two distinct natures. (1.) His human
nature: Made of the seed of David ([Rom
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)), that is, born of the virgin
Mary, who was of the house of David ([Luk
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#027)), as was Joseph his supposed
father, [Luk 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#004). David is here
mentioned, because of the special promises made to him concerning the
Messiah, especially his kingly office; [Sa2
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012); [Psa
132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011), compared with [Luk
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032), [Luk
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#033). (2.) His divine nature: Declared
to be the Son of God ([Rom 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)), the
Son of God by eternal generation, or, as it is here explained, according
to the Spirit of holiness. According to the flesh, that is, his human
nature, he was of the seed of David; but, according to the Spirit of
holiness, that is, the divine nature (as he is said to be quickened by
the Spirit, [Pe1 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018), compared with
[Co2 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)), he is the Son of God. The
great proof or demonstration of this is his resurrection from the dead,
which proved it effectually and undeniably. The sign of the prophet
Jonas, Christ's resurrection, was intended for the last conviction, [Mat
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039), [Mat
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040). Those that would not be
convinced by that would be convinced by nothing. So that we have here a
summary of the gospel doctrine concerning Christ's two natures in one
person.

3\. The fruit of it ([Rom 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005)); By
whom, that is, by Christ manifested and made known in the gospel, we
(Paul and the rest of the ministers) have received grace and
apostleship, that is, the favour to be made apostles, [Eph
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008). The apostles were made a
spectacle to the world, led a life of toil, and trouble, and hazard,
were killed all the day long, and yet Paul reckons the apostleship a
favour: we may justly reckon it a great favour to be employed in any
work or service for God, whatever difficulties or dangers we may meet
with in it. This apostleship was received for obedience to the faith,
that is, to bring people to that obedience; as Christ, so his ministers,
received that they might give. Paul's was for this obedience among all
nations, for he was the apostle of the Gentiles, [Rom
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#013). Observe the description here
given of the Christian profession: it is obedience to the faith. It does
not consist in a notional knowledge or a naked assent, much less does it
consist in perverse disputings, but in obedience. This obedience to the
faith answers the law of faith, mentioned [Rom
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027). The act of faith is the
obedience of the understanding to God revealing, and the product of that
is the obedience of the will to God commanding. To anticipate the ill
use which might be made of the doctrine of justification by faith
without the works of the law, which he was to explain in the following
epistle, he here speaks of Christianity as an obedience. Christ has a
yoke. "Among whom are you, [Rom 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#006).
You Romans in this stand upon the same level with other Gentile nations
of less fame and wealth; you are all one in Christ." The gospel
salvation is a common salvation, [Jde
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#003). No respect of persons with God.
The called of Jesus Christ; all those, and those only, are brought to an
obedience of the faith that are effectually called of Jesus Christ.

III\. The persons to whom it is written ([Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007)): To all that are in Rome, beloved
of God, called to be saints; that is, to all the professing Christians
that were in Rome, whether Jews or Gentiles originally, whether high or
low, bond or free, learned or unlearned. Rich and poor meet together in
Christ Jesus. Here is, 1. The privilege of Christians: They are beloved
of God, they are members of that body which is beloved, which is God's
Hephzibah, in which his delight is. We speak of God's love by his bounty
and beneficence, and so he hath a common love to all mankind and a
peculiar love for true believers; and between these there is a love he
hath for all the body of visible Christians. 2. The duty of Christians;
and that is to be holy, for hereunto are they called, called to be
saints, called to salvation through sanctification. Saints, and only
saints, are beloved of God with a special and peculiar love. Klētois
hagiois - called saints, saints in profession; it were well if all that
are called saints were saints indeed. Those that are called saints
should labour to answer to the name; otherwise, though it is an honour
and a privilege, yet it will be of little avail at the great day to have
been called saints, if we be not really so.

IV\. The apostolical benediction ([Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007)): Grace to you and peace. This is
one of the tokens in every epistle; and it hath not only the affection
of a good wish, but the authority of a blessing. The priests under the
law were to bless the people, and so are gospel ministers, in the name
of the Lord. In this usual benediction observe, 1. The favours desired:
Grace and peace. The Old Testament salutation was, Peace be to you; but
now grace is prefixed - grace, that is, the favour of God towards us or
the work of God in us; both are previously requisite to true peace. All
gospel blessings are included in these two: grace and peace. Peace, that
is all good; peace with God, peace in your own consciences, peace with
all that are about you; all these founded in grace. 2. The fountain of
those favours, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. All good
comes, (1.) From God as a Father; he hath put himself into that relation
to engage and encourage our desires and expectations; we are taught,
when we come for grace and peace, to call him our Father. (2.) From the
Lord Jesus Christ, as Mediator, and the great feoffee in trust for the
conveying and securing of these benefits. We have them from his fulness,
peace from the fulness of his merit, grace from the fulness of his
Spirit.

[Romans 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 1:8</span></span>

We may here observe,

I. His thanksgivings for them ([Rom
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)): First, I thank my God. It is
good to begin every thing with blessing God, to make that the alpha and
omega of every song, in every thing to give thanks. - My God. He speaks
this with delight and triumph. In all our thanksgivings, it is good for
us to eye God as our God; this makes every mercy sweet, when we can say
of God, "He is mine in covenant." - Through Jesus Christ. All our duties
and performances are pleasing to God only through Jesus Christ, praises
as well as prayers. - For you all. We must express our love to our
friends, not only by praying for them, but by praising God for them. God
must have the glory of all the comfort we have in our friends; for every
creature is that to us, and no more, which God makes it to be. Many of
these Romans Paul had no personal acquaintance with, and yet he could
heartily rejoice in their gifts and graces. When some of the Roman
Christians met him ([Act 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#015)), he
thanked God for them, and took courage; but here his true catholic love
extends itself further, and he thanks God for them all; not only for
those among them that were his helpers in Christ, and that bestowed much
labour upon him (of whom he speaks [Rom
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#003), [Rom
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#006)), but for them all. - That your
faith is spoken of. Paul travelled up and down from place to place, and,
wherever he came, he heard great commendations of the Christians at
Rome, which he mentions, not to make them proud, but to quicken them to
answer the general character people gave of them, and the general
expectation people had from them. The greater reputation a man hath for
religion, the more careful he should be to preserve it, because a little
folly spoils him that is in reputation, [Ecc
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#001). - Throughout the whole world,
that is, the Roman empire, into which the Roman Christians, upon
Claudius's edict to banish all the Jews from Rome, were scattered
abroad, but had now returned, and, it seems, left a very good report
behind them, wherever they had been, in all the churches. There was this
good effect of their sufferings: if they had not been persecuted, they
had not been famous. This was indeed a good name, a name for good things
with God and good people. As the elders of old, so these Romans,
obtained a good report through faith, [Heb
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#002). It is a desirable thing to be
famous for faith. The faith of the Roman Christians came to be thus
talked of, not only because it was excelling in itself, but because it
was eminent and observable in its circumstances. Rome was a city upon a
hill, every one took notice of what was done there. Thus those who have
many eyes upon them have need to walk circumspectly, for what they do,
good or bad, will be spoken of. The church of Rome was then a
flourishing church; but since that time how is the gold become dim! How
is the most fine gold changed! Rome is not what it was. She was then
espoused a chaste virgin to Christ, and excelled in beauty; but she has
since degenerated, dealt treacherously, and embraced the bosom of a
stranger; so that (as that good old book, the Practice of Piety, makes
appear in no less than twenty-six instances) even the epistle to the
Romans is now an epistle against the Romans; little reason has she
therefore to boast of her former credit.

II\. His prayer for them, [Rom 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009).
Though a famous flourishing church, yet they had need to be prayed for;
they had not yet attained. Paul mentions this as an instance of his love
to them. One of the greatest kindnesses we can do our friends, and
sometimes the only kindness that is in the power of our hands, is, by
prayer to recommend them to the loving-kindness of God. From Paul's
example here we may learn, 1. Constancy in prayer: Always without
ceasing. He did himself observe the same rules he gave to others, [Eph
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#018); [Th1
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017). Not that Paul did nothing else
but pray, but he kept up stated times for the solemn performance of that
duty, and those very frequent, and observed without fail. 2. Charity in
prayer: I make mention of you. Though he had not particular acquaintance
with them, nor interest in them, yet he prayed for them; not only for
all saints in general, but he made express mention of them. It is not
unfit sometimes to be express in our prayers for particular churches and
places; not to inform God, but to affect ourselves. We are likely to
have the most comfort in those friends that we pray most for. Concerning
this he makes a solemn appeal to the searcher of hearts: For God is my
witness. It was in a weighty matter, and in a thing known only to God
and his own heart, that he used this asseveration. It is very
comfortable to be able to call God to witness to our sincerity and
constancy in the discharge of a duty. God is particularly a witness to
our secret prayers, the matter of them, the manner of the performance;
then our Father sees in secret, [Mat
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006). God, whom I serve with my spirit.
Those that serve God with their spirits may, with a humble confidence,
appeal to him; hypocrites who rest in bodily exercise cannot. His
particular prayer, among many other petitions he put up for them, was
that he might have an opportunity of paying them a visit ([Rom
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#010)): Making request, if by any
means, etc. Whatever comfort we desire to find in any creature, we must
have recourse to God for it by prayer; for our times are in his hand,
and all our ways at his disposal. The expressions here used intimate
that he was very desirous of such an opportunity: if by any means; that
he had long and often been disappointed: now at length; and yet that he
submitted it to the divine Providence: a prosperous journey by the will
of God. As in our purposes, so in our desires, we must still remember to
insert this, if the Lord will, [Jam
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#015). Our journeys are prosperous or
otherwise according to the will of God, comfortable or not as he
pleases.

III\. His great desire to see them, with the reasons of it, [Rom
1:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011). He had heard so much of them
that he had a great desire to be better acquainted with them. Fruitful
Christians are as much the joy as barren professors are the grief of
faithful ministers. Accordingly, he often purposed to come, but was let
hitherto ([Rom 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013)), for man
purposeth, but God disposeth. He was hindered by other business that
took him off, by his care of other churches, whose affairs were
pressing; and Paul was for doing that first, not which was most pleasant
(then he would have gone to Rome), but which was most needful - a good
example to ministers, who must not consult their own inclinations so
much as the necessity of their people's souls. Paul desired to visit
these Romans,

1\. That they might be edified ([Rom
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011)): That I may impart unto you. He
received, that he might communicate. Never were full breasts so desirous
to be drawn out to the sucking infant as Paul's head and heart were to
be imparting spiritual gifts, that is, preaching to them. A good sermon
is a good gift, so much the better for being a spiritual gift. - To the
end you may be established. Having commended their flourishing he here
expresses his desire of their establishment, that as they grew upward in
the branches they might grow downward in the root. The best saints,
while they are in such a shaking world as this, have need to be more and
more established; and spiritual gifts are of special use for our
establishment.

2\. That he might be comforted, [Rom
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#012). What he heard of their
flourishing in grace was so much a joy to him that it must needs be much
more so to behold it. Paul could take comfort in the fruit of the
labours of other ministers. - By the mutual faith both of you and me,
that is, our mutual faithfulness and fidelity. It is very comfortable
when there is a mutual confidence between minister and people, they
confiding in him as a faithful minister, and he in them as a faithful
people. Or, the mutual work of faith, which is love; they rejoiced in
the expressions of one another's love, or communicating their faith one
to another. It is very refreshing to Christians to compare notes about
their spiritual concerns; thus are they sharpened, as iron sharpens
iron. - That I might have some fruit, [Rom
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013). Their edification would be his
advantage, it would be fruit abounding to a good account. Paul minded
his work, as one that believed the more good he did the greater would
his reward be.

3\. That he might discharge his trust as the apostle of the Gentiles
([Rom 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#014)): I am a debtor. (1.) His
receivings made him a debtor; for they were talents he was entrusted
with to trade for his Master's honour. We should think of this when we
covet great things, that all our receivings put us in debt; we are but
stewards of our Lord's goods. (2.) His office made him a debtor. He was
a debtor as he was an apostle; he was called and sent to work, and had
engaged to mind it. Paul had improved his talent, and laboured in his
work, and done as much good as ever any man did, and yet, in reflection
upon it, he still writes himself debtor; for, when we have done all, we
are but unprofitable servants. - Debtor to the Greeks, and to the
barbarians, that is, as the following words explain it, to the wise and
to the unwise. The Greeks fancied themselves to have the monopoly of
wisdom, and looked upon all the rest of the world as barbarians,
comparatively so; not cultivated with learning and arts as they were.
Now Paul was a debtor to both, looked upon himself as obliged to do all
the good he could both to the one and to the other. Accordingly, we find
him paying his debt, both in his preaching and in his writing, doing
good both to Greeks and barbarians, and suiting his discourse to the
capacity of each. You may observe a difference between his sermon at
Lystra among the plain Lycaonians ([Act
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015), etc.) and his sermon at Athens
among the polite philosophers, [Act
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#022), etc. He delivered both as
debtor to each, giving to each their portion. Though a plain preacher,
yet, as debtor to the wise, he speaks wisdom among those that are
perfect, [Co1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006). For these reasons
he was ready, if he had an opportunity, to preach the gospel at Rome,
[Rom 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#015). Though a public place,
though a perilous place, where Christianity met with a great deal of
opposition, yet Paul was ready to run the risk at Rome, if called to it:
I am ready - prothumon. It denotes a great readiness of mind, and that
he was very forward to it. What he did was not for filthy lucre, but of
a ready mind. It is an excellent thing to be ready to meet every
opportunity of doing or getting good.

[Romans 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 1:16</span></span>

Paul here enters upon a large discourse of justification, in the latter
part of this chapter laying down his thesis, and, in order to the proof
of it, describing the deplorable condition of the Gentile world. His
transition is very handsome, and like an orator: he was ready to preach
the gospel at Rome, though a place where the gospel was run down by
those that called themselves the wits; for, saith he, I am not ashamed
of it, [Rom 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016). There is a great
deal in the gospel which such a man as Paul might be tempted to be
ashamed of, especially that he whose gospel it is was a man hanged upon
a tree, that the doctrine of it was plain, had little in it to set it
off among scholars, the professors of it were mean and despised, and
every where spoken against; yet Paul was not ashamed to own it. I reckon
him a Christian indeed that is neither ashamed of the gospel nor a shame
to it. The reason of this bold profession, taken from the nature and
excellency of the gospel, introduces his dissertation.

I. The proposition, [Rom 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016), [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017). The excellency of the gospel
lies in this, that it reveals to us,

1\. The salvation of believers as the end: It is the power of God unto
salvation. Paul is not ashamed of the gospel, how mean and contemptible
soever it may appear to a carnal eye; for the power of God works by it
the salvation of all that believe; it shows us the way of salvation
([Act 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#017)), and is the great charter
by which salvation is conveyed and made over to us. But, (1.) It is
through the power of God; without that power the gospel is but a dead
letter; the revelation of the gospel is the revelation of the arm of the
Lord ([Isa 53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)), as power went along
with the word of Christ to heal diseases. (2.) It is to those, and those
only, that believe. Believing interests us in the gospel salvation; to
others it is hidden. The medicine prepared will not cure the patient if
it be not taken. - To the Jew first. The lost sheep of the house of
Israel had the first offer made them, both by Christ and his apostles.
You first ([Act 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026)), but upon their
refusal the apostles turned to the Gentiles, [Act
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046). Jews and Gentiles now stand
upon the same level, both equally miserable without a Saviour, and both
equally welcome to the Saviour, [Col
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#011). Such doctrine as this was
surprising to the Jews, who had hitherto been the peculiar people, and
had looked with scorn upon the Gentile world; but the long-expected
Messiah proves a light to enlighten the Gentiles, as well as the glory
of his people Israel.

2\. The justification of believers as the way ([Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)): For therein, that is, in this
gospel, which Paul so much triumphs in, is the righteousness of God
revealed. Our misery and ruin being the product and consequent of our
iniquity, that which will show us the way of salvation must needs show
us the way of justification, and this the gospel does. The gospel makes
known a righteousness. While God is a just and holy God, and we are
guilty sinners, it is necessary we should have a righteousness wherein
to appear before him; and, blessed be God, there is such a righteousness
brought in by Messiah the prince ([Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024)) and revealed in the gospel; a
righteousness, that is, a gracious method of reconciliation and
acceptance, notwithstanding the guilt of our sins. This evangelical
righteousness, (1.) Is called the righteousness of God; it is of God's
appointing, of God's approving and accepting. It is so called to cut off
all pretensions to a righteousness resulting from the merit of our own
works. It is the righteousness of Christ, who is God, resulting from a
satisfaction of infinite value. (2.) It is said to be from faith to
faith, from the faithfulness of God revealing to the faith of man
receiving (so some); from the faith of dependence upon God, and dealing
with him immediately, as Adam before the fall, to the faith of
dependence upon a Mediator, and so dealing with God (so others); from
the first faith, by which we are put into a justified state, to after
faith, by which we live, and are continued in that state: and the faith
that justifies us is no less than our taking Christ for our Saviour, and
becoming true Christians, according to the tenour of the baptismal
covenant; from faith engrafting us into Christ, to faith deriving virtue
from him as our root: both implied in the next words, The just shall
live by faith. Just by faith, there is faith justifying us; live by
faith, there is faith maintaining us; and so there is a righteousness
from faith to faith. Faith is all in all, both in the beginning and
progress of a Christian life. It is not from faith to works, as if faith
put us into a justified state, and then works preserved and maintained
us in it, but it is all along from faith to faith, as [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018), from glory to glory; it is
increasing, continuing, persevering faith, faith pressing forward, and
getting ground of unbelief. To show that this is no novel upstart
doctrine, he quotes for it that famous scripture in the Old Testament,
so often mentioned in the New ([Hab
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)): The just shall live by faith.
Being justified by faith he shall live by it both the life of grace and
of glory. The prophet there had placed himself upon the watch-tower,
expecting some extraordinary discoveries ([Rom
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)), and the discovery was of the
certainty of the appearance of the promised Messiah in the fulness of
time, not withstanding seeming delays. This is there called the vision,
by way of eminence, as elsewhere the promise; and while that time is
coming, as well as when it has come, the just shall live by faith. Thus
is the evangelical righteousness from faith to faith - from Old
Testament faith in a Christ to come to New Testament faith in a Christ
already come.

II\. The proof of this proposition, that both Jews and Gentiles stand in
need of a righteousness wherein to appear before God, and that neither
the one nor the other have nay of their own to plead. Justification must
be either by faith or works. It cannot be by works, which he proves at
large by describing the works both of Jews and Gentiles; and therefore
he concludes it must be by faith, [Rom
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020), [Rom
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028). The apostle, like a skilful
surgeon, before he applies the plaster, searches the wound - endeavours
first to convince of guilt and wrath, and then to show the way of
salvation. This makes the gospel the more welcome. We must first see the
righteousness of God condemning, and then the righteousness of God
justifying will appear worthy of all acceptation. In general ([Rom
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)), the wrath of God is revealed.
The light of nature and the light of the law reveal the wrath of God
from sin to sin. It is well for us that the gospel reveals the
justifying righteousness of God from faith to faith. The antithesis is
observable. Here is,

1\. The sinfulness of man described; he reduceth it to two heads,
ungodliness and unrighteousness; ungodliness against the laws of the
first table, unrighteousness against those of the second.

2\. The cause of that sinfulness, and that is, holding the truth in
unrighteousness. Some communes notitae, some ideas they had of the being
of God, and of the difference of good and evil; but they held them in
unrighteousness, that is, they knew and professed them in a consistency
with their wicked courses. They held the truth as a captive or prisoner,
that it should not influence them, as otherwise it would. An unrighteous
wicked heart is the dungeon in which many a good truth is detained and
buried. Holding fast the form of sound words in faith and love is the
root of all religion ([Ti2 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#013)), but
holding it fast in unrighteousness is the root of all sin.

3\. The displeasure of God against it: The wrath of God is revealed from
heaven; not only in the written word, which is given by inspiration of
God (the Gentiles had not that), but in the providences of God, his
judgments executed upon sinners, which do not spring out of the dust, or
fall out by chance, nor are they to be ascribed to second causes, but
they are a revelation from heaven. Or wrath from heaven is revealed; it
is not the wrath of a man like ourselves, but wrath from heaven,
therefore the more terrible and the more unavoidable.

[Romans 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 1:19</span></span>

In this last part of the chapter the apostle applies what he had said
particularly to the Gentile world, in which we may observe,

I. The means and helps they had to come to the knowledge of God. Though
they had not such a knowledge of his law as Jacob and Israel had ([Psa
147:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#020)), yet among them he left not
himself without witness ([Act 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)):
For that which may be known, etc., [Rom
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#019), [Rom
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020). Observe,

1\. What discoveries they had: That which may be known of God is
manifest, en autois - among them; that is, there were some even among
them that had the knowledge of God, were convinced of the existence of
one supreme Numen. The philosophy of Pythagoras, Plato, and the Stoics,
discovered a great deal of the knowledge of God, as appears by abundance
of testimonies. That which may be known, which implies that there is a
great deal which may not be known. The being of God may be apprehended,
but cannot be comprehended. We cannot by searching find him out, [Job
11:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#007). Finite understandings cannot
perfectly know an infinite being; but, blessed be God, there is that
which may be known, enough to lead us to our chief end, the glorifying
and enjoying of him; and these things revealed belong to us and to our
children, while secret things are not to be pried into, [Deu
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029).

2\. Whence they had these discoveries: God hath shown it to them. Those
common natural notions which they had of God were imprinted upon their
hearts by the God of nature himself, who is the Father of lights. This
sense of a Deity, and a regard to that Deity, are so connate with the
human nature that some think we are to distinguish men from brutes by
these rather than by reason.

3\. By what way and means these discoveries and notices which they had
were confirmed and improved, namely, by the work of creation ([Rom
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)); For the invisible things of
God, etc.

(1.) Observe what they knew: The invisible things of him, even his
eternal power and Godhead. Though God be not the object of sense, yet he
hath discovered and made known himself by those things that are
sensible. The power and Godhead of God are invisible things, and yet are
clearly seen in their products. He works in secret ([Job
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008), [Job
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#009); [Psa
139:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#015); [Ecc
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#005)), but manifests what he has
wrought, and therein makes known his power and Godhead, and others of
his attributes which natural light apprehends in the idea of a God. They
could not come by natural light to the knowledge of the three persons in
the Godhead (though some fancy they have found footsteps of this in
Plato's writings), but they did come to the knowledge of the Godhead, at
least so much knowledge as was sufficient to have kept them from
idolatry. This was that truth which they held in unrighteousness.

(2.) How they knew it: By the things that are made, which could not make
themselves, nor fall into such an exact order and harmony by any casual
hits; and therefore must have been produced by some first cause or
intelligent agent, which first cause could be no other than an eternal
powerful God. See [Psa 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001); [Isa
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026); [Act
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#024). The workman is known by his
work. The variety, multitude, order, beauty, harmony, different nature,
and excellent contrivance, of the things that are made, the direction of
them to certain ends, and the concurrence of all the parts to the good
and beauty of the whole, do abundantly prove a Creator and his eternal
power and Godhead. Thus did the light shine in the darkness. And this
from the creation of the world. Understand it either, \[1.\] As the
topic from which the knowledge of them is drawn. To evince this truth,
we have recourse to the great work of creation. And some think this
ktisis kosmou, this creature of the world (as it may be read), is to be
understood of man, the ktisis kat' exochēn - the most remarkable
creature of the lower world, called ktisis, [Mar
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015). The frame and structure of
human bodies, and especially the most excellent powers, faculties, and
capacities of human souls, do abundantly prove that there is a Creator,
and that he is God. Or, \[2.\] As the date of the discovery. It as old
as the creation of the world. In this sense apo ktiseōs is most
frequently used in scripture. These notices concerning God are not any
modern discoveries, hit upon of late, but ancient truths, which were
from the beginning. The way of the acknowledgement of God is a good old
way; it was from the beginning. Truth got the start of error.

II\. Their gross idolatry, notwithstanding these discoveries that God
made to them of himself; described here, [Rom
1:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021), [Rom
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025). We shall the less wonder at the
inefficacy of these natural discoveries to prevent the idolatry of the
Gentiles if we remember how prone even the Jews, who had scripture light
to guide them, were to idolatry; so miserably are the degenerate sons of
men plunged in the mire of sense. Observe,

1\. The inward cause of their idolatry, [Rom
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021), [Rom
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022). They are therefore without
excuse, in that they did know God, and from what they knew might easily
infer that it was their duty to worship him, and him only. Though some
have greater light and means of knowledge than others, yet all have
enough to leave them inexcusable. But the mischief of it was that, (1.)
They glorified him not as God. Their affections towards him, and their
awe and adoration of him, did not keep pace with their knowledge. To
glorify him as God is to glorify him only; for there can be but one
infinite: but they did not so glorify him, for they set up a multitude
of other deities. To glorify him as God is to worship him with spiritual
worship; but they made images of him. Not to glorify God as God is in
effect not to glorify him at all; to respect him as a creature is not to
glorify him, but to dishonour him. (2.) Neither were they thankful; not
thankful for the favours in general they received from God
(insensibleness of God's mercies is at the bottom of our sinful
departures from him); not thankful in particular for the discoveries God
was pleased to make of himself to them. Those that do not improve the
means of knowledge and grace are justly reckoned unthankful for them.
(3.) But they became vain in their imaginations, en tois dialogismois -
in their reasonings, in their practical inferences. They had a great
deal of knowledge of general truths ([Rom
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#019)), but no prudence to apply them
to particular cases. Or, in their notions of God, and the creation of
the world, and the origination of mankind, and the chief good; in these
things, when they quitted the plain truth, they soon disputed themselves
into a thousand vain and foolish fancies. The several opinions and
hypotheses of the various sects of philosophers concerning these things
were so many vain imaginations. When truth is forsaken, errors multiply
in infinitum - infinitely. (4.) And their foolish heart was darkened.
The foolishness and practical wickedness of the heart cloud and darken
the intellectual powers and faculties. Nothing tends more to the
blinding and perverting of the understanding than the corruption and
depravedness of the will and affections. (5.) Professing themselves to
be wise, they became fools, [Rom 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022).
This looks black upon the philosophers, the pretenders to wisdom and
professors of it. Those that had the most luxuriant fancy, in framing to
themselves the idea of a God, fell into the most gross and absurd
conceits: and it was the just punishment of their pride and
self-conceitedness. It has been observed that the most refined nations,
that made the greatest show of wisdom, were the arrantest fools in
religion. The barbarians adored the sun and moon, which of all others
was the most specious idolatry; while the learned Egyptians worshipped
an ox and an onion. The Grecians, who excelled them in wisdom, adored
diseases and human passions. The Romans, the wisest of all, worshipped
the furies. And at this day the poor Americans worship the thunder;
while the ingenious Chinese adore the devil. Thus the world by wisdom
knew not God, [Co1 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021). As a
profession of wisdom is an aggravation of folly, so a proud conceit of
wisdom is the cause of a great deal of folly. Hence we read of few
philosophers who were converted to Christianity; and Paul's preaching
was no where so laughed at and ridiculed as among the learned Athenians,
[Act 17:18-32](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018). Phaskontes einai -
conceiting themselves to be wise. The plain truth of the being of God
would not content them; they thought themselves above that, and so fell
into the greatest errors.

2\. The outward acts of their idolatry, [Rom
1:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023). (1.) Making images of God
([Rom 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023)), by which, as much as in
them lay, they changed the glory of the incorruptible God. Compare [Psa
106:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#020); [Jer
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011). They ascribed a deity to the
most contemptible creatures, and by them represented God. It was the
greatest honour God did to man that he made man in the image of God; but
it is the greatest dishonour man has done to God that he has made God in
the image of man. This was what God so strictly warned the Jews against,
[Deu 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#015), etc. This the apostle shows
the folly of in his sermon at Athens, [Act
17:29](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#029). See [Isa
40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018), etc.; [Isa
44:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#010), etc. This is called ([Rom
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)) changing the truth of God into a
lie. As it did dishonour his glory, so it did misrepresent his being.
Idols are called lies, for they belie God, as if he had a body, whereas
he is a Spirit, [Jer 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#014); [Hos
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#001). Teachers of lies, [Hab
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#018). (2.) Giving divine honour to the
creature: Worshipped and served the creature, para ton ktisanta -
besides the Creator. They did own a supreme Numen in their profession,
but they did in effect disown him by the worship they paid to the
creature; for God will be all or none. Or, above the Creator, paying
more devout respect to their inferior deities, stars, heroes, demons,
thinking the supreme God inaccessible, or above their worship. The sin
itself was their worshipping the creature at all; but this is mentioned
as an aggravation of the sin, that they worshipped the creature more
than the Creator. This was the general wickedness of the Gentile world,
and became twisted in with their laws and government; in compliance with
which even the wise men among them, who knew and owned a supreme God and
were convinced of the nonsense and absurdity of their polytheism and
idolatry, yet did as the rest of their neighbours did. Seneca, in his
book De Superstitione, as it is quoted by Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 6,
cap. 10 (for the book itself is lost), after he had largely shown the
great folly and impiety of the vulgar religion, in divers instances of
it, yet concludes, Quae omnia sapiens servabit tanquam legibus jussa,
non tanquam diis grata - All which a wise man will observe as
established by law, not imagining them grateful to the gods. And
afterwards, Omnem istam ignobilem deorum turbam, quam longo aevo longa
superstitio congessit, sic adorabimus, ut meminerimus cultum ejus magis
ad morem quam ad rem pertinere - All this ignoble rout of gods, which
ancient superstition has amassed together by long prescription, we will
so adore as to remember that the worship of them is rather a compliance
with custom than material in itself. Upon which Augustine observes,
Colebat quod reprehendebat, agebat quod arguebat, quod culpabat adorabat
- He worshipped that which he censured, he did that which he had proved
wrong, and he adored what he found fault with. I mention this thus
largely because methinks it doth fully explain that of the apostle here
([Rom 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)): Who hold the truth in
unrighteousness. It is observable that upon the mention of the dishonour
done to God by the idolatry of the Gentiles the apostle, in the midst of
his discourse, expresses himself in an awful adoration of God: Who is
blessed for ever. Amen. When we see or hear of any contempt cast upon
God or his name, we should thence take occasion to think and speak
highly and honourably of him. In this, as in other things, the worse
others are, the better we should be. Blessed for ever, notwithstanding
these dishonours done to his name: though there are those that do not
glorify him, yet he is glorified, and will be glorified to eternity.

III\. The judgments of God upon them for this idolatry; not many
temporal judgments (the idolatrous nations were the conquering ruling
nations of the world), but spiritual judgments, giving them up to the
most brutish and unnatural lusts. Paredōken autous - He gave them up; it
is thrice repeated here, [Rom 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024),
[Rom 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026), [Rom
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028). Spiritual judgments are of all
judgments the sorest, and to be most dreaded. Observe,

1\. By whom they were given up. God gave them up, in a way of righteous
judgment, as the just punishment of their idolatry - taking off the
bridle of restraining grace - leaving them to themselves - letting them
alone; for his grace is his own, he is debtor to no man, he may give or
withhold his grace at pleasure. Whether this giving up be a positive act
of God or only privative we leave to the schools to dispute: but this we
are sure of that it is no new thing for God to give men up to their own
hearts' lusts, to send them strong delusions, to let Satan loose upon
them, nay, to lay stumbling-blocks before them. And yet God is not the
author of sin, but herein infinitely just and holy; for, though the
greatest wickedness follow upon this giving up, the fault of that is to
be laid upon the sinner's wicked heart. If the patient be obstinate, and
will not submit to the methods prescribed, but wilfully takes and does
that which is prejudicial to him, the physician is not to be blamed if
he give him up as in a desperate condition; and all the fatal symptoms
that follow are not to be imputed to the physician, but to the disease
itself and to the folly and wilfulness of the patient.

2\. To what they were given up.

(1.) To uncleanness and vile affections, [Rom
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024), [Rom
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026), [Rom
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#027). Those that would not entertain
the more pure and refined notices of natural light, which tend to
preserve the honour of God, justly forfeited those more gross and
palpable sentiments which preserve the honour of human nature. Man being
in honour, and refusing to understand the God that made him, thus
becomes worse than the beasts that perish, [Psa
49:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#020). Thus one, by the divine
permission, becomes the punishment of another; but it is (as it said
here) through the lusts of their own hearts - there all the fault is to
be laid. Those who dishonoured God were given up to dishonour
themselves. A man cannot be delivered up to a greater slavery than to be
given up to his own lusts. Such are given over, like the Egyptians ([Isa
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#004)), into the hand of a cruel lord.
The particular instances of their uncleanness and vile affections are
their unnatural lusts, for which many of the heathen, even of those
among them who passed for wise men, as Solon and Zeno, were infamous,
against the plainest and most obvious dictates of natural light. The
crying iniquity of Sodom and Gomorrah, for which God rained hell from
heaven upon them, became not only commonly practised, but avowed, in the
pagan nations. Perhaps the apostle especially refers to the abominations
that were committed in the worship of their idol-gods, in which the
worst of uncleannesses were prescribed for the honour of their gods;
dunghill service for dunghill gods: the unclean spirits delight in such
ministrations. In the church of Rome, where the pagan idolatries are
revived, images worshipped, and saints only substituted in the room of
demons, we hear of these same abominations going barefaced, licensed by
the pope (Fox's Acts and Monuments, vol. 1, p. 808), and not only
commonly perpetrated, but justified and pleaded for by some of their
cardinals: the same spiritual plagues for the same spiritual
wickednesses. See what wickedness there is in the nature of man. How
abominable and filthy is man! Lord, what is man? says David; what a vile
creature is he when left to himself! How much are we beholden to the
restraining grace of God for the preserving any thing of the honour and
decency of the human nature! For, were it not for this, man, who was
made but little lower than the angels, would make himself a great deal
lower than the devils. This is said to be that recompence of their error
which was meet. The Judge of all the earth does right, and observes a
meetness between the sin and the punishment of it.

(2.) To a reprobate mind in these abominations, [Rom
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028).

\[1.\] They did not like to retain God in their knowledge. The blindness
of their understandings was caused by the wilful aversion of their wills
and affections. They did not retain God in their knowledge, because they
did not like it. They would neither know nor do any thing but just what
pleased themselves. It is just the temper of carnal hearts; the pleasing
of themselves is their highest end. There are many that have God in
their knowledge, they cannot help it, the light shines so fully in their
faces; but they do not retain him there. They say to the Almighty,
Depart ([Job 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#014)), and they
therefore do not retain God in their knowledge because it thwarts and
contradicts their lusts; they do not like it. In their knowledge - en
epignōsei. There is a difference between gnōsis and epignōsis, the
knowledge and the acknowledgement of God; the pagans knew God, but did
not, would not, acknowledge him.

\[2.\] Answerable to this wilfulness of theirs, in gainsaying the truth,
God gave them over to a wilfulness in the grossest sins, here called a
reprobate mind - eis adokimon noun, a mind void of all sense and
judgment to discern things that differ, so that they could not
distinguish their right hand from their left in spiritual things. See
whither a course of sin leads, and into what a gulf it plunges the
sinner at last; hither fleshly lusts have a direct tendency. Eyes full
of adultery cannot cease from sin, [Pe2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014). This reprobate mind was a blind
scared conscience, past feeling, [Eph
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019). When the judgment is once
reconciled to sin, the man is in the suburbs of hell. At first Pharaoh
hardened his heart, but afterwards God hardened Pharaoh's heart. Thus
wilful hardness is justly punished with judicial hardness. - To do those
things which are not convenient. This phrase may seem to bespeak a
diminutive evil, but here it is expressive of the grossest enormities;
things that are not agreeable to men, but contradict the very light and
law of nature. And here he subjoins a black list of those unbecoming
things which the Gentiles were guilty of, being delivered up to a
reprobate mind. No wickedness so heinous, so contrary to the light of
nature, to the law of nations, and to all the interests of mankind, but
a reprobate mind will comply with it. By the histories of those times,
especially the accounts we have of the then prevailing dispositions and
practices of the Romans when the ancient virtue of that commonwealth was
so degenerated, it appears that these sins here mentioned were then and
there reigning national sins. No fewer than twenty-three several sorts
of sins and sinners are here specified, [Rom
1:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029). Here the devil's seat is; his
name is legion, for they are many. It was time to have the gospel
preached among them, for the world had need of reformation.

First, Sins against the first table: Haters of God. Here is the devil in
his own colours, sin appearing sin. Could it be imagined that rational
creatures should hate the chief good, and depending creatures abhor the
fountain of their being? And yet so it is. Every sin has in it a hatred
of God; but some sinners are more open and avowed enemies to him than
others, [Zac 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008). Proud men and
boasters cope with God himself, and put those crowns upon their own
heads which must be cast before his throne.

Secondly, Sins against the second table. These are especially mentioned,
because in these things they had a clearer light. In general here is a
charge of unrighteousness. This is put first, for every sin is
unrighteousness; it is withholding that which is due, perverting that
which is right; it is especially put for second-table sins, doing as we
would not be done by. Against the fifth commandment: Disobedient to
parents, and without natural affection - astorgous, that is parents
unkind and cruel to their children. Thus, when duty fails on one side,
it commonly fails on the other. Disobedient children are justly punished
with unnatural parents; and, on the contrary, unnatural parents with
disobedient children. Against the sixth commandment: Wickedness (doing
mischief for mischief's sake), maliciousness, envy, murder, debate
(eridos - contention), malignity, despiteful, implacable, unmerciful;
all expressions of that hatred of our brother which is heart-murder.
Against the seventh commandment: Fornication; he mentions no more,
having spoken before of other uncleannesses. Against the eighth
commandment: Unrighteousness, covetousness. Against the ninth
commandment: Deceit, whisperers, back-biters, covenant-breakers, lying
and slandering. Here are two generals not before mentioned - inventors
of evil things, and without understanding; wise to do evil, and yet
having no knowledge to do good. The more deliberate and politic sinners
are in inventing evil things, the greater is their sin: so quick of
invention in sin, and yet without understanding (stark fools) in the
thoughts of God. Here is enough to humble us all, in the sense of our
original corruption; for every heart by nature has in it the seed and
spawn of all these sins. In the close he mentions the aggravations of
the sins, [Rom 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#032). 1. They knew the
judgment of God; that is, (1.) They knew the law. The judgment of God is
that which his justice requires, which, because he is just, he judgeth
meet to be done. (2.) They knew the penalty; so it is explained here:
They knew that those who commit such things were worthy of death,
eternal death; their own consciences could not but suggest this to them,
and yet they ventured upon it. It is a great aggravation of sin when it
is committed against knowledge ([Jam
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#017)), especially against the
knowledge of the judgment of God. It is daring presumption to run upon
the sword's point. It argues the heart much hardened, and very
resolutely set upon sin. 2. They not only do the same, but have pleasure
in those that do them. The violence of some present temptation may hurry
a man into the commission of such sins himself in which the vitiated
appetite may take a pleasure; but to be pleased with other people's sins
is to love sin for sin's sake: it is joining in a confederacy for the
devil's kingdom and interest. Suneudokousi: they do not only commit sin,
but they defend and justify it, and encourage others to do the like. Our
own sins are much aggravated by our concurrence with, and complacency
in, the sins of others.

Now lay all this together, and then say whether the Gentile world, lying
under so much guilt and corruption, could be justified before God by any
works of their own.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 2](rom002)

</div>
