<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1006)  [Next](sa1008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 7:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. The eclipsing of the glory of the ark, by
its privacy in Kirjath-jearim for many years ([Sa1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001), [Sa1
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#002)). II. The appearing of the glory
of Samuel in his public services for the good of Israel, to whom he was
raised up to be a judge, and he was the last that bore that character.
This chapter gives us all the account we have of him when he was in the
prime of his time; for what we had before was in his childhood (ch. 2
and 3); what we have of him after was in his old age ([Sa1
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#001)). We have him here active, 1. In
the reformation of Israel from their idolatry ([Sa1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003), [Sa1
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#004)). 2. In the reviving of religion
among them ([Sa1 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#005), [Sa1
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#006)). 3. In praying for them against
the invading Philistines ([Sa1 7:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#007)),
over whom God, in answer to his prayer, gave them a glorious victory
([Sa1 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#010), [Sa1
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#011)). 4. In erecting a thankful
memorial of that victory ([Sa1 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#012)).
5. In the improvement of that victory ([Sa1
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#013), [Sa1
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#014)). 6. In the administration of
justice ([Sa1 7:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#015)). And these were
the things for which God was preparing the designing him, in the early
vouchsafements of his grace to him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 7:1</span></span>

Here we must attend the ark to Kirjath-jearim, and then leave it there,
to hear not a word more of it except once ([Sa1
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#018)), till David fetched it thence,
about forty years after, [Ch1 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#006).

I. We are very willing to attend it thither, for the men of Beth-shemesh
have by their own folly made that a burden which might have been a
blessing; and gladly would we see it among those to whom it will be a
savour of life unto life, for in every place where it has been of late
it has been a savour of death unto death. Now,

1\. The men of Kirjath-jearim cheerfully bring it among them, [Sa1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001). They came, at the first word, and
fetched up the ark of the Lord. Their neighbours the Beth-shemites, were
not more glad to get rid of it than they were to receive it, knowing
very well that what slaughter the ark had made at Beth-shemesh was not
an act of arbitrary power, but of necessary justice, and those that
suffered by it must blame themselves, not the ark; we may depend upon
the word which God hath said ([Jer
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#006)), Provoke me not, and I will do
you no hurt. Note, The judgments of God on those who profane his
ordinances should not make us afraid of the ordinances, but of profaning
them and making an ill use of them.

2\. They carefully provided for its decent entertainment among them, as
a welcome guest, with true affection, and, as an honourable guest, with
respect and reverence.

(1.) They provided a proper place to receive it. They had no public
building to adorn with it, but they lodged it in the house of Abinadab,
which stood upon the highest ground, and, probably, was the best house
in their city; or perhaps the master of it was the most eminent man they
had for piety, and best affected to the ark. The men of Beth-shemesh
left it exposed upon a stone in the open field, and, though it was a
city of priests, none of them received it into his house; but the men of
Kirjath-jearim, though common Israelites, gave it house-room, and no
doubt the best-furnished room in the house to which it was brought.
Note, \[1.\] God will find out a resting-place for his ark; if some
thrust it from them, yet the hearts of others shall be inclined to
receive it. \[2.\] It is no new thing for God's ark to be thrust into a
private house. Christ and his apostles preached from house to house when
they could not have public places at command. \[3.\] Sometimes priests
are shamed and out-done in religion by common Israelites.

(2.) They provided a proper person to attend it: They sanctified Eleazar
his son to keep it; not the father, either because he was aged and
infirm, or because he had the affairs of his house and family to attend,
from which they would not take him off. But the son, who, it is
probable, was a very pious devout young man, and zealously affected
towards the best things. His business was to keep the ark, not only from
being seized by malicious Philistines, but from being touched or looked
into by too curious Israelites. He was to keep the room clean and decent
in which the ark was, that, though it was in an obscure place, it might
no look like a neglected thing, which no man looked after. It does not
appear that this Eleazar was of the tribe of Levi, much less of the
house of Aaron, nor was it needful that he should, for here was no altar
either for sacrifice or incense, only we may suppose that some devout
Israelites would come and pray before the ark, and those that did so he
was there ready to attend and assist. For this purpose they sanctified
him, that is, by his own consent, they obliged him to make this his
business, and to give a constant attendance to it; they set him apart
for it in the name of all their citizens. This was irregular, but was
excusable because of the present distress. When the ark has but recently
come out of captivity we cannot expect it to be on a sudden in its usual
solemnity, but must take things as they are, and make the best of them.

II\. Yet we are very loth to leave it here, wishing it well at Shiloh
again, but that is made desolate ([Jer
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#014)), or at least wishing it at Nob,
or Gibeon, or wherever the tabernacle and the altars are; but, it seems,
it must lie by the way for want of some public-spirited men to bring it
to its proper place. 1. The time of its continuance here was long, very
long, above forty years it lay in these fields of the wood, a remote,
obscure, private place, unfrequented and almost unregarded ([Sa1
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#002)): The time that the ark abode in
Kirjath-jearim was long, even till David fetched it thence. It was very
strange that all the time that Samuel governed the ark was never brought
to its place in the holy of holies, an evidence of the decay of holy
zeal among them. God suffered it to be so, to punish them for their
neglect of the ark when it was in its place and to show that the great
stress which the institution laid upon the ark was but typical of
Christ, and those good things to come which cannot be moved, [Heb
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#023); [Heb
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#027). It was a just reproach to the
priests that one not of their order was sanctified to keep the ark. 2.
Twenty years of this time had passed before the house of Israel was
sensible of the want of the ark. The Septuagint read it somewhat more
clearly than we do; and it was twenty years, and (that is, when) the
whole house of Israel looked up again after the Lord. So long the ark
remained in obscurity, and the Israelites were not sensible of the
inconvenience, nor ever made any enquiry after it, what has become of
it; though, while it was absent from the tabernacle, the token of God's
special presence was wanting, nor could they keep the day of atonement
as it should be kept. They were content with the altars without the ark;
so easily can formal professors rest satisfied in a round of external
performances, without any tokens of God's presence or acceptance. But at
length they bethought themselves, and began to lament after the lord,
stirred up to it, it is probable, by the preaching of Samuel, with which
an extraordinary working of the Spirit of God set in. A general
disposition to repentance and reformation now appears throughout all
Israel, and they begin to look unto him whom they had slighted, and to
mourn, [Zac 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010). Dr. Lightfoot
thinks this was a matter and time as remarkable as almost any we read of
in scripture; and that the great conversion, Acts 2 and 3, is the only
parallel to it. Note, (1.) Those that know how to value God's ordinances
cannot but reckon it a very lamentable thing to want them. (2.) True
repentance and conversion begin in lamenting after the Lord; we must be
sensible that by sin we have provoked him to withdraw and are undone if
we continue in a state of distance from him, and be restless till we
have recovered his favour and obtained his gracious returns. It was
better with the Israelites when they wanted the ark, and were lamenting
after it, than when they had the ark, and were prying into it, or
priding themselves in it. Better see people longing in the scarcity of
the means of grace than loathing in the abundance of them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 7:3</span></span>

We may well wonder where Samuel was and what he was doing all this
while, for we have not had him so much as named till now, since [Sa1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#001), not as if he were unconcerned,
but his labours among his people are not mentioned till there appears
the fruit of them. When he perceived that they began to lament after the
Lord he struck while the iron was hot, and two things he endeavoured to
do for them, as a faithful servant of God and a faithful friend to the
Israel of God: -

I. He endeavoured to separate between them and their idols, for there
reformation must begin. He spoke to all the house of Israel ([Sa1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003)), going, as it should seem, from
place to place, an itinerant preacher (for we find not that they were
gathered together till [Sa1 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#005)), and
wherever he came this was his exhortation, "If you do indeed return to
the Lord, as you seem inclined to do, by your lamentations for your
departure from him and his from you, then know, 1. That you must
renounce and abandon your idols, put away the strange gods, for your God
will admit no rival; put them away from you, each one from himself, nay,
and put them from among you, do what you can, in your places, to rid
them out of the country. Put away Baalim, the strange gods, and
Ashtaroth, the strange goddesses," for such also they had. Or Ashtaroth
is particularly named because it was the best-beloved idol, and that
which they were most wedded to. Note, True repentance strikes at the
darling sin, and will with a peculiar zeal and resolution put away that,
the sin which most easily besets us. 2. "That you must make a solemn
business of returning to God, and do it with a serious consideration and
a stedfast resolution, for both are included in preparing the heart,
directing, disposing, establishing, the heart unto the Lord. 3. That you
must be wholly for God, for him and no other, serve him only, else you
do not serve him at all so as to please him. 4. That this is the only
way and a sure way to prosperity and deliverance. Take this course, and
he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines; for it was
because you forsook him and served other gods that he delivered you into
their hands." This was the purport of Samuel's preaching, and it had a
wonderfully good effect ([Sa1 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#004)):
They put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, not only quitted the worship of
them, but destroyed their images, demolished their altars, and quite
abandoned them. What have we to do any more with idols? [Hos
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#008); [Isa
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#022).

II\. He endeavoured to engage them for ever to God and his service. Now
that he had them in a good mind he did all he could to keep them in it.

1\. He summons all Israel, at least by their elders, as their
representatives, to meet him at Mizpeh ([Sa1
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#005)), and there he promises to pray
for them. And it was worth while for them to come from the remotest part
of the country to join with Samuel in seeking God's favour. Note,
Ministers should pray for those to whom they preach, that God by his
grace would make the preaching effectual. And, when we come together in
religious assemblies, we must remember that it is as much our business
there to join in public prayers as it is to hear a sermon. He would pray
for them that, by the grace of God, they might be parted from their
idols, and that then, by the providence of God, they might be delivered
from the Philistines. Ministers would profit their people more if they
did but pray more for them.

2\. They obey his summons, and not only come to the meeting, but conform
to the intentions of it, and appear there very well disposed, [Sa1
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#006).

(1.) They drew water and poured it out before the Lord, signifying,
\[1.\] Their humiliation and contrition for sin, owning themselves as
water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered up again ([Sa2
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#014)), so mean, so miserable, before
God, [Psa 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#014). The Chaldee reads it,
They poured out their hearts in repentance before the Lord. They wept
rivers of tears, and sorrowed after a godly sort, for it was before the
Lord and with an eye to him. \[2.\] Their earnest prayers and
supplications to God for mercy. The soul is, in prayer, poured out
before God, [Psa 62:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#008). \[3.\] Their
universal reformation; they thus expressed their willingness to part
with all their sins, and to retain no more of the relish or savour of
them than the vessel does of the water that is poured out of it. They
were free and full in their confession, and fixed in their resolution to
cast away from them all their transgressions. Israel is now baptized
from their idols, so Dr. Lightfoot. \[4.\] Some think it signifies their
joy in the hope of God's mercy, which Samuel had assured them of. This
ceremony was used with that signification at the feast of tabernacles,
[Joh 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037), [Joh
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038), and see [Isa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003). Taking it in this sense, it must
be read, They drew water after they had fasted. In the close of their
humiliation they thus expressed their hope of pardon and reconciliation.

(2.) They fasted, abstained from food, afflicted their souls, so
expressing repentance and exciting devotion.

(3.) They made a public confession: We have sinned against the Lord, so
giving glory to God and taking shame to themselves. And, if we thus
confess our sins, we shall find our God faithful and just to forgive us
our sins.

3\. Samuel judged them at that time in Mizpeh, that is, he assured them,
in God's name, of the pardon of their sins, upon their repentance, and
that God was reconciled to them. It was a judgment of absolution. Or he
received informations against those that did not leave their idols, and
proceeded against them according to law. Those that would not judge
themselves he judged. Or now he settled courts of justice among them,
and appointed the terms and circuits which he observed afterwards, [Sa1
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#016). Now he set those wheels a-going;
and, whereas he began to act as a magistrate, to prevent their relapsing
into those sins which now they seemed to have renounced.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 7:7</span></span>

Here, I. The Philistines invade Israel ([Sa1
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#007)), taking umbrage from that general
meeting for repentance and prayer as if it had been a rendezvous for
war, and, if so, they thought it prudent to keep the war out of their
own country. They had no just cause for this suspicion; but those that
seek to do mischief to others will be forward to imagine that others
design mischief to them. Now see here, 1. How evil sometimes seems to
come out of good. The religious meeting of the Israelites at Mizpeh
brought trouble upon them from the Philistines, which perhaps tempted
them to wish they had staid at home and to blame Samuel for calling them
together. But we may be in God's way and yet meet with distress; nay,
when sinners begin to repent and reform, they must expect that Satan
will muster all his force against them, and set his instruments on work
to the utmost to oppose and discourage them. But, 2. How good is, at
length, brought out of that evil. Israel could never be threatened more
seasonably than at this time, when they were repenting and praying, nor
could they have been better prepared to receive the enemy; nor could the
Philistines have acted more impolitely for themselves than to make war
upon Israel at this time, when they were making their peace with God.
But God permitted them to do it, that he might have an opportunity
immediately of crowning his people's reformation with tokens of his
favour, and of confirming the words of his messenger, who had assured
them that if they repented God would deliver them out of the hand of the
Philistines. Thus he makes man's wrath to praise him, and serves the
purposes of his grace to his people even by the malicious designs of
their enemies against them, [Mic 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011),
[Mic 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012).

II\. Israel cleaves closely to Samuel, as their best friend, under God,
in this distress; though he was no military man, nor ever celebrated as
a mighty man of valour, yet, being afraid of the Philistines, for whom
they thought themselves an unequal match, they engaged Samuel's prayers
for them: Cease not to cry unto the Lord our God for us, [Sa1
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#008). They were here unarmed,
unprepared for war, come together to fast and pray, not to fight;
prayers and tears therefore being all the weapons many of them are now
furnished with, to these they have recourse. And, knowing Samuel to have
a great interest in heaven, they earnestly beg of him to improve it for
them. They had reason to expect it, because he had promised to pray for
them ([Sa1 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#005)), had promised them
deliverance from the Philistines ([Sa1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003)), and they had been observant of
him in all that which he had spoken to them from the Lord. Thus those
who sincerely submit to Christ, as their lawgiver and judge, need not
doubt of their interest in his intercession. They were very solicitous
that Samuel should not cease to pray for them: what military
preparations were to be made they would undertake them, but let him
continue instant in prayer, perhaps remembering that when Moses did but
let down his hand ever so little Amalek prevailed. O what a comfort is
it to all believers that our great intercessor above never ceases, is
never silent, for he always appears in the presence of God for us!

III\. Samuel intercedes with God for them, and does it by sacrifice,
[Sa1 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#009). He took a sucking lamb, and
offered it for a burnt-offering, a whole burnt-offering, to the Lord,
and, while the sacrifice was in burning, with the smoke of it his
prayers ascended up to heaven for Israel. Observe, 1. He made
intercession with a sacrifice. Christ intercedes in the virtue of his
satisfaction, and in all our prayers we must have an eye to his great
oblation, depending upon that for audience and acceptance. Samuel's
sacrifice without his prayer would have been an empty shadow, his prayer
without the sacrifice would not have been so prevalent, but both
together teach us what great things we may expect from God in answer to
those prayers which are made with faith in Christ's sacrifice. 2. It was
a burnt-offering, which was offered purely for the glory of God, so
intimating that the great plea he relied on in his prayer was taken from
the honour of God. "Lord, help thy people now for thy name's sake." When
we endeavour to give glory to God we may hope he will, in answer to our
prayers, work for his own glory. 3. It was but one sucking lamb that he
offered; for it is the integrity and intention of the heart that God
looks at, more than the bulk or number of the offerings. This one lamb
(typifying the Lamb of God) was more acceptable than thousands of rams
or bullocks would have been without faith and prayer. Samuel was no
priest, but he was a Levite and a prophet; the case was extraordinary,
and what he did was by special direction, and therefore was accepted of
God. And justly was this reproach put upon the priests because they had
corrupted themselves.

IV\. God gave a gracious answer to Samuel's prayer ([Sa1
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#009)): The Lord heard him. He was
himself a Samuel, asked of God, and many a Samuel, many a mercy in
answer to prayer, God gave him. Sons of prayer should be famous for
praying, as Samuel was among those that call upon his name, [Psa
99:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006). The answer was a real answer:
the Philistines were discomfited ([Sa1
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#010), [Sa1
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#011)), totally routed, and that in
such a manner as highly magnified the prayer of Samuel, the power of
God, and the valour of Israel. 1. The prayer of Samuel was honoured; for
at the very time when he was offering up his sacrifice, and his prayer
with it, the battle began, and turned immediately against the
Philistines. Thus while he was yet speaking God heard, and answered in
thunder, [Isa 65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024). God showed that
it was Samuel's prayer and sacrifice that he had respect to, and hereby
let Israel know that as in a former engagement with the Philistines he
had justly chastised their presumptuous confidence in the presence of
the ark, on the shoulders of two profane priests, so now he graciously
accepted their humble dependence upon the prayer of faith from the mouth
and heart of a pious prophet. 2. The power of God was greatly honoured;
for he took the work into his own hand, and discomfited them, not with
great hail-stones, which would kill them (as [Jos
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#011)), but with a great thunder,
which frightened them and put them into such terror and consternation
that they fainted away, and became a very easy prey to the sword of
Israel, before whom, being thus confounded, they were smitten. Josephus
adds that the earth quaked under them when first they made the onset and
in many places opened and swallowed them up, and that, besides the
terror of the thunder, their faces and hands were burnt with lightning,
which obliged them to shift for themselves by flight. And, being thus
driven to their heels by the immediate hand of God (whom they feared not
so much as they had feared his ark, [Sa1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#007)), then, 3. Honour was put upon the
hosts of Israel; they were made use of for the completing of the
victory, and had the pleasure of triumphing over their oppressors: They
pursued the Philistines, and smote them. How soon did they find the
benefit of their repentance, and reformation, and return to God! Now
that they have thus engaged him for them none of their enemies can stand
before them.

V. Samuel erected a thankful memorial of this victory, to the glory of
God and for the encouragement of Israel, [Sa1
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#012). He set up an Eben-ezer, the
stone of help. If ever the people's hard hearts should lose the
impressions of this providence, this stone would either revive the
remembrance of it, and make them thankful, or remain a standing witness
against them for their unthankfulness. 1. The place where this memorial
was set up was the same where, twenty years before, the Israelites were
smitten before the Philistines, for that was beside Eben-ezer, [Sa1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#001). The sin which procured that
defeat formerly being pardoned upon their repentance, the pardon was
sealed by this glorious victory in the very same place where they then
suffered loss; see [Hos 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010). 2.
Samuel himself took care to set up this monument. He had been
instrumental by prayer to obtain the mercy, and therefore he thought
himself in a special manner obliged to make this grateful
acknowledgement of it. 3. The reason he gives for the name is, Hitherto
the Lord hath helped us, in which he speaks thankfully of what was past,
giving the glory of the victory to God only, who had added this to all
his former favours; and yet he speaks somewhat doubtfully for the
future: "Hitherto things have done well, but what God may yet do with us
we know not, that we refer to him; but let us praise him for what he has
done." Note, The beginnings of mercy and deliverance are to be
acknowledged by us with thankfulness so far as they go, though they be
not completely finished, nay, though the issue seem uncertain. Having
obtained help from God, I continue hitherto, says blessed Paul, [Act
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#022).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 7:13</span></span>

We have here a short account of the further good services that Samuel
did to Israel. Having parted them from their idols, and brought them
home to their God, he had put them into a capacity of receiving further
benefits by his ministry. Having prevailed in that, he becomes, in other
instances, a great blessing to them; yet, writing it himself, he is
brief in the relation. We are not told here, but it appears ([Ch2
35:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#018)) that in the days of Samuel the
prophet the people of Israel kept the ordinance of the passover with
more than ordinary devotion, notwithstanding the distance of the ark and
the desolations of Shiloh. Many good offices, no doubt, he did for
Israel, but here we are only told how instrumental he was, 1. In
securing the public peace ([Sa1 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#013)):
"In his days the Philistines came no more into the coast of Israel, made
no inroads or incursions upon them; they perceived that God now fought
for Israel and that his hand was against the Philistines, and this kept
them in awe, and restrained the remainder of their wrath." Samuel was a
protector and deliverer to Israel, not by dint of sword, as Gideon, nor
by strength of arm, as Samson, but by the power of prayer to God and
carrying on a work of reformation among the people. Religion and piety
are the best securities of a nation. 2. In recovering the public rights,
[Sa1 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#014). By his influence Israel had
the courage to demand the cities which the Philistines had unjustly
taken from them and had long detained; and the Philistines, not daring
to contend with one that had so great an interest in heaven, tamely
yielded to the demand, and restored (some think) even Ekron and Gath,
two of the capital cities, though afterwards they retook them; others
think some small towns that lay between Ekron and Gath, which were
forced out of the Philistines' hands. This they got by their reformation
and religion, they got ground of their enemies and got forward in their
affairs. It is added, There was peace between Israel and the Amorites,
that is, the Canaanites, the remains of the natives. Not that Israel
made any league with them, but they were quiet, and not so mischievous
to Israel as they had sometimes been. Thus when a man's ways please the
Lord he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him and give him no
disturbance, [Pro 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#007). 3. In
administering public justice ([Sa1
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#015), [Sa1
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#016)): He judged Israel; as a prophet
he taught them their duty and reproved them for their sins, which is
called judging, [Eze 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#004); [Eze
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#002). Moses judged Israel when he made
them know the statutes of God and his laws ([Exo
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#016)); and thus Samuel judged them to
the last, even after Saul was made king; so he promised them then, when
Saul was inaugurated ([Sa1 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#023)), I
will not cease to teach you the good and the right way. As a magistrate,
he received appeals from the inferior courts and gave judgment upon
them, tried causes and determined them, tried prisoners and acquitted or
condemned them, according to the law. This he did all his days, till he
grew old and past service, and resigned to Saul; and afterwards he
exercised authority when application was made to him; nay, he judged
even Agag, and Saul himself. But when he was in his prime he rode the
circuit, for the convenience of the country, at least of that part of it
which lay most under his influence. He kept courts at Beth-el, Gilgal,
and Mizpeh, all in the tribe of Benjamin; but his constant residence was
at Ramah, his father's city, and there he judged Israel, thither they
resorted to him from all parts with their complaints, [Sa1
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#017). 4. In keeping up the public
exercises of religion; for there, where he lived, he built an altar to
the Lord, not in contempt of the altar that was at Nob, or Gibeon, or
wherever the tabernacle was; but divine justice having laid Sholoh
waste, and no other place being yet chosen for them to bring their
offerings to ([Deu 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#011)), he looked
upon the law which confined them to one place to be for the present
suspended, and therefore, being a prophet, and under divine direction,
he did as the patriarchs did, he built an altar where he lived, both for
the use of his own family and for the good of the country that resorted
to it. Great men should use their wealth, power, and interest, for the
keeping up of religion in the places where they live.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 8](sa1008)

</div>
