<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1000)  [Next](sa1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

The history of Samuel here begins as early as that of Samson did, even
before he was born, as afterwards the history of John the Baptist and
our blessed Saviour. Some of the scripture-worthies drop out of the
clouds, as it were, and their first appearance is in their full growth
and lustre. But others are accounted for from the birth, and from the
womb, and from the conception. What God says of the prophet Jeremiah is
true of all: "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee," [Jer
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005). But some great men were brought
into the world with more observation than others, and were more early
distinguished from common persons, as Samuel for one. God, in this
matter, acts as a free agent. The story of Samson introduces him as a
child of promise, Jdg. 13. But the story of Samuel introduces him as a
child of prayer. Samson's birth was foretold by an angel to his mother;
Samuel was asked of God by his mother. Both together intimate what
wonders are produced by the word and prayer. Samuel's mother was Hannah,
the principal person concerned in the story of this chapter. I. Here is
her affliction - she was childless, and this affliction aggravated by
her rival's insolence, but in some measure balanced by her husband's
kindness ([Sa1 1:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)). II. The prayer
and vow she made to God under this affliction, in which Eli the high
priest at first censured her, but afterwards encouraged her ([Sa1
1:9-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009)). III. The birth and nursing of
Samuel ([Sa1 1:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#019)) IV. The
presenting of him to the Lord ([Sa1
1:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#024)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 1:1</span></span>

We have here an account of the state of the family into which Samuel the
prophet was born. His father's name was Elkanah, a Levite, and of the
family of the Kohathites (the most honourable house of that tribe) as
appears, [Ch1 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#033), [Ch1
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#034). His ancestor Zuph was an
Ephrathite, that is, of Bethlehem-Judah, which was called Ephrathah,
Ruth, [Rut 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#002). There this family of
the Levites was first seated, but one branch of it, in process of time,
removed to Mount Ephraim, from which Elkanah descended. Micah's Levite
came from Bethlehem to Mount Ephraim, [Jdg
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#008). Perhaps notice is taken of their
being originally Ephrathites to show their alliance to David. This
Elkanah lived at Ramah, or Ramathaim, which signifies the double Ramah,
the higher and lower town, the same with Arimathea of which Joseph was,
here called Ramathaim-zophim. Zophim signifies watchmen; probably they
had one of the schools of the prophets there, for prophets are called
watchmen: the Chaldee paraphrase calls Elkanah a disciple of the
prophets. But it seems to me that it was in Samuel that prophecy
revived, before his time there being, for a great while, no open vision,
[Sa1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001). Nor is there any mention of
a prophet of the Lord from Moses to Samuel, except [Jdg
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#008). So that we have no reason to
think that there was any nursery or college of prophets here till Samuel
himself founded one, [Jdg 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#019), [Jdg
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#020). This is the account of Samuel's
parentage, and the place of his nativity. Let us now take notice of the
state of the family.

I. It was a devout family. All the families of Israel should be so, but
Levites' families in a particular manner. Ministers should be patterns
of family religion. Elkanah went up at the solemn feasts to the
tabernacle at Shiloh, to worship and to sacrifice to the Lord of hosts.
I think this is the first time in scripture that God is called the Lord
of hosts - Jehovah Sabaoth, a name by which he was afterwards very much
called and known. Probably Samuel the prophet was the first that used
this title of God, for the comfort of Israel, when in his time their
hosts were few and feeble and those of their enemies many and mighty;
then it would be a support to them to think that the God they served was
Lord of hosts, of all the hosts both of heaven and earth; of them he has
a sovereign command, and makes what use he pleases of them. Elkanah was
a country Levite, and, for aught that appears, had not any place or
office which required his attendance at the tabernacle, but he went up
as a common Israelite, with his own sacrifices, to encourage his
neighbours and set them a good example. When he sacrificed he
worshipped, joining prayers and thanksgivings with his sacrifices. In
this course of religion he was constant, for he went up yearly. And that
which made it the more commendable in him was, 1. That there was a
general decay and neglect of religion in the nations. Some among them
worshipped other gods, and the generality were remiss in the service of
the God of Israel, and yet Elkanah kept his integrity; whatever others
did, his resolution was that he and his house should serve the Lord. 2.
That Hophni and Phinehas, the sons of Eli, were the men that were now
chiefly employed in the service of the house of God; and they were men
that conducted themselves very ill in their place, as we shall find
afterwards; yet Elkanah went up to sacrifice. God had then tied his
people to one place and one altar, and forbidden them, under any
pretence whatsoever, to worship elsewhere, and therefore, in pure
obedience to that command, he attended at Shiloh. If the priests did not
do their duty, he would do his. Thanks be to God, we, under the gospel,
are not tied to any one place or family; but the pastors and teachers
whom the exalted Redeemer has given to his church are those only whose
ministration tends to the perfecting of the saints and the edifying of
the body of Christ, [Eph 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011), [Eph
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#012). None have dominion over our
faith; but our obligation is to those that are the helpers of our
holiness and joy, not to any that by their scandalous immoralities, like
Hophni and Phinehas, make the sacrifices of the Lord to be abhorred,
though still the validity and efficacy of the sacraments depend not on
the purity of him that administers them.

II\. Yet it was a divided family, and the divisions of it carried with
them both guilt and grief. Where there is piety, it is a pity but there
should be unity. The joint-devotions of a family should put an end to
divisions in it.

1\. The original cause of this division was Elkanah's marrying two
wives, which was a transgression of the original institution of
marriage, to which our Saviour reduces it. [Mat
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#005), [Mat
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#008), From the beginning it was not
so. It made mischief in Abraham's family, and Jacob's, and here in
Elkanah's. How much better does the law of God provide for our comfort
and ease in this world than we should, if we were left to ourselves! It
is probable that Elkanah married Hannah first, and, because he had not
children by her so soon as he hoped, he married Peninnah, who bore him
children indeed, but was in other things a vexation to him. Thus are men
often beaten with rods of their own making.

2\. That which followed upon this error was that the two wives could not
agree. They had different blessings: Peninnah, like Leah, was fruitful
and had many children, which should have made her easy and thankful,
though she was but a second wife, and was less beloved; Hannah, like
Rachel, was childless indeed, but she was very dear to her husband, and
he took all occasions to let both her and others know that she was so,
and many a worthy portion he gave her ([Sa1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#005)), and this should have made her
easy and thankful. But they were of different tempers: Peninnah could
not bear the blessing of fruitfulness, but she grew haughty and
insolent; Hannah could not bear the affliction of barrenness, but she
grew melancholy and discontented: and Elkanah had a difficult part to
act between them.

(1.) Elkanah kept up his attendance at God's altar notwithstanding this
unhappy difference in his family, and took his wives and children with
him, that, if they could not agree in other things, they might agree to
worship God together. If the devotions of a family prevail not to put an
end to its divisions, yet let not the divisions put a stop to the
devotions.

(2.) He did all he could to encourage Hannah, and to keep up her spirits
under her affliction, [Sa1 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#004), [Sa1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#005). At the feast he offered
peace-offerings, to supplicate for peace in his family; and when he and
his family were to eat their share of the sacrifice, in token of their
communion with God and his altar, though he carved to Peninnah and her
children competent portions, yet to Hannah he gave a worthy portion, the
choicest piece that came to the table, the piece (whatever it was) that
used to be given on such occasions to those that were most valued; this
he did in token of his love to her, and to give all possible assurances
of it. Observe, \[1.\] Elkanah loved his wife never the less for her
being barren. Christ loves his church, notwithstanding her infirmities,
her barrenness; and so ought men to love their wives, [Eph
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025). To abate our just love to any
relation for the sake of any infirmity which they cannot help, and which
is not their sin but their affliction, is to make God's providence
quarrel with his precept, and very unkindly to add affliction to the
afflicted. \[2.\] He studied to show his love so much the more because
she was afflicted, insulted, and low-spirited. It is wisdom and duty to
support the weakest, and to hold up those that are run down. \[3.\] He
showed his great love to her by the share he gave her of his
peace-offerings. Thus we should testify our affection to our friends and
relations, by abounding in prayer for them. The better we love them the
more room let us give them in our prayers.

(3.) Peninnah was extremely peevish and provoking. \[1.\] She upbraided
Hannah with her affliction, despised her because she was barren, and
gave her taunting language, as one whom Heaven did not favour. \[2.\]
She envied the interest she had in the love of Elkanah, and the more
kind he was to her the more was she exasperated against her, which was
all over base and barbarous. \[3.\] She did this most when they went up
to the house of the Lord, perhaps because then they were more together
than at other times, or because then Elkanah showed his affection most
to Hannah. But it was very sinful at such a time to show her malice,
when pure hands were to be lifted up at God's altar without wrath and
quarrelling. It was likewise very unkind at that time to vex Hannah, not
only because then they were in company, and others would take notice of
it, but then Hannah was to mind her devotions, and desired to be most
calm and composed, and free from disturbance. The great adversary to our
purity and peace is then most industrious to ruffle us when we should be
most composed. When the sons of God come to present themselves before
the Lord Satan will be sure to come among them, [Job
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006). \[4.\] She continued to do this
from year to year, not once or twice, but it was her constant practice;
neither deference to her husband nor compassion to Hannah could break
her of it. \[5.\] That which she designed was to make her fret, perhaps
in hopes to break her heart, that she might possess her husband's heart
solely, or because she took a pleasure in her uneasiness, nor could
Hannah gratify her more than by fretting. Note, It is an evidence of a
base disposition to delight in grieving those that are melancholy and of
a sorrowful spirit, and in putting those out of humour that are apt to
fret and be uneasy. We ought to bear one another's burdens, not add to
them.

(4.) Hannah (poor woman) could not hear the provocation: She wept, and
did not eat, [Sa1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#007). It made her
uneasy to herself and to all her relations. She did not eat of the
feast; her trouble took away her appetite, made her unfit for any
company, and a jar in the harmony of family-joy. It was of the feast
upon the sacrifice that she did not eat, for they were not to eat of the
holy things in their mourning, [Deu
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#014); [Lev
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#019). Yet it was her infirmity so far
to give way to the sorrow of the world as to unfit herself for holy joy
in God. Those that are of a fretful spirit, and are apt to lay
provocations too much to heart, are enemies to themselves, and strip
themselves very much of the comforts both of life and godliness. We find
that God took notice of this ill effect of discontents and disagreements
in the conjugal relation, that the parties aggrieved covered the altar
of the Lord with tears, insomuch that he regarded not the offering, [Mal
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#013).

(5.) Elkanah said what he could to her to comfort her. She did not
upbraid him with his unkindness in marrying another wife as Sarah did,
nor did she render to Peninnah railing for railing, but took the trouble
wholly to herself, which made her an object of much compassion. Elkanah
showed himself extremely grieved at her grief ([Sa1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#008)): Hannah, why weepest thou? \[1.\]
He is much disquieted to see her thus overwhelmed with sorrow. Those
that by marriage are made one flesh ought thus far to be of one spirit
too, to share in each other's troubles, so that one cannot be easy while
the other is uneasy. \[2.\] He gives her a loving reproof for it: Why
weepest thou? And why is thy heart grieved? As many as God loves he
rebukes, and so should we. He puts her upon enquiring into the cause of
her grief. Though she had just reason to be troubled, yet let her
consider whether she had reason to be troubled to such a degree,
especially so much as to be taken off by it from eating of the holy
things. Note, Our sorrow upon any account is sinful and inordinate when
it diverts us from our duty to God and embitters our comfort in him,
when it makes us unthankful for the mercies we enjoy and distrustful of
the goodness of God to us in further mercies, when it casts a damp upon
our joy in Christ, and hinders us from doing the duty and taking the
comfort of our particular relations. \[3.\] He intimates that nothing
should be wanting on his part to balance her grief: "Am not I better to
thee than ten sons? Thou knowest thou hast my entire affection, and let
that comfort thee." Note, We ought to take notice of our comforts, to
keep us from grieving excessively for our crosses; for our crosses we
deserve, but our comforts we have forfeited. If we would keep the
balance even, we must look at that which is for us, as well as at that
which is against us, else we are unjust to Providence and unkind to
ourselves. God hath set the one over-against the other ([Ecc
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#014)) and so should we.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 1:9</span></span>

Elkanah had gently reproved Hannah for her inordinate grief, and here we
find the good effect of the reproof.

I. It brought her to her meat. She ate and drank, [Sa1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009). She did not harden herself in
sorrow, nor grow sullen when she was reproved for it; but, when she
perceived her husband uneasy that she did not come and eat with them,
she cheered up her own spirits as well as she could, and came to table.
it is as great a piece of self-denial to control our passions as it is
to control our appetites.

II\. It brought her to her prayers. It put her upon considering, "Do I
well to be angry? Do I well to fret? What good does it do me? Instead of
binding the burden thus upon my shoulders, had I not better easy myself
of it, and cast it upon the Lord by prayer?" Elkanah had said, Am not I
better to thee than ten sons? which perhaps occasioned her to think
within herself, "Whether he be so or no, God is, and therefore to him
will I apply, and before him will I pour out my complaint, and try what
relief that will give me." If ever she will make a more solemn address
than ordinary to the throne of grace upon this errand, now is the time.
They are at Shiloh, at the door of the tabernacle, where God had
promised to meet his people, and which was the house of prayer. They had
recently offered their peace-offerings, to obtain the favour of God and
all good and in token of their communion with him; and, taking the
comfort of their being accepted of him, they had feasted upon the
sacrifice; and now it was proper to put up her prayer in virtue of that
sacrifice, for the peace-offerings, for by it not only atonement is made
for sin, but the audience and acceptance of our prayers and an answer of
peace to them are obtained for us: to that sacrifice, in all our
supplications, we must have an eye. Now concerning Hannah's prayer we
may observe,

1\. The warm and lively devotion there was in it, which appeared in
several instances, for our direction in prayer. (1.) She improved the
present grief and trouble of her spirit for the exciting and quickening
of her pious affections in prayer: Being in bitterness of soul, she
prayed, [Sa1 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#010). This good use we
should make of our afflictions, they should make us the more lively in
our addresses to God. Our blessed Saviour himself, being in an agony,
prayed more earnestly, [Luk 22:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#044).
(2.) She mingled tears with her prayers. It was not a dry prayer: she
wept sore. Like a true Israelite, she wept and made supplication ([Hos
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#004)), with an eye to the tender mercy
of our God, who knows the troubled soul. The prayer came from her heart,
as the tears from her eyes. (3.) She was very particular, and yet very
modest, in her petition. She begged a child, a man-child, that it might
be fit to serve in the tabernacle. God gives us leave, in prayer, not
only to ask good things in general, but to mention that special good
thing which we most need and desire. Yet she says not, as Rachel, Give
me children, [Gen 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001). She will be
very thankful for one. (4.) She made a solemn vow, or promise, that if
God would give her a son she would give him up to God, [Sa1
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#011). He would be by birth a Levite,
and so devoted to the service of God, but he should be by her vow a
Nazarite, and his very childhood should be sacred. It is probable she
had acquainted Elkanah with her purpose before, and had had his consent
and approbation. Note, Parents have a right to dedicate their children
to God, as living sacrifices and spiritual priests; and an obligation is
thereby laid upon them to serve God faithfully all the days of their
life. Note further, It is very proper, when we are in pursuit of any
mercy, to bind our own souls with a bond, that, if God give it us, we
will devote it to his honour and cheerfully use it in his service. Not
that hereby we can pretend to merit the gift, but thus we are qualified
for it and for the comfort of it. In hope of mercy, let us promise duty.
(5.) She spoke all this so softly that none could hear her. Her lips
moved, but her voice was not heard, [Sa1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#013). Hereby she testified her belief
of God's knowledge of the heart and its desires. Thoughts are words to
him, nor is he one of those gods that must be cried aloud to, [Kg1
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#027). It was likewise an instance of
her humility and holy shamefacedness in her approach to God. She was
none of those that made her voice to be heard on high, [Isa
58:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#004). It was a secret prayer, and
therefore, though made in a public place, yet was thus made secretly,
and not, as the Pharisees prayed, to be seen of men. It is true prayer
is not a thing we have reason to be ashamed of, but we must avoid all
appearances of ostentation. Let what passes between God and our souls be
kept to ourselves.

2\. The hard censure she fell under for it. Eli was now high priest, and
judge in Israel; he sat upon a seat in the temple, to oversee what was
done there, [Sa1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009). The tabernacle
is here called the temple, because it was now fixed, and served all the
purposes of a temple. There Eli sat to receive addresses and give
direction, and somewhere (it is probable in a private corner) he espied
Hannah at her prayers, and by her unusual manner fancied she was
drunken, and spoke to her accordingly ([Sa1
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#014)): How long wilt thou be drunken?
- the very imputation that Peter and the apostles fell under when the
Holy Ghost gave them utterance, [Act
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#013). Perhaps in this degenerate age
it was no strange thing to see drunken women at the door of the
tabernacle; for otherwise, one would think, the vile lust of Hophni and
Phinehas could not have found so easy a prey there, [Sa1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#022). Eli took Hannah for one of
these. It is one bad effect of the abounding of iniquity, and its
becoming fashionable, that it often gives occasion to suspect the
innocent. When a disease is epidemical every one is suspected to be
tainted with it. Now, (1.) This was Eli's fault; and a great fault it
was to pass so severe a censure without better observation or
information. If his own eyes had already become dim, he should have
employed those about him to enquire. Drunkards are commonly noisy and
turbulent, but this poor woman was silent and composed. His fault was
the worse that he was the priest of the Lord, who should have had
compassion on the ignorant, [Heb 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#002).
Note, It ill becomes us to be rash and hasty in our censures of others,
and to be forward to believe people guilty of bad things, while either
the matter of fact on which the censure is grounded is doubtful and
unproved or is capable of a good construction. Charity commands us to
hope the best concerning all, and forbids censoriousness. Paul had very
good information when he did but partly believe ([Co1
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#018)), hoping it was not so.
Especially we ought to be cautious how we censure the devotions of
others, lest we call that hypocrisy, enthusiasm, or superstition, which
is really the fruit of an honest zeal, and it is accepted of God. (2.)
It was Hannah's affliction; and a great affliction it was, added to all
the rest, vinegar to the wounds of her spirit. She had been reproved by
Elkanah because she would not eat and drink, and now to be reproached by
Eli as if she had eaten and drunk too much was very hard. Note, It is no
new thing for those that do well to be ill thought of, and we must not
think it strange if at any time it be our lot.

3\. Hannah's humble vindication of herself from this crime with which
she was charged. She bore it admirably well. She did not retort the
charge and upbraid him with the debauchery of his own sons, did not bid
him look at home and restrain them, did not tell him how ill it became
one in his place thus to abuse a poor sorrowful worshipper at the throne
of grace. When we are at any time unjustly censured we have need to set
a double watch before the door of our lips, that we do not recriminate,
and return censure for censure. Hannah thought it enough to vindicate
herself, and so must we, [Sa1 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#015),
[Sa1 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#016). (1.) In justice to herself,
she expressly denies the charge, speaks to him with all possible
respect, calls him, My lord, intimates how very desirous she was to
stand right in his opinion and how loth to lie under his censure. "No,
my lord, it is not as you suspect; I have drunk neither wine nor strong
drink, not any at all" (though it was proper enough to be given to one
of such a heavy heart, [Pro 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#006)),
"much less to any excess; therefore count not thy handmaid for a
daughter of Belial." Note, Drunkards are children of Belial
(women-drunkards, particularly), children of the wicked one, children of
disobedience, children that will not endure the yoke (else they would
not be drunk), more especially when they are actually drunk. Those that
cannot govern themselves will not bear that any one else should. Hannah
owns that the crime would have been very great if she had indeed been
guilty of it, and he might justly have shut her out of the courts of
God's house; but the very manner of her speaking in her own defence was
sufficient to demonstrate that she was not drunk. (2.) In justice to
him, she gives an account of her present behaviour, which had given
occasion to his suspicion: "I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit, dejected
and discomposed, and that is the reason I do not look as other people;
the eyes are red, not with wine, but with weeping. And at this time I
have not been talking to myself, as drunkards and fools do, but I have
been pouring out my soul before the Lord, who hears and understands the
language of the heart, and this out of the abundance of my complaint and
grief." She had been more than ordinarily fervent in prayer to God, and
this, she tells him, was the true reason of the transport and disorder
she seemed to be in. Note, When we are unjustly censured we should
endeavour, not only to clear ourselves, but to satisfy our brethren, by
giving them a just and true account of that which they misapprehended.

4\. The atonement Eli made for his rash unfriendly censure, by a kind
and fatherly benediction, [Sa1 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#017).
He did not (as many are apt to do in such a case) take it for an affront
to have his mistake rectified and to be convinced of his error, nor did
it put him out of humour. But, on the contrary, he now encouraged
Hannah's devotions as much as before he had discountenanced them; not
only intimated that he was satisfied of her innocency by those words, Go
in peace, but, being high priest, as one having authority he blessed her
in the name of the Lord, and, though he knew not what the particular
blessing was that she had been praying for, yet he puts his Amen to it,
so good an opinion had he now conceived of her prudence and piety: The
God of Israel grant thee thy petition, whatever it is, that thou hast
asked of him. Note, By our meek and humble carriage towards those that
reproach us because they do not know us, we may perhaps make them our
friends, and turn their censures of us into prayers for us.

5\. The great satisfaction of mind with which Hannah now went away, [Sa1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#018). She begged the continuance of
Eli's good opinion of her and his good prayers for her, and then she
went her way and did eat of what remained of the peace-offerings (none
of which was to be left until the morning), and her countenance was no
more sad, no more as it had been, giving marks of inward trouble and
discomposure; but she looked pleasant and cheerful, and all was well.
Why, what had happened? Whence came this sudden happy change? She had by
prayer committed her case to God and left it with him, and now she was
no more perplexed about it. She had prayed for herself, and Eli had
prayed for her; and she believed that God would either give her the
mercy she had prayed for or make up the want of it to her some other
way. Note, Prayer is heart's-ease to a gracious soul; the seed of Jacob
have often found it so, being confident that God will never say unto
them, Seek you me in vain, see [Phi
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006), [Phi
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007). Prayer will smooth the
countenance; it should do so.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 1:19</span></span>

Here is, I. The return of Elkanah and his family to their own
habitation, when the days appointed for the feast were over, [Sa1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#019). Observe how they improved their
time at the tabernacle. Every day they were there, even that which was
fixed for their journey home, they worshipped God; and they rose up
early to do it. It is good to begin the day with God. Let him that is
the first have the first. They had a journey before them, and a family
of children to take with them, and yet they would not stir till they had
worshipped God together. Prayer and provender do not hinder a journey.
They had spent several days now in religious worship, and yet they
attended once more. We should not be weary of well-doing.

II\. The birth and name of this desired son. At length the Lord
remembered Hannah, the very thing she desired ([Sa1
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#011)), and more she needed not desire,
that was enough, for then she conceived and bore a son. Though God seem
long to forget his people's burdens, troubles, cares, and prayers, yet
he will at length make it to appear that they are not out of his mind.
This son the mother called Samuel, [Sa1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#020). Some make the etymology of this
name to be much the same with that of Ishmael - heard of God, because
the mother's prayers were remarkably heard, and he was an answer to
them. Others, because of the reason she gives for the name, make it to
signify asked of God. It comes nearly to the same; she designed by it to
perpetuate the remembrance of God's favour to her in answering her
prayers. Thus she designed, upon every mention of his name, to take the
comfort to herself and to give God the glory of that gracious
condescension. Note, Mercies in answer to prayer are to be remembered
with peculiar expressions of thankfulness, as [Psa
116:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#001), [Psa
116:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#002). How many seasonable
deliverances and supplies may we call Samuels, asked of God; and
whatever is so we are in a special manner engaged to devote to him.
Hannah intended by this name to put her son in mind of the obligation he
was under to be the Lord's, in consideration of this, that he was asked
of God and was at the same time dedicated to him. A child of prayer is
in a special manner bound to be a good child. Lemuel's mother reminds
him that he was the son of her vows, [Pro
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#002).

III\. The close attendance Hannah gave to the nursing of him, not only
because he was dear to her, but because he was devoted to God, and for
him she nursed him herself, and did not hang him on another's breast. We
ought to take care of our children, not only with an eye to the law of
nature as they are ours, but with an eye to the covenant of grace as
they are given up to God. See [Eze
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020), [Eze
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#021). This sanctifies the nursing of
them, when it is done as unto the Lord. Elkanah went up every year to
worship at the tabernacle, and particularly to perform his vow, perhaps
some vow he had made distinct from Hannah's if God would give him a son
by her, [Sa1 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#021). But Hannah, though
she felt a warm regard for the courts of God's house, begged leave of
her husband to stay at home; for the women were not under any obligation
to go up to the three yearly feasts, as the men were. However Hannah had
been accustomed to go, but now desired to be excused, 1. Because she
would not be so long absent from her nursery. Can a woman forget her
sucking child? We may suppose she kept constantly at home, for, if she
had gone any where, she would have gone to Shiloh. Note, God will have
mercy and not sacrifice. Those that are detained from public ordinances
by the nursing and tending of little children may take comfort from this
instance, and believe that, if they do that with an eye to God, he will
graciously accept them therein, and though they tarry at home they shall
divide the spoil. 2. Because she would not go up to Shiloh till her son
was big enough, not only to be taken thither, but to be left there; for,
if once she took him thither, she thought she could never find in her
heart to bring him back again. Note, Those who are stedfastly resolved
to pay their vows may yet see good cause to defer the payment of them.
Every thing is beautiful in its season. No animal was accepted in
sacrifice till it had been for some time under the dam, [Lev
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#027). Fruit is best when it is ripe.
Elkanah agrees to what she proposes ([Sa1
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#023)): Do what seemeth thee good. So
far was he from delighting to cross her that he referred it entirely to
her. Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is, when yoke-fellows thus
draw even in the yoke, and accommodate themselves to one another, each
thinking well of what the other does, especially in works of piety and
charity. He adds a prayer: Only the Lord establish his word, that is,
"God preserve the child through the perils of his infancy, that the
solemn vow which God signified his acceptance of, by giving us the
child, may be performed in its season, and so the whole matter may be
accomplished." Note, Those that have in sincerity devoted their children
to God may with comfort pray for them, that God will establish the word
sealed to them at the same time that they were sealed for him.

IV\. The solemn entering of this child into the service of the
sanctuary. We may take it for granted that he was presented to the Lord
at forty days old, as all the first-born were ([Luk
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#022), [Luk
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#023)): but this is not mentioned,
because there was nothing in it singular; but now that he was weaned he
was presented, not to be redeemed. Some think it was as soon as he was
weaned from the breast, which, the Jews say, was not till he was three
years old; it is said she gave him suck till she had weaned him, [Sa1
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#023). Others think it was not till he
was weaned from childish things, at eight or ten years old. But I see no
inconvenience in admitting such an extraordinary child as this into the
tabernacle at three years old, to be educated among the children of the
priests. It is said ([Sa1 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#024)), The
child was young, but, being intelligent above his years, he was no
trouble. None can begin too soon to be religious. The child was a child,
so the Hebrew reads it, in his learning-age. For whom shall he teach
knowledge but those that are newly weaned from the milk and drawn from
the breasts? [Isa 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#009). Observe how
she presented her child, 1. With a sacrifice; no less than three
bullocks, with a meat-offering for each, [Sa1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#024). A bullock, perhaps, for each
year of the child's life. Or one for a burnt-offering, another for a
sin-offering, and the third of a peace-offering. So far was she from
thinking that, by presenting her son to God, she made God her debtor,
that she thought it requisite by these slain offerings to seek God's
acceptance of her living sacrifice. All our covenants with God for
ourselves and ours must be made by sacrifice, the great sacrifice. 2.
With a grateful acknowledgement of God's goodness in answer to prayer.
This she makes to Eli, because he had encouraged her to hope for an
answer of peace ([Sa1 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#026), [Sa1
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#027)): "For this child I prayed. Here
it was obtained by prayer, and here it is resigned to the prayer-hearing
God. You have forgotten me, my lord, but I who now appear so cheerful am
the woman, the very same, that three years ago stood by thee here
weeping and praying, and this was the child I prayed for." Answers of
prayer may thus be humbly triumphed in, to the glory of God. Here is a
living testimony for God. "I am his witness that he is gracious (see
[Psa 66:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#016)); for this mercy, this
comfort, I prayed, and the Lord has given me my petition." See [Psa
34:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002), [Psa
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#004), [Psa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006). Hannah does not remind Eli of it
by adverting to the suspicion he had formerly expressed; she does not
say, "I am the woman whom you passed that severe censure upon; what do
you think of me now?" Good men ought not to be upbraided with their
infirmities and oversights. They have themselves repented of them; let
them hear no more of them. 3. With a full surrender of all her interest
in this child unto the Lord ([Sa1
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#028)): I have lent him to the Lord as
long as he liveth. And she repeats it, because she will never revoke it:
He shall be (a deodand) lent or given to the Lord. Not that she designed
to call for him back, as we do what we lend, but she uses this word
Shaol, lent, because it is the same word that she had used before ([Sa1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#020), I asked him of the Lord), only
in another conjugation. And ([Sa1
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#027)) the Lord gave me the petition
which I asked (Shaalti, in Kal), therefore I have lent him (Hishilti,
the same word in Hiphil), and so it gives another etymology of his name
Samuel, not only asked of God, but lent to God. And observe, (1.)
Whatever we give to God, it is what we have first asked and received
from him. All our gifts to him were first his gifts to us. Of thy own,
Lord, have we given thee, [Ch1 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#014),
[Ch1 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#016). (2.) Whatever we give to
God may upon this account be said to be lent to him, that though we may
not recall it, as a thing lent, yet he will certainly repay it, with
interest, to our unspeakable advantage, particularly what is given to
his poor, [Pro 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017). When by baptism
we dedicate our children to God, let us remember that they were his
before by a sovereign right, and that they are ours still so much the
more to our comfort. Hannah resigns him to the Lord, not for a certain
term of years, as children are sent apprentices, but durante vita - as
long as he liveth, he shall be lent unto the Lord, a Nazarite for life.
Such must our covenant with God be, a marriage-covenant; as long as live
we must be his, and never forsake him.

Lastly, The child Samuel did his part beyond what could have been
expected from one of his years; for of him that seems to be spoken, He
worshipped the Lord there, that is he said his prayers. He was no doubt
extraordinarily forward (we have known children that have discovered
some sense of religion very young), and his mother, designing him for
the sanctuary, took particular care to train him up to that which was to
be his work in the sanctuary. Note, Little children should learn betimes
to worship God. Their parents should instruct them in his worship and
bring them to it, put them upon engaging in it as well as they can, and
God will graciously accept them and teach them to do better.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 2](sa1002)

</div>
