<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1013)  [Next](sa1015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 14:0</span></span>

We left the host of Israel in a very ill posture, in the close of the
foregoing chapter; we saw in them no wisdom, nor strength, nor goodness,
to give us ground to expect any other than that they should all be cut
off by the army of the Philistines; yet here we find that infinite power
which works without means, and that infinite goodness which gives
without merit, glorified in a happy turn to their affairs, that still
Samuel's words may be made good: "The Lord will not forsake his people,
for his great name's sake," ([Sa1
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#022)). In this chapter we have, I.
The host of the Philistines trampled upon, and triumphed over, by the
faith and courage of Jonathan, who unknown to his father ([Sa1
14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#001)), with his armour-bearer only,
made a brave attack upon them, encouraging himself in the Lord his God
([Sa1 14:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#004)). He challenged them
([Sa1 14:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#008)), and, upon their
acceptance of the challenge, charged them with such fury, or rather such
faith, that he put them to flight, and set them one against another
([Sa1 14:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#013)), which gave
opportunity to Saul and his forces, with other Israelites, to follow the
blow, and gain a victory ([Sa1
14:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#016)). II. The host of Israel
troubled and perplexed by the rashness and folly of Saul, who adjured
the people to eat no food till night, which 1. Brought Jonathan to a
praemunire ([Sa1 14:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#024)). 2. Was a
temptation to the people, when the time of their fast had expired, to
eat with the blood, ([Sa1 14:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#031)).
Jonathan's error, through ignorance, had like to have been his death,
but the people rescued him ([Sa1
14:36-46](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#036)). III. In the close we have a
general account of Saul's exploits ([Sa1
14:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#047), [Sa1
14:48](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#048)) and of his family ([Sa1
14:49-52](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#049)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 14:1</span></span>

We must here take notice,

I. Of the goodness of God in restraining the Philistines, who had a vast
army of valiant men in the field, from falling upon that little handful
of timorous trembling people that Saul had with him, whom they would
easily have swallowed up at once. It is an invisible power that sets
bounds to the malice of the church's enemies, and suffers them not to do
that which we should think there is nothing to hinder them from.

II\. Of the weakness of Saul, who seems here to have been quite at a
loss, and unable to help himself. 1. He pitched his tent under a tree,
and had but 600 men with him, [Sa1
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#002). Where were now the 3000 men he
had chosen, and put such a confidence in? [Sa1
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#002). Those whom he trusted too much
to failed him when he most needed them. He durst not stay in Gibeah, but
got into some obscure place, in the uttermost part of the city, under a
pomegranate-tree, under Rimmon (so the word is), Ha-Rimmon, that Rimmon
near Gibeah, in the caves of which those 600 Benjamites that escaped his
themselves, [Jdg 20:47](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#047). Some think
that there Saul took shelter, so mean and abject was his spirit, now
that he had fallen under God's displeasure, every hour expecting the
Philistines upon him, and thereby the accomplishment of Samuel's
threatening, [Sa1 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014). Those can
never think themselves safe that see themselves cast out of God's
protection. 2. Now he sent for a priest, and the ark, a priest from
Shiloh, and the ark from Kirjath-jearim, [Sa1
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#003), [Sa1
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#018). Saul had once offended by
offering sacrifice himself, [Sa1 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#009).
Now he resolves never to fall into that error again, and therefore sends
for a priest, and hopes to compromise the matter with God Almighty by a
particular reformation, as many do whose hearts are unhumbled and
unchanged. Samuel, the Lord's prophet, had forsaken him, but he thinks
he can make up that loss by commanding Ahiah, the Lord's priest, to
attend him, and he will not make him stay for him nor reprove him, as
Samuel had done, but will do just as he bids him, [Sa1
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#018), [Sa1
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#019). Many love to have such
ministers as will be what they would have them to be, and prophesy
smooth things to them; and their caressing them because they are
priests, they hope, will atone for their enmity to those ministers that
deal faithfully and plainly with them. He will also have the ark
brought, perhaps to upbraid Samuel, who in the days of his government,
for aught that appears, had not made any public use of it; or in hopes
that this would make up the deficiency of his forces; one would have
supposed that they would never bring the ark into the camp again, since,
the last time, it not only did not save them, but did itself fall into
the Philistines' hands. But it is common for those that have lost the
substance of religion to be most fond of the shadows of it, as here is a
deserted prince courting a deserted priest.

III\. Of the bravery and piety of Jonathan, the son of Saul, who was
much fitter than the father to wear the crown. "A sweet imp (says bishop
Hall) out of a crab-stock."

1\. He resolved to go incognito - unknown to any one, into the camp of
the Philistines; he did not acquaint his father with his design, for he
knew he would forbid him; nor the people, for he knew they would all
discourage him, and, because he resolved not to heed their objections,
he resolved not to hear them, nor ask their advice, [Sa1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#001), [Sa1
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#003). Nor had he so great an opinion
of the priest as to consult him, but, being conscious of a divine
impulse putting him upon it, he threw himself into the mouth of danger,
in hope of doing service to his country. The way of access to the
enemies' camp is described ([Sa1 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#004),
[Sa1 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#005)) as being peculiarly
difficult, and their natural entrenchments impregnable, yet this does
not discourage him; the strength and sharpness of the rocks do but
harden and whet his resolutions. Great and generous souls are animated
by opposition and take a pleasure in breaking through it.

2\. He encouraged his armour-bearer, a young man that attended him, to
go along with him in the daring enterprise, ([Sa1
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#006)): "Come, and let us put our lives
in our hands, and go over to the enemies' garrison, and try what we can
do to put them into confusion." See whence he draws his encouragements.
(1.) "They are uncircumcised, and have not the seal of the covenant in
their flesh, as we have. Fear not, we shall do well enough with them,
for they are not under the protection of God's covenant as we are,
cannot call him theirs as we can, by the sign of circumcision." If such
as are enemies to us are also strangers to God, we need not fear them.
(2.) "God is able to make us two victorious over their unnumbered
regiments. There is no restraint in the Lord, no limitation to the holy
One of Israel, but it is all one to him to save by many or by few." This
is a true easily granted in general, that it is all alike to Omnipotence
what the instruments are by which it works; and yet it is not so easy to
apply it to a particular case; when we are but few and feeble then to
believe that God can not only save us, but save by us, this is an
instance of faith, which, wherever it is, shall obtain a good report.
Let this strengthen the weak and encourage the timid: let it be pleaded
with God for the enforcing of our petitions and with ourselves for the
silencing of our fears: It is nothing with God to help, whether with
many or with those that have no power, [Ch2
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#011). (3.) "Who knows but he that can
use us for his glory will do it? It may be the Lord will work for us,
work with us, work a sign or miracle for us." So the Chaldee. We may
encourage ourselves with hope that God will appear for us, though we
have not ground on which to build an assurance. An active faith will
venture far in God's cause upon an it may be. Jonathan's armour-bearer,
or esquire, as if he had learned to carry, not his arms only, but his
heart, promised to stand by him and to follow him withersoever he went,
[Sa1 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#007). We have reason to think
that Jonathan felt a divine impulse and impression putting him upon this
bold adventure, in which he was encouraged by his servant's concurrence,
otherwise the danger was so great which he ran upon that he would have
tempted God rather than trusted him. And perhaps he had an actual regard
to that word of Joshua ([Jos 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#010)),
One man of you shall chase a thousand, borrowed from Moses, [Deu
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030).

3\. How bold soever his resolution was, he resolved to follow Providence
in the execution of it, which, he believed, would guide him with its eye
([Psa 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008)), and which therefore he
would carefully attend and take hints of direction from. See how he put
himself upon Providence, and resolved to be determined by it. "Come"
(says he to his confidant), "we will discover ourselves to the enemy, as
those that are not afraid to look them in the face ([Sa1
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#008)), and then, if they be so
cautious as to bid us stand, we will advance no further, taking it for
an intimation of Providence that God would have us act defensively, and
we will prepare as well as we can to give them a warm reception ([Sa1
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#009)); but if they be so presumptuous
as to challenge us, and the first sentinel we meet with bid us march on,
we will push forward, and make as brisk an onset, assuredly gathering
thence that it is the will of God we should act offensively, and then
not doubting but he will stand by us," [Sa1
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#010). And upon this issue he puts it,
firmly believing, as we all should, (1.) That God has the governing of
the hearts and tongues of all men, even of those that know him not, nor
have any regard to him, and serves his own purposes by them, though they
mean not so, neither do their hearts think so. Jonathan knew God could
discover his mind to him if he pleased, and would do it, since he
depended upon him, as surely by the mouth of a Philistine as by the
mouth of a priest. (2.) That God will, some way or other, direct the
steps of those that acknowledge him in all their ways, and seek unto him
for direction, with full purpose of heart to follow it. Sometimes we
find most comfort in that which is least our own doing, and into which
we have been led by the unexpected, but well observed, turns of
Providence.

4\. Providence gave him the sign he expected, and he answered the
signal. He and his armour-bearer did not surprise the Philistines when
they were asleep, but discovered themselves to them by day-light, [Sa1
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#011). The guards of the Philistines,
(1.) Disdained them, upbraided them with the cowardice of many of their
people, and looked upon them to be of the regiment of sneakers: Behold,
the Hebrews come forth out of their holes. If some of Christ's soldiers
play the coward, others that play the man may perhaps be upbraided with
it. (2.) They defied them ([Sa1
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#012)): Come, and we will show you a
thing, as if they came like children to gaze about them; but meaning, as
Goliath ([Sa1 17:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#044)), that they would
give them as meat to the fowls of the air. They bantered them, not
doubting but to make a prey of them. This greatly emboldened Jonathan.
With it he encouraged his servant; he had spoken with uncertainty ([Sa1
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#006)): It may be the Lord will work
for us; but now he speaks with assurance ([Sa1
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#012)): The Lord has delivered them,
not into our hands (he sought not his own glory), but into the hand of
Israel, for he aimed at nothing but the advantage of the public. His
faith being thus strengthened, no difficulty can stand before him; he
climbs up the rock upon all four ([Sa1
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#013)), though he has nothing to cover
him, nor any but his own servant to second him, nor any human
probability of any thing but death before him.

5\. The wonderful success of this daring enterprise. The Philistines,
instead of falling upon Jonathan, to slay him, or take him prisoner,
fell before him ([Sa1 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#013))
unaccountably, upon the first blows he gave. They fell, that is, (1.)
They were many of them slain by him and his armour-bearer, [Sa1
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#014). Twenty Philistines fell
presently. It was not so much the name of Jonathan that made them yield
so tamely (though some think that this had become terrible to them,
since he smote one of their garrisons, [Sa1
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#003)), but it was God's right hand and
his arm that got him this victory. (2.) The rest were put to flight, and
fell foul upon one another ([Sa1
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#015)): There was trembling in the
host. There was no visible cause for fear; they were so numerous, bold,
and advantageously posted; the Israelites had fled before them; not an
enemy made head against them, but one gentleman and his man; and yet
they shook like an aspen-leaf. The consternation was general: they all
trembled; even the spoilers, those that had been most bold and forward,
shared in the common fright, the joints of their loins were loosed, and
their knees smote one against another, and yet none of them could tell
why or wherefore. It is called a trembling of God (so the original
phrase is), signifying not only, as we render it, a very great
trembling, which they could not resist nor reason themselves clear of,
but that it was supernatural, and came immediately from the hand of God.
He that made the heart knows how to make it tremble. To complete the
confusion, even the earth quaked, and made them ready to fear that it
would sink under them. Those that will not fear the eternal God, he can
make afraid of a shadow. See [Pro
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#001); [Isa
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#014).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 14:16</span></span>

We have here the prosecution and improvement of the wonderful advantages
which Jonathan and his armour-bearer gained against the Philistines.

I. The Philistines were, by the power of God, set against one another.
They melted away like snow before the sun, and went on beating down one
another ([Sa1 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#016)), for ([Sa1
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#020)) every man's sword was against
his fellow. When they fled for fear, instead of turning back upon those
that chased them, they reckoned those only their enemies that stood in
their way, and treated them accordingly. The Philistines were very
secure, because all the swords and spears were in their hands. Israel
had none except what Saul and Jonathan had. But now God showed them the
folly of that confidence, by making their own swords and spears the
instruments of their own destruction, and more fatal in their own hands
than if they had been in the hands of Israel. See the like done, [Jdg
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#022); [Ch2
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#023).

II\. The Israelites were hereby animated against them.

1\. Notice was soon taken of it by the watchmen of Saul, those that
stood sentinel at Gibeah, [Sa1 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#016).
They were aware that the host of the enemy was in great confusion, and
that a great slaughter was made among them, and yet, upon search, they
found none of their own forces absent, but only Jonathan and his servant
([Sa1 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#017)), which no doubt greatly
animated them, and assured them that it could be no other than the
Lord's doing, when there was no more of man's doing than what those two
could do against a great host.

2\. Saul began to enquire of God, but soon desisted. His spirit had not
come down so far as to allow him to consult Samuel, though, it is
probable, he was near him; for we read ([Sa1
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#015)) that he had come to Gibeah of
Benjamin; but he called for the ark ([Sa1
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#018)), desiring to know whether it
would be safe for him to attack the Philistines, upon the disorder they
perceived them to be in. Many will consult God about their safety that
would never consult him about their duty. But, perceiving by his scouts
that the noise in the enemy's camp increased, he commanded the priest
that officiated to break off abruptly: "Withdraw thy hand ([Sa1
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#019)), consult no more, wait no
longer for an answer." He was very unwise indeed if (as some think) he
forbade him to lift up his hands in prayer; for when Joshua was actually
engaged with Amalek Moses continued still to lift up his hands. It is
rather a prohibition to his enquiring of the Lord, either, (1.) Because
now he thought he did not need an answer, the case was plain enough. And
yet the more evident it was that God did all the more reason he had to
enquire whether he would give him leave to do any thing. Or, (2.)
Because now he would not stay for it; he was in such haste to fight a
falling enemy that he would not stay to make and end of his devotions,
nor hear what answer God would give him. A little thing will divert a
vain and carnal mind from religious exercises. He that believeth will
not make haste, such haste as this, nor reckon any business so urgent as
not to allow time to take God along with him.

3\. He, and all the little force he had, made a vigorous attack upon the
enemy; and all the people were cried together (so the word is, [Sa1
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#020)), for want of the silver
trumpets wherewith God appointed them to sound an alarm in the day of
battle, [Num 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#009). They summoned them
together by shouting, and their number was not so great but that they
might soon be got together. And now they seem bold and brave when the
work is done to their hands. Our Lord Jesus had conquered our spiritual
enemies, routed and dispersed them, so that we are cowards indeed if we
will not stand to our arms when it is only to pursue the victory and to
divide the spoil.

4\. Every Hebrew, even those from whom one would least have expected it,
now turned his hand against the Philistines. (1.) Those that had
deserted and gone over to the enemy, and were among them, now fought
against them, [Sa1 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#021). Some think,
they were such as had been taken prisoners by them, and now they were
goads in their sides. It rather seems that they went in to them
voluntarily, but, now that they saw them falling, recovered the hearts
of Israelites, and did valiantly for their country. (2.) Those that had
fled their colours, and hid themselves in the mountains, returned to
their posts, and joined in with the pursuers ([Sa1
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#022)), hoping by their great zeal and
officiousness, now that the danger was over and the victory sure, to
atone for their former cowardice. It was not much to their praise to
appear now, but it would have been more their reproach if they had not
appeared. Those that are remiss and faint-hearted indeed that will not
act in the cause of God when they see it victorious, as well as
righteous. Thus all hands were at work against the Philistines, and
every Israelite slew as many as he could, without sword or spear; yet it
is said ([Sa1 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#023)), it was the Lord
that saved Israel that day. He did it by them, for without him they
could do nothing. Salvation is of the Lord.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 14:24</span></span>

We have here an account of the distress of the children of Israel, even
in the day of their triumphs. Such alloys are all present joys subject
to. And such obstructions does many a good cause meet with, even when it
seems most prosperous, through the mismanagement of instruments.

I. Saul forbade the people, under the penalty of a curse, to taste any
food that day, [Sa1 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#024). Here we
will suppose, 1. That as king he had power to put his soldiers under
this interdict, and to bind it on with a curse; and therefore they
submitted to it, and God so far owned it as to discover, by the lot,
that Jonathan was the delinquent that had meddled with the accursed
thing (though ignorantly), on which account God would not be at that
time enquired of by them. 2. That he did it with a good intention, lest
the people, who perhaps had been kept for some time at short allowance,
when they found plenty of victuals in the deserted camp of the
Philistines, should fall greedily upon that, and so lose time in pursing
the enemy, and some of them, it may be, glut themselves to such a degree
as not to be fit for any more service that day. To prevent this, he
forbade them to taste any food, and laid himself, it is likely, under
the same restraint. And yet his making this severe order was, (1.)
Impolitic and very unwise; for, if it gained time, it lost strength, for
the pursuit. (2.) It was imperious, and disobliging to the people, and
worse than muzzling the mouth of the ox when he treads out the corn. To
forbid them to feast would have been commendable, but to forbid them so
much as to taste, though ever so hungry, was barbarous. (3.) It was
impious to enforce the prohibition with a curse and an oath. Had he no
penalty less than an anathema wherewith to support his military
discipline? Death for such a crime would have been too much, but
especially death with a curse. Though superiors may chide and correct,
they may not curse their inferiors; our rule is, Bless, and curse not.
When David speaks of an enemy he had that loved cursing perhaps he meant
Saul, [Psa 109:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#017), [Psa
109:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#018).

II\. The people observed his order, but it had many inconveniences
attending it. 1. The soldiers were tantalized; for, in their pursuit of
the enemy, it happened that they went through a wood so full of wild
honey that it dropped from the trees upon the ground, the Philistines
having perhaps, in their flight, broken in upon the honeycombs, for
their own refreshment, and left them running. Canaan flowed with honey,
and here is an instance of it. They sucked honey out of the rock, the
flinty rock ([Deu 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013)); yet, for
fear of the curse, they did not so much as taste the honey, [Sa1
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#025), [Sa1
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#026). Those are worthy of the name of
Israelites that can deny themselves and their own appetites even when
they are most craving, and the delights of sense most tempting, for fear
of guilt and a curse, and the table becoming a snare. Let us never feed
ourselves, much less feast ourselves, without fear. 2. Jonathan fell
under the curse through ignorance. He heard not of the charge his father
had given; for, having bravely forced the lines, he was then following
the chase, and therefore might justly be looked upon as exempted from
the charge and intended in it. But it seems it was taken for granted,
and he himself did not object against it afterwards, that it extended to
him, though absent upon so good an occasion. He, not knowing any peril
in it, took up a piece of a honey-comb, upon the end of his staff, and
sucked it ([Sa1 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#027)), and was
sensibly refreshed by it: His eyes were enlightened, which began to grow
dim through hunger and faintness; it made his countenance look pleasant
and cheerful, for it was such as a stander-by might discern ([Sa1
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#029)): See how my eyes have been
enlightened. He thought no harm, nor feared any, till one of the people
acquainted him with the order, and then he found himself in a snare.
Many a good son has been thus entangled and distressed, in more ways
than one, by the rashness of an inconsiderate father. Jonathan, for his
part, lost the crown he was heir to by his father's folly, which, it may
be, this was an ill omen of. 3. The soldiers were faint, and grew
feeble, in the pursuit of the Philistines. Jonathan foresaw this would
be the effect of it; their spirits would flag, and their strength would
fail, for want of sustenance. Such is the nature of our bodies that they
soon grow unfit for service if they be not supplied with fresh recruits.
Daily work cannot be done without daily bread, which our Father in
heaven graciously gives us. It is bread that strengthens man's heart;
therefore Jonathan reasoned very well, If the people had eaten freely,
there would have been a much greater slaughter ([Sa1
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#030)); but, as it was, they were very
faint, too much fatigued (so the Chaldee), and began to think more of
their meat than of their work. 4. The worst effect of all was that at
evening, when the restraint was taken off and they returned to their
food again, they were so greedy and eager upon it that they ate the
flesh with the blood, expressly contrary to the law of God, [Sa1
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#032). Two hungry meals, we say, make
the third a glutton; it was so here. They would not stay to have their
meat either duly killed (for they slew the cattle upon the ground, and
did not hang them up, as they used to do, that the blood might all run
out of them) or duly dressed, but fell greedily upon it before it was
half boiled or half roasted, [Sa1
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#032). Saul, being informed of it,
reproved them for the sin ([Sa1
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#033)): You have transgressed; but did
not, as he should have done, reflect upon himself as having been
accessory to it, and having made the Lord's people to transgress. To put
a stop to this irregularity, Saul ordered them to set up a great stone
before him, and let all that had cattle to kill, for their present use,
bring them thither, and kill them under his eye upon that stone ([Sa1
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#033)), and the people did so ([Sa1
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#034)), so easily were they restrained
and reformed when their prince took care to do his part. If magistrates
would but use their power as they might, people would be made better
than they are with more ease than is imagined.

III\. On this occasion Saul built an altar ([Sa1
14:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#035)), that he might offer sacrifice,
either by way of acknowledgment of the victory they had obtained or by
the way of atonement for the sin they had been guilty of. The same was
the first altar that he built, and perhaps the rolling of the great
stone to kill the beasts on reminded him of converting it into an altar,
else he would not have thought of it. Saul was turning aside from God,
and yet now he began to build altars, being most zealous (as many are)
for the form of godliness when he was denying the power of it. See [Hos
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#014), Israel has forgotten his Maker,
and buildeth temples. Some read it, He began to build that altar; he
laid the first stone, but was so hasty to pursue his victory that he
could not stay to finish it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 14:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">sa1 14:36</span></span>

Here is, I. Saul's boasting against the Philistines. He proposed, as
soon as his soldiers had got their suppers, to pursue them all night,
and not leave a man of them, [Sa1
14:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#036). Here he showed much zeal, but
little discretion; for his army, thus fatigued, could as ill spare a
night's sleep as a meal's meat. But it is common for rash and foolish
men to consider nobody but themselves, and, so that they might but have
their humour, not to care what hardships they put upon those that are
under them. However, the people were so obsequious to their king that
they would by no means oppose the motion, but resolved to make the best
of it, and, if he will go on, they will follow him: Do whatsoever
seemeth good to thee. Only the priest thought it convenient to go on
with the devotions that were broken off abruptly ([Sa1
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#019)), and to consult the oracle: Let
us draw near hither unto God. Princes and great men have need of such
about them as will thus be their remembrancers, wherever they go, to
take God along with them. And, when the priest proposed it, Saul could
not for shame reject the proposal, but asked counsel of God ([Sa1
14:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#037)): "Shall I go down after the
Philistines? And shall I speed?"

II\. His falling foul on his son Jonathan: and the rest of this
paragraph is wholly concerning him: for, while he is prosecuted, the
Philistines make their escape. We know not what mischief may ensue upon
on rash resolve.

1\. God, by giving an intimation of his displeasure, put Saul upon
searching for an accursed thing. When, by the priest, he consulted the
oracle, God answered him not, [Sa1
14:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#037). Note, When God denies our
prayers it concerns us to enquire what the sin is that has provoked him
to do so. Let us see where the sin is, [Sa1
14:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#038). For God's ear is not heavy that
it cannot hear, but it is sin that separates between us and him. If God
turns away our prayer, we have reason to suspect it is for some iniquity
regarding our hearts, which we are concerned to find out, that we may
put it away, may mortify it, and put it to death. Saul swears by his
Maker that whoever was the Achan that troubled the camp, by eating the
forbidden fruit, should certainly die, though it were Jonathan himself,
that is, though ever so dear to himself and the people, little thinking
that Jonathan was the man ([Sa1
14:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#039)): He shall surely die, the curse
shall be executed upon him. But none of the people answered him, that
is, none of those who knew Jonathan had broken the order would inform
against him.

2\. Jonathan was discovered by lot to be the offender. Saul would have
lots cast between himself and Jonathan on the one side, and the people
on the other, perhaps because he was as confident of Jonathan's
innocency in this matter as of his own, [Sa1
14:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#040). The people, seeing him in a
heat, durst not gainsay any thing he proposed, but acquiesced: Do as
seemeth good unto thee. Before he cast lots, he prayed that God would
give a perfect lot ([Sa1 14:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#041)), that
is, make a full discovery of this matter, or, as it is in the margin,
that he would show the innocent. This was with an air of impartial
justice. Judges should desire that truth may come out, whoever may
suffer by it. Lots should be cast with prayer, because they are a solemn
appeal to Providence, and by them we beg of God to direct and determine
us ([Act 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#024)), for which reason some
have condemned games that depend purely upon lot or chance as making too
bold with a sacred thing. Jonathan at length was taken ([Sa1
14:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#042)), Providence designing hereby to
countenance and support a lawful authority, and to put an honour upon
the administration of public justice in general, reserving another way
to bring off one that had done nothing worthy of death.

3\. Jonathan ingenuously confesses the fact, and Saul, with an angry
curse, passes sentence upon him. Jonathan denies not the truth, nor goes
about to conceal it, only he thinks it hard that he must die for it,
[Sa1 14:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#043). He might very fairly have
pleaded his invincible ignorance of the law, or have insisted upon his
merit, but he submitted to the necessity with a great and generous mind:
"God's and my father's will be done:" thus he showed as much valour in
receiving the messengers of death himself as in sending them among the
Philistines. It is as brave to yield in some cases as it is in other
cases to fight. Saul is not mollified by his filial submission nor the
hardness of his case; but as one that affected to be thought firm to his
word, and much more to his oath; even when it bound him hardest, with
another imprecation he gives judgment upon Jonathan ([Sa1
14:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#044)): "God do so and more also to me
if I do not execute the law upon thee, for thou shalt surely die,
Jonathan." (1.) He passed this sentence too hastily, without consulting
the oracle. Jonathan had a very good plea in arrest of the judgment.
What he had done was not malum in se - bad in itself; and, as for the
prohibition of it, he was ignorant of that, so that he could not be
charged with rebellion or disobedience. (2.) He did it in fury. Had
Jonathan been worthy to die, yet it would have become a judge, much more
a father, to pass sentence with tenderness and compassion, and not with
such an air of triumph, like a man perfectly divested of all humanity
and natural affection. Justice is debased when it is administered with
wrath and bitterness. (3.) He backed it with a curse upon himself if he
did not see the sentence executed; and this curse did return upon his
own head. Jonathan escaped, but God did so to Saul, and more also; for
he was rejected of God and made anathema. Let none upon any occasion
dare to use such imprecations as these, lest God say Amen to them, and
make their own tongues to fall upon them, [Psa
64:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#008). This stone will return upon him
that rolleth it. Yet we have reason to think that Saul's bowels yearned
toward Jonathan, so that he really punished himself, and very justly,
when he seemed so severe upon Jonathan. God made him feel the smart of
his own rash edict, which might make him fear being again guilty of the
like. By all these vexatious accidents God did likewise correct him for
his presumption in offering sacrifice without Samuel. An expedition so
ill begun could not end without some rebukes.

4\. The people rescued Jonathan out of his father's hands, v. 45.
Hitherto they had expressed themselves very observant of Saul. What
seemed good to him they acquiesced in, v. 36, 40. But, when Jonathan is
in danger, Saul's word is no longer a law to them, but with the utmost
zeal they oppose the execution of his sentence: "Shall Jonathan die -
that blessing, that darling, of his country? Shall that life be
sacrificed to a punctilio of law and honour which was so bravely exposed
for the public service, and to which we owe our lives and triumphs? No,
we will never stand by and see him thus treated whom God delights to
honour." It is good to see Israelites zealous for the protection of
those whom God has made instruments of public good. Saul had sworn that
Jonathan should die, but they oppose their oath to his, and swear he
shall not die: "As the Lord liveth there shall not only not his head,
but not a hair of his head fall to the ground;" they did not rescue him
by violence, but by reason and resolution; and Josephus says they made
their prayer to God that he might be loosed from the curse. They pleaded
for him that he has wrought with God this day; that is, "he has owned
God's cause, and God has owned his endeavours, and therefore his life is
too precious to be thrown away upon a nicety." We may suppose Saul had
not so perfectly forgotten the relation of a father but that he was
willing enough to have Jonathan rescued, and well pleased to have that
done which yet he would not do himself: and he that knows the heart of a
father knows not how to blame him.

5\. The design against the Philistines is quashed by this incident (v.
46): Saul went up from following them, and so an opportunity was lost of
completing the victory. When Israel's shields are clashing with one
another the public safety and service suffer by it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 14:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">sa1 14:47</span></span>

Here is a general account of Saul's court and camp. 1. Of his court and
family, the names of his sons and daughters ([Sa1
14:49](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#049)), and of his wife and his
cousin-german that was general of his army, [Sa1
14:50](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#050). There is mention of another
wife of Saul's ([Sa2 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#008)), Rizpah, a
secondary wife, and of the children he had by her. 2. Of his camp and
military actions. (1.) How he levied his army: When he saw any strong
valiant man, that was remarkably fit for service, he took him unto him
([Sa1 14:52](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#052)), as Samuel had told them
the manner of the king would be ([Sa1
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#011)); and, if he must have a standing
army, it was his prudence to fill it up with the ablest men he could
make choice of. (2.) How he employed his army. He guarded his country
against the insults of its enemies on every side, and prevented their
incursions, [Sa1 14:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#047), [Sa1
14:48](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#048). It is supposed that he acted
only defensively against those that used to invade the borders of
Israel; and withersoever he turned himself, as there was occasion, he
vexed them, by checking and disappointing them. But the enemies he
struggled most with were the Philistines, with whom he had sore war all
his days, [Sa1 14:52](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#052). He had little
reason to be proud of his royal dignity, nor had any of his neighbours
cause to envy him, for he had little enjoyment of himself after he took
the kingdom. He could not vex his enemies without some vexation to
himself, such thorns are crowns quilted with.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 15](sa1015)

</div>
