<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1027)  [Next](sa1029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 28:0</span></span>

Preparations are herein making for that war which will put an end to the
life and reign of Saul, and so make way for David to the throne. In this
war, I. The Philistines are the aggressors and Achish their king makes
David his confidant ([Sa1 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001), [Sa1
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#002)). II. The Israelites prepare to
receive them, and Saul their king makes the devil his privy-counsellor,
and thereby fills the measure of his iniquity. Observe, 1. The
despairing condition which Saul was in ([Sa1
28:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#003)). 2. The application he made to
a witch, to bring him up Samuel ([Sa1
28:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007)). 3. His discourse with the
apparition ([Sa1 28:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#015)). The damp
it struck upon him ([Sa1 28:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#020)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 28:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The design of the Philistines against Israel. They resolved
to fight them, [Sa1 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001). If the
Israelites had not forsaken God, there would have been no Philistines
remaining to molest them; if Saul had not forsaken him, they would by
this time have been put out of all danger by them. The Philistines took
an opportunity to make this attempt when they had David among them, whom
they feared more than Saul and all his forces.

II\. The expectation Achish had of assistance from David in this war,
and the encouragement David gave him to expect it: "Thou shalt go with
me to battle," says Achish. "If I protect thee, I may demand service
from thee;" and he will think himself happy if he may have such a man as
David on his side, who prospered whithersoever he went. David gave him
an ambiguous answer: "We will see what will be done; it will be time
enough to talk of that hereafter; but surely thou shalt know what thy
servant can do" ([Sa1 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#002)), that is,
"I will consider in what post I may be best able to serve thee, if thou
wilt but give me leave to choose it." Thus he keeps himself free from a
promise to serve him and yet keeps up his expectation of it; for Achish
took it in no other sense than as an engagement to assist him, and
promised him, thereupon, that he would make him captain of the guards,
protector, or prime-minister of state.

III\. The drawing of the armies, on both sides, into the field ([Sa1
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#004)): The Philistines pitched in
Shunem, which was in the tribe of Issachar, a great way north from their
country. The land of Israel, it seems, was ill-guarded, when the
Philistines could march their army into the very heart of the country.
Saul, while he pursued David, left his people naked and exposed. On some
of the adjacent mountains of Gilboa Saul mustered his forces, and
prepared to engage the Philistines, which he had little heart to do now
that the Spirit of the Lord had departed from him.

IV\. The terror Saul was in, and the loss he was at, upon this occasion:
He saw the host of the Philistines, and by his own view of them, and the
intelligence his spies brought him, he perceived they were more
numerous, better armed, and in better heart, than his own were, which
made him afraid, so that his heart greatly trembled, [Sa1
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#005). Had he kept close to God, he
needed not have been afraid at the sight of an army of Philistines; but
now that he had provoked God to forsake him his interest failed, his
armies dwindled and looked mean, and, which was worse, his spirits
failed him, his heart sunk within him, a guilty conscience made him
tremble at the shaking of a leaf. Now he remembered the guilty blood of
the Amalekites which he had spared, and the innocent blood of the
priests which he had spilt. His sins were set in order before his eyes,
which put him into confusion, embarrassed all his counsels, robbed him
of all his courage, and produced in him a certain fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation. Note, Troubles are terrors to the
children of disobedience. In this distress Saul enquired of the Lord,
[Sa1 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#006). Need drives those to God
who in the day of their prosperity slighted his oracles and altars.
Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, [Isa
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#016). Did ever any seek the Lord and
not find him? Yes, Saul did; the Lord answered him not, took no notice
either of his petitions or of his enquiries; gave him no directions what
to do, nor any encouragement to hope that he would be with him. Should
he be enquired of at all by such a one as Saul? [Eze
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#003). No, he could not expect an
answer of peace, for, 1. He enquired in such a manner that it was as if
he had not enquired at all. Therefore it is said ([Ch1
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#014)), He enquired not of the Lord;
for he did it faintly and coldly, and with a secret design, if God did
not answer him, to consult the devil. He did not enquire in faith, but
with a double unstable mind. 2. He enquired of the Lord when it was too
late, when the days of his probation were over and he was finally
rejected. Seek the Lord while he may be found, for there is a time when
he will not be found. 3. He had forfeited the benefit of all the methods
of enquiry. Could he that hated and persecuted Samuel and David, who
were both prophets, expect to be answered by prophets? Could he that had
slain the high priest, expect to be answered by Urim? Or could he that
had sinned away the Spirit of grace, expect to be answered by dreams?
No. Be not deceived, God is not mocked.

V. The mention of some things that had happened a good while ago, to
introduce the following story, [Sa1
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#003). 1. The death of Samuel. Samuel
was dead, which made the Philistines the more bold and Saul the more
afraid; for, had Samuel been alive, Saul probably thought that his
presence and countenance, his good advice and good prayers, would have
availed him in his distress. 2. Saul's edict against witchcraft. He had
put the laws in execution against those that had familiar spirits, who
must not be suffered to live, [Exo
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#018). Some think that he did this in
the beginning of his reign, while he was under Samuel's influence;
others think that it was lately done, for it is spoken of here ([Sa1
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#009)) as a late edict. Perhaps when
Saul was himself troubled with an evil spirit he suspected that he was
bewitched, and, for that reason, cut off all that had familiar spirits.
Many seem zealous against sin, when they themselves are any way hurt by
it (they will inform against swearers if they swear at them, or against
drunkards if in their drink they abuse them), who otherwise have no
concern for the glory of God, nor any dislike of sin as sin. However it
was commendable in Saul thus to use his power for the terror and
restraint of these evil-doers. Note, Many seem enemies to sin in others,
while they indulge it in themselves. Saul will drive the devil out of
his kingdom, and yet harbour him in his heart, by envy and malice.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 28:7</span></span>

Here, I. Saul seeks for a witch, [Sa1
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007). When God answered him not, if he
had humbled himself by repentance and persevered in seeking God, who
knows but that at length he might have been entreated for him? but,
since he can discern no comfort either from heaven or earth ([Isa
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#021), [Isa
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#022)), he resolves to knock at the
gates of hell, and to see if any there will befriend him and give him
advice: Seek me a woman that has a familiar spirit, [Sa1
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007). And his servants were too
officious to serve him in this evil affair; they presently recommended
one to him at Endor (a city not far off) who had escaped the execution
of Saul's edict. To her he resolves to apply. Herein he is chargeable,
1. With contempt of the God of Israel; as if any creature could do him a
kindness when God had left him and frowned upon him. 2. With
contradiction to himself. He knew the heinousness of the sin of
witchcraft, else he would not have cut off those that had familiar
spirits; yet now he had recourse to that as an oracle which he had
before condemned as an abomination. It is common for men to inveigh
severely against those sins which they are in no temptation to, but
afterwards to be themselves overcome by them. Had one told Saul, when he
was destroying the witches, that he himself would, ere long, consult
with one, he would have said, as Hazael did, What? Is thy servant a dog?
But who knows what mischiefs those will run into that forsake God and
are forsaken of him?

II\. Hearing of one he hastens to her, but goes by night, and in
disguise, only with two servants, and probably on foot, [Sa1
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#008). See how those that are led
captive by Satan are forced, 1. To disparage themselves. Never did Saul
look so mean as when he went sneaking to a sorry witch to know his
fortune. 2. To dissemble. Evil works are works of darkness, and they
hate the light, neither care for coming to it. Saul went to the witch,
not in his robes, but in the habit of a common soldier, not only lest
the witch herself, if she had known him, should decline to serve him,
either fearing he came to trepan her or resolving to be avenged on him
for his edict against those of her profession, but lest his own people
should know it and abhor him for it. Such is the power of natural
conscience that even those who do evil blush and are ashamed to do it.

III\. He tells her his errand and promises her impunity. 1. All he
desires of her is to bring up one from the dead, whom he had a mind to
discourse with. It was necromancy or divination by the dead, that he
hoped to serve his purpose by. This was expressly forbidden by the law
([Deu 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#011)), seeking for the living
to the dead, [Isa 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019). Bring me up
him whom I shall name, [Sa1 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#008). This
supposes that it was generally taken for granted that souls exist after
death, and that when men die there is not an end of them: it supposes
too that great knowledge was attributed to separate souls. But to think
that any good souls would come up at the beck of an evil spirit, or that
God, who had denied a man the benefit of his own institutions, would
suffer him to reap any real advantage by a cursed diabolical invention,
was very absurd. 2. She signifies her fear of the law, and her suspicion
that this stranger came to draw her into a snare ([Sa1
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#009)): Thou knowest what Saul has
done. Providence ordered it so that Saul should be told to his face of
his edict against witches, at this very time when he was consulting one,
for the greater aggravation of his sin. She insists upon the peril of
the law, perhaps to raise her price; for, though no mention is made of
her fee, no doubt she demanded and had a large one. Observe how sensible
she is of danger from the edict of Saul, and what care she is in to
guard against it; but not at all apprehensive of the obligations off
God's law and the terrors of his wrath. She considered what Saul had
done, not what God had done, against such practices, and feared a snare
laid for her life more than a snare laid for her soul. It is common for
sinners to be more afraid of punishment from men than of God's righteous
judgment. But, 3. Saul promises with an oath not to betray her, [Sa1
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#010). It was his duty as a king to
punish her and he knew it, yet he swears no to do it; as if he could by
his own oath bind himself from doing that which, by the divine command,
he was bound to do. But he promised more than he could perform when he
said, There shall no punishment happen to thee; for he that could not
secure himself could much less secure her from divine vengeance.

IV\. Samuel, who was lately dead, is the person whom Saul desired to
have some talk with; and the witch, with her enchantments, gratifies his
desire, and brings them together. 1. As soon as Saul had given the witch
the assurance she desired (that he would not discover her) she applied
to her witchcrafts, and asked very confidently, Whom shall I bring up to
thee? [Sa1 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#011). Note, Hopes of
impunity embolden sinners in their evil ways and harden their hearts. 2.
Saul desires to speak with Samuel: Bring me up Samuel. Samuel had
anointed him to the kingdom and had formerly been his faithful friend
and counsellor, and therefore with him he wished to advise. While Samuel
was living at Ramah, not far from Gibeah of Saul, and presided there in
the school of the prophets, we never read of Saul's going to him to
consult him in any of the difficulties he was in (it would have been
well for him if he had); then he slighted him, and perhaps hated him,
looking upon him to be in David's interest. But now that he is dead, "O
for Samuel again! By all means, bring me up Samuel." Note, Many that
despise and persecute God's saints and ministers when they are living
would be glad to have them again when they are gone. Send Lazarus to me,
and send Lazarus to my father's house, [Luk
16:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024). The sepulchres of the
righteous are garnished. 3. Here is a seeming defector chasm in the
story. Saul said, Bring me up Samuel, and the very next words are, When
the woman saw Samuel, ([Sa1 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#012)),
whereas one would have expected to be told how she performed the
operation, what spells and charms she used, or that some little
intimation would be given of what she said or did; but the profound
silence of the scripture concerning it forbids our coveting to know the
depths of Satan ([Rev 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#024)) or to have
our curiosity gratified with an account of the mysteries of iniquity. It
has been said of the books of some of the popish confessors that, by
their descriptions of sin, they have taught men to commit it; but the
scripture conceals sinful art, that we may be simple concerning evil,
[Rom 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#019). 4. The witch, upon sight
of the apparition, was aware that her client was Saul, her familiar
spirit, it is likely, informing her of it ([Sa1
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#012)): "Why hast thou deceived me
with a disguise; for thou art Saul, the very man that I am afraid of
above any man?" Thus she gave Saul to understand the power of her art,
in that she could discover him through his disguise; and yet she feared
lest, hereafter, at least, he should take advantage against her for what
she was now doing. Had she believed that it was really Samuel whom she
saw, she would have had more reason to be afraid of him, who was a good
prophet, than of Saul, who was a wicked king. But the wrath of earthly
princes is feared by most more than the wrath of the King of kings. 5.
Saul (who, we may suppose, was kept at a distance in the next room) bade
her not to be afraid of him, but go on with the operation, and enquired
what she saw? [Sa1 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#013). O, says the
woman, I saw gods (that is, a spirit) ascending out of the earth; they
called angels gods, because spiritual beings. Poor gods that ascend out
of the earth! But she speaks the language of the heathen, who had their
infernal deities and had them in veneration. If Saul had thought it
necessary to his conversation with Samuel that the body of Samuel should
be called out of the grave, he would have taken the witch with him to
Ramah, where his sepulchre was; but the design was wholly upon his soul,
which yet, if it became visible, was expected to appear in the usual
resemblance of the body; and God permitted the devil, to answer the
design, to put on Samuel's shape, that those who would not receive the
love of the truth might be given up to strong delusions and believe a
lie. That it could not be the soul of Samuel himself they might easily
apprehend when it ascended out of the earth, for the spirit of a man,
much more of a good man, goes upward, [Ecc
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#021). But, if people will be deceived,
it is just with God to say, "Let them be deceived." That the devil, by
the divine permission, should be able to personate Samuel is not
strange, since he can transform himself into an angel of light! nor is
it strange that he should be permitted to do it upon this occasion, that
Saul might be driven to despair, by enquiring of the devil, since he
would not, in a right manner, enquire of the Lord, by which he might
have had comfort. Saul, being told of gods ascending, was eager to know
what was the form of this deity, and in what shape he appeared, so far
was he from conceiving any horror at it, his heart being wretchedly
hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. Saul, it seems, was not permitted
to see any manner of similitude himself, but he must take the woman's
word for it, that she saw an old man covered with a mantle, or robe, the
habit of a judge, which Samuel had sometimes worn, and some think it was
for the sake of that, and the majesty of its aspect, that she called
this apparition Elohim, a god or gods; for so magistrates are styled,
[Psa 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001). 6. Saul, perceiving, by the
woman's description, that it was Samuel, stooped with his face to the
ground, either, as it is generally taken, in reverence to Samuel, though
he saw him not, or perhaps to listen to that soft and muttering voice
which he now expected to hear (for those that had familiar spirits
peeped and muttered, [Isa 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019)); and
it should seem Saul bowed himself (probably by the witch's direction)
that he might hear what was whispered and listen carefully to it; for
the voice of one that has a familiar spirit is said to come out of the
ground, and whisper out of the dust, [Isa
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#004). He would stoop to that who would
not stoop to the word of God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 28:15</span></span>

We have here the conference between Saul and Satan. Saul came in
disguise ([Sa1 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#008)), but Satan soon
discovered him, [Sa1 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#012). Satan
comes in disguise, in the disguise of Samuel's mantle, and Saul cannot
discover him. Such is the disadvantage we labour under, in wrestling
with the rulers of the darkness of this world, that they know us, while
we are ignorant of their wiles and devices.

I. The spectre, or apparition, personating Samuel, asks why he is sent
for ([Sa1 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#015)): Why hast thou
disquieted me to bring me up? To us this discovers that it was an evil
spirit that personated Samuel; for (as bishop Patrick observes) it is
not in the power of witches to disturb the rest of good men and to bring
them back into the world when they please; nor would the true Samuel
have acknowledged such a power in magical arts: but to Saul this was a
proper device of Satan's, to draw veneration from him, to possess him
with an opinion of the power of divination, and so to rivet him in the
devil's interests.

II\. Saul makes his complaint to this counterfeit Samuel, mistaking him
for the true; and a most doleful complaint it is: "I am sorely
distressed, and know not what to do, for the Philistines make war
against me; yet I should do well enough with them if I had but the
tokens of God's presence with me; but, alas! God has departed from me."
He complained not of God's withdrawings till he fell into trouble, till
the Philistines made war against him, and then he began to lament God's
departure. He that in his prosperity enquired not after God in his
adversity thought it hard that God answered him not, nor took any notice
of his enquiries, either by dreams or prophets, neither gave answers
immediately himself nor sent them by any of his messengers. He does not,
like a penitent, own the righteousness of God in this; but, like a man
enraged, flies out against God as unkind and flies off from him:
Therefore I have called thee; as if Samuel, a servant of God, would
favour those whom God frowned upon, or as if a dead prophet could do him
more service than the living ones. One would think, from this, that he
really desired to meet with the devil, and expected no other (though
under the covert of Samuel's name), for he desires advice otherwise than
from God, therefore from the devil, who is a rival with God. "God denies
me, therefore I come to thee. Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta
movebo." - If I fail with heaven, I will move hell.

III\. It is cold comfort which this evil spirit in Samuel's mantle gives
to Saul, and is manifestly intended to drive him to despair and
self-murder. Had it been the true Samuel, when Saul desired to be told
what he should do he would have told him to repent and make his peace
with God, and recall David from his banishment, and would then have told
him that he might hope in this way to find mercy with God; but, instead
of that, he represents his case as helpless and hopeless, serving him as
he did Judas, to whom he was first a tempter and then a tormentor,
persuading him first to sell his master and then to hang himself. 1. He
upbraids him with his present distress ([Sa1
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#016)), tells him, not only that God
had departed from him, but that he had become his enemy, and therefore
he must expect no comfortable answer from him: "Wherefore dost thou ask
me? How can I be thy friend when God is thy enemy, or thy counsellor
when he has left thee?" 2. He upbraids him with the anointing of David
to the kingdom, [Sa1 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#017). He could
not have touched upon a string that sounded more unpleasant in the ear
of Saul than this. Nothing is said to reconcile him to David, but all
tends rather to exasperate him against David and widen the breach. Yet,
to make him believe that he was Samuel, the apparition affirmed that it
was God who spoke by him. The devil knows how to speak with an air of
religion, and can teach false apostles to transform themselves into the
apostles of Christ and imitate their language. Those who use spells and
charms, and plead, in defence of them, that they find nothing in them
but what is good, may remember what good words the devil here spoke, and
yet with what a malicious design. 3. He upbraids him with his
disobedience to the command of God in not destroying the Amalekites,
[Sa1 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#018). Satan had helped him to
palliate and excuse that sin when Samuel was dealing with him to bring
him to repentance, but now he aggravates it, to make him despair of
God's mercy. See what those get that hearken to Satan's temptations. He
himself will be their accuser, and insult over them. And see whom those
resemble that allure others to that which is evil and reproach them for
it when they have done. 4. He foretels his approaching ruin, [Sa1
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#019). (1.) That his army should be
routed by the Philistines. This is twice mentioned: The Lord shall
deliver Israel into the hand of the Philistines. This he might foresee,
by considering the superior strength and number of the Philistines, the
weakness of the armies of Israel, Saul's terror, and especially God's
departure from them. Yet, to personate a prophet, he very gravely
ascribes it once and again to God: The Lord shall do it. (2.) That he
and his sons should be slain in the battle: Tomorrow, that is, in a
little time (and, supposing that it was now after midnight, I see not
but it may be taken strictly for the very next day after that which had
now begun), thou and thy sons shall be with me, that is, in the state of
the dead, separate from the body. Had this been the true Samuel, he
could not have foretold the event unless God had revealed it to him;
and, though it were an evil spirit, God might by him foretel it; as we
read of an evil spirit that foresaw Ahab's fall at Ramoth-Gilead and was
instrumental in it ([Kg1 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#020), etc.),
as perhaps this evil spirit was, by the divine permission, in Saul's
destruction. That evil spirit flattered Ahab, this frightened Saul, and
both that they might fall; so miserable are those that are under the
power of Satan; for, whether he rage or laugh, there is no rest, [Pro
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#009).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 28:20</span></span>

We are here told how Saul received this terrible message from the ghost
he consulted. He desired to be told what he should do ([Sa1
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#015)), but was only told what he had
not done and what should be done to him. Those that expect any good
counsel or comfort otherwise than from God, and in the way of his
institutions, will be as wretchedly disappointed as Saul here was.
Observe,

I. How he sunk under the load, [Sa1
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#020). He was indeed unfit to bear it,
having eaten nothing all the day before, nor that night. He came fasting
from the camp, and continued fasting; not for want of food, but for want
of an appetite. The fear he was in of the power of the Philistines ([Sa1
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#005)) took away his appetite, or
perhaps the struggle he had with his own conscience, after he had
entertained the thought of consulting the witch, made him to nauseate
even his necessary food, though ever so dainty. This made him an easy
prey to this fresh terror that now came upon him like an armed man. He
fell all along on the earth, as if the archers of the Philistines had
already hit him, and there was no strength in him to bear up against
these heavy tidings. Now he had enough of consulting witches, and found
them miserable comforters. When God in his word speaks terror to sinners
he opens to them, at the same time, a door of hope if they repent: but
those that apply to the gates of hell for succour must there expect
darkness without any glimpse of light.

II\. With what difficulty he was persuaded to take so much relief as was
necessary to carry him back to his post in the camp. The witch, it
should seem, had left Saul alone with the spectre, to have his talk with
him by himself; but perhaps hearing him fall and groan, and perceiving
him to be in great agony, she came to him ([Sa1
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#021)), and was very importunate with
him to take some refreshment, that he might be able to get clear from
her house, fearing that if he should be ill, especially if he should die
there, she should be punished for it as a traitor, though she had
escaped punishment as a witch. This, it is probable, rather than any
sentiment of kindness, made her solicitous to help him. But what a
deplorable condition had he brought himself to when he needed so
wretched a comforter! 1. She showed herself very importunate with him to
take some refreshment. She pleaded ([Sa1
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#021)) that she had obeyed his voice
to the endangering of her life, and why therefore should not he hearken
to her voice for the relieving of his life? [Sa1
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#022). She had a fat calf at hand (and
the word signifies one that was made use of in treading out the corn,
and therefore could the worse be spared); this she prepared for his
entertainment, [Sa1 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#024). Josephus is
large in applauding the extraordinary courtesy and liberality of this
woman, and recommending what she did as an example of compassion to the
distressed, and readiness to communicate for their relief, though we
have no prospect of being recompensed. 2. He showed himself very averse
to it: He refused, and said, I will not eat ([Sa1
28:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#023)), choosing rather to die
obscurely by famine than honourably by the sword. Had he laboured only
under a defect of animal spirits, food might have helped him; but, alas!
his case was out of the reach of such succours. What are dainty meats to
a wounded conscience? As vinegar upon nitre, so is he that sings songs
to a heavy heart, so disagreeable and unwelcome. 3. The woman at length,
with the help of his servants, overpersuaded him, against his
inclination and resolution, to take some refreshment. Not by force, but
by friendly advice, they compelled him ([Sa1
28:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#023)), and of no other than such a
rational and courteous compulsion are we to understand that in the
parable, Compel them to come in, [Luk
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#023). How forcible are right words,
when men are pressed by them to that which is for their own interest!
[Job 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#025). Saul was somewhat revived
with this entertainment; so that he and his servants, when they had
eaten, rose up and went away before it was light ([Sa1
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#025)), that they might hasten to
their business and that they might not be seen to come out of such a
scandalous house. Josephus here much admires the bravery and magnanimity
of Saul, that, though he was assured he should lose both his life and
honour, yet he would not desert his army, but resolutely returned to the
camp, and stood ready for an engagement. I wonder more at the hardness
of his heart, that he did not again apply to God by repentance and
prayer, in hopes yet to obtain at least a reprieve; but he desperately
ran headlong upon his own ruin. Perhaps, indeed, now that rage and envy
possessed him to the uttermost, he was the better reconciled to his hard
fate, being told that his sons, and Jonathan among the rest, whom he
hated for his affection to David, should die with him. If he must fall,
he cared not what desolations of his family and kingdom accompanied his
fall, hoping it would be the worse for his successor. Emou thanontos
gaia michthetō puri - I care not if, when I am dead, the world should be
set on fire. He begged not, as David, "Let thy hand be against me, but
not against thy people."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 29](sa1029)

</div>
