<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1020)  [Next](sa1022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 21:0</span></span>

David has now quite taken leave both of Saul's court and of his camp,
has bidden farewell to his alter idem - his other self, the beloved
Jonathan; and henceforward to the end of this book he is looked upon and
treated as an outlaw and proclaimed a traitor. We still find him
shifting from place to place for his own safety, and Saul pursuing him.
His troubles are very particularly related in this and the following
chapters, not only to be a key to the Psalms, but that he might be, as
other prophets, an example to the saints in all ages, "of suffering
affliction, and of patience," and especially that he might be a type of
Christ, who, being anointed to the kingdom, humbled himself, and was
therefore highly exalted. But the example of the suffering Jesus was a
copy without a blot, that of David was not so; witness the records of
this chapter, where we find David in his flight, I. Imposing upon
Abimelech the priest, to get from him both victuals and arms ([Sa1
21:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001)). II. Imposing upon Achish,
king of Gath, by feigning himself mad ([Sa1
21:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#010)). Justly are troubles called
temptations, for many are by them drawn into sin.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 21:1</span></span>

Here, I. David, in distress, flies in the tabernacle of God, now pitched
at Nob, supposed to be a city in the tribe of Benjamin. Since Shiloh was
forsaken, the tabernacle was often removed, though the ark still
remained at Kirjath-jearim. Hither David came in his flight from Saul's
fury ([Sa1 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001)), and applied to
Ahimelech the priest. Samuel the prophet could not protect him, Jonathan
the prince could not. He therefore has recourse next to Ahimelech the
priest. He foresees he must now be an exile, and therefore comes to the
tabernacle, 1. To take an affecting leave of it, for he knows not when
he shall see it again, and nothing will be more afflictive to him in his
banishment than his distance from the house of God, and his restraint
from public ordinances, as appears by many of his psalms. He had given
an affectionate farewell to his friend Jonathan, and cannot go till he
has given the like to the tabernacle. 2. To enquire of the Lord there,
and to beg direction from him in the way both of duty and safety, his
case being difficult and dangerous. That this was his business appears
[Sa1 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#010), where it is said that
Ahimelech enquired of the Lord for him, as he had done formerly, [Sa1
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#015). It is a great comfort to us in
a day of trouble that we have a God to go to, to whom we may open our
case, and from whom we may ask and expect direction.

II\. Ahimelech the priest is surprised to see him in so poor an
equipage; having heard that he had fallen into disgrace at court, he
looked shy upon him, as most are apt to do upon their friends when the
world frowns upon them. He was afraid of incurring Saul's displeasure by
entertaining him, and took notice how mean a figure he now made to what
he used to make: Why art thou alone? He had some with him (as appears
[Mar 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#026)), but they were only his own
servants; he had none of the courtiers, no persons of quality with him,
as he used to have at other times, when he came to enquire of the Lord.
He says ([Psa 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004)) he was wont to go
with a multitude to the house of God; and, having now but two or three
with him, Ahimelech might well ask, Why art thou alone? He that was
suddenly advanced from the solitude of a shepherd's life to the crowd
and hurries of the camp is now as soon reduced to the desolate condition
of an exile and is alone like a sparrow on the housetop, such charges
are there in this world and so uncertain are its smiles! Those that are
courted today may be deserted tomorrow.

III\. David, under pretence of being sent by Saul upon public services,
solicits Ahimelech to supply his present wants, [Sa1
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#002), [Sa1
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#003).

1\. Here David did not behave like himself. He told Ahimelech a gross
untruth, that Saul had ordered him business to despatch, that his
attendants were dismissed to such a place, and that he was charged to
observe secresy and therefore durst not communicate it, no, not to the
priest himself. This was all false. What shall we say to this? The
scripture does not conceal it, and we dare not justify it. It was ill
done, and proved of bad consequence; for it occasioned the death of the
priests of the Lord, as David reflected upon it afterwards with regret,
[Sa1 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#022). It was needless for him
thus to dissemble with the priest, for we may suppose that, if he had
told him the truth, he would have sheltered and relieved him as readily
as Samuel did, and would have known the better how to advise him and
enquire of God for him. People should be free with their faithful
ministers. David was a man of great faith and courage, and yet now both
failed him, and he fell thus foully through fear and cowardice, and both
owing to the weakness of his faith. Had he trusted God aright, he would
not have used such a sorry sinful shift as this for his own
preservation. It is written, not for our imitation, no, not in the
greatest straits, but for our admonition. Let him that thinks he stands
take heed lest he fall; and let us all pray daily, Lord, lead us not
into temptation. Let us all take occasion from this to lament, (1.) The
weakness and infirmity of good men; the best are not perfect on this
side heaven. There may be true grace where yet there are many failings.
(2.) The wickedness of bad times, which forces good men into such
straits as prove temptations too strong for them. Oppression makes a
wise man do foolishly.

2\. Two things David begged of Ahimelech, bread and a sword.

(1.) He wanted bread: five loaves, [Sa1
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#003). Travelling was then troublesome,
when men generally carried their provisions with them in kind, having
little money and no public houses, else David would not now have had to
seek for bread. It seems David had known the seed of the righteous
begging bread occasionally, but not constantly, [Psa
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#025). Now, \[1.\] The priest objected
that he had none but hallowed bread, show-bread, which had stood a week
on the golden table in the sanctuary, and was taken thence for the use
of the priests and their families, [Sa1
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#004). It seems the priest kept no good
house, but wanted either a heart to be hospitable or provisions
wherewithal to be so. Ahimelech thinks that the young men that attended
David might not eat of this bread unless they had for some time
abstained from women, even from their own wives; this was required at
the giving of the law ([Exo 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#015)),
but otherwise we never find this made the matter of any ceremonial
purity on the one side or pollution on the other, and therefore the
priest here seems to be over-nice, not to say superstitious. \[2.\]
David pleads that he and those that were with him, in this case of
necessity, might lawfully eat of the hallowed bread, for they were not
only able to answer his terms of keeping from women for three days past,
but the vessels (that is, the bodies) of the young men were holy, being
possessed in sanctification and honour at all times ([Th1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#004), [Th1
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#005)), and therefore God would take
particular care of them, that they wanted not necessary supports, and
would have his priest to do so. Being thus holy, holy things were not
forbidden them. Poor and pious Israelites were in effect priests to God,
and, rather than be starved, might feed on the bread which was
appropriated to the priests. Believers are spiritual priests, and the
offerings of the Lord shall be their inheritance; they eat the bread of
their God. He pleads that the bread is in a manner common, now that what
was primarily the religious use of it is over; especially (as our margin
reads it) where there is other bread (hot, [Sa1
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#006)) sanctified that day in the
vessel, and put in the room of it upon the table. This was David's plea,
and the Son of David approves it, and shows from it that mercy is to be
preferred to sacrifice, that ritual observance must give way to moral
duties, and that may be done in a case of an urgent providential
necessity which may not otherwise be done. He brings it to justify his
disciples in plucking the ears of corn on the sabbath day, for which the
Pharisees censured them, [Mat 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#003),
[Mat 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#004). \[3.\] Ahimelech hereupon
supplies him: He gave him hallowed bread ([Sa1
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#006)), and some think it was about
this that he enquired of the Lord, [Sa1
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#010). As a faithful servant he would
not dispose of his master's provisions without his master's leave. This
bread, we may suppose, was the more agreeable to David for its being
hallowed, so precious were all sacred things to him. The show-bread was
but twelve loaves in all, yet out of these he gave David five ([Sa1
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#003)), though they had no more in the
house; but he trusted Providence.

(2.) He wanted a sword. Persons of quality, though officers of the army,
did not then wear their swords so constantly as now they do, else surely
David would not have been without one. It was a wonder that Jonathan did
not furnish him with his, as he had before done, [Sa1
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#004). However, it happened that he had
now no weapons with him, the reason of which he pretends to be because
he came away in haste, [Sa1 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#008).
Those that are furnished with the sword of the Spirit and the shield of
faith cannot be disarmed of them, nor need they, at any time, to be at a
loss. But the priests, it seems, had no swords: the weapons of their
warfare were not carnal. There was not a sword to be found about the
tabernacle but the sword of Goliath, which was laid up behind the ephod,
as a monument of the glorious victory David obtained over him. Probably
David had an eye to that when he asked the priest to help him with a
sword; for, that being mentioned, O! says he, there is none like that,
give it to me, [Sa1 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#009). He could not
use Saul's armour, for he had not proved it; but this sword of Goliath
he had made trial of and done execution with. By this it appears that he
was now well grown in strength and stature, that he could wear and wield
such a sword as that. God had taught his hands to war, so that he could
do wonders, [Psa 18:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#034). Two things we
may observe concerning this sword: - \[1.\] That God had graciously
given it to him, as a pledge of his singular favour; so that whenever he
drew it, nay, whenever he looked upon it, it would be a great support to
his faith, by bringing to mind that great instance of the particular
care and countenance of the divine providence respecting him. \[2.\]
That he had gratefully given it back to God, dedicating it to him and to
his honour as a token of his thankfulness; and now in his distress it
stood him greatly in stead. Note, What we devote to God's praise, and
serve him with, is most likely to redound, one way or other, to our own
comfort and benefit. What we gave we have.

Thus was David well furnished with arms and victuals; but it fell out
very unhappily that there was one of Saul's servants then attending
before the Lord, Doeg by name, that proved a base traitor both to David
and Ahimelech. He was by birth an Edomite ([Sa1
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#007)), and though proselyted to the
Jewish religion, to get the preferment he now had under Saul, yet he
retained the ancient and hereditary enmity of Edom to Israel. He was
master of the herds, which perhaps was then a place of as much honour as
master of the horse is now. Some occasion or other he had at this time
to wait on the priest, either to be purified from some pollution or to
pay some vow; but, whatever his business was, it is said, he was
detained before the Lord. He must attend and could not help it, but he
was sick of the service, snuffed at it, and said, What a weariness is
it! [Mal 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013). He would rather have
been any where else than before the Lord, and therefore, instead of
minding the business he came about, was plotting to do David a mischief
and to be revenged on Ahimelech for detaining him. God's sanctuary could
never secure such wolves in sheep's clothing. See [Gal
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 21:10</span></span>

David, though king elect, is here an exile - designed to be master of
vast treasures, yet just now begging his bread - anointed to the crown,
and yet here forced to flee from his country. Thus do God's providences
sometimes seem to run counter to his promises, for the trial of his
people's faith, and the glorifying of his name, in the accomplishment of
his counsels, notwithstanding the difficulties that lay in the way. Here
is, 1. David's flight into the land of the Philistines, where he hoped
to be hid, and to remain undiscovered in the court or camp of Achish
king of Gath, [Sa1 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#010). Israel's
darling is necessitated to quit the land of Israel, and he that was the
Philistine's great enemy (upon I know not what inducements) goes to seek
for shelter among them. It should seem that as, though the Israelites
loved him, yet the king of Israel had a personal enmity to him, which
obliged him to leave his own country, so, though the Philistines hated
him, yet the king of Gath had a personal kindness for him, valuing his
merit, and perhaps the more for his killing Goliath of Gath, who, it may
be, had been no friend to Achish. To him David now went directly, as to
one he could confide in, as afterwards ([Sa1
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#002), [Sa1
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#003)), and Achish would not have
protected him but that he was afraid of disobliging his own people.
God's persecuted people have often found better usage from Philistines
than from Israelites, in the Gentile theatres than in the Jewish
synagogues. The king of Judah imprisoned Jeremiah, and the king of
Babylon set him at liberty. 2. The disgust which the servants of Achish
took at his being there, and their complaint of it to Achish ([Sa1
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#011)): "Is not this David? Is not
this he that has triumphed over the Philistines? witness that burden of
the song which was so much talked of, Saul has slain his thousands, but
David, this very man, his ten thousands. Nay, Is not this he that (if
our intelligence from the land of Israel be true) is, or is to be, king
of the land?" As such, "he must be an enemy to our country; and is it
safe or honourable for us to protect or entertain such a man?" Achish
perhaps had intimated to them that it would be policy to entertain
David, because he was now an enemy to Saul, and he might be hereafter a
friend to them. It is common for the outlaws of a nation to be sheltered
by the enemies of that nation. But the servants of Achish objected to
his politics, and thought it not at all fit that he should stay among
them. 3. The fright which this put David into. Though he had some reason
to put confidence in Achish, yet, when he perceived the servants of
Achish jealous of him, he began to be afraid that Achish would be
obliged to deliver him up to them, and he was sorely afraid ([Sa1
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#012)), and perhaps he was the more
apprehensive of his own danger, when he was thus discovered, because he
wore Goliath's sword, which, we may suppose, was well known in Gath, and
with which he had reason to expect they would cut off his head, as he
had cut off Goliath's with it. David now learned by experience what he
has taught us ([Psa 118:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#009)), that it is
better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes. Men of
high degree are a lie, and, if we make them our hope, they may prove our
fear. It was at this time that David penned Psalm 55 (Michtam, a golden
psalm), when the Philistines took him in Gath, where having shown before
God his distresses, he resolves ([Psa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#003)), "What time I am afraid I will
trust in thee; and therefore ([Psa
55:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#011)) will not be afraid what man can
do unto me, no, not the sons of giants." 4. The course he took to get
out of their hands: He feigned himself mad, [Sa1
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#013). He used the gestures and
fashions of a natural fool, or one that had gone out of his wits,
supposing they would be ready enough to believe that the disgrace he had
fallen into, and the troubles he was now in, had driven him distracted.
This dissimulation of his cannot be justified (it was a mean thing thus
to disparage himself, and inconsistent with truth thus to misrepresent
himself, and therefore not becoming the honour and sincerity of such a
man as David); yet it may in some degree be excused, for it was not a
downright lie and it was like a stratagem in war, by which he imposed
upon his enemies for the preservation of his own life. What David did
here in pretence and for his own safety, which made it partly excusable,
drunkards do really, and only to gratify a base lust: they made fools of
themselves and change their behaviour; their words and actions commonly
are either as silly and ridiculous as an idiot's or as furious and
outrageous as a madman's, which has often made me wonder that ever men
of sense and honour should allow themselves in it. 5. His escape by this
means, [Sa1 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#014), [Sa1
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#015). I am apt to think Achish was
aware that the delirium was but counterfeit, but, being desirous to
protect David (as we find afterwards he was very kind to him, even when
the lord of the Philistines favoured him not, [Sa1
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001), [Sa1
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#002); [Sa1
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#006)), he pretended to his servants
that he really thought he was mad, and therefore had reason to question
whether it was David or no; or, if it were, they need not fear him, what
harm could he do them now that his reason had departed from him? They
suspected that Achish was inclined to entertain him: "Not I," says he.
"He is a madman. I'll have nothing to do with him. You need not fear
that I should employ him, or give him any countenance." He humours the
thing well enough when he asks, "Have I need of madmen? Shall this fool
come into my house? I will show him no kindness, but then you shall do
him no hurt, for, if he be a madmen, he is to be pitied." He therefore
drove him away, as it is in the title of Ps. 34, which David penned upon
this occasion, and an excellent psalm it is, and shows that he did not
change his spirit when he changed his behaviour, but even in the
greatest difficulties and hurries his heart was fixed, trusting in the
Lord; and he concludes that psalm with this assurance, that none of
those that trust in God shall be desolate, though they may be, as he now
was, solitary and distressed, persecuted, but not forsaken.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 22](sa1022)

</div>
