<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1019)  [Next](sa1021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 20:0</span></span>

David, having several times narrowly escaped Saul's fury, begins to
consider at last whether it may not be necessary for him to retire into
the country and to take up arms in his own defence. But he will not do
so daring a thing without consulting his faithful friend Jonathan; how
he did this, and what passed between them, we have an account in this
chapter, where we have as surprising instances of supernatural love as
we had in the chapter before of unnatural hatred. I. David complains to
Jonathan of his present distress, and engages him to be his friend ([Sa1
20:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#001)). II. Jonathan faithfully
promises to get and give him intelligence how his father stood affected
to him, and renews the covenant of friendship with him ([Sa1
20:9-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#009)). III. Jonathan, upon trial,
finds, to his grief, that his father was implacably enraged against
David ([Sa1 20:24-34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#024)). IV. He gives
David notice of this, according to the appointment between them ([Sa1
20:35-42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#035)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 20:1</span></span>

Here, I. David makes a representation to Jonathan of his present
troubles. While Saul lay bound by his trance at Naioth David escaped to
the court, and got to speak with Jonathan. And it was happy for him that
he had such a friend at court, when he had such an enemy on the throne.
If there be those that hate and despise us, let us not be disturbed at
that, for there are those also that love and respect us. God hath set
the one over against the other, and so must we. Jonathan was a friend
that loved at all times, loved David as well now in his distress, and
bade him as welcome into his arms, as he had done when he was in his
triumph ([Sa1 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#001)), and he was a
brother that was born for adversity, [Pro
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#017). Now, 1. David appeals to
Jonathan himself concerning his innocency, and he needed not say much to
him for the proof of it, only he desired him that if he knew of any just
offence he had given his father he would tell him, that he might humble
himself and beg his pardon: What have I done? [Sa1
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#001). 2. He endeavors to convince him
that, notwithstanding his innocency, Saul sought his life. Jonathan,
from a principal of filial respect to his father, was very loth to
believe that he designed or would ever do so wicked a thing, [Sa1
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#002). He the rather hoped so because
he knew nothing of any such design, and he had usually been made privy
to all his counsels. Jonathan, as became a dutiful son, endeavored to
cover his father's shame, as far as was consistent with justice and
fidelity to David. Charity is not forward to think evil of any,
especially of a parent, [Co1 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005).
David therefore gives him the assurance of an oath concerning his own
danger, swears the peace upon Saul, that he was in fear of his life by
him: "As the Lord liveth, than which nothing more sure in itself, and as
thy soul liveth, than which nothing more certain to thee, whatever thou
thinkest, there is but a step between me and death," [Sa1
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#003). And, as for Saul's concealing it
from Jonathan, it was easy to account for that; he knew the friendship
between him and David, and therefore, though in other things he advised
with him, yet not in that. None more fit than Jonathan to serve him in
every design that was just and honourable, but he knew him to be a man
of more virtue than to be his confidant in so base a design as the
murder of David.

II\. Jonathan generously offers him his service ([Sa1
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#004)): Whatsoever thou desirest, he
needed not insert the proviso of lawful and honest (for he knew David
too well to think he would ask any thing that was otherwise), I will
even do it for thee. This is true friendship. Thus Christ testifies his
love to us: Ask, and it shall be done for you; and we must testify ours
to him by keeping his commandments.

III\. David only desires him to satisfy himself, and then to satisfy him
whether Saul did really design his death or no. Perhaps David proposed
this more for Jonathan's conviction than his own, for he himself was
well satisfied. 1. The method of trial he proposed was very natural, and
would certainly discover how Saul stood affected to him. The two next
days Saul was to dine publicly, upon occasion of the solemnities of the
new moon, when extraordinary sacrifices were offered and feasts made
upon the sacrifices. Saul was rejected of God, and the Spirit of the
Lord had departed from him, yet he kept up his observance of the holy
feasts. There may be the remains of external devotion where there is
nothing but the ruins of real virtue. At these solemn feasts Saul had
either all his children to sit with him, and David had a seat as one of
them, or all his great officers, and David had a seat as one of them.
However it was, David resolved his seat should be empty (and that it
never used to be at a sacred feast) those two days ([Sa1
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#005)), and he would abscond till the
solemnity was over, and put it upon this issue: if Saul admitted an
excuse for his absence, and dispensed with it, he would conclude he had
changed his mind and was reconciled to him; but if he resented it, and
was put into a passion by it, it was easy to conclude he designed him a
mischief, since it was certain he did not love him so well as to desire
his presence for any other end than that he might have an opportunity to
do him a mischief, [Sa1 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#007). 2. The
excuse he desired Jonathan to make for his absence, we have reason to
think, was true, that he was invited by his elder brother to Bethlehem,
his own city, to celebrate this new moon with his relations there,
because, besides the monthly solemnity in which they held communion with
all Israel, they had now a yearly sacrifice, and a holy feast upon it,
for all the family, [Sa1 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#006). They
kept a day of thanksgiving in their family for the comforts they
enjoyed, and of prayer for the continuance of them. By this it appears
that the family David was of was a very religious family, a house that
had a church in it. 3. The arguments he used with Jonathan to persuade
him to do this kindness for him were very pressing, [Sa1
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#008). (1.) That he had entered into a
league of friendship with him, and it was Jonathan's own proposal: Thou
hast brought thy servant into a covenant of the Lord with thee. (2.)
That he would by no means urge him to espouse his cause if he was not
sure that it was a righteous cause: "If there be iniquity in me, I am so
far from desiring or expecting that the covenant between us should bind
thee to be a confederate with me in that iniquity that I freely release
thee from it, and wish that my hand may be first upon me: Slay me
thyself." No honest man will urge his friend to do a dishonest thing for
his sake.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 20:9</span></span>

Here, I. Jonathan protests his fidelity to David in his distress.
Notwithstanding the strong confidence David had in Jonathan, yet,
because he might have some reason to fear that his father's influence,
and his own interest, should make him warp, or grow cool towards him,
Jonathan thought it requisite solemnly to renew the professions of his
friendship to him ([Sa1 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#009)): "Far be
it from thee to think that I suspect thee of any crime for which I
should either slay thee myself or deliver thee to my father; no, if thou
hast any jealousy of that, Come let us go into the field ([Sa1
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#011)), and talk it over more fully."
He did not challenge him to the field to fight him for an affront, but
to fix him in his friendship. He faithfully promised him that he would
let him know how, upon trial, he found his father affected towards him,
and would make the matter neither better nor worse than it was. "If
there be good towards thee, I will show it thee, that thou mayest be
easy ([Sa1 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#012)), if evil, I will
send thee away, that thou mayest be safe" ([Sa1
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#013)); and thus he would help to
deliver him from the evil if it were real and from the fear of evil if
it were but imaginary. For the confirmation of his promise he appeals to
God, 1. As a witness ([Sa1 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#012)): "O
Lord God of Israel, thou knowest I mean sincerely, and think as I
speak." The strength of his passion made the manner of his speaking
concise and abrupt. 2. As a judge: "The Lord do so and much more to
Jonathan ([Sa1 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#013)), if I speak
deceitfully, or break my word with my friend." He expressed himself thus
solemnly that David might be abundantly assured of his sincerity. And
thus God has confirmed his promises to us, that we might have strong
consolation, [Heb 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#017), [Heb
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018). Jonathan adds to his
protestations his hearty prayers: "The Lord be with thee, to protect and
prosper thee, as he has been formerly with my father, though now he has
withdrawn." Thus he imitates his belief that David would be in his
father's place, and his good wishes that he might prosper in it better
than his father now did.

II\. He provides for the entail of the covenant of friendship with David
upon his posterity, [Sa1 20:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#014). He
engages David to be a friend to his family when he was gone ([Sa1
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#015)): Thou shalt promise that thou
wilt not cut off thy kindness from my house for ever. This he spoke from
a natural affection he had to his children, whom he desired it might go
well with after his decease, and for whose future welfare he desired to
improve his present interest. It also intimates his firm belief of
David's advancement, and that it would be in the power of his hand to do
a kindness or unkindness to his seed; for, in process of time, the Lord
would cut off his enemies, Saul himself was not expected; then "Do not
thou cut off thy kindness from my house, nor revenge my father's wrongs
upon my children." The house of David must likewise be bound to the
house of Jonathan from generation to generation; he made a covenant
([Sa1 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#016)) with the house of David.
Note, True friends cannot but covet to transmit to theirs after them
their mutual affections. Thy own friend, and thy father's friend,
forsake not. This kindness, 1. He calls the kindness of the Lord,
because it is such kindness as God shows to those he takes into covenant
with himself; for he is a God to them and to their seed; they are
beloved for the fathers' sakes. 2. He secures it by an imprecation ([Sa1
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#016)): The Lord require it at the
hand of David's seed (for of David himself he had no suspicion) if they
prove so far David's enemies as to deal wrongfully with the posterity of
Jonathan, David's friend. He feared lest David, or some of his, should
hereafter be tempted, for the clearing and confirming of their title to
the throne, to do by his seed as Abimelech had done by the sons of
Gideon ([Jdg 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#005)), and this he would
effectually prevent; but the reason given ([Sa1
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#017)) why Jonathan was so earnest to
have the friendship entailed is purely generous, and has nothing of self
in it; it was because he loved him as he loved his own soul, and
therefore desired that he and his might be beloved by him. David, though
now in disgrace at court and in distress, was as amiable in the eyes of
Jonathan as ever he had been, and he loved him never the less for his
father's hating him, so pure were the principles on which his friendship
was built. Having himself sworn to David, he caused David to swear to
him, and (as we read it) to swear again, which David consented to (for
he that bears an honest mind does not startle at assurances), to swear
by his love to him, which he looked upon as a sacred thing. Jonathan's
heart was so much upon it that, when they parted this time, he concluded
with a solemn appeal to God: The Lord be between me and thee for ever
([Sa1 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#023)), that is, "God himself be
judge between us and our families for ever, if on either side this
league of friendship be violated." It was in remembrance of this
covenant that David was kind to Mephibosheth, [Sa2
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#007); [Sa2
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#007). It will be a kindness to
ourselves and ours to secure an interest in those whom God favours and
to make his friends ours.

III\. He settles the method of intelligence, and by what signs and
tokens he would give him notice how his father stood affected towards
him. David would be missed the first day, or at least the second day, of
the new moon, and would be enquired after, [Sa1
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#018). On the third day, by which time
he would have returned from Bethlehem, he must be at such a place ([Sa1
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#019)), and Jonathan would come
towards that place with his bow and arrows to shoot for diversion ([Sa1
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#020)), would send his lad to fetch
his arrows, and, if they were shot short of the lad, David must take it
for a signal of safety, and not be afraid to show his head ([Sa1
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#021)); but, if he shot beyond the
lad, it was a signal of danger, and he must shift for his safety, [Sa1
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#022). This expedient he fixed lest he
should not have the opportunity, which yet it proved he had, of talking
with David, and making the report by word of mouth.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 20:24</span></span>

Jonathan is here effectually convinced of that which he was so loth to
believe, that his father had an implacable enmity to David, and would
certainly be the death of him if it were in his power; and he had like
to have paid very dearly himself for the conviction.

I. David is missed from the feast on the first day, but nothing is said
of him. The king sat upon his seat, to feast upon the peace-offerings as
at other times ([Sa1 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#025)), and yet
had his heart as full of envy and malice against David as it could hold.
He should first have been reconciled to him, and then have come and
offered his gift; but, instead of that, he hoped, at this feast, to
drink the blood of David. What an abomination was that sacrifice which
was brought with such a wicked mind as this! [Pro
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#027). When the king came to take his
seat Jonathan arose, in reverence to him both as a father and as his
sovereign; every one knew his place, but David's was empty. It did not
use to be so. None more content than he in attending holy duties; nor
had he been absent now but that he must have come at the peril of his
life; self-preservation obliged him to withdraw. In imminent peril
present opportunities may be waived, nay, we ought not to throw
ourselves into the mouth of danger. Christ himself absconded often, till
he knew that his hour had come. But that day Saul took no notice that he
missed David, but said within himself, "Surely he is not clean, [Sa1
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#026). Some ceremonial pollution has
befallen him, which forbids him to eat of the holy things till he has
washed his clothes, and bathed his flesh in water, and been unclean
until the evening." Saul knew what conscience David made of the law, and
that he would rather keep away from the holy feast than come in his
uncleanness. Blessed be God, no uncleanness is now a restraint upon us,
but what we may by faith and repentance be washed from in the fountain
opened, [Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006).

II\. He is enquired for the second day, [Sa1
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#027). Saul asked Jonathan, who he
knew was his confidant, Wherefore cometh not the son of Jesse to meat?
He was his own son by marriage, but he calls him in disdain, the son of
Jesse. He asks for him as if he were not pleased that he should be
absent from a religious feast; and so it should be example to masters of
families to see to it that those under their charge be not absent from
the worship of God, either in public or in the family. It is a bad thing
for us, except in case of necessity, to omit an opportunity of statedly
attending on God in solemn ordinances. Thomas lost a sight of Christ by
being once absent from a meeting of the disciples. But that which
displeased Saul was that hereby he missed the opportunity he expected of
doing David a mischief.

III\. Jonathan makes his excuse, [Sa1
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#028), [Sa1
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#029). 1. That he was absent upon a
good occasion, keeping the feast in another place, though not here, sent
for by his elder brother, who was now more respectful to him than he had
been ([Sa1 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#028)), and that he had
gone to pay his respects to his relations, for the keeping up of
brotherly love; and no master would deny a servant liberty to do that in
due time. He pleads, 2. That he did not go without leave humbly asked
and obtained from Jonathan, who, as his superior officer, was proper to
be applied to for it. Thus he represents David as not wanting in any
instance of respect and duty to the government.

IV\. Saul hereupon breaks out into a most extravagant passion, and rages
like a lion disappointed of his prey. David was out of his reach, but he
falls upon Jonathan for his sake ([Sa1
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#030), [Sa1
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#031)), gives him base language, not
fit for a gentleman, a prince, to give to any man, especially his own
son, heir apparent to his crown, a son that served him, the greatest
stay and ornament of his family, before a great deal of company, at a
feast, when all should be in good humour, at a sacred feast, by which
all irregular passions should be mortified and subdued; yet he does in
effect call him, 1. A bastard: Thou son of the perverse rebellious
woman; that is, according to the foolish filthy language of men's
brutish passion now a day, "Thou son of a whore." He tells him he was
born to the confusion of his mother, that is, he had given the world
cause to suspect that he was not the legitimate son of Saul, because he
loved him whom Saul hated and supported him who would be the destruction
of their family. 2. A traitor: Thou son of a perverse rebellion (so the
word is), that is, "thou perverse rebel." At other times he reckoned no
counsellor or commander that he had more trusty and well-beloved than
Jonathan; yet now in this passion he represents him as dangerous to his
crown and life. 3. A fool: Thou hast chosen the son of Jesse for thy
friend to thy own confusion, for while he lives thou shalt never be
established. Jonathan indeed did wisely and well for himself and family
to secure an interest in David, whom Heaven had destined to the throne,
yet, for this, he is branded as most impolitic. It is good taking God's
people for our people and going with those that have him with them. It
will prove to our advantage at last, however for the present it may be
thought a disparagement, and a prejudice to our secular interest. It is
probable Saul knew that David was anointed to the kingdom by the same
hand that anointed him, and then not Jonathan, but himself, was the
fool, to think to defeat the counsels of God. Yet nothing will serve him
but David must die, and Jonathan must fetch him to execution. See how
ill Saul's passion looks, and let it warn us against the indulgence of
any thing like it in ourselves. Anger is madness, and he that hates his
brother is a murderer.

V. Jonathan is sorely grieved and put into disorder by his father's
barbarous passion, and the more because he had hoped better things, [Sa1
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#002). He was troubled for his father,
that he should be such a brute, troubled for his friend, whom he knew to
be a friend of God, that he should be so basely abused; he was grieved
for David ([Sa1 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#034)), and troubled
for himself too, because his father had done him shame, and, though most
unjustly, yet he must submit to it. One would pity Jonathan to see how
he was put, 1. Into the peril of sin. Much ado that wise and good man
had to keep his temper, upon such a provocation as this. His father's
reflections upon himself made no return to; it becomes inferiors to bear
with meekness and silence the contempts put upon them in wrath and
passion. When thou art the anvil lie thou still. But his dooming David
to die he could not bear: to that he replied with some heat ([Sa1
20:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#032)), Wherefore shall he be slain?
What has he done? Generous spirits can much more easily bear to be
abused themselves than to hear their friends abused. 2. Into the peril
of death. Saul was now so outrageous that he threw his javelin at
Jonathan, [Sa1 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#033). He seemed to be
in great care ([Sa1 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#031)) than
Jonathan should be established in his kingdom, and yet now he himself
aims at his life. What fools, what savage beasts and worse does anger
make men! How necessary it is to put a hook in its nose and a bridle in
its jaws! Jonathan was fully satisfied that evil was determined against
David, which put him out of frame exceedingly: he rose from table,
thinking it high time when his life was struck at, and would eat no
meat, for they were not to eat of the holy things in their mourning. All
the guests, we may suppose, were discomposed, and the mirth of the feast
was spoiled. He that is cruel troubles his own flesh, [Pro
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#017).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">sa1 20:35</span></span>

Here is, 1. Jonathan's faithful performance of his promise to give David
notice of the success of his dangerous experiment. He went at the time
and to the place appointed ([Sa1
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#035)), within sight of which he knew
David lay hid, sent his footboy to fetch his arrows, which he would
shoot at random ([Sa1 20:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#036)), and gave
David the fatal signal by shooting an arrow beyond the lad ([Sa1
20:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#037)): Is not the arrow beyond thee?
That word \[beyond\] David knew the meaning of better than the lad.
Jonathan dismissed the lad, who knew nothing of the matter, and, finding
the coast clear and no danger of a discovery, he presumed upon one
minute's personal conversation with David after he had bidden him flee
for his life. 2. The most sorrowful parting of these two friends, who,
for aught that appears, never came together again but once, and that was
by stealth in a wood, [Sa1 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#016). (1.)
David addressed himself to Jonathan with the reverence of a servant
rather than the freedom of a friend: He fell on his face to the ground,
and bowed himself three times, as one deeply sensible of his obligations
to him for the good services he had done him. (2.) They took leave of
each other with the greatest affection imaginable, with kisses and
tears; they wept on each other's neck till David exceeded, [Sa1
20:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#041). The separation of two such
faithful friends was equally grievous to them both, but David's case was
the more deplorable; for, when Jonathan was returning to his family and
friends, David was leaving all his comforts, even those of God's
sanctuary, and therefore his grief exceeded Jonathan's, or perhaps it
was because his temper was more tender and his passions were stronger.
(3.) They referred themselves to the covenant of friendship that was
between them, both of them comforting themselves with this in this
mournful separation: "We have sworn both of us in the name of the Lord,
for ourselves and our heirs, that we and they will be faithful and kind
to each other from generation to generation." Thus, while we are at home
in the body and absent from the Lord, this is our comfort, that he has
made with us an everlasting covenant.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 21](sa1021)

</div>
