<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1029)  [Next](sa1031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 30:0</span></span>

When David was dismissed from the army of the Philistines he did not go
over to the camp of Israel, but, being expelled by Saul, observed an
exact neutrality, and silently retired to his own city Ziklag, leaving
the armies ready to engage. Now here we are told, I. What a melancholy
posture he found the city in, all laid waste by the Amalekites, and what
distress it occasioned him and his men ([Sa1
30:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001)). II. What course he took to
recover what he had lost. He enquired of God, and took out a commission
from him ([Sa1 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#007), [Sa1
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#008)), pursued the enemy ([Sa1
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#009), [Sa1
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#010)), gained intelligence from a
straggler ([Sa1 30:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#011)), attacked
and routed the plunderers ([Sa1 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#016),
[Sa1 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#017)), and recovered all that
they had carried off ([Sa1 30:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#018)).
III. What method he observed in the distribution of the spoil ([Sa1
30:21-31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#021)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 30:1</span></span>

Here we have, I. The descent which the Amalekites made upon Ziklag in
David's absence, and the desolations they made there. They surprised the
city when it was left unguarded, plundered it, burnt it, and carried all
the women and children captives, [Sa1
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001), [Sa1
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#002). They intended, by this to
revenge the like havoc that David had lately made of them and their
country, [Sa1 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#008). He that had made
so many enemies ought not to have left his own concerns so naked and
defenceless. Those that make bold with others must expect that others
will make as bold with them and provide accordingly. Now observe in
this, 1. The cruelty of Saul's pity (as it proved) in sparing the
Amalekites; if he had utterly destroyed them, as he ought to have done,
these would not have been in being to do this mischief. 2. How David was
corrected for being so forward to go with the Philistines against
Israel. God showed him that he had better have staid at home and looked
after his own business. When we go abroad in the way of our duty we may
comfortably hope that God will take care of our families in our absence,
but not otherwise. 3. How wonderfully God inclined the hearts of these
Amalekites to carry the women and children away captives, and not to
kill them. When David invaded them he put all to the sword ([Sa1
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#009)), and no reason can be given why
they did not retaliate upon this city, but that God restrained them; for
he has all hearts in his hands, and says to the fury of the most cruel
men, Hitherto thou shalt come, and no further. Whether they spared them
to lead them in triumph, or to sell them, or to use them for slaves,
God's hand must be acknowledged, who designed to make use of the
Amalekites for the correction, not for the destruction, of the house of
David.

II\. The confusion and consternation that David and his men were in when
they found their houses in ashes and their wives and children gone into
captivity. Three days' march they had from the camp of the Philistines
to Ziklag, and now that they came thither weary, but hoping to find rest
in their houses and joy in their families, behold a black and dismal
scene was presented to them ([Sa1
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#003)), which made them all weep (David
himself not excepted), though they were men of war, till they had no
more power to weep, [Sa1 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#004). The
mention of David's wives, Ahinoam and Abigail, and their being carried
captive, intimates that this circumstance went nearer his heart than any
thing else. Note, It is no disparagement to the boldest and bravest
spirits to lament the calamities of relations and friends. Observe, 1.
This trouble came upon them when they were absent. It was the ancient
policy of Amalek to take Israel at an advantage. 2. It met them at their
return, and, for aught that appears, their own eyes gave them the first
intelligence of it. Note, When we go abroad we cannot foresee what evil
tidings may meet us when we come home again. The going out may be very
cheerful, and yet the coming in be very doleful. Boast not thyself
therefore of tomorrow, nor of tonight either, for thou knowest not what
a day, or a piece of a day, may bring forth, [Pro
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#001). If, when we come off a journey,
we find our tabernacles in peace, and not laid waste as David here found
his, let the Lord be praised for it.

III\. The mutiny and murmuring of David's men against him ([Sa1
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#006)): David was greatly distressed,
for, in the midst of all his losses, his own people spoke of stoning
him, 1. Because they looked upon him as the occasion of their
calamities, by the provocation he had given the Amalekites, and his
indiscretion in leaving Ziklag without a garrison in it. Thus apt are
we, when we are in trouble, to fly into a rage against those who are in
any way the occasion of our trouble, while we overlook the divine
providence, and have not that regard to the operations of God's hand in
it which would silence our passions, and make us patient. 2. Because now
they began to despair of that preferment which they had promised
themselves in following David. They hoped ere this to have been all
princes; and now to find themselves all beggars was such a
disappointment to them as made them grow outrageous, and threaten the
life of him on whom, under God, they had the greatest dependence. What
absurdities will not ungoverned passions plunge men into? This was a
sore trial to the man after God's own heart, and could not but go very
near him. Saul had driven him from his country, the Philistines had
driven him from their camp, the Amalekites had plundered his city, his
wives were taken prisoners, and now, to complete his woe, his own
familiar friends, in whom he trusted, whom he had sheltered, and who did
eat of his bread, instead of sympathizing with him and offering him any
relief, lifted up the heel against him and threatened to stone him.
Great faith must expect such severe exercises. But it is observable that
David was reduced to this extremity just before his accession to the
throne. At this very time, perhaps, the stroke was struck which opened
the door to his advancement. Things are sometimes at the worst with the
church and people of God just before they begin to mend.

IV\. David's pious dependence upon the divine providence and grace in
this distress: But David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. His men
fretted at their loss. The soul of the people was bitter, so the word
is. Their own discontent and impatience added wormwood and gall to the
affliction and misery, and made their case doubly grievous. But 1. David
bore it better, though he had more reason than any of them to lament it;
they gave liberty to their passions, but he set his graces on work, and
by encouraging himself in God, while they dispirited each other, he kept
his spirit calm and sedate. Or, 2. There may be a reference to the
threatening words his men gave out against him. They spoke of stoning
him; but he, not offering to avenge the affront, nor terrified by their
menaces, encouraged himself in the Lord his God, believed, and
considered with application to his present case, the power and
providence of God, his justice and goodness, the method he commonly
takes of bringing low and then raising up, his care of his people that
serve him and trust in him, and the particular promises he had made to
him of bringing him safely to the throne; with these considerations he
supported himself, not doubting but the present trouble would end well.
Note, Those that have taken the Lord for their God may take
encouragement from their relation to him in the worst of times. It is
the duty and interest of all good people, whatever happens, to encourage
themselves in God as their Lord and their God, assuring themselves that
he can and will bring light out of darkness, peace out of trouble, and
good out of evil, to all that love him and are the called according to
his purpose, [Rom 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028). It was David's
practice, and he had the comfort of it, What time I am afraid I will
trust in thee. When he was at his wits' end he was not at his faith's
end.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 30:7</span></span>

Solomon observes that the righteous is delivered out of trouble and the
wicked cometh in his stead, that the just falleth seven times a-day and
riseth again; so it was with David. Many were his troubles, but the Lord
delivered him out of them all, and particularly out of this of which we
have here an account.

I. He enquired of the Lord both concerning his duty - Shall I pursue
after this troop? and concerning the event - Shall I overtake them? [Sa1
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#008). It was a great advantage to
David that he had the high priest with him and the breast-plate of
judgment, which, as a public person, he might consult in all his
affairs, [Num 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#021). We cannot think
that he left Abiathar and the ephod at Ziklag, for then he and it would
have been carried away by the Amalekites, unless we may suppose them
hidden by a special providence, that they might be ready for David to
consult at his return. If we conclude that David had his priest and
ephod with him in the camp of the Philistines, it was certainly a great
neglect in him that he did not enquire of the Lord by them concerning
his engagement to Achish. Perhaps he was ashamed to own his religion so
far among the uncircumcised; but now he begins to apprehend that this
trouble is brought upon him to correct him for that oversight, and
therefore the first thing he does is to call for the ephod. It is well
if we get this good by our afflictions, to be reminded by them of
neglected duties, and particularly to be quickened by them to enquire of
the Lord. See [Ch1 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#013). David had no
room to doubt but that his war against these Amalekites was just, and he
had an inclination strong enough to set upon them when it was for the
recovery of that which was dearest to him in this world; and yet he
would not go about it without asking counsel of God, thereby owning his
dependence upon God and submission to him. If we thus, in all our ways,
acknowledge God, we may expect that he will direct our steps, as he did
David's here, answering him above what he asked, with an assurance that
he should recover all.

II\. He went himself in person, and took with him all the force he had,
in pursuit of the Amalekites, [Sa1
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#009), [Sa1
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#010). See how quickly, how easily,
how effectually the mutiny among the soldiers was quelled by his
patience and faith. When they spoke of stoning him ([Sa1
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#006)), if he had spoken of hanging
them, or had ordered that the ringleaders of the faction should
immediately have their heads struck off, though it would have been just,
yet it might have been of pernicious consequence to his interest in this
critical juncture; and, while he and his men were contending, the
Amalekites would have clearly carried off their spoil. But when he, as a
deaf man, heard not, smothered his resentments, and encouraged himself
in the Lord his God, the tumult of the people was stilled by his
gentleness and the power of God on their hearts; and, being thus mildly
treated, they are now as ready to follow his foot as they were but a
little before to fly in his face. Meekness is the security of any
government. All his men were willing to go along with him in pursuit of
the Amalekites, and he needed them all; but he was forced to drop a
third part of them by the way; 200 out of 600 were so fatigued with
their long march, and so sunk under the load of their grief, that they
could not pass the brook Besor, but staid behind there. This was, 1. A
great trial of David's faith, whether he could go on, in a dependence
upon the word of God, when so many of his men failed him. When we are
disappointed and discouraged in our expectations from second causes,
then to go on with cheerfulness, confiding in the divine power, this is
giving glory to God, by believing against hope, in hope. 2. A great
instance of David's tenderness to his men, that he would by no means
urge them beyond their strength, though the case itself was so very
urgent. The Son of David thus considers the frame of his followers, who
are not all alike strong and vigorous in their spiritual pursuits and
conflicts; but, where we are weak, there he is kind; nay, more there he
is strong, [Co2 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009), [Co2
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010).

III\. Providence threw one in their way that gave them intelligence of
the enemy's motions, and guided theirs; a poor Egyptian lad, scarcely
alive, is made instrumental of a great deal of good to David. God
chooses the foolish things of the world, with them to confound the wise.
Observe, 1. His master's cruelty to him. He had got out of him all the
service he could, and when the lad fell sick, probably being over-toiled
with his work, he barbarously left him to perish in the field, when he
was in no such haste but he might have put him into some of the
carriages, and brought him home, or, at least, have left him wherewithal
to support himself. That master has the spirit of an Amalekite, not of
an Israelite, that can thus use a servant worse than one would use a
beast. The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. This Amalekite
thought he should now have servants enough of the Israelite-captives,
and therefore cared not what became of his Egyptian slave, but could
willingly let him die in a ditch for want of necessaries, while he
himself was eating and drinking, [Sa1
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#016). Justly did Providence make this
poor servant, that was thus basely abused, instrumental towards the
destruction of a whole army of Amalekites and his master among the rest;
for God hears the cry of oppressed servants. 2. David's compassion to
him. Though he had reason to think he was one of those that had helped
to destroy Ziklag, yet, finding him in distress, he generously relieved
him, not only with bread and water ([Sa1
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#011)), but with figs and raisins,
[Sa1 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#012). Though the Israelites were
in haste, and had no great plenty for themselves, yet they would not
forbear to deliver one that was drawn unto death, nor say, Behold, we
knew it not, [Pro 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#011), [Pro
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#012). Those are unworthy the name of
Israelites who shut up the bowels of their compassion from persons in
distress. It was also prudently done to relieve this Egyptian; for,
though despicable, he was capable of doing them service: so it proved,
though they were not certain of this when they relieved him. It is a
good reason why we should neither do an injury nor deny a kindness to
any man that we know not but, some time or other, it may be in his power
to return either a kindness or an injury. 3. The intelligence David
received from this poor Egyptian when he had come to himself. He gave
him an account concerning his party. (1.) What they had done ([Sa1
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#014)): We made an invasion, etc. The
countries which David had pretended to Achish to have made an incursion
upon ([Sa1 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#010)) they really had
invaded and laid waste. What was then false now proved too true. (2.)
Whither they had gone, [Sa1 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#015).
This he promised David to inform him of upon condition he would spare
his life and protect him from his master, who, if he could hear of him
again (he thought), would add cruelty to cruelty. Such an opinion this
poor Egyptian had of the obligation of an oath that he desired no
greater security for his life than this: Swear unto me by God, not by
the gods of Egypt or Amalek, but by the one supreme God.

IV\. David, being directed to the place where they lay, securely
celebrating their triumphs, fell upon them, and, as he used to pray, saw
his desire upon his enemies. 1. The spoilers were cut off. The
Amalekites, finding the booty was rich, and having got with it (as they
thought) out of the reach of danger, were making themselves very merry
with it, [Sa1 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#016). All thoughts of
war were laid aside, nor were they in any haste to house their prey, but
spread themselves abroad on the earth in the most careless manner that
could be, and there they were found eating, and drinking, and dancing,
probably in honour of their idol-gods, to whom they gave the praise of
their success. In this posture David surprised them, which made the
conquest of them, and the blow he gave them, the more easy to him and
the more dismal to them. Then are sinners nearest to ruin when they cry,
Peace and safety, and put the evil day far from them. Nor does any thing
give our spiritual enemies more advantage against us than sensuality and
the indulgence of the flesh. Eating, and drinking, and dancing, have
been the soft and pleasant way in which many have gone down to the
congregation of the dead. Finding them thus off their guard, and from
their arms (many of them, it may be, drunk, and unable to make any
resistance), he put them all to the sword, and only 400 escaped, [Sa1
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#017). Thus is the triumphing of the
wicked short, and wrath comes on them, as on Belshazzar, when they are
in the midst of their jollity. 2. The spoil was recovered and brought
off, and nothing was lost, but a great deal gotten. (1.) They retrieved
all their own ([Sa1 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#018), [Sa1
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#019)): David rescued his two wives;
this is mentioned particularly, because this pleased David more than all
the rest of his achievements. Providence had so ordered it that the
Amalekites carefully preserved all that they had taken, concluding that
they kept it for themselves, though really they preserved it for the
right owners, so that there was nothing lacking to them; so it proved,
when they concluded all was gone: so much better is God oftentimes to us
than our own fears. Our Lord Jesus was indeed the Son of David and the
Son of Abraham, in this resembling them both (Abraham, [Gen
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#016), and David here), that he took
the prey from the mighty, and led captivity captive. But this was not
all. (2.) They took all that belonged to the Amalekites besides ([Sa1
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#020)): Flocks and herds, either such
as were taken from the Philistines and others, which David had the
disposal of by the law of war; or perhaps he made a sally into the
enemy's country, and fetched off these flocks and herds thence, as
interest for his own. This drove was put in the van of the triumph, with
this proclamation, "This is David's spoil. This we may thank him for."
Those who lately spoke of stoning him now caressed him and cried him up,
because they got by him more than they had then lost. Thus are the world
and its sentiments governed by interest.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 30:21</span></span>

We have here an account of the distribution of the spoil which as taken
from the Amalekites. When the Amalekites had carried away a rich booty
from the land of Judah and the Philistines they spent it in sensuality,
in eating, and drinking, and making merry with it; but David disposed of
the spoil taken after another manner, as one that knew that justice and
charity must govern us in the use we make of whatever we have in this
world. What God gives us he designs we should do good with, not serve
our lusts with. In the distribution of the spoil,

I. David was just and kind to those who abode by the stuff. They came
forth to meet the conquerors, and to congratulate them on this success,
though they could not contribute to it ([Sa1
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#021)); for we should rejoice in a
good work done, though Providence had laid us aside and rendered us
incapable of lending a hand to it. David received their address very
kindly, and was so far from upbraiding them with their weakness that he
showed himself solicitous concerning them. He saluted them; he asked
them of peace (so the word is), enquired how they did, because he had
left them faint and not well; or wished them peace, bade them be of good
cheer, they should lose nothing by staying behind; for of this they
seemed afraid, as perhaps David saw by their countenances.

1\. There were those that opposed their coming in to share in the spoil;
some of David's soldiers, probably the same that spoke of stoning him,
spoke now of defrauding their brethren; they are called wicked men and
men of Belial, [Sa1 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#022). Let not the
best of men think it strange if they have those attending them that are
very bad and they cannot prevail to make them better. We may suppose
that David had instructed his soldiers, and prayed with them, and yet
there were many among them that were wicked men and men of Belial, often
terrified with the apprehensions of death and yet wicked men still and
men of Belial. These made a motion that the 200 men who abode by the
stuff should only have their wives and children given them, but none of
their goods. Well might they be called wicked men; for this bespeaks
them, (1.) Very covetous themselves and greedy of gain; for hereby the
more would fall to their share. Awhile ago they would gladly have given
half their own to recover the other half, yet now that they have all
their own they are not content unless they can have their brethren's
too; so soon do men forget their low estate. All seek their own, and too
often more than their own. (2.) Very barbarous to their brethren; for,
to give them their wives and children, and not their estates, was to
give them the mouths without the meat. What joy could they have of their
families if they had nothing to maintain them with? Was this to do as
they would be done by? Those are men of Belial indeed who delight in
putting hardships upon their brethren, and care not who is starved, so
they may be fed to the full.

2\. David would by no means admit this, but ordered that those who
tarried behind should come in for an equal share in the spoils with
those that went to the battle, [Sa1
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#023), [Sa1
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#024). This he did, (1.) In gratitude
to God. The spoil we have is that which God has given us; we have it
from him, and therefore must use it under his direction as good
stewards. Let this check us when we are tempted to misapply that which
God has entrusted us with of this world's goods. "Nay, I must not do so
with that which God has given me, not serve Satan and a base lust with
those things which are not only the creatures of his power, but the
gifts of his bounty. God has recompensed us by delivering the company
that came against us into our hand, let not us then wrong our brethren.
God has been kind to us in preserving us and giving us victory, let not
us be unkind to them." God's mercy to us should make us merciful to one
another. (2.) In justice to them. It was true they tarried behind; but,
\[1.\] It was not for want of good-will to the cause or to their
brethren, but because they had not strength to keep up with them. It was
not their fault, but their infelicity; and therefore they ought not to
suffer for it. \[2.\] Though they tarried behind now, they had formerly
engaged many times in battle and done their part as well as the best of
their brethren, and their former services must be considered now that
there was something to enjoy. \[3.\] Even now they did good service, for
they abode by the stuff, to guard that which somebody must take care of,
else that might have fallen into the hands of some other enemy. Every
post of service is not alike a post of honour, yet those that are in any
way serviceable to the common interest, though in a meaner station,
ought to share in the common advantages, as in the natural body every
member has its use and therefore has its share of the nourishment.
First, Thus David overruled the wicked men, and men of Belial, with
reason, but with a great deal of mildness; for the force of reason is
sufficient, without the force of passion. He calls them his brethren,
[Sa1 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#023). Superiors often lose their
authority by haughtiness, but seldom by courtesy and condescension.
Secondly, Thus he settled the matter for the time to come, made it a
statute of his kingdom (a statute of distributions, primo Davidis - in
the first year of David's reign), an ordinance of war ([Sa1
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#025)), that as his part is that goes
down to the battle, and hazards his life in the high places of the
field, so shall his be that guards the carriages. Abraham returned the
spoils of Sodom to the right owners, and quitted his title to them jure
belli - derived from the laws of war. If we help others to recover their
right, we must not think that this alienates the property and makes it
ours. God appointed that the spoil of Midian should be divided between
the soldiers and the whole congregation, [Num
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#027). The case here was somewhat
different, but governed by the same general rule - that we are members
one of another. The disciples, at first, had all things common, and we
should still be ready to distribute, willing to communicate, [Ti1
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#018). When kings of armies did flee
apace, she that tarried at home did divide the spoil, [Psa
68:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#012).

II\. David was generous and kind to all his friends. When he had given
every one his own with interest there was a considerable overplus, which
David, as general, had the disposal of; probably the spoil of the tents
of the Amalekites consisted much in plate and jewels ([Jdg
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#024), [Jdg
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#026)), and these, because he thought
they would but make his own soldiers proud and effeminate, he thought
fit to make presents of to his friends, even the elders of Judah, [Sa1
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#026). Several places are here named
to which he sent of these presents, all of them in or near the tribe of
Judah. The first place named is Bethel, which signifies the house of
God; that place shall be first served for its name's sake; or perhaps it
means not the city so called, but the place where the ark was, which was
therefore the house of God. Thither David sent the first and best, to
those that attended there, for his sake who is the first and best.
Hebron is named last ([Sa1 30:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#031)),
probably because thither he sent the residuum, which was the largest
share, having an eye upon that place as fittest for his head-quarters,
[Sa2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#001). In David's sending these
presents observe, 1. His generosity. He aimed not to enrich himself, but
to serve his country; and therefore God afterwards enriched him, and set
him to rule the country he had served. It becomes gracious souls to be
generous. There is that scatters, and yet increases. 2. His gratitude.
He sent presents to all the places where he and his men were wont to
haunt ([Sa1 30:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#031)), that is, to all
that he had received kindness from, that had sheltered him and sent him
intelligence or provisions. Note, Honesty, as well as honour, obliges us
to requite the favours that have been done us, or at least to make a
real acknowledgment of them as far as is in the power of our hand. 3.
His piety. He calls his present a blessing; for no present we give to
our friends will be a comfort to them but as it is made so by the
blessing of God: it intimates that his prayers for them accompanied his
present. He also sent it out of the spoil of the enemies of the Lord (so
he calls them, not his enemies), that they might rejoice in the victory
for the Lord's sake, and might join with him in thanksgivings for it. 4.
His policy. He sent these presents among his countrymen to engage them
to be ready to appear for him upon his accession to the throne, which he
now saw at hand. A man's gift maketh room for him. He was fit to be a
king who thus showed the bounty and liberality of a king. Munificence
recommends a man more than magnificence. The Ziphites had none of his
presents, nor the men of Keilah; and thus he showed that, though he was
such a saint as not to revenge affronts, yet he was not such a fool as
not to take notice of them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 31](sa1031)

</div>
