<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2007)  [Next](sa2009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 8:0</span></span>

David having sought first the kingdom of God and the righteousness
thereof, settling the ark as soon as he was himself well settled, we are
here told how all other things were added to him. Here is an account, I.
Of his conquests. He triumphed, 1. Over the Philistines ([Sa2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001)). 2. Over the Moabites ([Sa2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002)). 3. Over the king of Zobah ([Sa2
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003), [Sa2
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#004)). 4. Over the Syrians ([Sa2
8:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#005), [Sa2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013)). 5. Over the Edomites ([Sa2
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#014)). II. Of the presents that were
brought him and the wealth he got from the nations he subdued, which he
dedicated to God ([Sa2 8:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#009)). III.
Of his court, the administration of his government ([Sa2
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#015)), and his chief officers ([Sa2
8:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#016)). This gives us a general idea
of the prosperity of David's reign.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 8:1</span></span>

God had given David rest from all his enemies that opposed him and made
head against him; and he having made a good use of that rest, has now
commission given him to make war upon them, and to act offensively for
the avenging of Israel's quarrels and the recovery of their rights; for
as yet they were not in full possession of that country to which by the
promise of God they were entitled.

I. He quite subdued the Philistines, [Sa2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001). They had attacked him when they
thought him weak ([Sa2 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017)), and went
by the worst then; but, when he found himself strong, he attacked them,
and made himself master of their country. They had long been vexatious
and oppressive to Israel. Saul got no ground against them; but David
completed Israel's deliverance out of their hands, which Samson had
begun long before, [Jdg 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#005).
Metheg-ammah was Gath (the chief and royal city of the Philistines) and
the towns belonging to it, among which there was a constant garrison
kept by the Philistines on the hill Ammah ([Sa2
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#024)), which was Metheg, a bridle (so
it signifies) or curb upon the people of Israel; this David took out of
their hand and used it as a curb upon them. Thus, when the strong man is
disarmed, the armour wherein he trusted is taken from him, and used
against him, [Luk 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#022). And after the
long and frequent struggles which the saints have had with the powers of
darkness, like Israel with the Philistines, the Son of David shall tread
them all under their feet and make the saints more than conquerors.

II\. He smote the Moabites, and made them tributaries to Israel, [Sa2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002). He divided the country into three
parts, two of which he destroyed, casting down the strong-holds, and
putting all to the sword; the third part he spared, to till the ground
and be servants to Israel. Dr. Lightfoot says, "He laid them on the
ground and measured them with a cord, who should be slain and who should
live;" and this is called meting out the valley of Succoth, [Psa
60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006). The Jews say he used this
severity with the Moabites because they had slain his parents and
brethren, whom he put under the protection of the king of Moab during
his exile, [Sa1 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#003), [Sa1
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#004). He did it in justice, because
they had been dangerous enemies to the Israel of God; and in policy,
because, if left in their strength, they still would have been so. But
observe, Though it was necessary that two-thirds should be cut off, yet
the line that was to keep alive, though it was but one, is ordered to be
a full line. Be sure to give that length enough; let the line of mercy
be stretched to the utmost in favorem vitae - so as to favour life. Acts
of indemnity must be construed so as to enlarge the favour. Now Balaam's
prophecy was fulfilled, A sceptre shall arise out of Israel, and shall
smite the corners of Moab, to the utmost of which the fatal line
extended, [Num 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017). The Moabites
continued tributaries to Israel till after the death of Ahab, [Kg2
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004), [Kg2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#005). Then they rebelled and were never
reduced.

III\. He smote the Syrians or Aramites. Of them there were two distinct
kingdoms, as we find them spoken of in the title of the 60th Psalm: Aram
Naharaim, - Syria of the rivers, whose head city was Damascus (famed for
its rivers, [Kg2 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#012)), and Aram
Zobah, which joined to it, but extended to Euphrates. These were the two
northern crowns. 1. David began with the Syrians of Zobah, [Sa2
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003), [Sa2
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#004). As he went to settle his border
at the river Euphrates (for so far the land conveyed by the divine grant
to Abraham and his seed did extend, [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018)), the king of Zobah opposed him,
being himself possessed of those countries which belonged to Israel; but
David routed his forces, and took his chariots and horsemen. The
horsemen are here said to be 700, but [Ch1
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#004) they are said to be 7000. If they
divided their horse by ten in a company, as it is probable they did, the
captains and companies were 700, but the horsemen were 7000. David
houghed the horses, cut the sinews of their hams, and so lamed them, and
made them unserviceable, at least in war, God having forbidden them to
multiply horses, [Deu 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016). David
reserved only 100 chariots out of 1000 for his own use: for he placed
his strength not in chariots nor horses, but in the living God ([Psa
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007)), and wrote it from his own
observation that a horse is a vain thing for safety, [Psa
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#016), [Psa
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#017). 2. The Syrians of Damascus
coming in to the relief of the king of Zobah fell with him. 22,000 were
slain in the field, [Sa2 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#005). So that
it was easy for David to make himself master of the country, and
garrison it for himself, [Sa2 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#006). The
enemies of God's church, that think to secure themselves, will prove, in
the end, to ruin themselves, by their confederacies with each other.
Associate yourselves, and you shall be broken in pieces, [Isa
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009).

IV\. In all these wars, 1. David was protected: The Lord preserved him
whithersoever he went. It seems, he went in person, and, in the cause of
God and Israel, jeoparded his own life in the high places of the field;
but God covered his head in the day of battle, which he often speaks of,
in his psalms, to the glory of God. 2. He was enriched. He took the
shields of gold which the servants of Hadadezer had in their custody
([Sa2 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#007)) and much brass from several
cities of Syria ([Sa2 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#008)), which he
was entitled to, not only jure belli - by the uncontrollable right of
the longest sword ("Get it, and take it"); but by commission from
heaven, and the ancient entail of these countries on the seed of
Abraham.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 8:9</span></span>

Here is, 1. The court made to David by the king of Hamath, who, it seems
was at this time at war with the king of Zobah. He hearing of David's
success against his enemy, sent his own son ambassador to him ([Sa2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#009), [Sa2
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#010)), to congratulate him on his
victory, to return him thanks for the favour he had done him in breaking
the power of one he was in fear of, and to beg his friendship. Thus he
not only secured but strengthened himself. And David lost nothing by
taking this little prince under his protection, any more than the old
Romans did by the like policy; for the wealth he had from the countries
he conquered by way of spoil he had from this by way of present or
gratuity: Vessels of silver and gold. Better get by composition than by
compulsion. 2. The offering David made to God of the spoils of the
nations and all the rich things that were brought him. He dedicated all
to the Lord, [Sa2 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#011), [Sa2
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#012). This crowned all his victories,
and made them far to out-shine Alexander's or Caesar's, that they sought
their own glory, but he aimed at the glory of God. All the precious
things he was master of were dedicated things, that is, they were
designed for the building of the temple; and a good omen it was of
kindness to the Gentiles in the fulness of time, and of the making of
God's house a house of prayer for all people, that the temple was built
of the spoils and presents of Gentile nations, in allusion to which we
find the kings of the earth bringing their glory and honour into the new
Jerusalem, [Rev 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024). Their gods of
gold David burnt ([Sa2 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#021)), but
their vessels of gold he dedicated. Thus in the conquest of a soul, by
the grace of the Son of David, what stands in opposition to God must be
destroyed, every lust mortified and crucified, but what may glorify him
must be dedicated and the property of it altered. Even the merchandise
and the hire must be holiness to the Lord ([Isa
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#018)), the gain consecrated to the
Lord of the whole earth ([Mic 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#013)),
and then it is truly our own and that most comfortably. 3. The
reputation he got, in a particular manner, by his victory over the
Syrians and their allies the Edomites, who acted in conjunction with
them, as appears by comparing the title of the 60th Psalm, which was
penned on this occasion, with [Sa2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013). He got himself a name for all
that conduct and courage which are the praise of a great and
distinguished general. Something extraordinary, it is likely, there was
in that action, which turned very much to his honour, yet he is careful
to transfer the honour to God, as appears by the psalm he penned on this
occasion, [Sa2 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#012). It is through God
that we do valiantly. 4. His success against the Edomites. They all
became David's servants, [Sa2 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#014).
Now, and not till now, Isaac's blessing was accomplished, by which Jacob
was made Esau's Lord ([Gen 27:37-40](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#037))
and the Edomites continued long tributary to the kings of Judah, as the
Moabites were to the kings of Israel, till, in Joram's time, they
revolted ([Ch2 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#008)) as Isaac had
there foretold that Esau should, in process of time, break the yoke from
off his neck. Thus David by his conquests, (1.) Secured peace to his
son, that he might have time to build the temple. And, (2.) Procured
wealth for his son, that he might have wherewith to build it. God
employs his servants variously, some in one employment, others in
another, some in the spiritual battles, others in the spiritual
buildings; and one prepares work for the other, that God may have the
glory of all. All David's victories were typical of the success of the
gospel against the kingdom of Satan, in which the Son of David rode
forth, conquering and to conquer, and he shall reign till he has brought
down all opposing rule, principality, and power: and he has, as David
had ([Sa2 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002)), a line to kill and a
line to save; for the same gospel is to some a savour of life unto life,
to others a savour of death unto death.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 8:15</span></span>

David was not so engaged in his wars abroad as to neglect the
administration of the government at home.

I. His care extended itself to all the parts of his dominion: He reigned
over all Israel ([Sa2 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#015)); not only
he had a right to reign over all the tribes, but he did so; they were
all safe under his protection, and shared in the fruits of his good
government.

II\. He did justice with an unbiased unshaken hand: He executed judgment
unto all his people, neither did wrong nor denied or delayed right to
any. This intimates, 1. His industry and close application to business,
his easiness of access and readiness to admit all addresses and appeals
made to him. All his people, even the meanest, and those too of the
meanest tribes, were welcome to his council-board. 2. His impartiality
and the equity of his proceedings, in administering justice. He never
perverted justice through favour or affection, nor had respect of
persons in judgment. Herein he was a type of Christ, who was faithful
and true, and who doth in righteousness both judge and make war, [Rev
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011). See [Psa
72:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#001), [Psa
72:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#002).

III\. He kept good order and good officers in his court. David being the
first king that had an established government (for Saul's reign was
short and unsettled) he had the modelling of the administration. In
Saul's time we read of no other great officer than Abner, that was
captain of the host. But David appointed more officers: Joab that was
general of the forces in the field, and Banaiah that was over the
Cherethites and Pelethites, who were either the city train-bands
(archers and slingers, so the Chaldee), or rather the life-guards, or
standing force, that attended the king's person, the pretorian band, the
militia. They were ready to do service at home, to assist in the
administering of justice, and to preserve the public peace. We find them
employed in proclaiming Solomon, [Kg1
1:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#038). 2. Two ecclesiastical officers:
Zadok and Ahimelech were priests, that is, they were most employed in
the priests' work under Abiathar, the high priest. 3. Two civil
officers: one that was recorder, or remembrancer, to put the king in
mind of business in its season (he was prime minister of state, yet not
entrusted with the custody of the king's conscience, as they say of our
lord chancellor, but only of the king's memory; let the king be put in
mind of business and he would do it himself); another that was scribe,
or secretary of state, that drew up public orders and despatches, and
recorded judgments given. 4. David's sons, as they grew up to be fit for
business, were made chief rulers; they had places of honour and trust
assigned them, in the household, or in the camp, or in the courts of
justice, according as their genius led them. They were chief about the
king (so it is explained, [Ch1 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#017)),
employed near him, that they might be under his eye. Our Lord Jesus has
appointed officers in his kingdom, for his honour and the good of the
community; when he ascended on high he gave these gifts ([Eph
4:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)), to every man his work, [Mar
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#034). David made his sons chief
rulers; but all believers, Christ's spiritual seed, are better
preferred, for they are made to our God kings and priests, [Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 9](sa2009)

</div>
