<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2023)  [Next](kg1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 24:0</span></span>

The last words of David, which we read in the chapter before, were
admirably good, but in this chapter we read of some of his last works,
which were none of the best; yet he repented, and did his first works
again, and so he finished well. We have here, I. His sin, which was
numbering the people in the pride of his heart ([Sa2
24:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001)). II. His conviction of the
sin, and repentance for it ([Sa2
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#010)). III. The judgment inflicted
upon him for it ([Sa2 24:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#011)). IV.
The staying of the judgment ([Sa2
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016), [Sa2
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#017)). V. The erecting of an altar in
token of God's reconciliation to him and his people ([Sa2
24:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#018)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 24:1</span></span>

Here we have,

I. The orders which David gave to Joab to number the people of Israel
and Judah, [Sa2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001), [Sa2
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#002). Two things here seem strange: -
1. The sinfulness of this. What harm was there in it? Did not Moses
twice number the people without any crime? Does not political arithmetic
come in among the other policies of a prince? Should not the shepherd
know the number of his sheep? Does not the Son of David know all his own
by name? Might not he make good use of this calculation? What evil has
he done, if he do this? Answer, It is certain that it was a sin, and a
great sin; but where the evil of it lay is not so certain. (1.) Some
think the fault was that he numbered those that were under twenty years
old if they were but of stature and strength able to bear arms, and that
this was the reason why this account was not enrolled, because it was
illegal, [Ch1 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#023), [Ch1
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#024). (2.) Others think the fault was
that he did not require the half-shekel, which was to be paid for the
service of the sanctuary whenever the people were numbered, as a ransom
for their souls, [Exo 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#012). (3.)
Others think that he did it with a design to impose a tribute upon them
for himself, to be put into his treasury, and this by way of poll, so
that when he knew their numbers he could tell what it would amount to.
But nothing of this appears, nor was David ever a raiser of taxes. (4.)
This was the fault, that he had no orders from God to do it, nor was
there any occasion for the doing of it. It was a needless trouble both
to himself and to his people. (5.) Some think that it was an affront to
the ancient promise which God made to Abraham, that his seed should be
innumerable as the dust of the earth; it savoured of distrust of that
promise, or a design to show that it was not fulfilled in the letter of
it. He would number those of whom God had said that they could not be
numbered. Those know not what they do that go about to disprove the word
of God. (6.) That which was the worst thing in numbering the people was
that David did it in the pride of his heart, which was Hezekiah's sin in
showing his treasures to the ambassadors. \[1.\] It was a proud conceit
of his own greatness in having the command of so numerous a people, as
if their increase, which was to be ascribed purely to the blessing of
God, had been owing to any conduct of his own. \[2.\] It was a proud
confidence in his own strength. By publishing among the nations the
number of his people, he thought to appear the more formidable, and
doubted not that, if he should have any war, he should overpower his
enemies with the multitude of his forces, trusting in God only. God
judges not of sin as we do. What appears to us harmless, or at least but
a small offence, may be a great sin in the eye of God, who sees men's
principles, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.
But his judgment, we are sure, is according to truth.

2\. The spring from which it is here said to arise is yet more strange,
[Sa2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001). It is not strange that the
anger of the Lord should be kindled against Israel. There was cause
enough for it. They were unthankful for the blessings of David's
government, and strangely drawn in to take part with Absalom first and
afterwards with Sheba. We have reason to think that their peace and
plenty made them secure and sensual, and that God was therefore
displeased with them. But that, in this displeasure, he should move
David to number the people is very strange. We are sure that God is not
the author of sin; he tempts no man: we are told ([Ch1
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#001)) that Satan provoked David to
number Israel. Satan, as an enemy, suggested it for a sin, as he put it
into the heart of Judas to betray Christ. God, as righteous Judge,
permitted it, with a design, from this sin of David, to take an occasion
to punish Israel for other sins, for which he might justly have punished
them without this. But, as before he brought a famine upon them for the
sin of Saul, so now a pestilence for the sin of David, that princes may
from these instances learn, when the judgments of God are abroad, to
suspect that their sins are the ground of the controversy, and may
therefore repent and reform themselves, which should have a great
influence upon national repentance and reformation, and that people may
learn to pray for those in authority, that God would keep them from sin,
because, if they sin, the kingdom smarts.

II\. The opposition which Joab made to these orders. Even he was aware
of David's folly and vain-glory in this design. He observed that David
gave no reason for it, only, Number the people, that I may know the
number of the people; and therefore he endeavored to divert his pride,
and in a much more respectful manner than he had before endeavoured to
divert his passion upon the death of Absalom; then he spoke rudely and
insolently ([Sa2 19:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#005)), but now as
became him: Now the Lord thy God add unto the people a hundred fold,
[Sa2 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#003). There was no occasion to
tax them, nor to enlist them, nor to make any distribution of them. They
were all easy and happy; and Joab wished both that their number might
increase and that the king, though old, might live to see their
increase, and have the satisfaction of it. "But why doth my lord the
king delight in this thing? What need is there of doing it?" Pauperis
est numerare pecus - Leave it to the poor to count their flocks.
Especially why should David, who speaks so much of delighting in God and
the exercises of devotion, and who, being old, one would think, should
have put away childish things, take a pleasure (so he calls it modestly,
but he means taking pride) in a thing of this nature? Note, Many things,
not in themselves sinful, turn into sin to us by our inordinately
delighting in them. Joab was aware of David's vanity herein, but he
himself was not. It would be good for us to have a friend that would
faithfully admonish us when we say or do any thing proud or
vain-glorious, for we often do so and are not ourselves aware of it.

III\. The orders executed notwithstanding. The king's word prevailed,
[Sa2 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#004). He would have it done; Joab
must not gainsay it, lest he be thought to grudge his time and pains in
the king's service. It is an unhappiness to great men to have those
about them that will aid them and serve them in that which is evil.
Joab, according to order, applied himself with some reluctancy to this
unpleasing task, and took the captains of the host to help him. They
began in the most distant places, in the east first, on the other side
Jordan ([Sa2 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#005)), then they went
towards Dan in the north ([Sa2 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#006)),
so to Tyre on the east, and thence to Beersheba in the south, [Sa2
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#007). Above nine months were spent in
taking this account, a great deal of trouble and amazement were
occasioned by it in the country ([Sa2
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#008)), and the sum total was, at
length, brought to the king at Jerusalem, [Sa2
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#009). Whether the numbers answered
David's expectation or no we are not told, nor whether the account fed
his pride or mortified it. The people were very many, but, it may be,
not so many as he thought they were. They had not increased in Canaan as
they had in Egypt, nor were much more than double to what they were when
they came into Canaan under Joshua, about 400 years before; yet it is an
evidence that Canaan was a very fruitful land that so many thousands
were maintained within so narrow a compass.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 24:10</span></span>

We have here David repenting of the sin and yet punished for it, God
repenting of the judgment and David thereby made more penitent.

I. Here is David's penitent reflection upon and confession of his sin in
numbering the people. While the thing was in doing, during all those
nine months, we do not find that David was sensible of his sin, for had
he been so he would have countermanded the orders he had given; but,
when the account was finished and laid before him, that very night his
conscience was awakened, and he felt the pain of it just then when he
promised himself the pleasure of it. When he was about to feast on the
satisfaction of the number of his people, it was turned into the gall of
asps within him; sense of the sin cast a damp upon the joy, [Sa2
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#010). 1. He was convinced of his sin:
His heart smote him before the prophet came to him (I think it should
not be read for, [Sa2 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#011), but and,
when David was up, so it is in the original), his conscience showed him
the evil of what he had done; now that appeared sin, and exceedingly
sinful, which before he saw no harm in. He reflected upon it with great
regret and his heart reproached him for it. Note, It is a good thing,
when a man has sinned, to have a heart within him to smite him for it;
it is a good sign of a principle of grace in the heart, and a good step
towards repentance and reformation. 2. He confessed it to God and begged
earnestly for the forgiveness of it. (1.) He owned that he had sinned,
sinned greatly, though to others it might seem no sin at all, or a very
little one. True penitents, whose consciences are tender and well
informed, see that evil in sin which others do not see. (2.) He owned
that he had done foolishly, very foolishly, because he had done it in
the pride of his heart; and it was folly for him to be proud of the
numbers of his people, when they were God's people, not his, and, as
many as they were, God could soon make them fewer. (3.) He cried to God
for pardon: I beseech thee, O Lord! take away the iniquity of thy
servant. If we confess our sins, we may pray in faith that God will
forgive them, and take away, by pardoning mercy, that iniquity which we
cast away by sincere repentance.

II\. The just and necessary correction which he suffered for this sin.
David had been full of tossings to and fro all night under the sense of
his sin, having no rest in his bones because of it, and he arose in the
morning expecting to hear of God's displeasure against him for what he
had done, or designing to speak with Gad his seer concerning it. Gad is
called his seer because he had him always at hand to advise with in the
things of God, and made use of him as his confessor and counsellor; but
God prevented him, and directed the prophet Gad what to say to him ([Sa2
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#011)), and,

1\. Three things are taken for granted, (1.) That David must be
corrected for his fault. It is too great a crime, and reflects too much
dishonour upon God, to go unpunished, even in David himself. Of the
seven things that God hates, pride is the first, [Pro
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#017). Note, Those who truly repent of
their sins, and have them pardoned are yet often made to smart for them
in this world. (2.) The punishment must answer to the sin. He was proud
of the judgment he must be chastised with for this sin must be such as
will make them fewer. Note, What we make the matter of our pride it is
just with God to take from us, or embitter to us, and, some way or
other, to make the matter of our punishment. (3.) It must be such a
punishment as the people must have a large share in, for God's anger was
kindled against Israel, [Sa2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001).
Though it was David's sin that immediately opened the sluice, the sins
of the people all contributed to the deluge.

2\. As to the punishment that must be inflicted,

(1.) David is told to choose what rod he will be beaten with, [Sa2
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#012), [Sa2
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#013). His heavenly Father must
correct him, but, to show that he does not do it willingly, he gives
David leave to make choice whether it shall be by war, famine, or
pestilence, three sore judgments, which greatly weaken and diminish a
people. God, by putting him thus to his choice, designed, \[1.\] To
humble him the more for his sin, which we would see to be exceedingly
sinful when he came to consider each of these judgments as exceedingly
dreadful. Or, \[2.\] To upbraid him with the proud conceit he had of his
own sovereignty over Israel. He that is so great a prince begins to
think he may have what he will. "Come then," says God, "which wilt thou
have of these three things?" Compare [Jer
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#017), I proclaim a liberty for you,
but it is such a liberty as this of David's to the sword, to the
pestilence, and to the famine; and [Jer
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#002), Such as are for death to death.
Or \[3.\] To give him some encouragement under the correction, letting
him know that God did not cast him out of communion with himself, but
that still his secret was with him, and in afflicting him he considered
his frame and what he could best bear. Or \[4.\] That he might the more
patiently bear the rod when it was a rod of his own choosing. The
prophet bids him advise with himself, and then tell him what answer he
should return to him that sent him. Note, Ministers are sent of God to
us, and they must give an account of the success of their embassy. It
concerns us therefore to consider what answer they shall return from us,
that they may give up their account of us with joy.

(2.) He objects only against the judgments of the sword, and, for the
other two, he refers the matter to God, but intimates his choice of the
pestilence rather ([Sa2 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#014)): I am
in a great strait; and well he might be when fear, and the pit, and the
snare, were before him, and if he escape one, he must inevitably fall
into the other, [Jer 48:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#043), [Jer
48:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#044). Note, Sin brings men into
straits; wise and good men often distress themselves by their own folly.
\[1.\] He begs that he may not fall into the hand of man. "Whatever
comes, let us not flee three months before our enemies;" this would
sully all the glory of David's triumphs and give occasion to the enemies
of God and Israel to behave themselves proudly. See [Deu
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#026), [Deu
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#027). "Their tender mercies are
cruel; and in three months they will do that damage to the nation which
many years will not repair." But, \[2.\] He casts himself upon God: Let
us fall now into the hand of the Lord, for his mercies are great. Men
are God's hand (so they are called, [Psa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014), the sword of his sending), yet
there are some judgments which come more immediately from his hand than
others, as famine and pestilence, and David refers it to God which of
these shall be the scourge, and God chooses the shortest, that he may
the sooner testify his being reconciled. But some think that David, by
these words, intimates his choice of the pestilence. The land had not
yet recovered the famine under which it smarted three years upon the
Gibeonites' account, and therefore, "Let us not be corrected with that
rod, for that also will be the triumph of our neighbours," hence we read
of the reproach of famine ([Eze
36:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#030)); "but if Israel must be
diminished, let it be by the pestilence, for that is falling into the
hands of the Lord," who usually inflicted that judgment by the hand of
his own immediate servants, the angels, as in the death of the
first-born of Egypt. That is a judgment to which David himself, and his
own family, lie as open as the meanest subject, but not so either to
famine or sword, and therefore David, tenderly conscious of his guilt,
chooses that. Sword and famine will devour one as well as another, but,
it may be thought, the destroying angel will draw his sword against
those who are known to God to be most guilty. This will be of the
shortest continuance, and he dreads the thought of lying long under the
tokens of God's displeasure. It is a dreadful thing, the apostle says,
to fall into the hands of the living God ([Heb
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#031)), a fearful thing indeed for
sinners that have, by their impenitency, shut themselves out from all
hope of his mercy. But David, a penitent, dares cast himself into God's
hand, knowing he shall find that his mercies are great. Good men, even
when they are under God's frowns, yet will entertain no other than good
thoughts of him. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.

(3.) A pestilence is accordingly sent ([Sa2
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#015)), which, for the extent of it,
spread from Dan to Beersheba, from one end of the kingdom to the other,
which showed it to come immediately from God's hand and not from any
natural causes. David has his choice; he suffers by miracle, and not by
ordinary means. For the continuance of it, it lasted from morning (this
very morning on which it was put to David's choice) to the time
appointed that is, to the third day (so Mr. Poole), or only to the
evening of the first day, the time appointed for the evening sacrifice,
so bishop Patrick and others, who reckon that the pestilence lasted but
nine hours, and that, in compassion to David, God shortened the time he
had first mentioned. The execution the pestilence did was very severe.
There died 70,000 men, that were all well, and sick, and dead, in a few
hours. What a great cry, may we suppose, was there now throughout all
the land of Israel, as there was in Egypt when the first-born were
slain! but that was at midnight, this in the daytime, [Psa
91:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#006). See the power of the angels,
when God gives them commission, either to save or to destroy. Joab is
nine months in passing with his pen, the angel but nine hours in passing
with his sword, through all the coasts and corners of the land of
Israel. See how easily God can bring down the proudest sinners, and how
much we owe daily to the divine patience. David's adultery is punished,
for the present, only with the death of one infant, his pride with the
death of all those thousands, so much does God hate pride. The number
slain amounted to almost half a decimation, 70,000 being about one in
twenty. Now, we may suppose, David's flesh trembled for fear of God and
he was afraid of his judgments, [Psa
119:120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120).

III\. God's gracious relaxation of the judgment, when it began to be
inflicted upon Jerusalem ([Sa2 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016)):
The angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem, as if he intended to do
greater execution there than any where else, even to destroy it. The
country had drunk of the bitter cup, but Jerusalem must drink the dregs.
It should seem that was last numbered, and therefore was reserved to be
last plagued; perhaps there was more wickedness, especially more pride
(and that was the sin now chastised), in Jerusalem than elsewhere,
therefore the hand of the destroyer is stretched out upon that; but then
the Lord repented him of the evil, changed not his mind, but his way;
and said to the destroying angel, It is enough; stay now thy hand, and
let mercy rejoice against judgment. Jerusalem shall be spared for the
ark's sake, for it is the place God hath chosen to put his name there.
See here how ready God is to forgive and how little pleasure he takes in
punishing; and let it encourage us to meet him by repentance in the way
of his judgments. This was on Mount Moriah. Dr. Lightfoot observes that
in the very place where Abraham, by a countermand from heaven, was
stayed from slaying his son, this angel, by a like countermand, was
stayed from destroying Jerusalem. It is for the sake of the great
sacrifice that our forfeited lives are preserved from the destroying
angel.

IV\. David's renewed repentance for his sin upon this occasion, [Sa2
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#017). He saw the angel (God opening
his eyes for that purpose), saw his sword stretched out to destroy, a
flaming sword, saw him ready to sheath it upon the orders given him to
stay proceedings; seeing all this, he spoke, not to the angel (he knew
better than to address himself to the servant in the presence of the
Master, or to give that honour to the creature which is the Creator's
due), but to the Lord, and said, Lo, I have sinned. Note, True
penitents, the more they perceive of God's sparing pardoning mercy the
more humbled they are for sin and the more resolved against it. They
shall be ashamed when I am pacified towards them, [Eze
16:63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#063). Observe, 1. How he criminates
himself, as if he could never speak ill enough of his own fault: "I have
sinned, and I have done wickedly; mine is the crime, and therefore on me
be the cross. Let thy hand be against me, and my father's house. I am
the sinner, let me be the sufferer;" so willing was he to accept the
punishment of his iniquity, though he was worth 10,000 of them. 2. How
he intercedes for the people, whose bitter lamentations made his heart
to ache, and his ears to tingle: These sheep, what have they done? Done!
Why they had done much amiss; it was their sin that provoked God to
leave David to himself to do as he did; yet, as becomes a penitent, he
is severe upon his own faults, while he extenuates theirs. Most people,
when God's judgments are abroad, charge others with being the cause of
them, and care not who falls by them, so they can escape. But David's
penitent and public spirit was otherwise affected. Let this remind us of
the grace of our Lord Jesus, who gave himself for our sins and was
willing that God's hand should be against him, that we might escape. The
shepherd was smitten that the sheep might be spared.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 24:18</span></span>

Here is, I. A command sent to David to erect an altar in the place where
he saw the angel, [Sa2 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#018). This was
to intimate to David, 1. That, upon his repeated submission and
humiliation, God was now thoroughly reconciled to him; for, if the Lord
had been pleased to kill him, he would not have accepted an offering,
and therefore would not have ordered him to build an altar. God's
encouraging us to offer to him spiritual sacrifices is a comfortable
evidence of his reconciling us to himself. 2. That peace is made between
God and sinners by sacrifice, and not otherwise, even by Christ the
great propitiation, of whom all the legal sacrifices were types. It is
for his sake that the destroying angel is told to stay his hand. 3. That
when God's judgments are graciously stayed we ought to acknowledge it
with thankfulness to his praise. This altar was to be for
thank-offerings. See [Isa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001).

II\. The purchase which David made of the ground in order hereunto. It
seems the owner was a Jebusite, Araunah by name, proselyted no doubt to
the Jewish religion, though by birth a Gentile, and therefore allowed,
not only to dwell among the Israelites, but to have a possession of his
own in a city, [Lev 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#029), [Lev
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#030). The piece of ground was a
threshing-floor, a mean place, yet thus dignified - a place of labour,
therefore thus dignified. Now,

1\. David went in person to the owner, to treat with him. See his
justice, that he would not so much as use this place in the present
exigence, though the proprietor was an alien, though he himself was a
king, and though he had express orders from God to rear an altar there,
till he had bought it and paid for it. God hates robbery for
burnt-offering. See his humility, how far he was from taking state;
though a king, he was now a penitent, and therefore, in token of his
self-abasement, he neither sent for Araunah to come to him nor sent
another to deal with him, but went himself ([Sa2
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#019)), and, though it looked like a
diminution of himself, he lost no honour by it. Araunah, when he saw
him, went and bowed himself to the ground before him [Sa2
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#020). Great men will never be the
less respected for their humility, but the more.

2\. Araunah, when he understood his business ([Sa2
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#021)), generously offered him, not
only the ground to build his altar on, but oxen for sacrifices, and
other things that might be of use to him in the service ([Sa2
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#022)), and all this gratis, and a
good prayer into the bargain: The Lord thy God accept thee! This he did,
(1.) Because he had a generous spirit with a great estate. He gave as a
king ([Sa2 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#023)); though an ordinary
subject, he had the spirit of a prince. In the Hebrew it is, He gave,
even the king to the king, whence it is supposed that Araunah had been
king of the Jebusites in that place, or was descended from their royal
family, though now a tributary to David. (2.) Because he highly esteemed
David, though his conqueror, upon the score of his personal merits, and
never thought he could do too much to oblige him. (3.) Because he had an
affection for Israel, and earnestly desired that the plague might be
stayed; and the honour of its being stayed at his threshing-floor, he
would account a valuable consideration for all he now tendered to David.
3. David resolved to pay the full value of it, and did so, [Sa2
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#024). Here were two generous souls
well met. Araunah is very willing to give; but David is determined to
buy, and for a good reason: he will not offer that to God which costs
him nothing. He would not take advantage of the pious Jebusite's
generosity. He thanked him, no doubt, for his kind offer, but paid him
fifty shekels of silver for the floor and the oxen for the present
service, and afterwards 600 shekels of gold for the ground adjoining, to
build the temple on. Note, Those know not what religion is whose chief
care it is to make it cheap and easy to themselves, and who are best
pleased with that which costs them least pains or money. What have we
our substance for but to honour God with it? and how can it be better
bestowed?

III\. The building of the altar, and the offering of the proper
sacrifices upon it ([Sa2 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#025)),
burnt-offerings to the glory of God's justice in the execution that had
been done, and peace-offerings to the glory of his mercy in the
seasonable staying of the process. Hereupon God showed (it is supposed
by fire from heaven consuming the sacrifices) that he was entreated for
the land, and that it was in mercy that the plague was removed and in
token of God's being reconciled both to prince and people. Christ is our
altar, our sacrifice; in him alone we may expect to find favour with
God, to escape his wrath, and the sword, the flaming sword, of the
cherubim who keep the way of the tree of life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Introduction](kg1000)

</div>
