<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2004)  [Next](sa2006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 5:0</span></span>

How far Abner's deserting the house of Saul, his murder, and the murder
of Ish-bosheth, might contribute to the perfecting of the revolution,
and the establishing of David as king over all Israel, does not appear;
but, it should seem, that happy change followed presently thereupon,
which in this chapter we have an account of. Here is, I. David anointed
king by all the tribes ([Sa2 5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001)).
II. Making himself master of the strong-hold of Zion ([Sa2
5:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006)). III. Building himself a house
and strengthening himself in his kingdom ([Sa2
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#011), [Sa2
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#012)). IV. His children that were born
after this ([Sa2 5:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#013)). V. His
victories over the Philistines ([Sa2
5:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 5:1</span></span>

Here is, I. The humble address of all the tribes to David, beseeching
him to take upon him the government (for they were now as sheep having
no shepherd), and owning him for their king. Though David might by no
means approve the murder of Ish-bosheth, yet he might improve the
advantages he gained thereby, and accept the applications made to him
thereupon. Judah had submitted to David as their king above seven years
ago, and their ease and happiness, under his administration, encouraged
the rest of the tribes to make their court to him. What numbers came
from each tribe, with what zeal and sincerity they came, and how they
were entertained for three days at Hebron, when they were all of one
heart to make David king, we have a full account, 1 Chr. 12:23-40. Here
we have only the heads of their address, containing the grounds they
went upon in making David king. 1. Their relation to him was some
inducement: "We are thy bone and thy flesh ([Sa2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001)), not only thou art our bone and
our flesh, not a stranger, unqualified by the law to be king ([Deu
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#015)), but we are thine," that is,
"we know that thou considerest us as thy bone and thy flesh, and hast as
tender a concern for us as a man has for his own body, which Saul and
his house had not. We are thy bone and thy flesh, and therefore thou
wilt be as glad as we shall be to put an end to this long civil war; and
thou wilt take pity on us, protect us, and do thy utmost for our
welfare." Those who take Christ for their king may thus plead with him:
"We are thy bone and thy flesh, thou hast made thyself in all things
like unto thy brethren ([Heb 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#017));
therefore be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand," [Isa
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#006). 2. His former good services to
the public were a further inducement ([Sa2
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#002)): "When Saul was king he was but
the cypher, thou wast the figure, thou wast he that leddest out Israel
to battle, and broughtest them in in triumph; and therefore who so fit
now to fill the vacant throne?" He that is faithful in a little deserves
to be entrusted with more. Former good offices done for us should be
gratefully remembered by us when there is occasion. 3. The divine
appointment was the greatest inducement of all: The Lord said, Thou
shalt feed my people Israel, that is, thou shalt rule them; for princes
are to feed their people as shepherds, in every thing consulting the
subjects' benefit, feeding them and not fleecing them. "And thou shalt
be not only a king to govern in peace, but a captain to preside in war,
and be exposed to all the toils and perils of the camp." Since God has
said so, now at length, when need drives them to it, they are persuaded
to say so too.

II\. The public and solemn inauguration of David, [Sa2
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#003). A convention of the states was
called; all the elders of Israel came to him; the contract was settled,
the pacta conventa - covenants, sworn to, and subscribed on both sides.
He obliged himself to protect them as their judge in peace and captain
in war; and they obliged themselves to obey him. He made a league with
them to which God was a witness: it was before the Lord. Hereupon he
was, for the third time, anointed king. His advances were gradual, that
his faith might be tried and that he might gain experience. And thus his
kingdom typified that of the Messiah, which was to come to its height by
degrees; for we see not yet all things put under him ([Heb
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#008)), but we shall see it, [Co1
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025).

III\. A general account of his reign and age. He was thirty years old
when he began to reign, upon the death of Saul, [Sa2
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#004). At that age the Levites were at
first appointed to begin their administration, [Num
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003). About that age the Son of David
entered upon his public ministry, [Luk
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#023). Then men come to their full
maturity of strength and judgment. He reigned, in all, forty years and
six months, of which seven years and a half in Hebron and thirty-three
years in Jerusalem, [Sa2 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#005). Hebron
had been famous, [Jos 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#015). It was a
priest's city. But Jerusalem was to be more so, and to be the holy city.
Great kings affected to raise cities of their own, [Gen
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011), 36, 32-35. David did so, and
Jerusalem was the city of David. It is a name famous to the end of the
Bible (Rev. 21), where we read of a new Jerusalem.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 5:6</span></span>

If Salem, the place of which Melchizedec was king, was Jerusalem (as
seems probable from [Psa 76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002)), it was
famous in Abraham's time. Joshua, in his time, found it the chief city
of the south part of Canaan, [Jos
10:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#001). It fell to Benjamin's lot
([Jos 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#028)), but joined close to
Judah's, [Jos 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008). The children of
Judah had taken it ([Jdg 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008)), but the
children of Benjamin suffered the Jebusites to dwell among them ([Jdg
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021)), and they grew so upon them that
it became a city of Jebusites, [Jdg
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#011). Now the very first exploit
David did, after he was anointed king over all Israel, was to gain
Jerusalem out of the hand of the Jebusites, which, because it belonged
to Benjamin, he could not well attempt till that tribe, which long
adhered to Saul's house ([Ch1 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#029)),
submitted to him. Here we have,

I. The Jebusites' defiance of David and his forces. They said, Except
thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither,
[Sa2 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006). They sent David this
provoking message, because, as it is said afterwards, on another
occasion, they could not believe that ever an enemy would enter into the
gates of Jerusalem, [Lam 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#012). They
confided either, 1. In the protection of their gods, which David, in
contempt, had called the blind and the lame, for they have eyes and see
not, feet and walk not. "But," say they, "these are the guardians of our
city, and except thou take these away (which thou canst never do) thou
canst not come in hither." Some think they were constellated images of
brass set up in the recess of the fort, and entrusted with the custody
of the place. They called their idols their Mauzzim, or strong-holds
([Dan 11:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#038)) and as such relied on
them. The name of the Lord is our strong tower, and his arm is strong,
his eyes are piercing. Or, 2. In the strength of their fortifications,
which they thought were made so impregnable by nature or art, or both,
that the blind and the lame were sufficient to defend them against the
most powerful assailant. The strong-hold of Zion they especially
depended on, as that which could not be forced. Probably they set blind
and lame people, invalids or maimed soldiers, to make their appearance
upon the walls, in scorn of David and his men, judging them an equal
match for him. Though there remain but wounded men among them, yet they
should serve to beat back the besiegers. Compare [Jer
37:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#010). Note, The enemies of God's
people are often very confident of their own strength and most secure
when their day to fall draws nigh.

II\. David's success against the Jebusites. Their pride and insolence,
instead of daunting him, animated him, and when he made a general
assault he gave this order to his men: "He that smiteth the Jebusites,
let him also throw down into the ditch, or gutter, the lame and the
blind, which are set upon the wall to affront us and our God." It is
probable they had themselves spoken blasphemous things, and were
therefore hated of David's soul. Thus [Sa2
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#008) may be read; we fetch our reading
of it from [Ch1 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#006), which speaks
only of smiting the Jebusites, but nothing of the blind and the lame.
The Jebusites had said that if these images of theirs did not protect
them the blind and the lame should not come into the house, that is,
they would never again trust their palladium (so Mr. Gregory understands
it) nor pay the respect they had paid to their images; and David, having
gained the fort, said so too, that these images, which could not protect
their worshippers, should never have any place there more.

III\. His fixing his royal seat in Sion. He himself dwelt in the fort
(the strength whereof, which had given him opposition, and was a terror
to him, now contributed to his safety), and he built houses round about
for his attendants and guards ([Sa2
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#009)) from Millo (the town-hall, or
state-house) and inward. He proceeded and prospered in all he set his
hand to, grew great in honour, strength, and wealth, more and more
honourable in the eyes of his subjects and formidable in the eyes of his
enemies; for the Lord God of hosts was with him. God has all creatures
at his command, makes what use he pleases of them, and serves his own
purposes by them; and he was with him, to direct, preserve, and prosper
him, Those that have the Lord of hosts for them need not fear what hosts
of men or devils can do against them. Those who grow great must ascribe
their advancement to the presence of God with them, and give him the
glory of it. The church is called Sion, and the city of the living God.
The Jebusites, Christ's enemies, must first be conquered and
dispossessed, the blind and the lame taken away, and then Christ divides
the spoil, sets up his throne there, and makes it his residence by the
Spirit.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 5:11</span></span>

Here is, I. David's house built, a royal palace, fit for the reception
of the court he kept and the homage that was paid to him, [Sa2
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#011). The Jews were husbandmen and
shepherds, and did not much addict themselves either to merchandise or
manufactures; and therefore Hiram, king of Tyre, a wealthy prince, when
he sent to congratulate David on his accession to the throne, offered
him workmen to build him a house. David thankfully accepted the offer,
and Hiram's workmen built David a house to his mind. Many have excelled
in arts and sciences who were strangers to the covenants of promise. Yet
David's house was never the worse, nor the less fit to be dedicated to
God, for being built by the sons of the stranger. It is prophesied of
the gospel church, The sons of the strangers shall build up thy walls,
and their kings shall minister unto thee, [Isa
60:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#010).

II\. David's government settled and built up, [Sa2
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#012). 1. His kingdom was established,
there was nothing to shake it, none to disturb his possession or
question his title. He that made him king established him, because he
was to be a type of Christ, with whom God's hand should be established,
and his covenant stand fast, [Psa
89:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#021). Saul was made king, but not
established; so Adam in innocency. David was established king, so is the
Son of David, with all who through him are made to our God kings and
priests. 2. It was exalted in the eyes both of its friends and enemies.
Never had the nation of Israel looked so great or made such a figure as
it began now to do. Thus it is promised of Christ that he shall be
higher than the kings of the earth, [Psa
89:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027). God has highly exalted him,
[Phi 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009). 3. David perceived, by the
wonderful concurrence of providences to his establishment and
advancement, that God was with him. By this I know that thou favourest
me, [Psa 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#011). Many have the favour
of God and do not perceive it, and so want the comfort of it: but to be
exalted to that and established in it, and to perceive it, is happiness
enough. 4. He owned that it was for his people Israel's sake that God
had done great things for him, that he might be a blessing to them and
they might be happy under his administration. God did not make Israel
his subjects for his sake, that he might be great, and rich, and
absolute: but he made him their king for their sake, that he might lead,
and guide, and protect them. Kings are ministers of God to their people
for good, [Rom 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004).

III\. David's family multiplied and increased. All the sons that were
born to him after he came to Jerusalem are here mentioned together,
eleven in all, besides the six that were born to him before in Hebron,
[Sa2 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#002), [Sa2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#005). There the mothers are mentioned,
not here; only, in general, it is said that he took more concubines and
wives, [Sa2 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#013). Shall we praise him
for this? We praise him not; we justify him not; nor can we scarcely
excuse him. The bad example of the patriarchs might make him think there
was no harm in it, and he might hope it would strengthen his interest,
by multiplying his alliances, and increasing the royal family. Happy is
the man that has his quiver full of these arrows. But one vine by the
side of the house, with the blessing of God, may send boughs to the sea
and branches to the rivers. Adam, by one wife, peopled the world, and
Noah re-peopled it. David had many wives, and yet that did not keep him
from coveting his neighbour's wife and defiling her; for men that have
once broken the fence will wander endlessly. Of David's concubines, see
[Sa2 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#016); [Sa2
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#022); [Sa2
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#005). Of his sons, see [Ch1
3:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#001).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 5:17</span></span>

The particular service for which David was raised up was to save Israel
out of the hand of the Philistines, [Sa2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#018). This therefore divine
Providence, in the first place, gives him an opportunity of
accomplishing. Two great victories obtained over the Philistines we have
here an account of, by which David not only balanced the disgrace and
retrieved the loss Israel had sustained in the battle wherein Saul was
slain, but went far towards the total subduing of those vexatious
neighbours, the last remains of the devoted nations.

I. In both these actions the Philistines were the aggressors, stirred
first towards their own destruction, and pulled it on their own heads.
1. In the former they came up to seek David ([Sa2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017)), because they heard that he was
anointed king over Israel. He that under Saul had slain his ten
thousands, what would he do when he himself came to be king! They
therefore thought it was time to look about them, and try to crush his
government in its infancy, before it was well settled. Their success
against Saul, some years ago, perhaps encouraged them to make this
attack upon David; but they considered not that David had that presence
of God with him which Saul had forfeited and lost. The kingdom of the
Messiah, as soon as ever it was set up in the world, was thus vigorously
attacked by the powers of darkness, who, with the combined force both of
Jews and Gentiles, made head against it. The heathen raged, and the
kings of the earth set themselves to oppose it; but all in vain, [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001), etc. The destruction will turn,
as this did, upon Satan's own kingdom. They took counsel together, but
were broken in pieces, [Isa 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009), [Isa
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#010). 2. In the latter they came up
yet again, hoping to recover what they had lost in the former
engagement, and their hearts being hardened to their destruction, [Sa2
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#022). 3. In both they spread
themselves in the valley of Rephaim, which lay very near Jerusalem. That
city they hoped to make themselves masters of before David had completed
the fortifications of it. Jerusalem, from its infancy, has been aimed
at, and struck at, with a particular enmity. Their spreading themselves
intimates that they were very numerous and that they made a very
formidable appearance. We read of the church's enemies going up on the
breadth of the earth ([Rev 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009)), but
the further they spread themselves the fairer mark they are to God's
arrows.

II\. In both, David, though forward enough to go forth against them (for
as soon as he heard it he went down to the hold, to secure some
important and advantageous post, [Sa2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017)), yet entered not upon action
till he had enquired of the Lord by the breast-plate of judgment, [Sa2
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#019), and again, [Sa2
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#023). His enquiry was twofold: - 1.
Concerning his duty: "Shall I go up? Shall I have a commission from
heaven to engage them?" One would think he needed not doubt this; what
was he made king for, but to fight the battles of the Lord and Israel?
But a good man loves to see God going before him in every step he takes.
"Shall I go up now?" It is to be done, but is it to be done at this
time? In all thy ways acknowledge him. And besides, though the
Philistines were public enemies, yet some of them had been his
particular friends. Achish had been kind to him in his distress, and had
protected him. "Now," says David, "ought not I, in remembrance of that,
rather to make peace with them than to make war with them?" "No," says
God, "they are Israel's enemies, and are doomed to destruction, and
therefore scruple not, but go up." 2. Concerning his success. His
conscience asked the former question, Shall I go up? His prudence asked
this, Wilt thou deliver them into my hand? Hereby he owns his dependence
on God for victory, that he could not conquer them unless God delivered
them into his hand, and refers his cause to the good pleasure of God:
Wilt thou do it? Yea, says God, I will doubtless do it. If God send us,
he will bear us out and stand by us. The assurance God has given us of
victory over our spiritual enemies, that he will tread Satan under our
feet shortly, should animate us in our spiritual conflicts. We do not
fight at uncertainty. David had now a great army at command and in good
heart, yet he relied more on God's promise than his own force.

III\. In the former of these engagements David routed the army of the
Philistines by dint of sword ([Sa2
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#020)): He smote them; and when he had
done, 1. He gave his God the glory; he said, "The Lord has broken forth
upon my enemies before me. I could not have done it if he had not done
it before me; he opened the breach like the breach of waters in a dam,
which when once opened grows wider and wider." The principal part of the
work was God's doing; nay, he did all; what David did was not worth
speaking of; and therefore, Not unto us, but unto the Lord, give glory.
He hoped likewise that this breach, like that of waters, was as the
opening of the sluice, to let in a final desolation upon them; and, to
perpetuate the remembrance of it, he called the place Baal-perazim, the
master of the breaches, because, God having broken in upon their forces,
he soon had the mastery of them. Let posterity take notice of it to
God's honour. 2. He put their gods to shame. They brought the images of
their gods into the field as their protectors, in imitation of the
Israelites bringing the ark into their camp; but, being put to flight,
they could not stay to carry off their images, for they were a burden to
the weary beasts ([Isa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001)), and
therefore they left them to fall with the rest of their baggage into the
hands of the conqueror. Their images failed them, and gave them no
assistance, and therefore they left their images to shift for
themselves. God can make men weary of those things that they have been
most fond of, and compel them to desert what they dote upon, and cast
even the idols of silver and gold to the moles and the bats, [Isa
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#020), [Isa
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#021). David and his men converted to
their own use the rest of the plunder, but the images they burnt, as God
had appointed ([Deu 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#005)): "You shall
burn their graven images with fire, in token of your detestation of
idolatry, and lest they should be a snare." Bishop Patrick well observes
here that when the ark fell into the Philistines' hands it consumed
them, but, when these images fell into the hands of Israel, they could
not save themselves from being consumed.

IV\. In the latter of these engagements God gave David some sensible
tokens of his presence with him, bade him not fall upon them directly,
as he had done before, but fetch a compass behind them, [Sa2
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#023). 1. God appoints him to draw
back, as Israel stood still to see the salvation of the Lord. 2. He
promised him to charge the enemy himself, by an invisible host of
angels, [Sa2 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#024). "Thou shalt hear
the sound of a going, like the march of an army in the air, upon the
tops of the mulberry trees." Angels tread light, and he that can walk
upon the clouds can, when he pleases, walk on the tops of trees, or (as
bishop Patrick understands it) at the head of the mulberry-trees, that
is, of the wood, or hedge-row of those trees. "And, by that sign, thou
shalt know that the Lord goes out before thee; though thou see him not,
yet thou shalt hear him, and faith shall come and be confirmed by
hearing. He goes forth to smite the host of the Philistines." When David
had himself smitten them ([Sa2 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#020)),
he ascribed it to God: The Lord has broken forth upon my enemies, to
reward him for which thankful acknowledgment the next time God did it
himself alone, without putting him to any toil or peril. Those that own
God in what he has done for them will find him doing more. But observe,
Though God promised to go before him and smite the Philistines, yet
David, when he heard the sound of the going must bestir himself and be
ready to pursue the victory. Note, God's grace must quicken our
endeavours. If God work in us both to will and to do, it does not follow
that we must sit still, as those that have nothing to do, but we must
therefore, work out our own salvation with all possible care and
diligence, [Phi 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012), [Phi
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013). The sound of the going was, (1.)
A signal to David when to move; it is comfortable going out when God
goes before us. And, (2.) Perhaps it was an alarm to the enemy, and put
them into confusion. Hearing the march of an army against their front,
they retreated with precipitation, and fell into David's army which lay
behind them in their rear. Of those whom God fights against it is said
([Lev 26:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#036)), The sound of a shaken
leaf shall chase them. (3.) The success of this is briefly set down,
[Sa2 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#025). David observed his orders,
waited till God moved, and stirred them, but not till then. Thus he was
trained up in a dependence on God and his providence. God performed his
promise, went before him, and routed all the enemies' force, and David
failed not to improve his advantages; he smote the Philistines, even to
the borders of their own country. When the kingdom of the Messiah was to
be set up, the apostles that were to beat down the devil's kingdom must
not attempt any thing till they received the promise of the Spirit, who
came with a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind ([Act
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#002)), which was typified by this sound
of the going on the tops of the mulberry trees; and, when they heard
that, they must bestir themselves, and did so; they went forth
conquering and to conquer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 6](sa2006)

</div>
