<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2008)  [Next](sa2010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 9:0</span></span>

The only thing recorded in this chapter is the kindness David showed to
Jonathan's seed for his sake. I. The kind enquiry he made after the
remains of the house of Saul, and his discovery of Mephibosheth ([Sa2
9:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#001)). II. The kind reception he gave
to Mephibosheth, when he was brought to him ([Sa2
9:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#005)). III. The kind provision he
made for him and his ([Sa2 9:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#009)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 9:1</span></span>

Here is, I. David's enquiry after the remains of the ruined house of
Saul, [Sa2 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#001). This was a great while
after his accession to the throne, for it should seem that Mephibosheth,
who was but five years old when Saul died, had now a son born, [Sa2
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#012). David had too long forgotten his
obligations to Jonathan, but now, at length, they are brought to his
mind. It is good sometimes to bethink ourselves whether there be any
promises or engagements that we have neglected to make good; better do
it late than never. The compendium which Paul gives us of the life of
David is this ([Act 13:36](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#036)), that he
served his generation according to the will of God, that is, he was a
man that made it his business to do good; witness this instance, where
we may observe,

1\. That he sought an opportunity to do good. He might perhaps have
satisfied his conscience with the performance of his promise to Jonathan
if he had been only ready, upon request or application made to him by
any of his seed, to help and succour them. But he does more, he enquires
of those about him first ([Sa2 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#001)),
and, when he met with a person that was likely to inform him, asked him
particularly, Is there any yet left of the house of Saul, that I may
show him kindness? [Sa2 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#003). "Is there
any, not only to whom I may do justice ([Num
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#008)), but to whom I may show
kindness?" Note, Good men should seek opportunities of doing good. The
liberal deviseth liberal things, [Isa
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#008). For, the most proper objects of
our kindness and charity are such as will not be frequently met with
without enquiry. The most necessitous are the least clamorous.

2\. Those he enquired after were the remains of the house of Saul, to
whom he would show kindness for Jonathan's sake: Is there any left of
the house of Saul? Saul had a very numerous family ([Ch1
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#033)), enough to replenish a country,
and was yet so emptied that none of it appeared; but it was a matter of
enquiry, Is there any left? See how the providence of God can empty full
families; see how the sin of man will do it. Saul's was a bloody house,
no marvel it was thus reduced, [Sa2
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001). But, though God visited the
iniquity of the father upon the children, David would not. "Is there any
left that I can show kindness to, not for Saul's own sake, but for
Jonathan's?" (1.) Saul was David's sworn enemy, and yet he would show
kindness to his house with all his heart and was forward to do it. He
does not say, "Is there any left of the house of Saul, that I may find
some way to take them off, and prevent their giving disturbance to me or
my successor?" It was against Abimelech's mind that any one was left of
the house of Gideon ([Jdg 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#005)), and
against Athaliah's mind that any one was left of the seed royal, [Ch2
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#010), [Ch2
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#011). Those were usurped governments.
David's needed no such vile supports. He was desirous to show kindness
to the house of Saul, not only because he trusted in God and feared not
what they could do unto him, but because he was of a charitable
disposition and forgave what they had done to him. Note, We must evince
the sincerity of our forgiving those that have been any way unjust or
injurious to us by being ready, as we have opportunity, to show kindness
both to them and theirs. We must not only not avenge ourselves upon
them, but we must love them, and do them good ([Mat
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)), and not be backward to do any
office of love and good-will to those that have done us many an injury.
[Pe1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#009), - but, contrari-wise,
blessing. This is the way to overcome evil, and to find mercy for
ourselves and ours, when we or they need it. (2.) Jonathan was David's
sworn friend, and therefore he would show kindness to his house. This
teaches us, \[1.\] To be mindful of our covenant. The kindness we have
promised we must conscientiously perform, though it should not be
claimed. God is faithful to us; let us not be unfaithful to one another.
\[2.\] To be mindful of our friendships, our old friendships. Note,
Kindness to our friends, even to them and theirs, is one of the laws of
our holy religion. He that has friends must show himself friendly, [Pro
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#024). If Providence has raised us,
and our friends and their families are brought low, yet we must not
forget former acquaintance, but rather look upon that as giving us so
much the fairer opportunity of being kind to them: then our friends have
most need of us and we are in the best capacity to help them. Though
there be not a solemn league of friendship tying us to this constancy of
love, yet there is a sacred law of friendship no less obliging, that to
him that is in misery pity should be shown by his friend, [Job
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#014). A brother is born for adversity.
Friendship obliges us to take cognizance of the families and surviving
relations of those we have loved, who, when they left us, left behind
them their bodies, their names, and their posterity, to be kind to.

3\. The kindness he promised to show them he calls the kindness of God;
not only great kindness, but, (1.) Kindness in pursuance of the covenant
that was between him and Jonathan, to which God was a witness. See [Sa1
20:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#042). (2.) Kindness after God's
example; for we must be merciful as he is. He spares those whom he has
advantage against, and so must we. Jonathan's request to David was ([Sa1
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#014), [Sa1
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#015)), "Show me the kindness of the
Lord, that I die not, and the same to my seed." The kindness of God is
some greater instance of kindness than one can ordinarily expect from
men. (3.) It is kindness done after a godly sort, and with an eye to
God, and his honour and favour.

II\. Information given him concerning Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan.
Ziba was an old retainer to Saul's family, and knew the state of it. He
was sent for and examined, and informed the king that Jonathan's son was
living, but lame (how he came to be so we read before, [Sa2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#004)), and that he lived in obscurity,
probably among his mother's relations in Lo-debar in Gilead, on the
other side Jordan, where he was forgotten, as a dead man out of mind,
but bore this obscurity the more easily because he could remember little
of the honour he fell from.

III\. The bringing of him to court. The king sent (Ziba, it is likely)
to bring him up to Jerusalem with all convenient speed, [Sa2
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#005). Thus he eased Machir of his
trouble, and perhaps recompensed him for what he had laid out on
Mephibosheth's account. This Machir appears to have been a very generous
free-hearted man, and to have entertained Mephibosheth, not out of any
disaffection to David or his government, but in compassion to the
reduced son of a prince, for afterwards we find him kind to David
himself when he fled from Absalom. He is named ([Sa2
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#027)) among those that furnished the
king with what he wanted at Mahanaim, though David, when he sent for
Mephibosheth from him, little thought that the time would come when he
himself would gladly be beholden to him: and perhaps Machir was then the
more ready to help David in recompence for his kindness to Mephibosheth.
Therefore we should be forward to give, because we know not but we
ourselves may some time be in want, [Ecc
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#002). And he that watereth shall be
watered also himself, [Pro 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#025). Now,

1\. Mephibosheth presented himself to David with all the respect that
was due to his character. Lame as he was, he fell on his face, and did
homage, [Sa2 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#006). David had thus made
his honours to Mephibosheth's father, Jonathan, when he was next to the
throne ([Sa1 20:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#041), he bowed himself
to him three times), and now Mephibosheth, in like manner, addresses
him, when affairs are so completely reversed. Those who, when they are
in inferior relations, show respect, shall, when they come to be
advanced, have respect shown to them.

2\. David received him with all the kindness that could be. (1.) He
spoke to him as one surprised, but pleased to see him. "Mephibosheth!
Why, is there such a man living?" He remembered his name, for it is
probable that he was born about the time of the intimacy between him and
Jonathan. (2.) He bade him not be afraid: Fear not, [Sa2
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#007). It is probable that the sight of
David put him into some confusion, to free him from which he assures him
that he sent for him, not out of any jealousy he had of him, nor with
any bad design upon him, but to show him kindness. Great men should not
take a pleasure in the timorous approaches of their inferiors (for the
great God does not), but should encourage them. (3.) He gives him, by
grant from the crown, all the land of Saul his father, that is, his
paternal estate, which was forfeited by Ishbosheth's rebellion and added
to his own revenue. This was a real favour, and more than giving him a
kind word. True friendship will be generous. (4.) Though he had thus
given him a good estate, sufficient to maintain him, yet for Jonathan's
sake (whom perhaps he saw some resemblance of in Mephibosheth's face),
he will take him to be a constant guest at his own table, where he will
not only be comfortably fed, but have company and attendance suitable to
his birth and quality. Though Mephibosheth was lame and unsightly, and
does not appear to have had any great fitness for business, yet, for his
good father's sake, David took him to be one of his family.

3\. Mephibosheth accepts this kindness with great humility and
self-abasement. He was not one of those that take every favour as a
debt, and think every thing too little that their friends do for them;
but, on the contrary, speaks as one amazed at the grants David made him
([Sa2 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#008)): What is thy servant, that
thou shouldst look upon such a dead dog as I am? How does he vilify
himself! Though the son of a prince, and the grandson of a king, yet his
family being under guilt and wrath, and himself poor and lame, he calls
himself a dead dog before David. Note, It is good to have the heart
humble under humbling providences. If, when divine Providence brings our
condition down, divine grace brings our spirits down with it, we shall
be easy. And those who thus humble themselves shall be exalted. How does
he magnify David's kindness! It would have been easy to lessen it if he
had been so disposed. Had David restored him his father's estate? It was
but giving him his own. Did he take him to his table? This was policy,
that he might have an eye upon him. But Mephibosheth considered all that
David said and did as very kind, and himself as less than the least of
all his favours. See [Sa1 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#018).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 9:9</span></span>

The matter is here settled concerning Mephibosheth. 1. This grant of his
father's estate is confirmed to him, and Ziba called to be a witness to
it ([Sa2 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#009)); and, it should seem,
Saul had a very good estate, for his father was a mighty man of
substance ([Sa1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001)), and he had
fields and vineyards to bestow, [Sa1
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#007). Be it ever so much, Mephibosheth
is now master of it all. 2. The management of the estate is committed to
Ziba, who knew what it was and how to make the most of it, in whom,
having been his father's servant, he might confide, and who, having a
numerous family of sons and servants, had hands sufficient to be
employed about it, [Sa2 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#010). Thus
Mephibosheth is made very easy, having a good estate without care, and
is in a fair way of being very rich, having much coming in and little
occasion to spend, himself being kept at David's table. Yet he must have
food to eat besides his own bread, provisions for his son and servants;
and Ziba's sons and servants would come in for their share of his
revenue, for which reason perhaps their number is here mentioned,
fifteen sons and twenty servants, who would require nearly all there
was; for as goods are increased those are increased that eat them, and
what good has the owner thereof save the beholding of them with his
eyes? [Ecc 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#011). All that dwelt in the
house of Ziba were servants to Mephibosheth ([Sa2
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#012)), that is, they all lived upon
him, and made a prey of his estate, under pretence of waiting on him and
doing him service. The Jews have a saying, "He that multiplies servants
multiplies thieves." Ziba is now pleased, for he loves wealth, and will
have abundance. "As the king has commanded, so will thy servant do, [Sa2
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#011). Let me alone with the estate:
and as for Mephibosheth" (they seem to be Ziba's words), "if the king
please, he need not trouble the court, he shall eat at my table, and be
as well treated as one of the king's sons." But David will have him at
his own table, and Mephibosheth is as well pleased with his post as Ziba
with his. How unfaithful Ziba was to him we shall find afterwards, [Sa2
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#003). Now because David was a type of
Christ, his Lord and son, his root and offspring, let his kindness to
Mephibosheth serve to illustrate the kindness and love of God our
Saviour towards fallen man, which yet he was under no obligation to, as
David was to Jonathan. Man was convicted of rebellion against God, and,
like Saul's house, under a sentence of rejection from him, was not only
brought low and impoverished, but lame and impotent, made so by the
fall. The Son of God enquires after this degenerate race, that enquired
not after him, comes to seek and save them. To those of them that humble
themselves before him, and commit themselves to him, he restores the
forfeited inheritance, he entitles them to a better paradise than that
which Adam lost, and takes them into communion with himself, sets them
with his children at his table, and feasts them with the dainties of
heaven. Lord, what is man, that thou shouldst thus magnify him!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 10](sa2010)

</div>
