<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2016)  [Next](sa2018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 17:0</span></span>

The contest between David and Absalom is now hasting towards a crisis.
It must be determined by the sword, and preparation is made accordingly
in this chapter. I. Absalom calls a council of war, in which Ahithophel
urges despatch ([Sa2 17:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#001)), but
Hushai recommends deliberation ([Sa2
17:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#005)); and Hushai's counsel is
agreed to ([Sa2 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#014)), for vexation
at which Ahithophel hangs himself ([Sa2
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#023)). II. Secret intelligence is
sent to David (but with much difficultly) of their proceedings ([Sa2
17:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#015)). III. David marches to the
other side Jordan ([Sa2 17:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#022)), and
there his camp is victualled by some of his friends in that country
([Sa2 17:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#027)). IV. Absalom and his
forces march after him into the land of Gilead on the other side Jordan
([Sa2 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#025), [Sa2
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#026)). There we shall, in the next
chapter, find the cause decided by a battle: hitherto, every thing has
looked black upon poor David, but now the day of his deliverance begins
to dawn.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 17:1</span></span>

Absalom is now in peaceable possession of Jerusalem; the palace-royal is
his own, as are the thrones of judgment, even the thrones of the house
of David. His good father reigned in Hebron, and only over the tribe of
Judah, above seven years, and was not hasty to destroy his rival; his
government was built upon a divine promise, the performance of which he
was sure of in due time, and therefore he waited patiently in the mean
time. But the young man, Absalom, not only hastens from Hebron to
Jerusalem, but is impatient there till he has destroyed his father,
cannot be content with his throne till he has his life; for his
government is founded in iniquity, and therefore feels itself tottering
and thinks itself obliged to do every thing with violence. That so
profligate a wretch as Absalom should aim at the life of so good a
father is not so strange (there are here and there monsters in nature);
but that the body of the people of Israel, to whom David had been so
great a blessing in all respects, should join with him in his attempt,
is very amazing. But their fathers often mutinied against Moses. The
best of parents, and the best of princes will not think it strange if
they be made uneasy by those who should be their support and joy, when
they consider what sons and what subjects David himself had.

David and all that adhered to him must be cut off. This was resolved,
for aught that appears, nemine contradicente - unanimously. None durst
mention his personal merits, and the great services done to his country,
in opposition to this resolve, nor so much as ask, "Why, what evil has
he done to forfeit his crown, much less his head?" None durst propose
that his banishment should suffice, for the present, nor that agents
should be sent to treat with him to resign the crown, which, having so
tamely quitted the city, they might think he would easily be persuaded
to do. It was not long since that Absalom himself fled for a crime, and
David contented himself with his being an exile, though he deserved
death, nay, he mourned and longed for him; but so perfectly void of all
natural affection is this ungrateful Absalom that he eagerly thirsts
after his own father's blood. It is past dispute that David must be
destroyed; all the question is how he may be destroyed.

I. Ahithophel advises that he be pursued immediately, this very night,
with a flying army (which he himself undertakes the command of), that
the king only be smitten and his forces dispersed, and then the people
that were now for him would fall in with Absalom of course, and there
would not be such a long war as had been between the house of Saul and
David: The man whom thou seekest is as if all returned, [Sa2
17:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#001). By this it appears that
Absalom had declared his design to be upon David's life, and Ahithophel
concurs with him in it. Smite the shepherd, and the sheep will be
scattered, and be an easy prey to the wolf. Thus he contrives to include
the war in a little compass, by fighting neither with small nor great
but the king of Israel only, and to conclude it in a little time, by
falling upon him immediately. Nothing could be more fatal to David than
the taking of these measures. It was too true that he was weary and
weak-handed, that a little thing would make him afraid, else he would
not have fled from his house upon the first alarm of Absalom's
rebellion; it was probable enough that upon a fierce attack, especially
in the night, the small force he had would be put into confusion and
disorder, and it would bean easy thing to smite the king only, and then
the business would be done, the whole nation would be reduced, of
course, and all the people, says he, shall be in peace. See how a
general ruin is called by usurpers a general peace; but thus the devil's
palace is in peace, while he, as a strong man armed, keeps it. Compare
with this the plot of Caiaphas (that second Ahithophel) against the Son
of David, to crush his interest by destroying him. Let that one man die
for the people, [Joh 11:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#050). Kill the
heir, and the inheritance shall be ours, [Mat
21:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#038). But the counsel of them both
was turned into foolishness. Yet the children of light may, in their
generation, learn wisdom from the children of this world. What our hand
finds to do let us do quickly, and with all our might. It is prudence to
be vigorous and expeditious, and not to lose time, particularly in our
spiritual warfare. If Satan flee from us, let us follow our blow. Those
that have quarrelled with crowned heads have generally observed the
decorum of declaring only against their evil counsellors, and calling
them to an account (The king himself can do no wrong, it is they that do
it); but Absalom's bare-faced villany strikes at the king directly, nay,
at the king only; for (would you think it?) this saying, I will smite
the king only, pleased Absalom well ([Sa2
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#004)), nor had he so much sense of
humor and virtue left him to pretend to startle at it or even to be
reluctant in this barbarous and monstrous resolution. What good can
stand before the heat of a furious ambition?

II\. Hushai advises that they be not too hasty in pursuing David, but
take time to draw up all their force against him, and to overpower him
with numbers, as Ahithophel had advised to take him by surprise. Now
Hushai, in giving this counsel, really intended to serve David and his
interest, that he might have time to send him notice of his proceedings,
and that David might gain time to gather an army and to remove into
those countries beyond Jordan, in which, lying more remote, Absalom had
probably least interest. Nothing would be of greater advantage to David
in this juncture than time to turn himself in; that he may have this,
Hushai counsels Absalom to do nothing rashly, but to proceed with
caution and secure his success by securing his strength. Now,

1\. Absalom gave Hushai a fair invitation to advise him. All the elders
of Israel approved of Ahithophel's counsel, yet God overruled the heart
of Absalom not to proceed upon it, till he had consulted Hushai ([Sa2
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#005)): Let us hear what he saith.
Herein he thought he did wisely (two heads are better than one), but God
taketh the wise in their own craftiness. See Mr. Poole's note on this.

2\. Hushai gave very plausible reasons for what he said.

(1.) He argued against Ahithophel's counsel, and undertook to show the
danger of following his advice. It is with modesty, and all possible
deference to Ahithophel's settled reputation, that he begs leave to
differ from him, [Sa2 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#007). He
acknowledges that the counsel of Ahithophel is usually the best, and
such as may be relied on; but, with submission to that noble peer, he is
of opinion that his counsel is not good at this time, and that it is by
no means safe to venture so great a cause as that in which they are now
engaged upon so small a number, and such a hasty sally, as Ahithophel
advises, remembering the defeat of Israel before Ai, [Jos
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#004). It has often proved of bad
consequence to despise an enemy. See how plausibly Hushai reasoned.
\[1.\] He insisted much upon it that David was a great soldier, a man of
great conduct, courage, and experience; all knew and owned this, even
Absalom himself: "Thy father is a man of war ([Sa2
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#008)), a mighty man ([Sa2
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#010)), and not so weary and
weak-handed as Ahithophel imagines. His retiring from Jerusalem must be
imputed, not to his cowardice, but his prudence." \[2.\] His attendants,
though few, were mighty men ([Sa2
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#008)), valiant men ([Sa2
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#010)), men of celebrated bravery and
versed in all the arts of war. Ahithophel, who perhaps had worn the gown
more than the sword, would find himself an unequal match for them. One
of them would chase a thousand. \[3.\] They were all exasperated against
Absalom, who was the author of all this mischief, were chafed in their
minds, and would fight with the utmost fury; so that, what with their
courage, and what with their rage, there would be no standing before
them, especially for such raw soldiers as Absalom's generally were. Thus
did he represent them as formidable as Ahithophel had made them
despicable. \[4.\] He suggested that probably David and some of his men
would lie in ambush, in some pit, or other close place, and fall upon
Absalom's soldiers before they were aware the terror of which would put
them to flight; and the defeat, though but of a small party, would
dispirit all the rest, especially their own consciences at the same time
accusing them of treason against one that, they were sure, was not only
God's anointed, but a man after his own heart, [Sa2
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#009). "It will soon be given out that
there is a slaughter among Absalom's men, and then they will all make
the best of their way, and the heart of Ahithophel himself, though now
it seems like the heart of a lion, will utterly melt. In short, he will
not find it so easy a matter to deal with David and his men as he thinks
it is; and, if he be foiled, we shall all be routed."

(2.) He offered his own advice, and gave his reasons; and, \[1.\] He
counselled that which he knew would gratify Absalom's proud
vain-gloriuos humour, though it would not be really serviceable to his
interest. First, He advised that all Israel should be gathered together,
that is, the militia of all the tribes. His taking it for granted that
they are all for him, and giving him an opportunity to see them all
together under his command, would gratify him as much as any thing.
Secondly, He advises that Absalom go to battle in his own person, as if
he looked upon him to be a better soldier than Ahithophel, more fit to
give command and have the honour of the victory, insinuating that
Ahithophel had put a slight upon him in offering to go without him. See
how easy it is to betray proud men, by applauding them, and feeding
their pride. \[2.\] He counselled that which seemed to secure the
success, at last, infallibly, without running any hazard. For, if they
could raise such vast numbers as they promised themselves, wherever they
found David they could not fail to crush him. First, If in the field,
they should fall upon him, as the dew that covers the face of the
ground, and cut off all his men with him, [Sa2
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#012). Perhaps Absalom was better
pleased with the design of cutting off all the men that were with him,
having a particular antipathy to some of David's friends, than with
Ahithophel's project of smiting the king only. Thus Hushai gained his
point by humouring his revenge, as well as his pride. Secondly, If in a
city, they need not fear conquering him, for they should have hands
enough, if occasion were, to draw the city itself into its river with
ropes, [Sa2 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#013). This strange
suggestion, how impracticable soever, being new, served for an
amusement, and recommended itself by pleasing the fancy, for they would
all smile at the humour of it.

(3.) By all these arts, Hushai gained not only Absalom's approbation of
his advice, but the unanimous concurrence of this great counsel of war;
they all agreed that the counsel of Hushai was better than the counsel
of Ahithophel, [Sa2 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#014). See here,
\[1.\] How much the policy of man can do; If Hushai had not been there,
Ahithophel's counsel would certainly have prevailed; and, though all had
given their opinion, nothing could be really more for Absalom's interest
than that which he advised; yet Hushai, with his management, brings them
all over to his side, and none of them are aware that he says all this
in favour of David and his interest, but all say as he says. See how the
unthinking are imposed upon by the designing part of mankind; what
tools, what fools, great men make of one another by their intrigues; and
what tricks there are often in courts and councils, which those are
happiest that are least conversant with. \[2.\] See how much more the
providence of God can do. Hushai managed the plot with dexterity, yet
the success is ascribed to God, and his agency on the minds of those
concerned: The Lord had appointed to defeat the good counsel of
Ahithophel. Be it observed, to the comfort of all that fear God, he
turns all men's hearts as the rivers of water, though they know not the
thoughts of the Lord. He stands in the congregation of the mighty, has
an overruling hand in all counsels and a negative voice in all resolves,
and laughs at men's projects against his anointed.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 17:15</span></span>

We must now leave David's enemies pleasing themselves with the thoughts
of a sure victory by following Hushai's counsel, and sending a summons,
no doubt, to all the tribes of Israel, to come to the general rendezvous
at a place appointed, pursuant to that counsel; and we next find David's
friends consulting how to get him notice of all this, that he might
steer his course accordingly. Hushai tells the priests what had passed
in council, [Sa2 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#015). But, it should
seem, he was not sure but that yet Ahithophel's counsel might be
followed, and was therefore jealous lest, if he made not the best of his
way, the king would be swallowed up, and all the people that were with
him, [Sa2 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#016). Perhaps, as he was
called in to give advice ([Sa2 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#005)),
so he was dismissed before they came to that resolve ([Sa2
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#014)) in favour of his advice, or he
feared they might afterwards change their mind. However, it was good to
provide against the worst, and therefore to hasten those valuable lives
out of the reach of these destroyers. Such strict guards did Absalom set
upon all the avenues to Jerusalem that they had much ado to get this
necessary intelligence to David. 1. The young priests that were to be
the messengers were forced to retire secretly out of the city, by
En-rogel, which signifies, as some say, the fountain of a spy. Surely it
went ill with Jerusalem when two such faithful priests as they were
might not be seen to come into the city. 2. Instructions were sent to
them by a poor simple young woman, who probably went to that well under
pretence of fetching water, [Sa2
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#017). If she carried the message by
word of mouth, there was danger of her making some mistake or blunder in
it; but Providence can make an ignorant girl a trusty messenger, and
serve its wise counsels by the foolish things of the world. 3. Yet, by
the vigilance of Absalom's spies, they were discovered, and information
was brought to Absalom of their motions: A lad saw them and told him,
[Sa2 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#018). 4. They, being aware that
they were discovered, sheltered themselves in a friend's house in
Bahurim, where David had refreshed himself but just before, [Sa2
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#014). There they were happily hidden
in a well, which now, in summer time, perhaps was dry, [Sa2
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#018). The woman of the house very
ingeniously covered the mouth of the well with a cloth, on which she
spread corn to dry, so that the pursuers were not aware that there was a
well; else they would have searched it, [Sa2
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#019). Thus far the woman did well;
but we know not how to justify her further concealing them with a lie,
[Sa2 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#020). We must not do evil that
good may come of it. However, hereby the messengers were protected, and
the pursuers were defeated and returned to Absalom without their prey.
It was well that Absalom did not hereupon fall upon their two fathers,
Zadok and Abiathar, as Saul on Ahimelech for his kindness to David: but
God restrained him. Being thus preserved, they brought their
intelligence very faithfully to David ([Sa2
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#021)), with this advice of his
friends, that he should not delay to pass over Jordan, near to which, it
seems, he now was. There, as some think, he penned the 42nd and 43rd
Psalms, looking back upon Jerusalem from the land of Jordan, [Psa
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#006).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 17:22</span></span>

Here is, I. The transporting of David and his forces over Jordan,
pursuant to the advice he had received from his friends at Jerusalem,
[Sa2 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#022). He, and all that were with
him, went over in the night, whether in ferryboats, which probably
always plied there, or through the fords, does not appear. But special
notice is taken of this, that there lacked not one of them: none
deserted him, though his distress was great, none staid behind sick or
weary, nor were any lost or cast away in passing the river. Herein some
make him a type of the Messiah, who said, in a difficult day, Of all
that thou hast given me have I lost none. Having got over Jordan, he
marched many miles forward to Mahanaim, a Levites' city in the tribe of
Gad, in the utmost border of that tribe, and not far from Rabbah, the
chief city of the Ammonites. This city, which Ishbosheth had made his
royal city ([Sa2 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#008)), David now made
his head-quarters, [Sa2 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#024). And now
he had time to raise an army wherewith to oppose the rebels and give
them a warm reception.

II\. The death of Ahithophel, [Sa2
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#023). He died by his own hands, felo
de se - a suicide. He hanged himself for vexation that his counsel was
not followed; for thereby, 1. He thought himself slighted, and an
intolerable slur cast upon his reputation for wisdom. His judgment
always used to sway at the counsel-board, but now another's opinion is
thought wiser and better than his. His proud heart cannot bear the
affront; it rises and swells, and the more he thinks of it the more
violent his resentments grow, till they bring him at last to this
desperate resolve not to live to see another preferred before him. All
men think him a wise man, but he thinks himself the only wise man; and
therefore to be avenged upon mankind for not thinking so too, he will
die, that wisdom may die with him. The world is not worthy of such an
oracle as he is, and therefore he will make them know the want of him.
See what real enemies those are to themselves that think too well of
themselves, and what mischiefs those run upon that are impatient of
contempt. That will break a proud man's heart that will not break a
humble man's sleep. 2. He thought himself endangered and his life
exposed. He concluded that, because his counsel was not followed,
Absalom's cause would certainly miscarry, and then, whoever would find
David's mercy, he concluded that he, who was the greatest criminal, and
had particularly advised him to lie with his father's concubines, must
be sacrificed to justice. To prevent therefore the shame and terror of a
public and solemn execution, he does justice upon himself, and, after
his reputation for wisdom, by this last act puts a far greater disgrace
upon himself than Absalom's privy-council had put upon him, and answers
his name Ahithophel, which signifies, the brother of a fool. Nothing
indicates so much folly as self-murder. Observe, How deliberately he did
it, and of malice prepense against himself; not in a heat, but he went
home to his city, to his house, to do it; and, which is strange, took
time to consider of it, and yet did it. And, to prove himself compos
mentis - in his senses, when he did it, he first put his household in
order, made his will as a man of sane memory and understanding, settled
his estate, balanced his accounts; yet he that had sense and prudence
enough to do this had not consideration enough to revoke the sentence
his pride and passion had passed upon his own neck, nor so much as to
suspend the execution of it till he saw the event of Absalom's
rebellion. Now herein we may see, (1.) Contempt poured upon the wisdom
of man. He that was more renowned for policy than any man played the
fool with himself more abundantly. Let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom, when he sees him that was so great an oracle dying as a fool
dies. (2.) Honour done to the justice of God. When the wicked are thus
snared in the work of their own hands, and sunk in a pit of their own
digging, the Lord is known by the judgment which he executeth, and we
must say, Higgaion, Selah; it is a thing to be marked and meditated
upon, [Psa 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015), [Psa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016). (3.) Prayer answered, and an
honest cause served even by its enemies. Now, as David had prayed,
Ahithophel's counsel was turned into foolishness to himself. Dr.
Lightfoot supposes that David penned the 55th Psalm upon occasion of
Ahithophel's being in the plot against him, and that he is the man
complained of ([Sa2 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#013)) that had
been his equal, his guide, and his acquaintance; and, if so, this was an
immediate answer to his prayer there ([Sa2
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#015)): Let death seize upon them, and
let them go down quickly into hell. Ahithophel's death was an advantage
to David's interest; for had he digested that affront (as those must
resolve often to do that will live in this world), and continued his
post at Absalom's elbow, he might have given him counsel afterwards that
might have been of pernicious consequence to David. It is well that that
breath is stopped and that head laid from which nothing could be
expected but mischief. It seems, it was not then usual to disgrace the
dead bodies of self-murderers, for Ahithophel was buried, we may suppose
honourably buried, in the sepulchre of his father, though he deserved no
better than the burial of an ass. See [Ecc
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#010).

III\. Absalom's pursuit of his father. He had now got all the men of
Israel with him, as Hushai advised, and he himself, at the head of them,
passed over Jordan, [Sa2 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#024). Not
content that he had driven his good father to the utmost corner of his
kingdom, he resolved to chase him out of the world. He pitched in the
land of Gilead with all his forces, ready to give David battle, [Sa2
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#026). Absalom made one Amasa his
general ([Sa2 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#025)), whose father was
by birth Jether, an Ishmaelite ([Ch1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#017)), but by religion Ithra (as he is
here called), an Israelite; probably he was not only proselyted, but,
having married a near relation of David's, was, by some act of the
state, naturalized, and is therefore called an Israelite. His wife,
Amasa's mother, was Abigail, David's sister, whose other sister,
Zeruiah, was Joab's mother ([Ch1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#016)), so that Amasa was in the same
relation to David that Joab was. In honour to his family, even while he
was in arms against his father, Absalom made him commander-in-chief of
all his forces. Jesse is here called Nahash, for many had two names; or
perhaps this was his wife's name.

IV\. The friends David met with in this distant country. Even Shobi, a
younger brother of the royal family of the Ammonites, was kind to him,
[Sa2 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#027). It is probable that he had
detested the indignity which his brother Hanun had done to David's
ambassadors, and for that had received favours from David, which he now
returned. Those that think their prosperity most confirmed know not but,
some time or other, they may stand in need of the kindness of those that
now lie at their mercy, and may be glad to be beholden to them, which is
a reason why we should, as we have opportunity, do good to all men, for
he that watereth shall be watered also himself, when there is occasion.
Machir, the son of Ammiel, was he that maintained Mephibosheth ([Sa2
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#004)), till David eased him of that
charge, and is now repaid for it by that generous man, who, it seems,
was the common patron of distressed princes. Barzillai we shall hear of
again. These, compassionating David and his men, now that they were
weary with a long march, brought him furniture for his house, beds and
basins, and provision for his table, wheat and barley, etc., [Sa2
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#028), [Sa2
17:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#029). He did not put them under
contribution, did not compel them to supply him, much less plunder them;
but in token of their dutiful affection to him, and their sincere
concern for him in his present straits, of their own good will they
brought in plenty of all that which he had occasion for. Let us learn
hence to be generous and open-handed, according as our ability is, to
all in distress, especially great men, to whom it is most grievous, and
good men, who deserve better treatment; and see how God sometimes makes
up to his people that comfort from strangers which they are disappointed
of in their own families.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 18](sa2018)

</div>
