<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol006)  [Next](sol008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 7:0</span></span>

In this chapter, I. Christ, the royal bridegroom, goes on to describe
the beauties of his spouse, the church, in many instances, and to
express his love to her and the delight he has in her conversation ([Sol
7:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001)). II. The spouse, the church,
expresses her great delight in him, and the desire that she had of
communion and fellowship with him ([Sol
7:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#010)). Such mutual esteem and
endearment are there between Christ and believers. And what is heaven
but an everlasting interchanging of loves between the holy God and holy
souls!

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 7:1</span></span>

The title which Jesus Christ here gives to the church is new: O prince's
daughter! agreeing with [Psa 45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013),
where she is called the king's daughter. She is so in respect of her new
birth, born from above, begotten of God, and his workmanship, bearing
the image of the King of kings, and guided by his Spirit. She is so by
marriage; Christ, by betrothing her to himself, though he found her mean
and despicable, has made her a prince's daughter. She has a princely
disposition, something in her truly noble and generous; she is daughter
and heir to the prince of the kings of the earth. If children, then
heirs. Now here we have,

I. A copious description of the beauty of the spouse, which, some think,
is given by the virgins her companions, and that those were they who
called upon her to return; it seems rather to be given by Christ
himself, and to be designed to express his love to her and delight in
her, as before, [Sol 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001), etc., and
[Sol 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#005), [Sol
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#006). The similitudes are here
different from what they were before, to show that the beauty of
holiness is such as nothing in nature can reach; you may still say more
of it, and yet still come short of it. That commendation of the spouse,
ch. 4, was immediately upon the espousals ([Sol
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#011)), this upon her return from a
by-path ([Sol 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#013)); yet this exceeds
that, to show the constancy of Christ's love to his people; he loves
them to the end, since he made them precious in his sight and
honourable. The spouse had described the beauty of her beloved in ten
particulars ([Sol 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#011), etc.); and now
he describes her in as many, for he will not be behindhand with her in
respects and endearments. Those that honour Christ he will certainly
honour, and make honourable. As the prophet, in describing the
corruptions of degenerate Israel, reckons from the sole of the foot even
unto the head ([Isa 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006)), so here the
beauties of the church are reckoned from foot to head, that, as the
apostle speaks, when he is comparing the church, as here, to the natural
body ([Co1 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#023)), more abundant
honour might be bestowed on those parts of the body which we think to be
less honourable, and which therefore lacked honour, [Co1
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#024). 1. Her feet are here praised;
the feet of Christ's ministers are beautiful in the eyes of the church
([Isa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)), and her feet are here
said to be beautiful in the eyes of Christ. How beautiful are thy feet
with shoes! When believers, being made free from the captivity of sin
([Act 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#008)), stand fast in the liberty
with which they are made free, preserve the tokens of their
enfranchisement, have their feet shod with the preparation of the gospel
of peace, and walk steadily according to the rule of the gospel, then
their feet are beautiful with shoes; they tread firmly, being well armed
against the troubles they meet with in their way. When we rest not in
good affections, but they are accompanied with sincere endeavors and
resolutions, then our feet are beautified with shoes. See [Eze
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010). 2. The joint of the thighs are
here said to be like jewels, and those curiously wrought by a cunning
workman. This is explained by [Eph
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016) and [Col
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#019), where the mystical body of
Christ is said to be held together by joints and bands, as the hips and
knees (both which are the joints of the thighs) serve the natural body
in its strength and motion. The church is then comely in Christ's eyes
when those joints are kept firm by holy love and unity, and the
communion of saints. When believers act in religion from good
principles, and are steady and regular in their whole conversation, and
turn themselves easily to every duty in its time and place, then the
joints are like jewels. 3. The navel is here compared to a round cup or
goblet, that wants not any of the agreeable liquor that one would wish
to find in it, such as David's cup that ran over ([Psa
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005)), well shaped, and not as that
miserable infant whose navel was not cut, [Eze
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#004). The fear of the Lord is said to
be health to the navel. See [Pro 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#008).
When the soul wants not that fear then the navel wants not liquor. 4.
The belly is like a heap of wheat in the store-chamber, which perhaps
was sometimes, to make show, adorned with flowers. The wheat is useful,
the lilies are beautiful; there is every thing in the church which may
be to the members of that body either for use or for ornament. All the
body is nourished from the belly; it denotes the spiritual prosperity of
a believer and the healthful constitution of the soul all in good
plight. 5. The breasts are like two young roes that are twins, [Sol
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#003). By the breasts of the church's
consolations those are nourished who are born from its belly ([Isa
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#003)), and by the navel received
nourishment in the womb. This comparison we had before, [Sol
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#005). 6. The neck, which before was
compared to the tower of David ([Sol
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004)), is here compared to a tower of
ivory, so white, so precious; such is the faith of the saints, by which
they are joined to Christ their head. The name of the Lord, improved by
faith, is to the saints as a strong and impregnable tower. 7. The eyes
are compared to the fish-pools in Heshbon, or the artificial fish-ponds,
by a gate, either of Jerusalem or Heshbon, which is called Bath-rabbim,
the daughter of a multitude, because a great thoroughfare. The
understanding, the intentions of a believer, are clean and clear as
these ponds. The eyes, weeping for sin, are as fountains ([Jer
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001)), and comely with Christ. 8. The
nose is like the tower of Lebanon, the forehead or face set like a flint
([Isa 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007)), undaunted as that tower
was impregnable. So it denotes the magnanimity and holy bravery of the
church, or (as others) a spiritual sagacity to discern things that
differ, as animals strangely distinguish by the smell. This tower looks
towards Damascus, the head city of Syria, denoting the boldness of the
church in facing its enemies and not fearing them. 9. The head like
Carmel, a very high hill near the sea, [Sol
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#005). The head of a believer is lifted
up above his enemies ([Psa 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#006)),
above the storms of the lower region, as the top of Carmel was, pointing
heaven-ward. The more we get above this world, and the nearer to heaven,
and the more secure and serene we become by that means, the more amiable
we are in the eyes of the Lord Jesus. 10. The hair of the head is said
to be like purple. This denotes the universal amiableness of a believer
in the eyes of Christ, even to the hair, or (as some understand it) the
pins with which the hair is dressed. Some by the head and the hair
understand the governors of the church, who, if they be careful to do
their duty, add much to her comeliness. The head like crimson (so some
read it) and the hair like purple, the two colours worn by great men.

II\. The complacency which Christ takes in his church thus beautified
and adorned. She is lovely indeed if she be so in his eyes; as he puts
the comeliness upon her, so it is his love that makes this comeliness
truly valuable, for he is an unexceptionable judge. 1. He delighted to
look upon his church, and to converse with it, rejoicing in that
habitable part of his earth: The king is held in the galleries, and
cannot leave them. This is explained by [Psa
132:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#013), [Psa
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014), The Lord has chosen Zion,
saying, This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell; and [Psa
147:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#011), The Lord takes pleasure in
those that fear him. And, if Christ has such delight in the galleries of
communion with his people, much more reason have they to delight in
them, and to reckon a day there better than a thousand. 2. He was even
struck with admiration at the beauty of his church ([Sol
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#006)): How fair and how pleasant art
thou, O love! How art thou made fair! (so the word is), "not born so,
but made so with the comeliness which I have put upon thee." Holiness is
a beauty beyond expression; the Lord Jesus is wonderfully pleased with
it; the outward aspect of it is fair; the inward disposition of it is
pleasant and highly agreeable, and the complacency he has in it is
inexpressible. O my dearest for delights! so some read. 3. He determined
to keep up communion with his church. (1.) To take hold of her as of the
boughs of a palm-tree. He compares her stature to a palm-tree ([Sol
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#007)), so straight, so strong, does she
appear, when she is looked upon in her full proportion. The palm-tree is
observed to flourish most when it is loaded; so the church, the more it
has been afflicted, the more it has multiplied; and the branches of it
are emblems of victory. Christ says, "I will go up to the palm-tree, to
entertain myself with the shadow of it ([Sol
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#008)) and I will take hold of its
boughs and observe the beauty of them." What Christ has said he will do,
in favour to his people; we may be sure he will do it, for his kind
purposes are never suffered to fall to the ground; and if he take hold
of the boughs of his church, take early hold of her branches, when they
are young and tender, he will keep his hold and not let them go. (2.) To
refresh himself with her fruits. He compares her breasts (her pious
affections towards him) to clusters of grapes, a most pleasant fruit
([Sol 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#007)), and he repeats it ([Sol
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#008)): They shall be (that is, they
shall be to me) as clusters of the vine, which make glad the heart. "Now
that I come up to the palm-tree thy graces shall be exerted and
excited." Christ's presence with his people kindles the holy heavenly
fire in their souls, and then their breasts shall be as clusters of the
vine, a cordial to themselves and acceptable to him. And since God, at
first, breathed into man's nostrils the breath of life, and breathes the
breath of the new life still, the smell of their nostrils is like the
smell of apples, or oranges, which is pleasing and reviving. The Lord
smelt a sweet savour from Noah's sacrifice, [Gen
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021). And, lastly, the roof of her
mouth is like the best wine ([Sol
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#009)); her spiritual taste and relish,
or the words she speaks of God and man, which come not from the teeth
outward, but from the roof of the mouth, these are pleasing to God. The
prayer of the upright is his delight. And, when those that fear the Lord
speak one to another as becomes them, the Lord hearkens, and hears with
pleasure, [Mal 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016). It is like that
wine which is, \[1.\] Very palatable and grateful to the taste. It goes
down sweetly; it goes straightly (so the margin reads it); it moves
itself aright, [Pro 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#031). The
pleasures of sense seem right to the carnal appetite, and go down
smoothly, but they are often wrong, and, compared with the pleasure of
communion with God, they are harsh and rough. Nothing goes down so
sweetly with a gracious soul as the wine of God's consolations. \[2.\]
It is a great cordial. The presence of Christ by his Spirit with him
people shall be reviving and refreshing to them, as that strong wine
which makes the lips even of those that are asleep (that are ready to
faint away in a deliquium), to speak. Unconverted sinners are asleep;
saints are often drowsy, and listless, and half asleep; but the word and
Spirit of Christ will put life and vigour into the soul, and out of the
abundance of the heart that is thus filledthe mouth will speak. When the
apostles were filled with the Spirit they spoke with tongues the
wonderful works of God ([Act 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#010),
[Act 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#012)); and those who in
opposition to being drunk with wine, wherein is excess, are filled with
the Spirit, speak to themselves in psalms and hymns, [Eph
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#018), [Eph
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#019). When Christ is thus commending
the sweetness of his spouse's love, excited by the manifestation of his,
she seems to put in that word, for my beloved, as in a parenthesis. "Is
there any thing in me that is pleasant or valuable? As it is from, so it
is for my beloved." Then he delights in our good affections and
services, when they are all for him and devoted to his glory.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 7:10</span></span>

These are the words of the spouse, the church, the believing soul, in
answer to the kind expressions of Christ's love in the foregoing verses.

I. She here triumphs in her relation to Christ and her interest in him,
and in his name will she boast all the day long. With what a transport
of joy and holy exultation does she say ([Sol
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#010)), "I am my beloved's, not my own,
but entirely devoted to him and owned by him." If we can truly say that
Christ is our best beloved, we may be confident that we are his and he
will save us, [Psa 119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094). The
gracious discoveries of Christ's love to us should engage us greatly to
rejoice in the hold he has of us, his sovereignty over us and property
in us, which is no less a spring of comfort than a bond of duty.
Intimacy of communion with Christ should help clear up our interest in
him. Glorying in this, that she is his, to serve him, and reckoning that
her honour, she comforts herself with this, that his desire is towards
her, that is, he is her husband; it is a periphrasis of the conjugal
relation, [Gen 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016). Christ's desire
was strongly towards his chosen remnant, when he came from heaven to
earth to seek and save them; and when, in pursuance of his undertaking,
he was even straitened till the baptism of blood he was to pass through
for them was accomplished, [Luk 12:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#050).
He desired Zion for a habitation; this is a comfort to believers that,
whosoever slights them, Christ has a desire towards them, such a desire
as will again bring him from heaven to earth to receive them to himself;
for he longs to have them all with him, [Joh
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024); [Joh
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#003).

II\. She humbly and earnestly desires communion with him ([Sol
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#011), [Sol
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#012)): "Come, my beloved, let us take
a walk together, that I may receive counsel, instruction, and comfort
from thee, and may make known my wants and grievances to thee, with
freedom, and without interruption." Thus Christ can walk with the two
disciples that were going to the village called Emmaus, and talked with
them, till he made their hearts burn within them. Observe here, 1.
Having received fresh tokens of his love, and full assurances of her
interest in him, she presses forward towards further acquaintance with
him; as blessed Paul, who desired yet more and more of the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus, [Phi
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008). Christ has made it to appear how
much his desire is towards us, and we are very ungrateful if ours be not
towards him. Note, Communion with Christ is that which all that are
sanctified earnestly breathe after; and the clearer discoveries he makes
to them of his love the more earnestly do they desire it. Sensual
pleasures pall the carnal appetite, and soon give it surfeit, but
spiritual delights whet the desires, the language of which is, Nothing
more than God, but still more and more of him. Christ had said, I will
go up to the palm-tree. Come, saith she, Let us go. The promises Christ
has made us of communion with him are not to supersede, but quicken and
encourage, our prayers for that communion. 2. She desires to go forth
into the fields and villages to have this communion with him. Those that
would converse with Christ must go forth from the world and the
amusements of it, must avoid every thing that would divert the mind and
be a hindrance to it when it should be wholly taken up with Christ; we
must contrive how to attend upon the Lord without distraction ([Co1
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#035)), for therefore the spouse here
covets to get out of the noise of the town. Let us go forth to him
without the camp, Heb. 14:13. Solitude and retirement befriend communion
with God; therefore Isaac went out into the field to meditate and pray.
Enter into thy closet, and shut thy door. A believer is never less alone
than when alone with Christ, where no eye sees. 3. Having business to go
abroad, to look after their grounds, she desires the company of her
beloved. Note, Wherever we are, we may keep up our communion with God,
if it be not our own fault, for he is always at our right hand, his eye
always upon us, and both his word and his ear always nigh us. By going
about our worldly affairs with heavenly holy hearts, mixing pious
thoughts with common actions, and having our eyes ever towards the Lord,
we may take Christ along with us whithersoever we go. Nor should we go
any whither where we cannot in faith ask him to go along with us. 4. She
is willing to rise betimes, to go along with her beloved: Let us get up
early to the vineyards. It intimates her care to improve opportunities
of conversing with her beloved; when the time appointed has come, we
must lose no time, but, as the woman ([Mar
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#002)), go very early, though it be to
a sepulchre, if we be in hopes to meet him there. Those that will go
abroad with Christ must begin betimes with him, early in the morning of
their days, must begin every day with him, seek him early, seek him
diligently. 5. She will be content to take up her lodging in the
villages, the huts or cottages which the country people built for their
shelter when they attended their business in the fields; there, in these
mean and cold dwellings, she will gladly reside, if she may but have her
beloved with her. His presence will make them fine and pleasant, and
convert them into palaces. A gracious soul can reconcile itself to the
poorest accommodations, if it may have communion with God in them. 6.
The most pleasant delightful fields, even in the spring-time, when the
country is most pleasant, will not satisfy her, unless she have her
beloved with her. No delights on earth can make a believer easy, unless
he enjoy God in all.

III\. She desires to be better acquainted with the state of her own soul
and the present posture of its affairs ([Sol
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#012)): Let us see if the vine
flourish. Our own souls are our vineyards; they are, or should be,
planted with vines and pomegranates, choice and useful trees. We are
made keepers of these vineyards, and therefore are concerned often to
look into them, to examine the state of our own souls, to seek whether
the vine flourishes, whether our graces be in act and exercise, whether
we be fruitful in the fruits of righteousness, and whether our fruit
abound. And especially let us enquire whether the tender grape appear
and whether the pomegranates bud forth, what good motions and
dispositions there are in us that are yet but young and tender, that
they may be protected and cherished with a particular care, and may not
be nipped, or blasted, or rubbed off, but cultivated, that they may
bring forth fruit unto perfection. In this enquiry into our own
spiritual state, it will be good to take Christ along with us, because
his presence will make the vine flourish and the tender grape appear, as
the returning sun revives the gardens, and because to him we are
concerned to approve ourselves. If he sees the vine flourish, and the
tender grape appear - if we can appeal to him, Thou knowest all things,
thou knowest that I love thee, - if his Spirit witness with our spirit
that our souls prosper, it is enough. And, if we would be acquainted
with ourselves, we must beg of him to search and try us, to help us in
the search, and discover us to ourselves.

IV\. She promises to her beloved the best entertainment she can give him
at her country seat; for he will come in to us, and sup with us, [Rev
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020). 1. She promises him her best
affections; and, whatever else she had for him, it would utterly be
contemned if her heart were not entire for him: "There therefore will I
give thee my love; I will repeat the professions of it, honour thee with
the tokens of it; and the out-goings of my soul towards thee in
adorations and desires shall be quickened and enlarged, and my heart
offered up to thee in a holy fire." 2. She promises him her best
provision, [Sol 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#013). "There we shall
find pleasant odours, for the mandrakes give a smell;" the love-flowers
or lovely ones (so the word signifies), or the love-fruits; it was
something that was in all respects very grateful, so valuable that
Rachel and Leah had like to have fallen out above it, [Gen
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#014). "We shall also find that which
is good for food, as well as pleasant to the eye, all the rarities that
the country affords: At our gates are all manner of pleasant fruits."
Note, (1.) The fruits and exercises of grace are pleasant to the Lord
Jesus. (2.) These must be carefully laid up for him, devoted to his
service and honour, must be always ready to us when we have occasion for
them, as that which is laid up at our gates, that, by our bringing forth
much fruit, he may be glorified, [Joh
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018). (3.) There is a great variety
of these pleasant fruits, with which our souls should be well stocked;
we must have all sorts of them, grace for all occasions, new and old, as
the good householder has in his treasury, not only the products of this
year, but remainders of the last, [Mat
13:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052). We must not only have that
ready to us, for the service of Christ, which we have heard, and
learned, and experienced lately, but must retain that which we have
formerly gathered; nor must we content ourselves only with what we have
laid up in store in the days of old, but, as long as we live, must be
still adding something new to it, that our stock may increase, and we
may be thoroughly furnished for every good work. (4.) Those that truly
love Christ will think all they have, even their most pleasant fruits,
and what they have treasured up most carefully, too little to be
bestowed upon him, and he is welcome to it all; if it were more and
better, it should be at his service. It is all from him, and therefore
it is fit it should be all for him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 8](sol008)

</div>
