<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol004)  [Next](sol006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 5:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. Christ's gracious acceptance of the
invitation which his church had given him, and the kind visit which he
made to her ([Sol 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001)). II. The
account which the spouse gives of her own folly, in putting a slight
upon her beloved, and the distress she was in by reason of his
withdrawings ([Sol 5:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002)). III. The
enquiry of the daughters of Jerusalem concerning the amiable perfections
of her beloved ([Sol 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#009)), and her
particular answer to that enquiry ([Sol
5:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#010)). "Unto you that believe he is
thus precious."

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 5:1</span></span>

These words are Christ's answer to the church's prayer in the close of
the foregoing chapter, Let my beloved come into his garden; here he has
come, and lets her know it. See how ready God is to hear prayer, how
ready Christ is to accept the invitations that his people give him,
though we are backward to hear his calls and accept his invitations. He
is free in condescending to us, while we are shy of ascending to him.
Observe how the return answered the request, and outdid it. 1. She
called him her beloved (and really he was so), and invited him because
she loved him; in return to this, he called her his sister and spouse,
as several times before, ch. 4. Those that make Christ their best
beloved shall be owned by him in the nearest and dearest relations. 2.
She called the garden his, and the pleasant fruits of it his, and he
acknowledges them to be so: It is my garden, it is my spice. When God
was displeased with Israel he turned them off to Moses (They are thy
people, [Exo 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007)); and he called the
appointed feasts of the Lord their appointed feasts ([Isa
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014)); but now that they are in his
favour he owns them for his garden. "Though of small account, yet it is
mine." Those that are in sincerity give up themselves and all they have
and can do to Jesus Christ, he will do them the honour to stamp them,
and what they have and do for him, with his own mark, and say, It is
mine. 3. She invited him to come into his garden, and he says, I have
come. [Isa 58:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009), Thou shalt cry, and
he shall say, Here I am. When Solomon prayed that God would come and
take possession of the house he had built for him, he did come; his
glory filled the house ([Ch2 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#002)), and
([Sol 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#016)) he let him know that he
had chosen and sanctified this house, that his name might be there for
ever. Those that throw open the door of their souls to Jesus Christ
shall find him ready to come in to them; and in every place where he
records his name he will meet his people, and bless them, [Exo
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024). 4. She desired him to eat his
pleasant fruits, to accept of the sacrifices offered in his temple,
which were as the fruits of his garden, and he does so, but finds they
are not gathered and ready for eating, therefore he does himself gather
them. As the fruits are his, so is the preparation of them; he finds his
heart unready for his entertainment, but does himself draw out into
exercise those gracious habits which he had planted there. What little
good there is in us would be shed and lost if he did not gather it, and
preserve it to himself. 5. She only desired him to eat the fruits of the
garden, but he brought along with him something more, honey, and wine,
and milk, which yield substantial nourishment, and which were the
products of Canaan, Immanuel's land. Christ delights himself greatly in
that which he has both conferred upon his people and wrought in them. Or
we may suppose this to have been prepared by the spouse herself, as
Esther prepared for the king her husband a banquet of wine; it is but
plain fare, and what is natural, honey and milk, but, being kindly
designed, it is kindly accepted; imperfections are overlooked; the
honey-comb is eaten with the honey, and the weakness of the flesh passed
by and pardoned, because the spirit is willing. When Christ appeared to
his disciples after his resurrection he did eat with them a piece of a
honey-comb ([Luk 24:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#042), [Luk
24:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#043)), in which this scripture was
fulfilled. He did not drink the wine only, which is liquor for men, for
great men, but the milk too, which is liquor for children, little
children, for he was to be the holy child Jesus, that had need of milk.
6. She only invited him to come himself, but he, bringing his own
entertainment along with him, brings his friends too, and invites them
to share in the provisions. The more the merrier, we say; and here,
where there was so great a plenty, there was not the worse fare. When
our Lord Jesus fed 5000 at once they did all eat and were filled. Christ
invites all his friends to the wine and milk which he himself drinks of
([Isa 55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001)), to the feast of fat
things and wines on the lees, [Isa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006). The great work of man's
redemption, and the riches of the covenant of grace, are a feast to the
Lord Jesus and they ought to be so to us. The invitation is very free,
and hearty, and loving: Eat, O friends! If Christ comes to sup with us,
it is we that sup with him, [Rev 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020).
Eat, O friends! Those only that are Christ's friends are welcome to his
table; his enemies, that will not have him to reign over them, have no
part nor lot in the matter. Drink, yea, drink abundantly. Christ, in his
gospel, has made plentiful provision for poor souls. He fills the hungry
with good things; there is enough for all, there is enough for each; we
are not straitened in him or in his grace, let us not therefore be
straitened in our own bosoms. Open the mouth widely, and Christ will
fill it. Be not drunk with wine, but be filled with the Spirit, [Eph
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#018). Those that entertain Christ must
bid his friends welcome with him; Jesus and his disciples were called
together to the marriage ([Joh 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#002)),
and Christ will have all his friends to rejoice with him in the day of
his espousals to his church, and, in token of that, to feast with him.
In spiritual and heavenly joys there is no danger of exceeding; there we
may drink abundantly, drink of the river of God's pleasures ([Psa
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008)), and be abundantly satisfied,
[Psa 65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 5:2</span></span>

In this song of loves and joys we have here a very melancholy scene; the
spouse here speaks, not to her beloved (as before, for he has
withdrawn), but of him, and it is a sad story she tells of her own folly
and ill conduct towards him, notwithstanding his kindness, and of the
just rebukes she fell under for it. Perhaps it may refer to Solomon's
own apostasy from God, and the sad effects of that apostasy after God
had come into his garden, had taken possession of the temple he had
built, and he had feasted with God upon the sacrifices ([Sol
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001)); however, it is applicable to the
too common case both of the churches and particular believers, who by
their carelessness and security provoke Christ to withdraw from them.
Observe,

I. The indisposition that the spouse was under, and the listlessness
that had seized her ([Sol 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002)): I
sleep, but my heart wakes. Here is, 1. Corruption appearing in the
actings of it: I sleep. The wise virgins slumbered. She was on her bed
([Sol 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001)), but now she sleeps.
Spiritual distempers, if not striven against at first, are apt to grow
upon us and to get ground. She slept, that is, pious affections cooled,
she neglected her duty and grew remiss in it, she indulged herself in
her ease, was secure and off her watch. This is sometimes the bad effect
of more than ordinary enlargements - a good cause. St. Paul himself was
in danger of being puffed up with abundant revelations, and of saying,
Soul, take thy ease, which made a thorn in the flesh necessary for him,
to keep him from sleeping. Christ's disciples, when he had come into his
garden, the garden of his agony, were heavy with sleep, and could not
watch with him. True Christians are not always alike lively and vigorous
in religion. 2. Grace remaining, notwithstanding, in the habit of it:
"My heart wakes; my own conscience reproaches me for it, and ceases not
to rouse me out of my sluggishness. The spirit is willing, and, after
the inner man, I delight in the law of God, and with my mind I serve
that. I am, for the present, overpowered by temptation, but all does not
go one way in me. I sleep, but it is not a dead sleep; I strive against
it; it is not a sound sleep; I cannot be easy under this indisposition."
Note, (1.) We ought to take notice of our own spiritual slumbers and
distempers, and to reflect upon it with sorrow and shame that we have
fallen asleep when Christ has been nigh us in his garden. (2.) When we
are lamenting what is amiss in us, we must not overlook the good that is
wrought in us, and preserved alive: "My heart wakes in Christ, who is
dear to me as my own heart, and is my life; when I sleep, he neither
slumbers nor sleeps."

II\. The call that Christ gave to her, when she was under this
indisposition: It is the voice of my beloved; she knew it to be so, and
was soon aware of it, which was a sign that her heart was awake. Like
the child Samuel, she heard at the first call, but did not, like him,
mistake the person; she knew it to be the voice of Christ. He knocks, to
awaken us to come and let him in, knocks by his word and Spirit, knocks
by afflictions and by our own consciences; though this is not expressly
quoted, yet probably it is referred to ([Rev
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020)), Behold, I stand at the door,
and knock. He calls sinners into covenant with him and saints into
communion with him. Those whom he loves he will not let alone in their
carelessness, but will find some way or other to awaken them, to rebuke
and chasten them. When we are unmindful of Christ he thinks of us, and
provides that our faith fail not. Peter denied Christ, but the Lord
turned and looked upon him, and so brought him to himself again. Observe
how moving the call is: Open to me, my sister, my love. 1. He sues for
entrance who may demand it; he knocks who could easily knock the door
down. 2. He gives her all the kind and most endearing titles imaginable:
My sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled; he not only gives her no hard
names, nor upbraids her with unkindness in not sitting up for him, but,
on the contrary, studies how to express his tender affection to her
still. His loving-kindness he will not utterly take away. Those that by
faith are espoused to Christ he looks upon as his sisters, his loves,
his doves, and all that is dear; and, being clothed with his
righteousness, they are undefiled. This consideration should induce her
to open to him. Christ's love to us should engage ours to him, even in
the most self-denying instances. Open to me. Can we deny entrance to
such a friend, to such a guest? Shall we not converse more with one that
is infinitely worthy of our acquaintance, and so affectionately desirous
of it, though we only can be gainers by it? 3. He pleads distress, and
begs to be admitted sub form pauperis - under the character of a poor
traveller that wants a lodging: "My head is wet with the dew, with the
cold drops of the night; consider what hardships I have undergone, to
merit thee, which surely may merit from thee so small a kindness as
this." When Christ was crowned with thorns, which no doubt fetched blood
from his blessed head, then was his head wet with the dew. "Consider
what a grief it is to me to be thus unkindly used, as much as it would
be to a tender husband to be kept out of doors by his wife in a rainy
stormy night." Do we thus require him for his love? The slights which
careless souls put upon Jesus Christ are him as a continual dropping in
a very rainy day.

III\. The excuse she made to put off her compliance with this call ([Sol
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#003)): I have put off my coat; how
shall I put it on again? She is half asleep; she knows the voice of her
beloved; she knows his knock, but cannot find in her heart to open to
him. She was undressed, and would not be at the pains to dress herself
again; she had washed her feet, and would not have occasion to wash them
again. She could not send another to open the door (it must be our own
act and deed to let Christ into our hearts), and yet she was loth to go
herself; she did not say, I will not open, but, How shall I? Note,
Frivolous excuses are the language of prevailing slothfulness in
religion; Christ calls to us to open to him, but we pretend we have no
mind, or we have no strength, or we have no time, and therefore think we
may be excused, as the sluggard that will not plough by reason of cold.
And those who ought to watch for the Lord's coming with their loins
girt, if they ungird themselves and put off their coat, will find it
difficult to recover their former resolution and to put it on again; it
is best therefore to keep tight. Making excuses ( [Luk
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#018)) is interpreted making light of
Christ ([Mat 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#005)), and so it is.
Those put a great contempt upon Christ that cannot find in their hearts
to bear a cold blast for him, or get out of a warm bed.

IV\. The powerful influences of divine grace, by which she was made
willing to rise and open to her beloved. When he could not prevail with
her by persuasion he put in his hand by the hole in the door, to unbolt
it, as one weary of waiting, [Sol 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#004).
This intimates a work of the Spirit upon her soul, by which she was
unwilling made willing, [Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003).
The conversion of Lydia is represented by the opening of her heart ([Act
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#014)) and Christ is said to open his
disciples' understandings, [Luk 24:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#045).
He that formed the spirit of man within him knows all the avenues to it,
and which way to enter into it; he can find the hole of the door at
which to put in his hand for the conquering of prejudices and the
introducing of his own doctrine and law. He has the key of David ([Rev
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007)), with which he opens the door of
the heart in such a way as is suited to it, as the key is fitted to the
wards of the lock, in such a way as not to put a force upon its nature,
but only upon its ill nature.

V. Her compliance with these methods of divine grace at last: My bowels
were moved for him. The will was gained by a good work wrought upon the
affections: My bowels were moved for him, as those of the two disciples
were when Christ made their hearts to burn within them. She was moved
with compassion to her beloved, because his head was wet with dew. Note,
Tenderness of spirit, and a heart of flesh, prepare the soul for the
reception of Christ into it; and therefore his love to us is represented
in such a way as is most affecting. Did Christ redeem us in his pity?
Let us in pity receive him, and, for his sake, those that are his, when
at any time they are in distress. This good work, wrought upon her
affections, raised her up, and made her ashamed of her dulness and
slothfulness ([Sol 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#005), I rose up, to
open to my beloved), his grace inclining her to do it and conquering the
opposition of unbelief. It was her own act, and yet he wrought it in
her. And now her hands dropped with myrrh upon the handles of the lock.
Either, 1. She found it there when she applied her hand to the lock, to
shoot it back; he that put in his hand by the hole of the door left it
there as an evidence that he had been there. When Christ has wrought
powerfully upon a soul he leaves a blessed sweetness in it, which is
very delightful to it. With this he oiled the lock, to make it go easy.
Note, When we apply ourselves to our duty, in the lively exercises of
faith, under the influence of divine grace, we shall find it will go on
much more readily and sweetly than we expected. If we will but rise up,
to open to Christ, we shall find the difficulty we apprehended in it
strangely overcome, and shall say with Daniel, Now let my Lord speak,
for thou hast strengthened me, [Dan
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#019). Or, 2. She brought it thither.
Her bowels being moved for her beloved, who had stood so long in the
cold and wet, when she came to open to him she prepared to anoint his
head, and so to refresh and comfort him, and perhaps to prevent his
catching cold; she was in such haste to meet him that she would not stay
to make the usual preparation, but dipped her hand in her box of
ointment, that she might readily anoint his head at his first coming in.
Those that open the doors of their hearts to Christ, those everlasting
doors, must meet him with the lively exercises of faith and other
graces, and with these must anoint him.

VI\. Her said disappointment when she did open to her beloved. And here
is the most melancholy part of the story: I opened to my beloved, as I
intended, but, alas! my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone. My
beloved was gone, was gone, so the word is.

1\. She did not open to him at his first knock, and now she came too
late, when afterwards she would have inherited this blessing. Christ
will be sought while he may be found; if we slip our time, we may lose
our passage. Note, (1.) Christ justly rebukes our delays with his
denials, and suspends the communications of comfort from those that are
remiss and drowsy in their duty. (2.) Christ's departures are matter of
great grief and lamentation to believers. The royal psalmist never
complains of any thing with such sorrowful accents as God's hiding his
face from him, and casting him off, and forsaking him. The spouse here
is ready to tear her hair, and rend her clothes, and wring her hands,
crying, He is gone, he is gone; and that which cuts her to the heart is
that she may thank herself, she provoked him to withdraw. If Christ
departs, it is because he takes something unkindly.

2\. Now observe what she does, in this case, and what befel her. (1.)
She still calls him her beloved, being resolved, how cloudy and dark
soever the day be, she will not quit her relation to him and interest in
him. It is a weakness, upon every apprehension either of our own
failings or of God's withdrawings, to conclude hardly as to our
spiritual state. Every desertion is not despair. I will say, Lord, I
believe, though I must say, Lord, help my unbelief. Though he leave me,
I love him; he is mine. (2.) She now remembers the words he said to her
when he called her, and what impressions they made upon her, reproaching
herself for her folly in not complying sooner with her convictions: "My
soul failed when he spoke; his words melted me when he said, My head is
wet with dew; and yet, wretch that I was, I lay still, and made excuses,
and did not open to him." The smothering and stifling of our convictions
is a thing that will be very bitter in the reflection, when God opens
our eyes. Sometimes the word has not its effect immediately upon the
heart, but it melts it afterwards, upon second thoughts. My soul now
melted because of his words which he had spoken before. (3.) She did not
go to bed again, but went in pursuit of him: I sought him; I called him.
She might have saved herself this labour if she would but have bestirred
herself when he first called; but we cut ourselves out a great deal of
work, and create ourselves a great deal of trouble, by our own
slothfulness and carelessness in improving our opportunities. Yet it is
her praise that, when her beloved has withdrawn, she continues seeking
him; her desires toward him are made more strong, and her enquiries
after him more solicitous, by his withdrawings. She calls him by prayer,
calls after him, and begs of him to return; and she not only prays but
uses means, she seeks him in the ways wherein she used to find him. (4.)
Yet still she missed of him: I could not find him; he gave me no answer.
She had no evidence of his favour, no sensible comforts, but was
altogether in the dark, and in doubt concerning his love towards her.
Note, There are those who have a true love for Christ, and yet have not
immediate answers to their prayers for his smiles; but he gives them an
equivalent if he strengthens them with the strength in their souls to
continue seeking him, [Psa 138:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#003). St.
Paul could not prevail for the removing of the thorn in the flesh, but
was answered with grace sufficient for him. (5.) She was ill-treated by
the watchmen; They found me; they smote me; they wounded me, [Sol
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#007). They took her for a lewd woman
(because she went about the streets at that time of night, when they
were walking their rounds), and beat her accordingly. Disconsolate
saints are taken for sinners, and are censured and reproached as such.
Thus Hannah, when she was praying in the bitterness of her soul, was
wounded and smitten by Eli, one of the prime watchmen, when he said to
her, How long wilt thou be drunken? so counting her a daughter of
Belial, [Sa1 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#014), [Sa1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#015). It is no new thing for those
that are of the loyal loving subjects of Zion's King to be
misrepresented by the watchmen of Zion, as enemies or scandals to his
kingdom; they could not abuse and persecute them but by putting them
into an ill name. Some apply it to those ministers who, though watchmen
by office, yet misapply the word to awakened consciences, and through
unskillfulness, or contempt of their griefs, add affliction to the
afflicted, and make the hearts of the righteous sad whom God would not
have made sad ([Eze 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#022)),
discouraging those who ought to be encouraged and talking to the grief
of those whom God has wounded, [Psa
69:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#026). Those watchmen were bad enough
that could not, or would not, assist the spouse in her enquiries after
her beloved ([Sol 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#003)); but these were
much worse, that hindered her with their severe and uncharitable
censures, smote her and wounded her with their reproaches, and though
they were the keepers of the wall of Jerusalem, as if they had been the
breakers of it, took away her veil, from her rudely and barbarously, as
if it had been only a pretence of modesty, but a cover of the contrary.
Those whose outward appearances are all good, and who yet are
invidiously condemned and run down as hypocrites, have reason to
complain, as the spouse here, of the taking away of their veil from
them. (6.) When she was disabled by the abuses the watchmen gave her to
prosecute her enquiry herself she gave charge to those about her to
assist her in the enquiry ([Sol 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#008)):
I charge you, O you daughters of Jerusalem! all my friends and
acquaintance, if you find my beloved, it may be you may meet with him
before I shall, what shall you tell him? so some read. "Speak a good
word for me; tell him that I am sick of love." Observe here, \[1.\] What
her condition was. She loved Jesus Christ to such a degree that his
absence made her sick, extremely sick, she could not bear it, and she
was in pain for his return as a woman in travail, as Ahab for Naboth's
vineyard, which he so passionately coveted. This is a sickness which is
a sign of a healthy constitution of soul, and will certainly end well, a
sickness that will not be death, but life. It is better to be sick of
love to Christ than at ease in love to the world. (2.) What course she
took in this condition. She did not sink into despair, and conclude that
she should die of her disease, but she sent after her beloved; she asked
the advice of her neighbours, and begged their prayers for her, that
they would intercede with him on her behalf. "Tell him, though I was
careless, and foolish, and slothful, and rose not up so soon as I should
have done to open to him, yet I love him; he knows all things, he knows
that I do. Represent me to him as sincere, though in many instances
coming short of my duty; nay, represent me to him as sincere, though in
many instances coming short of my duty; nay, represent me as an object
of his pity, that he may have compassion on me and help me." She does
not bid them tell him how the watchmen had abused her; how unrighteous
soever they were in it, she acknowledges that the Lord is righteous, and
therefore bears it patiently. "But tell him that I am wounded with love
to him." Gracious souls are more sensible of Christ's withdrawings than
of any other trouble whatsoever.

Languet amaus, non languet amor -

The lover languishes, but not his love.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 5:9</span></span>

Here is, I. The question which the daughters of Jerusalem put to the
spouse concerning her beloved, in answer to the charge she had given
them, [Sol 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#009). Observe, 1. The
respectful title they give to the spouse: O thou fairest among women!
Our Lord Jesus makes his spouse truly amiable, not only in his eyes, but
in the eyes of all the daughters of Jerusalem. The church is the most
excellent society in the world, the communion of saints the best
communion, and the beauty of the sanctuary a transcendent beauty. The
saints are the most excellent people; holiness is the symmetry of the
soul; it is its agreement with itself; it recommends itself to all that
are competent judges of it. Even those that have little acquaintance
with Christ, as those daughters of Jerusalem here, cannot but see an
amiable beauty in those that bear his image, which we should love
wherever we see it, though in different dresses. 2. Their enquiry
concerning her beloved: "What is thy beloved more than another beloved?
If thou wilt have us to find him for thee, give us his marks, that we
may know him when we see him." (1.) Some take it for a scornful
question, blaming her for making such ado about him: "Why shouldst thou
be so passionate in enquiring after thy beloved, more than others are
after theirs? Why shouldst thou be so set upon him, more than others
that yet have a kindness for him?" Those that are zealous in religion
are men wondered at by such as are indifferent to it. The many careless
ones laugh at the few that are solicitous and serious. "What is there in
him that is so very charming, more than in another person? If he be
gone, thou, who art the fairest among women, wilt soon have another with
an equal flame." Note, Carnal hearts see nothing excellent or
extraordinary in the Lord Jesus, in his person or offices, in his
doctrine or in his favours; as if there were no more in the knowledge of
Christ, and in communion with him, than in the knowledge of the world
and in its conversation. (2.) Others rather take it for a serious
question, and suppose that those who put it intended, \[1.\] To comfort
the spouse, who, they knew, would recover new spirits if she did but
talk awhile of her beloved; nothing would please her better, nor give a
more powerful diversion to her grief, than to be put upon the pleasing
task of describing the beauties of her beloved. \[2.\] To inform
themselves; they had heard, in general, that he was excellent and
glorious, but they desired to know more particularly. They wondered what
moved the spouse to charge them concerning her beloved with so much
vehemence and concern, and therefore concluded there must be something
more in him than in another beloved, which they are willing to be
convinced of. Then there begin to be some hopes of people when they
begin to enquire concerning Christ and his transcendent perfections. And
sometimes the extraordinary zeal of one, in enquiring after Christ, may
be a means to provoke many ([Co2 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#002)),
as the apostle, by the faith of the Gentiles, would stir up the Jews to
a holy emulation, [Rom 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#014). See [Joh
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#010).

II\. The account which the spouse gives of her beloved in answer to this
question. We should always be ready to instruct and assist those that
are enquiring after Christ. Experienced Christians, who are well
acquainted with Christ themselves, should do all they can to make others
acquainted with him.

1\. She assures them, in general, that he is one of incomparable
perfections and unparalleled worth ([Sol
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#010)): "Do not you know my beloved?
Can the daughters of Jerusalem be ignorant of him that is Jerusalem's
crown and crowned head? Let me tell you then," (1.) That he has every
thing in him that is lovely and amiable: My beloved is white and ruddy,
the colours that make up a complete beauty. This points not at any
extraordinary beauty of his body, when he should be incarnate (it was
never said of the child Jesus, as of the child Moses, when he was born,
that he was exceedingly fair, [Act
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#020); nay, he had no form nor
comeliness, [Isa 53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002)); but his divine
glory, and the concurrence of every thing in him as Mediator, to make
him truly lovely in the eyes of those that are enlightened to discern
spiritual things. In him we may behold the beauty of the Lord; he was
the holy child Jesus; that was his fairness. If we look upon him as made
to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, he appears,
in all, very amiable. His love to us renders him lovely. He is white in
the spotless innocency of his life, ruddy in the bloody sufferings he
went through at his death, - white in his glory, as God (when he was
transfigured his raiment was white as the light), ruddy in his assuming
the nature of man, Adam - red earth, - white in his tenderness towards
his people, ruddy in his terrible appearances against his and their
enemies. His complexion is a very happy composition. (2.) That he has
that loveliness in him which is not to be found in any other: He is the
chief among ten thousand, a nonsuch for beauty, fairer than the children
of men, than any of them, than all of them; there is none like him, nor
any to be compared with him; every thing else is to be accounted loss
and dung in comparison of him, [Phi
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008). He is higher than the kings of
the earth ([Psa 89:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027)) and has
obtained a more excellent name than any of the principalities and powers
of the upper or lower world, [Phi 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009);
[Heb 1:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001), 4. He is a
standard-bearer among ten thousand (so the word is), the tallest and
comeliest of the company. He is himself lifted up as an ensign ([Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)), to whom we must be gathered
and must always have an eye. And there is all the reason in the world
why he should have the innermost and uppermost place in our souls who is
the fairest of ten thousands in himself and the fittest of twenty
thousands for us.

2\. She gives a particular detail of his accomplishments, conceals not
his power or comely proportion. Every thing in Christ is amiable. Ten
instances she here gives of his beauty, which we need not be nice in the
application of, lest the wringing of them bring forth blood and prove
the wresting of them. The design, in general, is to show that he is
every way qualified for his undertaking, and has all that in him which
may recommend him to our esteem, love, and confidence. Christ's
appearance to John ([Rev 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013), etc.)
may be compared with the description which the spouse gives of him here,
the scope of both being to represent him transcendently glorious, that
is, both great and gracious, made lovely in the eyes of believers and
making them happy in himself. (1.) His head is as the most fine gold.
The head of Christ is God ([Co1 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)),
and it is promised to the saints that the Almighty shall be their gold
([Job 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#025)), their defence, their
treasure; much more was he so to Christ, in whom dwells all the fulness
of the Godhead bodily, [Col 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009).
Christ's head bespeaks his sovereign dominion over all and his vital
influence upon his church and all its members. This is as gold, gold;
the former word in the original signifies shining gold, the latter
strong solid gold; Christ's sovereignty is both beautiful and powerful.
Nebuchadnezzar's monarchy is compared to a head of gold ([Dan
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#038)), because it excelled all the
other monarchies, and so does Christ's government. (2.) His locks are
bushy and black, not black as the tents of Kedar, whose blackness was
their deformity, to which therefore the church compares herself ([Sol
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#005)), but black as a raven, whose
blackness is his beauty. Sometimes Christ's hair is represented as white
([Rev 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014)), denoting his eternity,
that he is the ancient of days; but here as black and bushy, denoting
that he is ever young and that there is in him no decay, nothing that
waxes old. Every thing that belongs to Christ is amiable in the eyes of
a believer, even his hair is so; it was pity that it should be wet, as
it was, with the dew, and these locks with the drops of the night, while
he waited to be gracious, [Sol 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002).
(3.) His eyes are as the eyes of doves, fair and clear, and chaste and
kind, by the rivers of waters, which doves delight in, and in which, as
in a glass, they see themselves. They are washed, to make them clean,
washed with milk, to make them white, and fitly set, neither starting
out nor sunk in. Christ is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, for
they are doves' eyes, [Hab 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013). All
believers speak with pleasure of the omniscience of Christ, as the
spouse here of his eyes; for, though it be terrible to his enemies as a
flame of fire ([Rev 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014)), yet it is
amiable and comfortable to his friends, as doves' eyes, for it is a
witness to their integrity. Thou knowest all things, thou knowest that I
love thee. Blessed and holy are those that walk always as under the eye
of Christ. (4.) His cheeks (the rising of the face) are as a bed of
spices, raised in the gardens, which are the beauty and wealth of them,
and as sweet flowers, or towers of sweetness. There is that in Christ's
countenance which is amiable in the eyes of all the saints, in the least
glimpse of him, for the cheek is but a part of the face. The half
discoveries Christ makes of himself to the soul are reviving and
refreshing, fragrant above the richest flowers and perfumes. (5.) His
lips are like lilies, not white like lilies, but sweet and pleasant.
Such are the words of his lips to all that are sanctified, sweeter than
honey and the honey-comb; such are the kisses of his lips, all the
communications of his grace; grace is poured into his lips, and those
that heard him wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his
mouth. His lips are as lilies, dropping sweet-smelling myrrh. Never any
lilies in nature dropped myrrh, but nothing in nature can fully set
forth the beauty and excellence of Christ, and therefore, to do it by
comparison, there must be a composition of images. (6.) His hands are as
gold rings set with the beryl, a noted precious stone, [Sol
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#014). Great men had their hands
adorned with gold rings on their fingers, set with diamonds or other
precious stones, but, in her eye, his hands themselves were as gold
rings; all the instances of his power, the works of his hands, all the
performances of his providence and grace, are all rich, and pure, and
precious, as gold, as the precious onyx and the sapphire, all fitted to
the purpose for which they were designed as gold rings to the finger,
and all beautiful and very becoming, as rings set with beryl. His hands,
which are stretched forth both to receive his people and to give to
them, are thus rich and comely. (7.) His bowels are as bright ivory, for
so it should be rendered, rather than his belly, for it is the same word
that was used for bowels ([Sol 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#004))
and is often ascribed to God (as [Isa
63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015); [Jer
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020)), and so it denotes his tender
compassion and affection for his spouse, and the love he has to her even
in her desolate and deserted state. This love of his is like bright
ivory, finely polished, and richly overlaid with sapphires. The love
itself is strong and firm, and the instances and circumstances of it are
bright and sparkling, and add much to the inestimable value of it. (8.)
His legs are as pillars of marble, so strong, and stately, and no
disgrace, no, not to the sockets of fine gold upon which they are set,
[Sol 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#015). This bespeaks his stability
and stedfastness; where he sets his foot he will fix it; he is able to
bear all the weight of the government that is upon his shoulders, and
his legs will never fail under him. This sets forth the stateliness and
magnificence of the goings of our God, our King, in his sanctuary ([Psa
68:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#024)), and the steadiness and
evenness of all his dispensations towards his people. The ways of the
Lord are equal; they are all mercy and truth; these are the pillars of
marble, more lasting than the pillars of heaven. (9.) His countenance
(his port and mien) is as Lebanon, that stately hill; his aspect
beautiful and charming, like the prospect of that pleasant forest or
park, excellent as the cedars, which, in height and strength, excel
other trees, and are of excellent use. Christ is a goodly person; the
more we look upon him the more beauty we shall see in him. (10.) His
mouth is most sweet; it is sweetness itself; it is sweetnesses (so the
word is); it is pure essence, nay, it is the quintessence of all
delights, [Sol 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#016). The words of his
mouth are all sweet to a believer, sweet as milk to babes (to whom it is
agreeable), as honey to those that are grown up ([Psa
119:103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103)), to whom it is delicious. The
kisses of his mouth, all the tokens of his love, have a transcendent
sweetness in them, and are most delightful to those who have their
spiritual senses exercised. To you that believe he is precious.

3\. She concludes with a full assurance both of faith and hope, and so
gets the mastery of her trouble. (1.) Here is a full assurance of faith
concerning the complete beauty of the Lord Jesus: "He is altogether
lovely. Why should I stand to mention particulars, when throughout there
is nothing amiss?" She is sensible she does him wrong in the particular
descriptions of him, and comes far short of the dignity and merit of the
subject, and therefore she breaks off with the general encomium: He is
truly lovely, he is wholly so; there is nothing in him but what is
amiable, and nothing amiable but what is in him. He is all desires; he
has all in him that one can desire. And therefore all her desire is
towards him, and she seeks him thus carefully and cannot rest contented
in the want of him. Who can but love him who is so lovely? (2.) Here is
a full assurance of hope concerning her own interest in him: "This is my
beloved, and this is my friend; and therefore wonder not that I thus
long after him." See with what a holy boldness she claims relation to
him, and then with what a holy triumph she proclaims it. It is property
that sweetens excellency. To see Christ, and not to see him as ours,
would be rather a torture than a happiness; but to see one that is thus
lovely, and to see him as ours, is a complete satisfaction. Here is a
true believer, \[1.\] Giving an entire consent to Christ: "He is mine,
my Lord and my God ([Joh 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028)), mine
according to the tenour of the gospel-covenant, mine in all relations,
bestowed upon me, to be all that to me that my poor soul stands in need
of." \[2.\] Taking an entire complacency in Christ. It is spoken of here
with an air of triumph: "This is he whom I have chosen, and to whom I
have given up myself. None but Christ, none but Christ. This is he on
whom my heart is, for he is my best-beloved; this is he in whom I trust,
and from whom I expect all good, for this is my friend." Note, Those
that make Christ their beloved shall have him their friend; he has been,
is, and will be, a special friend to all believers. He loves those that
love him; and those that have him their friend have reason to glory in
him, and speak of him with delight. "Let others be governed by the love
of the world, and seek their happiness in its friendship and favours,
This is my beloved and this is my friend. Others may do as they please,
but this is my soul's choice, my soul's rest, my life, my joy, my all;
this is he whom I desire to live and die with."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 6](sol006)

</div>
