<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1)  
  [Previous](th1001)  [Next](th1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#001)

[1 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th1 2:0</span></span>

In this chapter the apostle puts the Thessalonians in mind of the manner
of his preaching among them ([Th1
2:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#001)). Then of the manner of his
conversation among them ([Th1 2:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#007)).
Afterwards of the success of his ministry, with the effects both on
himself and on them ([Th1 2:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013)),
and then apologizes for his absence ([Th1
2:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#017)).

[1 Thessalonians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th1 2:1</span></span>

Here we have an account of Paul's manner of preaching, and his
comfortable reflection upon his entrance in among the Thessalonians. As
he had the testimony of his own conscience witnessing to his integrity,
so he could appeal to the Thessalonians how faithful he, and Silas, and
Timotheus, his helpers in the work of the Lord, had discharged their
office: You yourselves, brethren, know our entrance in unto you. Note,
It is a great comfort to a minister to have his own conscience and the
consciences of others witnessing for him that he set out well, with good
designs and from good principles; and that his preaching was not in
vain, or, as some read it, was not fain. The apostle here comforts
himself either in the success of his ministry, that it was not fruitless
or in vain (according to our translation), or as others think,
reflecting upon the sincerity of his preaching, that it was not vain and
empty, or deceitful and treacherous. The subject-matter of the apostle's
preaching was not vain and idle speculations about useless niceties and
foolish questions, but sound and solid truth, such as was most likely to
profit his hearers. A good example this is, to be imitated by all the
ministers of the gospel. Much less was the apostle's preaching vain or
deceitful. He could say to these Thessalonians what he told the
Corinthians ([Co2 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#002)): We have
renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness,
nor handling the word of God deceitfully. He had no sinister or worldly
design in his preaching, which he puts them in mind to have been,

I. With courage and resolution: We were bold in our God to speak unto
you the gospel of God, [Th1 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#002). The
apostle was inspired with a holy boldness, nor was he discouraged at the
afflictions he met with, or the opposition that was made against him. He
had met with ill usage at Philippi, as these Thessalonians well knew.
There it was that he and Silas were shamefully treated, being put in the
stocks; yet no sooner were they set at liberty than they went to
Thessalonica, and preached the gospel with as much boldness as ever.
Note, Suffering in a good cause should rather sharpen than blunt the
edge of holy resolution. The gospel of Christ, at its first setting out
in the world, met with much opposition; and those who preached it
preached it with contention, with great agony, which denoted either the
apostles' striving in their preaching or their striving against the
opposition they met with. This was Paul's comfort; he was neither
daunted in his work, nor driven from it.

II\. With great simplicity and godly sincerity: Our exhortation was not
of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in guile, [Th1
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#003). This, no doubt, was matter of the
greatest comfort to the apostle - the consciousness of his own
sincerity; and was one reason of his success. It was the sincere and
uncorrupted gospel that he preached and exhorted them to believe and
obey. His design was not to set up a faction, to draw men over to a
party, but to promote pure religion and undefiled before God and the
Father. The gospel he preached was without deceit, it was true and
faithful; it was not fallacious, nor a cunningly-devised fable. Nor was
it of uncleanness. His gospel was pure and holy, worthy of its holy
author, tending to discountenance all manner of impurity. The word of
God is pure. There should be no corrupt mixtures therewith; and, as the
matter of the apostle's exhortation was thus true and pure, the manner
of his speaking was without guile. He did not pretend one thing and
intend another. He believed, and therefore he spoke. He had no sinister
and secular aims and views, but was in reality what he seemed to be. The
apostle not only asserts his sincerity, but subjoins the reasons and
evidences thereof. The reasons are contained, [Th1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#004).

1\. They were stewards, put in trust with the gospel: and it is required
of a steward that he be faithful. The gospel which Paul preached was not
his own, but the gospel of God. Note, Ministers have a great favour
shown them, and honour put upon them, and trust committed to them. They
must not dare to corrupt the word of God: they must diligently make use
of what is entrusted with them, so as God hath allowed and commanded,
knowing they shall be called to an account, when they must be no longer
stewards.

2\. Their design was to please God and not men. God is a God of truth,
and requires truth in the inward parts; and, if sincerity be wanting,
all that we do cannot please God. The gospel of Christ is not
accommodated to the fain fancies and lusts of men, to gratify their
appetites and passions; but, on the contrary, it was designed for the
mortifying of their corrupt affections, and delivering them from the
power of fancy, that they might be brought under the power of faith. If
I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ, [Gal
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010).

3\. They acted under the consideration of God's omniscience, as in the
sight of him who tries our hearts. This is indeed the great motive to
sincerity, to consider that God not only seeth all that we do, but
knoweth our thoughts afar off, and searcheth the heart. He is well
acquainted with all our aims and designs, as well as our actions. And it
is from this God who trieth our hearts that we must receive our reward.
The evidences of the apostle's sincerity follow; and they are these: -
(1.) He avoided flattery: Neither at any time used we flattering words,
as you know, [Th1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#005). He and his
fellow-labourers preached Christ and him crucified, and did not aim to
gain an interest in men's affections for themselves, by glorying, and
fawning and wheedling them. No, he was far from this; nor did he flatter
men in their sins; nor tell them, if they would be of his party, they
might live as they listed. He did not flatter them with fain hopes, nor
indulge them in any evil work or way, promising them life, and so
daubing with untempered mortar. (2.) He avoided covetousness. He did not
make the ministry a cloak, or a covering, for covetousness, as God was
witness, [Th1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#005). His design was not
to enrich himself by preaching the gospel; so far from this, he did not
stipulate with them for bread. He was not like the false apostles, who,
through covetousness, with feigned words made merchandise of the people,
[Pe2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#003). (3.) He avoided ambition and
vain-glory: Nor of men sought we glory, neither of you nor yet of
others, [Th1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#006). They expected
neither people's purses nor their caps, neither to be enriched by them
nor caressed, and adored, and called Rabbi by them. This apostle exhorts
the Galatians ([Gal 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#026)) not to be
desirous of vain glory; his ambition was to obtain that honour which
comes from God, [Joh 5:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044). He tells
them that they might have used greater authority as apostles, and
expected greater esteem, and demanded maintenance, which is meant by the
phrase of being burdensome, because perhaps some would have thought this
too great a burden for them to bear.

[1 Thessalonians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">th1 2:7</span></span>

In these words the apostle reminds the Thessalonians of the manner of
his conversation among them. And,

I. He mentions the gentleness of their behaviour: We were gentle among
you, [Th1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#007). He showed great
mildness and tenderness who might have acted with the authority of an
apostle of Christ. Such behaviour greatly recommends religion, and is
most agreeable to God's gracious dealing with sinners, in and by the
gospel. This great apostle, though he abhorred and avoided flattery, was
most condescending to all men. He accommodated himself to all men's
capacities, and became all things to all men. He showed the kindness and
care of a nurse that cherishes her children. This is the way to win
people, rather than to rule with rigour. The word of God is indeed
powerful; and as it comes often with awful authority upon the minds of
men, as it always has enough in it to convince every impartial judgment,
so it comes with the more pleasing power, when the ministers of the
gospel recommend themselves to the affections of the people. And as a
nursing mother bears with frowardness in a child, and condescends to
mean offices for its good, and draws out her breast, cherishing it in
her bosom, so in like manner should the ministers of Christ behave
towards their people. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be
gentle unto all men, and patient, [Ti2
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024). This gentleness and goodness the
apostle expressed several ways. 1. By the most affectionate desire of
their welfare: Being affectionately desirous of you, [Th1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#008). The apostle had a most
affectionate love to their persons, and sought them, not theirs;
themselves, not their goods; and to gain them, not to be a gainer by
them, or to make a merchandise of them: it was their spiritual and
eternal welfare and salvation that he was earnestly desirous of. 2. By
great readiness to do them good, willingly imparting to them, not the
gospel of God only, but also our own souls, [Th1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#008). See here the manner of Paul's
preaching. He spared no pains therein. He was willing to run hazards,
and venture his soul, or life, in preaching the gospel. He was willing
to spend and be spent in the service of men's souls; and, as those who
give bread to the hungry from a charitable principle are said to impart
their souls in what they give ([Isa
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#010)), so did the apostles in giving
forth the bread of life; so dear were these Thessalonians in particular
to this apostle, and so great was his love to them. 3. By bodily labour
to prevent their charge, or that his ministry might not be expensive and
burdensome to them: You remember our labour and travail; for, labouring
night and day, etc., [Th1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#009). He
denied himself the liberty he had of taking wages from the churches. To
the labour of the ministry he added that of his calling, as a
tent-maker, that he might get his own bread. We are not to suppose that
the apostle spent the whole night and day in bodily labour, or work, to
supply the necessities of his body; for then he would have had no time
for the work of the ministry. But he spent part of the night, as well as
the day, in this work; and was willing to forego his rest in the night,
that he might have an opportunity to do good to the souls of men in the
day time. A good example is here set before the ministers of the gospel,
to be industrious for the salvation of men's souls, though it will not
follow that they are always obliged to preach freely. There is no
general rule to be drawn from this instance, either that ministers may
at no time work with their hands, for the supply of their outward
necessities, or that they ought always to do so. 4. By the holiness of
their conversation, concerning which he appeals not only to them, but to
God also ([Th1 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#010)): You are
witnesses, and God also. They were observers of their outward
conversation in public before men, and God was witness not only of their
behaviour in secret, but of the inward principles from which they acted.
Their behaviour was holy towards God, just towards all men, and
unblamable, without giving cause of scandal or offence; and they were
careful to give no offence either to those who were without, or to those
who believed, that they might give no ill example; that their preaching
and living might be all of a piece. Herein, said this apostle, do I
exercise myself, to have always a conscience void of offence towards
God, and towards men, [Act 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#016).

II\. He mentions their faithful discharge of the work and office of the
ministry, [Th1 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#011), [Th1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#012). Concerning this also he could
appeal to them as witnesses. Paul and his fellow-labourers were not only
good Christians, but faithful ministers. And we should not only be good
as to our general calling as Christians, but in our particular callings
and relations. Paul exhorted the Thessalonians, not only informing them
in their duty, but exciting and quickening them to the performance of
it, by proper motives and arguments. And he comforted them also,
endeavouring to cheer and support their spirits under the difficulties
and discouragements they might meet with. And this he did not only
publicly, but privately also, and from house to house ([Act
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#020)), and charged every one of them
by personal addresses: this, some think, is intended by the similitude
of a father's charging his children. This expression also denotes the
affectionate and compassionate counsels and consolations which this
apostle used. He was their spiritual father; and, as he cherished them
like a nursing mother, so he charged them as a father, with a father's
affection rather than a father's authority. As my beloved sons, I warn
you, [Co1 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#014). The manner of this
apostle's exhortation ought to be regarded by ministers in particular
for their imitation, and the matter of it is greatly to be regarded by
them and all others; namely, that they would walk worthy of God, who
hath called them to his kingdom and glory, [Th1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#012). Observe, 1. What is our great
gospel privilege - that God has called us to his kingdom and glory. The
gospel calls us into the kingdom and state of grace here and unto the
kingdom and state of glory hereafter, to heaven and happiness as our end
and to holiness as the way to that end. 2. What is our great gospel duty
- that we walk worthy of God, that the temper of our minds and tenour of
our lives be answerable to this call and suitable to this privilege. We
should accommodate ourselves to the intention and design of the gospel,
and live suitably to our profession and privileges, our hopes and
expectations, as becomes those who are called with such a high and holy
calling.

[1 Thessalonians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">th1 2:13</span></span>

Here observe, I. The apostle makes mention of the success of his
ministry among these Thessalonians ([Th1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013)), which is expressed,

1\. By the manner of their receiving the word of God: When you received
the word of God, which you heard of us, you received it, not as the word
of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God. Where note, (1.) The
word of the gospel is preached by men like ourselves, men of like
passions and infirmities with others: We have this treasure in earthen
vessels. The word of God, which these Thessalonians received, they heard
from the apostles. (2.) However, it is in truth the word of God. Such
was the word the apostles preached by divine inspiration, and such is
that which is left upon record, written in the scriptures by divine
inspiration; and such is that word which in our days is preached, being
either contained, or evidently founded on, or deduced fRom. these sacred
oracles. (3.) Those are greatly to blame who give out their own fancies
or injunctions for the word of God. This is the vilest way of imposing
upon a people, and to deal unfaithfully. (4.) Those are also to blame
who, in hearing the word, look no further than to the ministry of men,
who are only, or chiefly, pleased with the elegance of the style, or the
beauty of the composition, or the voice and manner in which the word is
preached, and expect to receive their advantage herein. (5.) We should
receive the word of God as the word of God, with affections suitable to
the holiness, wisdom, verity, and goodness, thereof. The words of men
are frail and perishing, like themselves, and sometimes false, foolish,
and fickle: but God's word is holy, wise, just, and faithful; and, like
its author, lives and abides for ever. Let us accordingly receive and
regard it.

2\. By the wonderful operation of this word they received: It
effectually worketh in those that believe, [Th1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013). Those who by faith receive the
word find it profitable. It does good to those that walk uprightly, and
by its wonderful effects evidences itself to be the word of God. This
converts their souls, and enlightens their minds, and rejoices their
hearts ([Psa 19:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)); and such as
have this inward testimony of the truth of the scriptures, the word of
God, by the effectual operations thereof on their hearts, have the best
evidence of their divine original to themselves, though this is not
sufficient to convince others who are strangers thereto.

II\. He mentions the good effects which his successful preaching had,

1\. Upon himself and fellow-labourers. It was a constant cause of
thankfulness: For this cause thank we God without ceasing, [Th1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013). The apostle expressed his
thankfulness to God so often upon this account that he seemed to think
he never could be sufficiently thankful that God had counted him
faithful, and put him into the ministry, and made his ministrations
successful.

2\. Upon them. The word wrought effectually in them, not only to be
examples unto others in faith and good works (which he had mentioned
before), but also in constancy and patience under sufferings and trials
for the sake of the gospel: You became followers of the churches of God,
and have suffered like things as they have done ([Th1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#014)), and with like courage and
constancy, with like patience and hope. Note, The cross is the
Christian's mark: if we are called to suffer we are called only to be
followers of the churches of God; so persecuted they the prophets that
were before you, [Mat 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012). It is a
good effect of the gospel when we are enabled to suffer for its sake.
The apostle mentions the sufferings of the churches of God, which in
Judea were in Christ Jesus. Those in Judea first heard the gospel, and
they first suffered for it: for the Jews were the most bitter enemies
Christianity had, and were especially enraged against their countrymen
who embraced Christianity. Note, Bitter zeal and fiery persecution will
set countrymen at variance, and break through all the bonds of nature,
as well as contradict all the rules of religion. In every city where the
apostles went to preach the gospel the Jews stirred up the inhabitants
against them. They were the ringleaders of persecution in all places; so
in particular it was at Thessalonica: [Act
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005), The Jews that believed not,
moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort,
and gathered a company, and set all the city in an uproar. Upon this
occasion, the apostle gives a character of the unbelieving Jews ([Th1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#015)), enough to justify their final
rejection and the ruin of their place, and church, and nation, which was
now approaching. (1.) They killed the Lord Jesus, and impudently and
presumptuously wished that his blood might be on them and their
children. (2.) They killed their own prophets: so they had done all
along; their fathers had done so: they had been a persecuting
generation. (3.) They hated the apostles, and did them all the mischief
they could. They persecuted them, and drove and chased them from place
to place: and no marvel, if they killed the Lord Jesus, that they
persecuted his followers. (4.) They pleased not God. They had quite lost
all sense of religion, and due care to do their duty to God. It was a
most fatal mistake to think that they did God service by killing God's
servants. Murder and persecution are most hateful to God and cannot be
justified on any pretence; they are so contrary to natural religion that
no zeal for any true or only pretended institution of religion can ever
excuse them. (5.) They were contrary to all men. Their persecuting
spirit was a perverse spirit; contrary to the light of nature, and
contrary to humanity, contrary to the welfare of all men, and contrary
to the sentiments of all men not under the power of bigotry. (6.) They
had an implacable enmity to the Gentiles, and envied them the offers of
the gospel: Forbidding the apostles to speak to the Gentiles, that they
might be saved. The means of salvation had long been confined to the
Jews. Salvation is of the Jews, says our Saviour. And they were envious
against the Gentiles, and angry that they should be admitted to share in
the means of salvation. Nothing provoked them more than our Saviour's
speaking to them at any time concerning this matter; this enraged the
Jews at Jerusalem, when, in his defence, Paul told them, he was sent
unto the Gentiles, [Act 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021). They
heard him patiently till he uttered these words, but then could endure
no longer, but lifted up their voices, and said, Away with such a fellow
from the earth, for it is not fit that he should live. Thus did the Jews
fill up their sins; and nothing tends more to any person or people's
filling up the measure of their sins than opposing the gospel,
obstructing the progress of it, and hindering the salvation of precious
souls. For the sake of these things wrath has come upon them to the
uttermost; that is, wrath was determined against them, and would soon
overtake them. It was not many years after this that Jerusalem was
destroyed, and the Jewish nation cut off by the Romans. Note, When the
measure of any man's iniquity is full, and he has sinned to the
uttermost, then comes wrath, and that to the uttermost.

[1 Thessalonians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">th1 2:17</span></span>

In these words the apostle apologizes for his absence. Here observe, 1.
He tells them they were involuntarily forced from them: We, brethren,
were taken from you, [Th1 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#017). Such
was the rage of his persecutors. He was unwillingly sent away by night
to Berea, [Act 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#010). 2. Though he was
absent in body, yet he was present in heart. He had still a remembrance
of them, and great care for them. 3. Even his bodily absence was but for
a short time, the time of an hour. Time is short, all our time on earth
is short and uncertain, whether we are present with our friends or
absent from them. This world is not a place where we are always, or
long, to be together. It is in heaven that holy souls shall meet, and
never part more. 4. He earnestly desired and endeavoured to see them
again: We endeavoured more abundantly to see your face with great
desire, [Th1 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#017). So that the apostle
at least intended his absence should be but for a short time. His desire
and endeavour were to return again very soon to Thessalonica. But men of
business are not masters of their own time. Paul did his endeavour, and
he could do no more, [Th1 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#018). 5. He
tells them that Satan hindered his return ([Th1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#018)), that is, either some enemy or
enemies, or the great enemy of mankind, who stirred up opposition to
Paul, either in his return to Thessalonica, when he intended to return
thither, or stirred up such contentions or dissensions in those places
whether he went as made his presence necessary. Note, Satan is a
constant enemy to the work of God, and does all he can to obstruct it.
6. He assures them of his affection and high esteem for them, though he
was not able, as yet, to be present with them according to his desire.
They were his hope, and joy, and crown of rejoicing; his glory and joy.
These are expressions of great and endeared affection, and high
estimation. And it is happy when ministers and people have such mutual
affection and esteem of each other, and especially if they shall thus
rejoice, if those that sow and those that reap shall rejoice together,
in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming.

The apostle here puts the Thessalonians in mind that though he could not
come to them as yet, and though he should never be able to come to them,
yet our Lord Jesus Christ will come, nothing shall hinder this. And
further, when he shall come, all must appear in his presence, or before
him. Ministers and people must all appear before him, and faithful
people will be the glory and joy of faithful ministers in that great and
glorious day.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Chapter 3](th1003)

</div>
