<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2)  
  [Previous](th2000)  [Next](th2002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

After the introduction ([Th2 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001), [Th2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#002)) the apostle begins this epistle
with an account of his high esteem for these Thessalonians ([Th2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#003), [Th2
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#004)). He then comforts them under
their afflictions and persecutions ([Th2
1:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#005)) and tells them what his
prayers were to God for them ([Th2
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#011), [Th2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#012)).

[2 Thessalonians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th2 1:1</span></span>

Here we have,

I. The introduction ([Th2 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001), [Th2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#002)), in the same words as in the
former epistle, from which we may observe that as this apostle did not
count it grievous to him to write the same things ([Phi
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#001)) in his epistles that he had
delivered in preaching, so he willingly wrote the same things to one
church that he did to another. The occurrence of the same words in this
epistle as in the former shows us that ministers ought not so much to
regard the variety of expression and elegance of style as the truth and
usefulness of the doctrines they preach. And great care should be taken
lest, from an affectation of novelty in method and phrases, we advance
new notions or doctrines, contrary to the principles of natural or
revealed religion, upon which this church of the Thessalonians was
built, as all true churches are; namely, in God our Father and the Lord
Jesus Christ.

II\. The apostle's expression of the high esteem he had for them. He not
only had a great affection for them (as he had expressed in his former
epistle, and now again in his pious wish of grace and peace for them),
but he also expresses his great esteem for them, concerning which
observe,

1\. How his esteem of them is expressed. (1.) He glorified God on their
behalf: We are bound to thank God always for you, brethren, as it is
meet, [Th2 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#003). He chose rather to
speak of what was praiseworthy in them in a way of thanksgiving to God
than by commendation of them; and, as what he mentions was matter of his
rejoicing, he accounted it matter of thanksgiving, and it was meet or
fit it should be so, for we are bound, and it is our duty, to be
thankful to God for all the good that is found in us or others: and it
not only is an act of kindness to our fellow-christians, but our duty,
to thank God on their behalf. (2.) He also glories in them before the
churches of God, [Th2 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#004). The apostle
never flattered his friends, but he took pleasure in commending them,
and speaking well of them, to the glory of God and for the excitement
and encouragement of others. Paul did not glory in his own gifts, nor in
his labour among them, but he gloried in the grace of God which was
bestowed upon them, and so his glorying was good, because all the
commendation he gave to them, and the pleasure he took himself, centered
in the praise and glory of God.

2\. For what he esteemed them and thanked God; namely, the increase of
their faith, and love, and patience. In his former epistle ([Th1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#003)) he gave thanks for their faith,
love, and patience; here he gives thanks for the increase of all those
graces, that they were not only true Christians, but growing Christians.
Note, Where there is the truth of grace there will be increase of it.
The path of the just is as the shining light, which shines more and more
unto the perfect day. And where there is the increase of grace God must
have all the glory of it. We are as much indebted to him for the
improvement of grace, and the progress of that good work, as we are for
the first work of grace and the very beginning of it. We may be tempted
to think that though when we were bad we could not make ourselves good,
yet when we are good we can easily make ourselves better; but we have as
much dependence on the grace of God for increasing the grace we have as
for planting grace when we had it not. The matter of the apostle's
thanksgiving and glorying on behalf of the Thessalonians was, (1.) That
their faith grew exceedingly, [Th2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#003). They were more confirmed in the
truth of gospel-revelations, confided in gospel-promises, and had lively
expectations of another world. The growth of their faith appeared by the
works of faith; and, where faith grows, all other graces grow
proportionably. (2.) Their charity abounded ([Th2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#003)), their love to God and man. Note,
Where faith grows love will abound, for faith works by love; and not
only the charity of some few of them, but of every one to each other,
did abound. There were no such divisions among them as in some other
churches. (3.) Their patience as well as faith increased in all their
persecutions and tribulations. And patience has then its perfect work
when it extends itself to all trials. There were many persecutions which
the Thessalonians endured for the sake of righteousness, as well as
other troubles which they met with in this calamitous life; yet they
endured all these, by faith seeing him that is invisible, and looking to
the recompence of reward; and endured them with patience, not with an
insensibility under them, but with patience arising from Christian
principles, which kept them quiet and submissive, and afforded them
inward strength and support.

[2 Thessalonians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th2 1:5</span></span>

Having mentioned their persecutions and tribulations, which they endured
principally for the cause of Christ, the apostle proceeds to offer
several things for their comfort under them; as,

I. He tells them of the present happiness and advantage of their
sufferings, [Th2 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#005). Their faith
being thus tried, and patience exercised, they were improved by their
sufferings, insomuch that they were counted worthy of the kingdom of
God. Their sufferings were a manifest token of this, that they were
worthy or meet to be accounted Christians indeed, seeing they could
suffer for Christianity. And the truth is, Religion, if it is worth any
thing, is worth every thing; and those either have no religion at all,
or none that is worth having, or know not how to value it, that cannot
find in their hearts to suffer for it. Besides, from their patient
suffering, it appeared that, according to the righteous judgment of God,
they should be counted worthy of the heavenly glory: not by worthiness
of condignity, but of congruity only; not that they could merit heaven,
but they were made meet for heaven. We cannot by all our sufferings, any
more than by our services, merit heaven as a debt; but by our patience
under our sufferings we are qualified for the joy that is promised to
patient sufferers in the cause of God.

II\. He tells them next of the future recompence that shall be given to
persecutor and persecuted.

1\. In this future recompence there will be, (1.) A punishment inflicted
on persecutors: God will recompense tribulation to those that trouble
you, [Th2 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006). And there is nothing
that more infallibly marks a man for eternal ruin than a spirit of
persecution, and enmity to the name and people of God: as the faith,
patience, and constancy of the saints are to them an earnest of
everlasting rest and joy, so the pride, malice, and wickedness of their
persecutors are to them an earnest of everlasting misery; for every man
carries about with him, and carries out of the world with him, either
his heaven or his hell. God will render a recompence, and will trouble
those that trouble his people. This he has done sometimes in this world,
witness the dreadful end of many persecutors; but especially this he
will do in the other world, where the portion of the wicked must be
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. (2.) A reward for those
that are persecuted: God will recompense their trouble with rest, [Th2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007). There is a rest that remains for
the people of God, a rest from sin and sorrow. Though many may be the
troubles of the righteous now, yet God will deliver them out of them
all. The future rest will abundantly recompense all their present
troubles. The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed. There is enough in
heaven to countervail all that we may lose or suffer for the name of
Christ in this world. The apostle says, To you who are troubled rest
with us. In heaven, ministers and people shall rest together, and
rejoice together, who suffer together here; and the meanest Christian
shall rest with the greatest apostle: nay, what is far more, if we
suffer for Christ, we shall also reign with him, [Ti2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#012).

2\. Concerning this future recompence we are further to observe,

(1.) The certainty of it, proved by the righteousness and justice of
God: It is a righteous thing with God ([Th2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006)) to render to every man according
to his works. The thoughts of this should be terrible to wicked men and
persecutors, and the great support of the righteous and such as are
persecuted; for, seeing there is a righteous God, there will be a
righteous recompence. God's suffering people will lose nothing by their
sufferings, and their enemies will gain nothing by their advantages
against them.

(2.) The time when this righteous recompence shall be made: When the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, [Th2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007). That will be the day of the
revelation of the righteous judgment of God; for then will God judge the
world in righteousness by that man whom he hath appointed, even Jesus
Christ the righteous Judge. The righteousness of God does not so visibly
appear to all men in the procedure of his providence as it will in the
process of the great judgment-day. The scripture has made known to us
the judgment to come, and we are bound to receive the revelation here
given concerning Christ. As,

\[1.\] That the Lord Jesus will in that day appear from heaven. Now the
heavens retain him, they conceal him; but then he will be revealed and
made manifest. He will come in all the pomp and power of the upper
world, whence we look for the Saviour.

\[2.\] He will be revealed with his mighty angels ([Th2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007)), or the angels of his power:
these will attend upon him, to grace the solemnity of that great day of
his appearance; they will be the ministers of his justice and mercy in
that day; they will summon the criminals to his tribunal, and gather in
the elect, and be employed in executing his sentence.

\[3.\] He will come in flaming fire, [Th2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008). A fire goeth before him, which
shall consume his enemies. The earth, and all the works that are
therein, shall be burnt up, and the elements shall melt with fervent
heat. This will be a trying fire, to try every man's work, - a refining
fire, to purify the saints, who shall share in the purity, and partake
of the felicity, of the new heaven and the new earth, - a consuming fire
to the wicked. His light will be piercing, and his power consuming, to
all those who in that day shall be found as chaff.

\[4.\] The effects of this appearance will be terrible to some and
joyful to others.

First, They will be terrible to some; for he will then take vengeance on
the wicked. 1. On those that sinned against the principles of natural
religion, and rebelled against the light of nature, that knew not God
([Th2 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008)), though the invisible
things of him are manifested in the things that are seen. 2. On those
that rebel against the light of revelation, that obey not the gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ. And this is the condemnation, that light is come
into the world, and men love darkness rather than light. This is the
great crime of multitudes - the gospel is revealed to them, and they
will not believe it; or, if they pretend to believe it, they will not
obey it. Note, Believing the truths of the gospel is in order to our
obeying the precepts of the gospel: there must be the obedience of
faith. To such persons as are here mentioned the revelation of our Lord
Jesus Christ will be terrible, because of their doom, which is
mentioned, [Th2 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#009). Here observe,
(1.) They will then be punished. Though sinners may be long reprieved,
yet they will be punished at last. Their misery will be a proper
punishment for their crimes, and only what they have deserved. They did
sin's work, and must receive sin's wages. (2.) Their punishment will be
no less than destruction, not of their being, but of their bliss; not
that of the body alone, but both as to body and soul. (3.) This
destruction will be everlasting. They shall be always dying, and yet
never die. Their misery will run parallel with the line of eternity. The
chains of darkness are everlasting chains, and the fire is everlasting
fire. It must needs be so, since the punishment is inflicted by an
eternal God, fastening upon an immortal soul, set out of the reach of
divine mercy and grace. (4.) This destruction shall come from the
presence of the Lord, that is, immediately from God himself. Here God
punishes sinners by creatures, by instruments; but then he will take the
work into his own hands. It will be destruction from the Almighty, more
terrible than the consuming fire which consumed Nadab and Abihu, which
came from before the Lord. (5.) It shall come from the glory of his
power, or from his glorious power. Not only the justice of God, but this
almighty power, will be glorified in the destruction of sinners; and who
knows the power of his anger? He is able to cast into hell.

Secondly, It will be a joyful day to some, even to the saints, unto
those that believe and obey the gospel. And then the apostle's testimony
concerning this day will be confirmed and believed ([Th2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#010)); in that bright and blessed day,
1. Christ Jesus will be glorified and admired by his saints. They will
behold his glory, and admire it with pleasure; they will glorify his
grace, and admire the wonders of his power and goodness towards them,
and sing hallelujahs to him in that day of his triumph, for their
complete victory and happiness. 2. Christ will be glorified and admired
in them. His grace and power will then be manifested and magnified, when
it shall appear what he has purchased for, and wrought in, and bestowed
upon, all those who believe in him. As his wrath and power will be made
known in and by the destruction of his enemies, so his grace and power
will be magnified in the salvation of his saints. Note, Christ's
dealings with those who believe will be what the world one day shall
wonder at. Now, they are a wonder to many; but how will they be wondered
at in this great and glorious day; or, rather, how will Christ, whose
name is Wonderful, be admired, when the mystery of God shall be
finished! Christ will not be so much admired in the glorious esteem of
angels that he will bring from heaven with him as in the many saints,
the many sons, that he will bring to glory.

[2 Thessalonians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th2 1:11</span></span>

In these verses the apostle again tells the Thessalonians of his earnest
and constant prayer for them. He could not be present with them, yet he
had a constant remembrance of them; they were much upon his thoughts; he
wished them well, and could not express his good-will and good wishes to
them better than in earnest constant prayer to God for them: Wherefore
also we pray, etc. Note, The believing thoughts and expectation of the
second coming of Christ should put us upon prayer to God for ourselves
and others. We should watch and pray, so our Saviour directs his
disciples ([Luk 21:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#036)), Watch
therefore, and pray always, that you may be counted worthy to stand
before the Son of man. Observe,

I. What the apostle prayed for, [Th2
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#011). It is a great concern to be well
instructed what to pray for; and without divine instruction we know not
what to pray for, as without divine assistance we shall not pray in such
a manner as we ought. Our prayers should be suitable to our
expectations. Thus the apostle prays for them, 1. That God would begin
his good work of grace in them; so we may understand this expression:
That our God would count you (or, as it might be read, make you) worthy
of this calling. We are called with a high and holy calling; we are
called to God's kingdom and glory; and no less than the inheritance of
the saints is the hope of our calling, nothing less than the enjoyment
of that glory and felicity which shall be revealed when Christ Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven. Now, if this be our calling, our great
concern should be to be worthy of it, or meet and prepared for this
glory: and because we have no worthiness of our own, but what is owing
purely to the grace of God, we should pray that he would make us worthy,
and then count us worthy, of this calling, or that he would make us meet
to partake of the inheritance of the saints in light, [Col
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012). 2. That God would carry on the
good work that is begun, and fulfil all the good pleasure of his
goodness. The good pleasure of God denotes his gracious purposes towards
his people, which flow from his goodness, and are full of goodness
towards them; and it is thence that all good comes to us. If there be
any good in us, it is the fruit of God's good-will to us, it is owing to
the good pleasure of his goodness, and therefore is called grace. Now,
there are various and manifold purposes of grace and good-will in God
towards his people; and the apostle prays that all of them may be
fulfilled or accomplished towards these Thessalonians. There are several
good works of grace begun in the hearts of God's people, which proceed
from this good pleasure of God's goodness, and we should desire that
they may be completed and perfected. In particular, the apostle prays
that God would fulfil in them the work of faith with power. Note, (1.)
The fulfilling of the work of faith is in order to the fulfilling of
every other good work. And, (2.) It is the power of God that not only
begins, but that carries on and perfects the work of faith.

II\. Why the apostle prayed for these things ([Th2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#012)): That the name of the Lord Jesus
may be glorified; this is the end we should aim at in every thing we do
and desire, that God and Christ in all things may be glorified. Our own
happiness and that of others should be subordinate to this ultimate end.
Our good works should so shine before men that others may glorify God,
that Christ may be glorified in and by us, and then we shall be
glorified in and with him. And this is the great end and design of the
grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ, which is manifested to us
and wrought in us. Or thus: it is according to the grace of God and
Christ, that is, it is an agreeable thing, considering the grace that is
manifested to us and bestowed on us, by God and Christ, that we direct
all we do to the glory of our Creator and Redeemer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians Chapter 2](th2002)

</div>
