<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2)  
  [Previous](th2002)  [Next](ti1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001)

[2 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th2 3:0</span></span>

In the close of the foregoing chapter, the apostle had prayed earnestly
for the Thessalonians, and now he desires their prayers, encouraging
them to trust in God, to which he subjoins another petition for them
([Th2 3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001)). He then proceeds to give
them commands and directions for correcting some things he was informed
were amiss among them ([Th2 3:6-15](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006))
and concludes with benedictions and prayers ([Th2
3:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#016)).

[2 Thessalonians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th2 3:1</span></span>

In these words observe,

I. The apostle desires the prayers of his friends: Finally, brethren,
pray for us, [Th2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001). He always
remembered them in his prayers, and would not have them forget him and
his fellow-labourers, but bear them on their hearts at the throne of
grace. Note, 1. This is one way by which the communion of saints is kept
us, not only by their praying together, or with one another, but by
their praying for one another when they are absent one from another. And
thus those who are at great distance may meet together at the throne of
grace; and thus those who are not capable of doing or receiving any
other kindness may yet this way do and receive real and very great
kindness. 2. It is the duty of people to pray for their ministers; and
not only for their own pastors, but also for all good and faithful
ministers. And, 3. Ministers need, and therefore should desire, the
prayers of their people. How remarkable is the humility, and how
engaging the example, of this great apostle, who was so mighty in prayer
himself, and yet despised not the prayers of the meanest Christian, but
desired an interest in them. Observe, further, what they are desired and
directed to pray for; namely, (1.) For the success of the gospel
ministry: That the word of the Lord may have free course, and be
glorified, [Th2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001). This was the
great thing that Paul was most solicitous about. He was more solicitous
that God's name might be sanctified, his kingdom advanced, and his will
done, than he was about his own daily bread. He desired that the word of
the Lord might run (so it is in the original), that it might get ground,
that the interest of religion in the world might go forward and not
backward, and not only go forward, but go apace. All the forces of hell
were then, and still are, more or less, raised and mustered to oppose
the word of the Lord, to hinder its publication and success. We should
pray, therefore, that oppositions may be removed, that so the gospel,
may have free course to the ears, the hearts, and the consciences of
men, that it may be glorified in the conviction and conversion of
sinners, the confutation, of gainsayers, and the holy conversation of
the saints. God, who magnified the law, and made it honourable, will
glorify the gospel, and make that honourable, and so will glorify his
own name; and good ministers and good Christians may very well be
contented to be little, to be any thing, to be nothing, if Christ be
magnified and his gospel be glorified. Paul was now at Athens, or, as
some think, at Corinth, and would have the Thessalonians pray that he
might have as good success there as he had at Thessalonica, that it
might be as well with others even as it was with them. Note, If
ministers have been successful in one place, they should desire to be
successful in every place where they may preach the gospel. (2.) For the
safety of gospel ministers. He asks their prayers, nor for preferment,
but for preservation: That we may be delivered from unreasonable and
wicked men, [Th2 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#002). Note, Those who
are enemies to the preaching of the gospel, and persecutors of the
faithful preachers of it, are unreasonable and wicked men. They act
against all the rules and laws of reason and religion, and are guilty of
the greatest absurdity and impiety. Not only in the principles of
atheism and infidelity, but also in the practice of the vice and
immorality, and especially in persecution, there is the greatest
absurdity in the world, as well as impiety. There is need of the
spiritual protection, as well as the assistance, of godly and faithful
ministers, for these are as the standard-bearers, who are most struck
at; and therefore all who wish well to the interest of Christ in the
world should pray for them. For all men have not faith; that is, many do
not believe the gospel; they will not embrace it themselves, and no
wonder if such are restless and malicious in their endeavours to oppose
the gospel, decry the ministry, and disgrace the ministers of the word;
and too many have not common faith or honesty; there is no confidence
that we can safely put in them, and we should pray to be delivered from
those who have no conscience nor honour, who never regard what they say
or do. We may sometimes be in as much or more danger from false and
pretended friends as from open and avowed enemies.

II\. He encourages them to trust in God. We should not only pray to God
for his grace, but also place our trust and confidence in his grace, and
humbly expect what we pray for. Observe,

1\. What the good is which we may expect from the grace of God -
establishment, and preservation from evil; and the best Christians stand
in need of these benefits. (1.) That God would establish them. This the
apostle had prayed for on their behalf ([Th2
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#017)), and now he encourages them to
expect this favour. We stand no longer than God holds us up; unless he
hold up our goings in his paths, our feet will slide, and we shall fall.
(2.) That God will keep them from evil. We have as much need of the
grace of God for our perseverance to the end as for the beginning of the
good work. The evil of sin is the greatest evil, but there are other
evils which God will also preserve his saints from - the evil that is in
the world, yea, from all evil, to his heavenly kingdom.

2\. What encouragement we have to depend upon the grace of God: The Lord
is faithful. He is faithful to his promises, and is the Lord who cannot
lie, who will not alter the thing that has gone out of his mouth. When
once the promise therefore is made, performance is sure and certain. He
is faithful to his relation, a faithful God and a faithful friend; we
may depend upon his filling up all the relations he stands in to his
people. Let it be our care to be true and faithful in our promises, and
to the relations we stand in to this faithful God. He adds,

3\. A further ground of hope that God would do this for them, seeing
they did and would do the things they were commanded, [Th2
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#004). The apostle had this confidence
in them, and this was founded upon his confidence in God; for there is
otherwise no confidence in man. Their obedience is described by doing
what he and his fellow-labourers had commanded them, which was no other
thing than the commandments of the Lord; for the apostles themselves had
no further commission than to teach men to observe and to do what the
Lord had commanded, [Mat 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020). And as
the experience the apostle had of their obedience for the time past was
one ground of his confidence that they would do the things commanded
them for the time to come, so this is one ground to hope that whatsoever
we ask of God we shall receive of him, because we keep his commandments,
and do those things that are pleasing in his sight, [Jo1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#022).

III\. He makes a short prayer for them, [Th2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#005). It is a prayer for spiritual
blessings. Two things of the greatest importance the apostle prays for:
- 1. That their hearts may be brought into the love of God, to be in
love with God as the most excellent and amiable Being, the best of all
beings; and this is not only most reasonable and necessary in order to
our happiness, but is our happiness itself; it is a great part of the
happiness of heaven itself, where this love shall be made perfect. We
can never attain to this unless God by his grace direct our hearts
aright, for our love is apt to go astray after other things. Note, We
sustain a great deal of damage by misplacing our affections; it is our
sin and our misery that we place our affections upon wrong objects. If
God directs our love aright upon himself, the rest of the affections
will thereby be rectified. 2. That a patient waiting for Christ may be
joined with this love of God. There is no true love of God without faith
in Jesus Christ. We must wait for Christ, which supposes our faith in
him, that we believe he came once in flesh and will come again in glory:
and we must expect this second coming of Christ, and be careful to get
ready for it; there must be a patient waiting, enduring with courage and
constancy all that we may meet with in the mean time: and we have need
of patience, and need of divine grace to exercise Christian patience,
the patience of Christ (as some read the word), patience for Christ's
sake and after Christ's example.

[2 Thessalonians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th2 3:6</span></span>

The apostle having commended their obedience for the time past, and
mentioned his confidence in their obedience for the time to come,
proceeds to give them commands and directions to some who were faulty,
correcting some things that were amiss among them. Observe, The best
society of Christians may have some faulty persons among them, and some
things that ought to be reformed. Perfection is not to be found on this
side heaven: but evil manners beget good laws; the disorders that Paul
heard of as existing among the Thessalonians occasioned the good laws we
find in these verses, which are of constant use to us, and all others
whom they may concern. Observe,

I. That which was amiss among the Thessalonians, which is expressed,

1\. More generally. There were some who walked disorderly, not after the
tradition they received from the apostle, [Th2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006). Some of the brethren were guilty
of this disorderly walking; they did not live regularly, nor govern
themselves according to the rules of Christianity, nor agreeably to
their profession of religion; not according to the precepts delivered by
the apostle, which they had received, and pretended to pay a regard to.
Note, It is required of those who have received the gospel, and who
profess a subjection to it, that they live according to the gospel. If
they do not, they are to be counted disorderly persons.

2\. In particular, there were among them some idle persons and
busy-bodies, [Th2 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#011). This the
apostle was so credibly informed of that he had sufficient reason to
give commands and directions with relation to such persons, how they
ought to behave, and how the church should act towards them. (1.) There
were some among them who were idle, not working at all, or doing
nothing. It does not appear that they were gluttons or drunkards, but
idle, and therefore disorderly people. It is not enough for any to say
they do no hurt; for it is required of all persons that they do good in
the places and relations in which Providence has placed them. It is
probable that these persons had a notion (by misunderstanding some
passages in the former epistle) concerning the near approach of the
coming of Christ, which served them for a pretence to leave off the work
of their callings, and live in idleness. Note, It is a great error, or
abuse of religion, to make it a cloak for idleness or any other sin. If
we were sure that the day of judgment were ever so near, we must,
notwithstanding, do the work of the day in its day, that when our Lord
comes he may find us doing. The servant who waits for the coming of his
Lord aright must be working as his Lord has commanded, that all may be
ready when he comes. Or, it may be, these disorderly persons pretended
that the liberty wherewith Christ had made them free discharged them
from the services and business of their particular callings and
employments in the world: whereas they were to abide in the same calling
wherein they were called of God, and therein abide with God, [Co1
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#020), [Co1
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#024). Industry in our particular
callings as men is a duty required of us by our general calling as
Christians. Or perhaps the general charity there was then among
Christians to their poor brethren encouraged some to live in idleness,
as knowing the church would maintain them: whatever was the cause, they
were much to blame. (2.) There were busy-bodies among them: and it
should seem, by the connection, that the same persons who were idle were
busy-bodies also. This may seem to be a contradiction; but so it is,
that most commonly those persons who have no business of their own to
do, or who neglect it, busy themselves in other men's matters. If we are
idle, the devil and a corrupt heart will soon find us something to do.
The mind of man is a busy thing; if it be not employed in doing good, it
will be doing evil. Note, Busy-bodies are disorderly walkers, such as
are guilty of vain curiosity, and impertinent meddling with things that
do not concern them, and troubling themselves and others with other
men's matters. The apostle warns Timothy ([Ti1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#013)) to beware of such as learn to be
idle, wandering about from house to house, and are not only idle, but
tatlers also, and busy-bodies, speaking things which they ought not.

II\. The good laws which were occasioned by these evil manners,
concerning which we may take notice,

1\. Whose laws they are: they are commands of the apostles of our Lord,
given in the name of their Lord and ours, that is, the commands of our
Lord himself. We command you, brethren, in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, [Th2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006). Again, We command
and exhort you by our Lord Jesus Christ, [Th2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#012). The apostle uses words of
authority and entreaty: and, where disorders are to be rectified or
prevented, there is need of both. The authority of Christ should awe our
minds to obedience, and his grace and goodness should allure us.

2\. What the good laws and rules are. The apostle gives directions to
the whole church, commands to those disorderly persons, and an
exhortation to those in particular who did well among them.

(1.) His commands and directions to the whole church regard, \[1.\]
Their behaviour towards the disorderly persons who were among them,
which is thus expressed ([Th2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006)), to
withdraw themselves from such, and afterwards to mark that man, and have
no company with him, that he may be ashamed; yet not to count him as an
enemy, but to admonish him as a brother. The directions of the apostle
are carefully to be observed in our conduct towards disorderly persons.
We must be very cautious in church-censures and church-discipline. We
must, First, Note that man who is suspected or charged with not obeying
the word of God, or walking contrary thereto, that is, we must have
sufficient proof of his fault before we proceed further. We must,
Secondly, Admonish him in a friendly manner; we must put him in mind of
his sin, and of his duty; and this should be done privately ([Mat
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015)); then, if he will not hear, we
must, Thirdly, Withdraw from him, and not keep company with him, that
is, we must avoid familiar converse and society with such, for two
reasons, namely, that we may not learn his evil ways; for he who follows
vain and idle persons, and keeps company with such, is in danger of
becoming like them. Another reason is for the shaming, and so the
reforming, of those that offend, that when idle and disorderly persons
see how their loose practices are disliked by all wise and good people
they may be ashamed of them, and walk more orderly. Love therefore to
the persons of our offending brethren, even when we hate their vices,
should be the motive of our withdrawing from them; and even those who
are under the censures of the church must not be accounted as enemies
([Th2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#015)); for, if they be reclaimed
and reformed by these censures, they will recover their credit and
comfort, and right to church-privileges as brethren. \[2.\] Their
general conduct and behaviour ought to be according to the good example
the apostle and those who were with him had given them: Yourselves know
how you ought to follow us, [Th2 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#007).
Those who planted religion among them had set a good example before
them; and the ministers of the gospel should be ensamples to the flock.
It is the duty of Christians not only to walk according to the
traditions of the apostles, and the doctrines they preached, but also
according to the good example they set before them, to be followers of
them so far as they were followers of Christ. The particular good
example the apostle mentions was their diligence, which was so different
from what was found in the disorderly walkers he takes notice of: "We
behaved not ourselves disorderly among you ([Th2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#007)), we did not spend our time idly,
in idle visits, idle talk, idle sports." They took pains in their
ministry, in preaching the gospel, and in getting their own living.
Neither did we eat any man's bread for nought, [Th2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#008). Though he might justly have
demanded a maintenance, because those who preach the gospel may of right
expect to live by the gospel. This is a just debt that people owe to
their ministers, and the apostle had power or authority to have demanded
this ([Th2 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#009)); but he waived his
right from affection to them, and for the sake of the gospel, and that
he might be an example for them to follow ([Th2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#009)), that they might learn how to
fill up time, and always be employed in something that would turn to
good account.

(2.) He commands and directs those that live idle lives to reform, and
set themselves to their business. He had given commandments to this
purport, as well as a good example of this, when he was among them: Even
when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any man would not
work neither should he eat, [Th2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#010).
It was a proverbial speech among the Jews, He who does not labour does
not deserve to eat. The labourer is worthy of his meat; but what is the
loiterer worthy of? It is the will of God that every man should have a
calling, and mind his calling, and make a business of it, and that none
should live like useless drones in the world. Such persons do what in
them lies to defeat the sentence, In the sweat of thy face shalt thou
eat thy bread. It was not the mere humour of the apostle, who was an
active stirring man himself and therefore would have every body else to
be so too, but it was the command of our Lord Jesus Christ, that with
quietness we work, and eat our own bread, [Th2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#012). Men ought some way or other to
earn their own living, otherwise they do not eat their own bread.
Observe, There must be work or labour, in opposition to idleness; and
there must be quietness, in opposition to being busy-bodies in other
men's matters. We must study to be quiet, and do our own business. This
is an excellent but rare composition, to be of an active yet quiet
spirit, active in our own business and yet quiet as to other people's.

(3.) He exhorts those that did well not to be weary in well-doing ([Th2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#013)); as if he had said, "Go on and
prosper. The Lord is with you while you are with him. See that whatever
you do, that is good, you persevere therein. Hold on your way, and hold
out to the end. You must never give over, nor tire in your work. It will
be time enough to rest when you come to heaven, that everlasting rest
which remains for the people of God."

[2 Thessalonians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">th2 3:16</span></span>

In this conclusion of the epistle we have the apostle's benediction and
prayers for these Thessalonians. Let us desire them for ourselves and
our friend. There are three blessings pronounced upon them, or desired
for them: -

I. That God would give them peace. Note, 1. Peace is the blessing
pronounced or desired. By peace we may understand all manner of
prosperity; here it may signify, in particular, peace with God, peace in
their own minds and consciences, peace among themselves, and peace with
all men. 2. This peace is desired for them always, or in every thing;
and he desired they might have all good things at all times. 3. Peace by
all means: that, as they enjoyed the means of grace, they might with
success use all the means and methods of peace too; for peace is often
difficult, as it is always desirable. 4. That God would give them peace,
who is the Lord of peace. If we have any peace that is desirable, God
must give it, who is the author of peace and lover of concord. We shall
neither have peaceable dispositions ourselves nor find men disposed to
be at peace with us, unless the God of peace give us both.

II\. That the presence of God might be with them: The Lord be with you
all. We need nothing more to make us safe and happy, nor can we desire
any thing better for ourselves and our friends, than to have God's
gracious presence with us and them. This will be a guide and guard in
every way that we may go, and our comfort in every condition we may be
in. It is the presence of God that makes heaven to be heaven, and this
will make this earth to be like heaven. No matter where we are if God be
with us, nor who is absent if God be with us, nor who is absent if God
be present with us.

III\. That the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ might be with them. So
this apostle concluded his first epistle to these Thessalonians; and it
is through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ that we may comfortably
hope to have peace with God and enjoy the presence of God, for he has
made those nigh that were afar off. It is this grace that is all in all
to make us happy. This is what the apostle admired and magnified on all
occasions, what he delighted and trusted in; and by this salutation or
benediction, written with his own hand, as the token of every epistle
(when the rest was written by an amanuensis), he took care lest the
churches he wrote to should be imposed on by counterfeit epistles, which
he knew would be of dangerous consequence.

Let us be thankful that we have the canon of scripture complete, and by
the wonderful and special care of divine Providence preserved pure and
uncorrupt through so many successive ages, and not dare to add to it,
nor diminish from it. Let us believe the divine original of the sacred
scriptures, and conform our faith and practice to this our sufficient
and only rule, which is able to make us wise unto salvation, through
faith which is in Christ Jesus. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Introduction](ti1000)

</div>
