<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1004)  [Next](ti1006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#001)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 5:0</span></span>

Here the apostle, I. Directs Timothy how to reprove ([Ti1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#001), [Ti1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#002)). II. Adverts to widows, both
elder and younger ([Ti1 5:3-16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#003)). III.
To elders ([Ti1 5:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017)). IV. Treats
of public reproof ([Ti1 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020)). V.
Gives a solemn charge concerning ordination ([Ti1
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021), [Ti1
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022)). VI. Refers to his health ([Ti1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023)), and states men's sins to be
very different in their effects ([Ti1
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#024), [Ti1
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#025)).

[1 Timothy 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 5:1</span></span>

Here the apostle gives rules to Timothy, and in him to other ministers,
in reproving. Ministers are reprovers by office; it is a part, though
the least pleasing part, of their office; they are to preach the word,
to reprove and rebuke, [Ti2 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002). A
great difference is to be made in our reproofs, according to the age,
quality, and other circumstances, of the persons rebuked; thus, and
elder in age or office must be entreated as a father; on some have
compassion, making a difference, [Jde
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#022). Now the rule is, 1. To be very
tender in rebuking elders - elders in age, elders by office. Respect
must be had to the dignity of their years and place, and therefore they
must not be rebuked sharply nor magisterially; but Timothy himself,
though an evangelist, must entreat them as fathers, for this would be
the likeliest way to work upon them, and to win upon them. 2. The
younger must be rebuked as brethren, with love and tenderness; not as
desirous, to spy faults or pick quarrels, but as being willing to make
the best of them. There is need of a great deal of meekness in reproving
those who deserve reproof. 3. The elder women must be reproved, when
there is occasion, as mothers. [Hos
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#002), Plead with your mother, plead. 4.
The younger women must be reproved, but reproved as sisters, with all
purity. If Timothy, so mortified a man to this world and to the flesh
and lusts of it, had need of such a caution as this, much more have we.

[1 Timothy 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 5:3</span></span>

Directions are here given concerning the taking of widows into the
number of those who were employed by the church and had maintenance from
the church: Honour widows that are widows indeed. Honour them, that is,
maintain them, admit them into office. There was in those times an
office in the church in which widows were employed, and that was to tend
the sick and the aged, to look to them by the direction of the deacons.
We read of the care taken of widows immediately upon the first forming
of the Christian church ([Act 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001)),
where the Grecians thought their widows were neglected in the daily
ministration and provision made for poor widows. The general rule is to
honour widows that are widows indeed, to maintain them, to relieve them
with respect and tenderness.

I. It is appointed that those widows only should be relieved by the
charity of the church who were pious and devout, and not wanton widows
that lived in pleasure, [Ti1 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005), [Ti1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006). She is to be reckoned a widow
indeed, and it to be maintained at the church's charge, who, being
desolate, trusteth in God. Observe, It is the duty and comfort of those
who are desolate to trust in God. Therefore God sometimes brings his
people into such straits that they have nothing else to trust to, that
they may with more confidence trust in him. Widowhood is a desolate
estate; but let the widows trust in me ([Jer
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#011)), and rejoice that they have a
God to trust to. Again, Those who trust in God must continue in prayer.
If by faith we confide in God, by prayer we must give glory to God and
commit ourselves to his guidance. Anna was a widow indeed, who departed
not from the temple ([Luk 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#037)), but
served God with fasting and prayer night and day. But she is not a widow
indeed that lives in pleasure ([Ti1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)), or who lives licentiously. A
jovial widow is not a widow indeed, not fit to be taken under the care
of the church. She that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives, is no
living member of the church, but as a carcase in it, or a mortified
member. We may apply it more generally; those who live in pleasure are
dead while they live, spiritually dead, dead in trespasses and sins;
they are in the world to no purpose, buried alive as to the great ends
of living.

II\. Another rule he gives is that the church should not be charged with
the maintenance of those widows who had relations of their own that were
able to maintain them. This is mentioned several times ([Ti1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004)): If any widow have children or
nephews, that is grandchildren or near relations, let them maintain
them, and let not the church be burdened. So [Ti1
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#016). This is called showing piety at
home ([Ti1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004)), or showing piety
towards their own families. Observe, The respect of children to their
parents, with their care of them, is fitly called piety. This is
requiting their parents. Children can never sufficiently requite their
parents for the care they have taken of them, and the pains they have
taken with them; but they must endeavour to do it. It is the
indispensable duty of children, if their parents be in necessity, and
they in ability to relieve them, to do it to the utmost of their power,
for this is good and acceptable before God. The Pharisees taught that a
gift to the altar was more acceptable to God than relieving a poor
parent, [Mat 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#005). But here we are
told that this is better than all burnt-offerings and sacrifices; this
is good and acceptable, etc. He speaks of this again ([Ti1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#008)), If any provide not for his own,
etc. If any men or women do not maintain their own poor relations who
belong to them, they do in effect deny the faith; for the design of
Christ was to confirm the law of Moses, and particularly the law of the
fifth commandment, which is, Honour thy father and mother; so that those
deny the faith who disobey that law, much more if they provide not for
their wives and children, who are parts of themselves; if they spend
that upon their lusts which should maintain their families, they have
denied the faith and are worse than infidels. One reason why this care
must be taken that those who are rich should maintain their poor
relations, and not burden the church with them is ([Ti1
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#016)) that it may relieve those who
are widows indeed. Observe, Charity misplaced is a great hindrance to
true charity; there should be prudence in the choice of the objects of
charity, that it may not be thrown away upon those who are not properly
so, that there may be the more for those who are real objects of
charity.

III\. He gives directions concerning the characters of the widows that
were to be taken into the number to receive the church's charity: not
under sixty years old, nor any who have divorced their husbands or been
divorced from them and have married again; she must have been the wife
of one man, such as had been a housekeeper, had a good name for
hospitality and charity, well reported of for good works. Observe,
Particular care ought to be taken to relieve those, when they fall into
decay, who, when they had wherewithal, were ready to every good work.
Here are instances of such good works as are proper to be done by good
wives: If she have brought up children: he does not say, If she have
borne children (children are a heritage of the Lord), that depends on
the will of God; but, if she had not children of her own, yet if she had
brought up children. If she have lodged strangers, and washed the
saints' feet; if she have been ready to give entertainment to good
Christians and good ministers, when they were in their travels for the
spreading of the gospel. Washing of the feet o their friends was a part
of their entertainments. If she have relieved the afflicted when she had
ability, let her be relieved now. Observe, Those who would find mercy
when they are in distress must show mercy when they are in prosperity.

IV\. He cautions them to take heed of admitting into the number those
who are likely to be no credit to them ([Ti1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#011)): The younger widows refuse: they
will be weary of their employments in the church, and of living by rule,
as they must do; so they will marry, and cast off their first faith. You
read of a first love ([Rev 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#004)), and
here of a first faith, that is, the engagements they gave to the church
to behave well, and as became the trust reposed in them: it does not
appear that by their first faith is meant their vow not to marry, for
the scripture is very silent on that head; besides the apostle here
advises the younger widows to marry ([Ti1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014)), which he would not if hereby
they must have broken their vows. Dr. Whitby well observes, "If this
faith referred to a promise made to the church not to marry, it could
not be called their first faith." Withal they learn to be idle, and not
only idle, but tattlers, etc., [Ti1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#013). Observe, It is seldom that those
who are idle are idle only, they learn to be tattlers and busy-bodies,
and to make mischief among neighbours, and sow discord among brethren.
Those who had not attained to such a gravity of mind as was fit for the
deaconesses (or the widows who were taken among the church's poor), let
them marry, bear children, etc., [Ti1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014). Observe, If housekeepers do not
mind their business, but are tattlers, they give occasion to the
adversaries of Christianity to reproach the Christian name, which, it
seems, there were some instances of, [Ti1
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#015). We learn hence, 1. In the
primitive church there was care taken of poor widows, and provision made
for them; and the churches of Christ in these days should follow so good
an example, as far as they are able. 2. In the distribution of the
church's charity, or alms, great care is to be taken that those share in
the public bounty who most want it and best deserve it. A widow was not
to be taken into the primitive church that had relations who were able
to maintain her, or who was not well reported of for good works, but
lived in pleasure: But the younger widows refuse, for, when they have
begun to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry. 3. The credit of
religion, and the reputation of Christian churches, are very much
concerned in the character and behaviour of those that are taken into
any employment in the church, though of a lower nature (such as the
business of deaconesses), or that receive alms of the church; if they do
not behave well, but are tatlers and busy-bodies, they will give
occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully. 4. Christianity
obliges its professors to relieve their indigent friends, particularly
poor widows, that the church may not be charged with them, that it may
relieve those that are widows indeed: rich people should be ashamed to
burden the church with their poor relations, when it is with difficulty
that those are supplied who have no children or nephews, that is,
grand-children, who are in a capacity to relieve them.

[1 Timothy 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ti1 5:17</span></span>

Here are directions,

I. Concerning the supporting of ministers. Care must be taken that they
be honourably maintained ([Ti1 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017)):
Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honour (that
is, of double maintenance, double to what they have had, or to what
others have), especially those who labour in the word and doctrine,
those who are more laborious than others. Observe, The presbytery ruled,
and the same that ruled were those who laboured in the word and
doctrine: they had not one to preach to them and another to rule them,
but the work was done by one and the same person. Some have imagined
that by the elders that rule well the apostle means lay-elders, who were
employed in ruling but not in teaching, who were concerned in
church-government, but did not meddle with the administration of the
word and sacraments; and I confess this is the plainest text of
scripture that can be found to countenance such an opinion. But it seem
a little strange that mere ruling elders should be accounted worthy of
double honour, when the apostle preferred preaching to baptizing, and
much more would he prefer it to ruling the church; and it is more
strange that the apostle should take no notice of them when he treats of
church-officers; but, as it is hinted before, they had not, in the
primitive church, one to preach to them and another to rule them, but
ruling and teaching were performed by the same persons, only some might
labour more in the word and doctrine than others. Here we have, 1. The
work of ministers; it consists principally in two things: ruling well
and labouring in the word and doctrine. This was the main business of
elders or presbyters in the days of the apostles. 2. The honour due to
those who were not idle, but laborious in this work; they were worthy of
double honour, esteem, and maintenance. He quotes a scripture to confirm
this command concerning the maintenance of ministers that we might think
foreign; but it intimates what a significancy there was in many of the
laws of Moses, and particularly in this, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox
that treads out the corn, [Deu 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004).
The beasts that were employed in treading out the corn (for that way
they took instead of threshing it) were allowed to feed while they did
the work, so that the more work they did the more food they had;
therefore let the elders that labour in the word and doctrine be well
provided for; for the labourer is worthy of his reward ([Mat
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)), and there is all the reason in
the world that he should have it. We hence learn, (1.) God, both under
the law, and now under the gospel, has taken care that his ministers be
well provided for. Does God take care for oxen, and will he not take
care of his own servants? The ox only treads out the corn of which they
make the bread that perishes; but ministers break the bread of life
which endures for ever. (2.) The comfortable subsistence of ministers,
as it is God's appointment that those who preach the gospel should live
of the gospel ([Co1 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#014)), so it is
their just due, as much as the reward of the labourer; and those who
would have ministers starved, or not comfortably provided for, God will
require it of them another day.

II\. Concerning the accusation of ministers ([Ti1
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#019)): Against an elder receive not an
accusation, but before two or three witnesses. Here is the
scripture-method of proceeding against an elder, when accused of any
crime. Observe, 1. There must be an accusation; it must not be a flying
uncertain report, but an accusation, containing a certain charge, must
be drawn up. Further, He is not to be proceeded against by way of
enquiry; this is according to the modern practice of the inquisition,
which draws up articles for men to purge themselves of such crimes, or
else to accuse themselves; but, according to the advice of Paul, there
must be an accusation brought against an elder. 2. This accusation is
not to be received unless supported by two or three credible witnesses;
and the accusation must be received before them, that is, the accused
must have the accusers face to face, because the reputation of a
minister is, in a particular manner, a tender thing; and therefore,
before any thing be done in the least to blemish that reputation, great
care should be taken that the thing alleged against him be well proved,
that he be not reproached upon an uncertain surmise; "but ([Ti1
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020)) those that sin rebuke before
all; that is, thou needest not be so tender of other people, but rebuke
them publicly." Or "those that sin before all rebuke before all, that
the plaster may be as wide as the wound, and that those who are in
danger of sinning by the example of their fall may take warning by the
rebuke given them for it, that others also may fear." Observe, (1.)
Public scandalous sinners must be rebuked publicly: as their sin has
been public, and committed before many, or at least come to the hearing
of all, so their reproof must be public, and before all. (2.) Public
rebuke is designed for the good of others, that they may fear, as well
as for the good of the party rebuked; hence it was ordered under the law
that public offenders should receive public punishment, that all Israel
might hear, and fear, and do no more wickedly.

III\. Concerning the ordination of ministers ([Ti1
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022)): Lay hands suddenly on no man;
it seems to be meant of the ordaining of men to the office of the
ministry, which ought not to be done rashly and inconsiderately, and
before due trial made of their gifts and graces, their abilities and
qualifications for it. Some understand it of absolution: "Be not too
hasty in laying hands on any; remit not the censure of the church to
any, till time be first taken for the proof of their sincerity in their
repentance, neither be partakers of other men's sins, implying that
those who are too easy in remitting the censures of the church encourage
others in the sins which are thus connived at, and make themselves
thereby guilty." Observe, We have great need to watch over ourselves at
all times, that we do not make ourselves partakers of other men's sins.
"Keep thyself pure, not only from doing the like thyself, but from
countenancing it, or being any way accessary to it, in others." Here is,
1. A caution against the rash ordination of ministers, or absolution of
those who have been under church-censures: Lay hands suddenly on no man.
2. Those who are rash, either in the one case or the other, will make
themselves partakers in other men's sins. 3. We must keep ourselves
pure, if we will be pure; the grace of God makes and keeps us pure, but
it is by our own endeavours.

IV\. Concerning absolution, to which [Ti1
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#024), [Ti1
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#025), seem to refer: Some men's sins
are open beforehand, going before to judgment, and some follow after,
etc. Observe, Ministers have need of a great deal of wisdom, to know how
to accommodate themselves to the variety of offences and offenders that
they have occasion to deal with. Some men's sins are so plain and
obvious, and not found by secret search, that there is no dispute
concerning the bringing of them under the censures of the church; they
go before to judgment, to lead them to censure. - Others they follow
after; that is, their wickedness does not presently appear, nor till
after a due search has been made concerning it. Or, as some understand
it, some men's sins continue after they are censured; they are not
reformed by the censure, and in that case there must be no absolution.
So, also, as to the evidences of repentance: The good works of some are
manifest beforehand. And those that are otherwise, whose good works do
not appear, their wickedness cannot be hid, and so it will be easy to
discern who are to be absolved, and who are not. Observe, 1. There are
secret, and there are open sins; some men's sins are open beforehand,
and going unto judgment, and some they follow after. 2. Sinners must be
differently dealt with by the church. 3. The effects of church-censures
are very different; some are thereby humbled and brought to repentance,
so that their good works are manifest beforehand, while it is quite
otherwise with others. 4. The incorrigible cannot be hid; for God will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the
counsels of all hearts.

V. Concerning Timothy himself. 1. Here is a charge to him to be careful
of his office; and a solemn charge it is: I charge thee before God, as
thou wilt answer it to God before the holy and elect angels, observe
these things without partiality, [Ti1
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021). Observe, It ill becomes
ministers to be partial, and to have respect of persons, and to prefer
one before another upon any secular account. He charges him, by all that
is dear, before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, to
guard against partiality. Ministers must give an account to God and the
Lord Jesus Christ, whether, and how, they have observed all things given
them in charge: and woe to them if they have been partial in their
ministrations, out of an worldly politic view. 2. He charges him to take
care of his health: Drink no longer water, etc. It seems Timothy was a
mortified man to the pleasures of sense; he drank water, and he was a
man of no strong constitution of body, and for this reason Paul advises
him to use wine for the helping of his stomach and the recruiting of his
nature. Observe, It is a little wine, for ministers must not be given to
much wine; so much as may be for the health of the body, not so as to
distemper it, for God has made wine to rejoice man's heart. Note, (1.)
It is the will of God that people should take all due care of their
bodies. As we are not to make them our masters, so neither our slaves;
but to use them so that they may be most fit and helpful to us in the
service of God. (2.) Wine is most proper for sickly and weak people,
whose stomachs are often out of order, and who labour under infirmities.
Give strong drink to him that is ready to perish, and wine to those that
are of heavy hearts, [Pro 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#006). (3.)
Wine should be used as a help, and not a hindrance, to our work and
usefulness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 6](ti1006)

</div>
