<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Timothy Index](ti2)  
  [Previous](ti2003)  [Next](tit000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Timothy Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001)

[2 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti2 4:0</span></span>

In this chapter, I. Paul with great solemnity and earnestness presses
Timothy to the diligent and conscientious discharge of his work and
office as an evangelist; and the charge given to him all gospel
ministers are to take to themselves ([Ti2
4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001)). II. The reason of his concern
in this case, Why must Timothy now be instant in season, etc., in a
particular manner? Because the church was likely to be deprived of the
apostle's labours, for his departure was at hand ([Ti2
4:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#006)). III. Divers particular
matters, with a hint and caution, about Alexander the coppersmith ([Ti2
4:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009)). IV. He informs him of what
befell him at his first answer; though men forsook him, the Lord stood
by him, and this encouraged him to hope for future deliverance ([Ti2
4:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016)). And then he concludes with
salutations and a benediction ([Ti2
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#019) to the end).

[2 Timothy 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti2 4:1</span></span>

Observe, I. How awfully this charge is introduced ([Ti2
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001)): I charge thee before God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his
appearing and his kingdom. Observe, The best of men have need to be awed
into the discharge of their duty. The work of a minister is not an
indifferent thing, but absolutely necessary. Woe be to him if he preach
not the gospel, [Co1 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#016). To induce
him to faithfulness, he must consider, 1. That the eye of God and Jesus
Christ was upon him: I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ;
that is, "as thou tenderest the favour of God and Jesus Christ; as thou
wilt approve thyself to God and Jesus Christ, by the obligations both of
natural and revealed religion; as thou wilt make due returns to the God
who made thee and the Lord Jesus Christ who redeemed thee." 2. He
charges him as he will answer it at the great day, reminding him of the
judgment to come, which is committed to the Lord Jesus. He shall judge
the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom, that is, when
he appears in his kingdom. It concerns all, both ministers and people,
seriously to consider the account that they must shortly give to Jesus
Christ of all the trusts reposed in them. Christ shall judge the quick
and the dead, that is, those that at the last day shall be found alive,
and those who shall be raised to life out of the grave. Note, (1.) The
Lord Jesus Christ shall judge the quick and the dead. God hath committed
all judgment unto the Son, and hath appointed him the Judge of quick and
dead, [Act 10:42](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#042). (2.) He will appear;
he will come the second time, and it will be a glorious appearance, as
the word epiphaniea signifies. (3.) Then his kingdom shall appear in its
glory: At his appearing and kingdom; for he will then appear in his
kingdom, sitting on a throne, to judge the world.

II\. What is the matter of the charge, [Ti2
4:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002). He is charged,

1\. To preach the word. This is ministers' business; a dispensation is
committed to them. It is not their own notions and fancies that they are
to preach, but the pure plain word of God; and they must not corrupt it,
but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, they speak in
Christ, [Co2 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#017).

2\. To urge what he preached, and to press it with all earnestness upon
his hearers: "Be instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort; do this work with all fervency of spirit. Call upon those under
thy charge to take heed of sin, to do their duty: call upon them to
repent, and believe, and live a holy life, and this both in season and
out of season. In season, when they are at leisure to hear thee, when
some special opportunity offers itself of speaking to them with
advantage. Nay, do it out of season, even when there is not that
apparent probability of fastening something upon them, because thou dost
not know but the Spirit of God may fasten upon them; for the wind
bloweth where it listeth; and in the morning we must sow our seed, and
in the evening not withhold our hand," [Ecc
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#006). We must do it in season, that
is, let slip no opportunity; and do it out of season, that is, not shift
off the duty, under pretence that it is out of season.

3\. He must tell people of their faults: "Reprove them, rebuke them.
Convince wicked people of the evil and danger of their wicked courses.
Endeavour, by dealing plainly with them, to bring them to repentance.
Rebuke them with gravity and authority, in Christ's name, that they may
take thy displeasure against them as an indication of God's
displeasure."

4\. He must direct, encourage, and quicken those who began well. "Exhort
them (persuade them to hold on, and endure to the end) and this with all
long-suffering and doctrine." (1.) He must do it very patiently: With
all long-suffering. "If thou do not see the effect of thy labours
presently, yet do not therefore give up the cause; be not weary of
speaking to them." While God shows to them all long-suffering, let
ministers exhort with all long-suffering. (2.) He must do it rationally,
not with passion, but with doctrine, that is, "In order to the reducing
of them to good practices, instil into them good principles. Teach them
the truth as it is in Jesus, reduce them to a firm belief of it, and
this will be a means both to reclaim them from evil and to bring them to
good." Observe, \[1.\] A minister's work has various parts: he is to
preach the word, to reprove, rebuke, and exhort. \[2.\] He is to be very
diligent and careful; he must be instant in season and out of season; he
must spare no pains nor labour, but must be urgent with them to take
care of their souls and their eternal concerns.

5\. He must watch in all things. "Seek an opportunity of doing them a
kindness; let no fair occasion slip, through thy negligence. Watch to
thy work; watch against the temptations of Satan, by which thou mayest
be diverted from it; watch over the souls of those who are committed to
thy charge."

6\. He must count upon afflictions, and endure them, make the best of
them. Kakopathēson, endure patiently. "Be not discouraged by the
difficulties thou meetest with, but bear them with an evenness of
spirit. Inure thyself to hardships."

7\. He must remember his office, and discharge its duties: Do the work
of an evangelist. The office of the evangelist was, as the apostles'
deputies, to water the churches that they planted. They were not settled
pastors, but for some time resided in, and presided over, the churches
that the apostles had planted, till they were settled under a standing
ministry. This was Timothy's work.

8\. He must fulfil his ministry: Make full proof of it. It was a great
trust that was reposed in him, and therefore he must answer it, and
perform all the parts of his office with diligence and care. Observe,
(1.) A minister must expect afflictions in the faithful discharge of his
duty. (2.) He must endure them patiently, like a Christian hero. (3.)
These must not discourage him in his work, for he must do his work, and
fulfil his ministry. (4.) The best way to make full proof of our
ministry is to fulfil it, to fill it up in all its parts with proper
work.

III\. The reasons to enforce the charge.

1\. Because errors and heresies were likely to creep into the church, by
which the minds of many professing Christians would be corrupted ([Ti2
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#003), [Ti2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#004)): "For the time will come when
they will not endure sound doctrine. Therefore improve the present time,
when they will endure it. Be busy now, for it is seedtime; when the
fields are white unto the harvest, put in the sickle, for the present
gale of opportunity will be soon over. They will not endure sound
doctrine. There will be those who will heap to themselves corrupt
teachers, and will turn away their ears from the truth; and therefore
secure as many as thou canst, that, when these storms and tempests do
arise, they may be well fixed, and their apostasy may be prevented."
People must hear, and ministers must preach, for the time to come, and
guard against the mischiefs that are likely to arise hereafter, though
they do not yet arise. They will turn away their ears from the truth;
they will grow weary of the old plain gospel of Christ, and then they
will be greedy of fables, and take pleasure in them, and God will give
them up to those strong delusions, because they received not the truth
in the love of it, [Th2 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011), [Th2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#012). Observe, (1.) These teachers
were of their own heaping up, and not of God's sending; but they chose
them, to gratify their lusts, and to please their itching ears. (2.)
People do so when they will not endure sound doctrine, that preaching
which is searching, plain, and to the purpose; then they will have
teachers of their own. (3.) There is a wide difference between the word
of God and the word of such teachers; the one is sound doctrine, the
word of truth, the other is only fables. (4.) Those that are turned unto
fables first turn away their ears from the truth, for they cannot hear
and mind both, any more than they can serve two masters. Nay, further,
it is said, They shall be turned unto fables. God justly suffers those
to turn to fables who grow weary of the truth, and gives them up to be
led aside from the truth by fables.

2\. Because Paul for his part had almost done his work: Do thou make
full proof of thy ministry, for I am now ready to be offered, [Ti2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#006). And,

(1.) "Therefore there will be the more occasion for thee." When
labourers are removed out of the vineyard, it is no time for those to
loiter that are left behind, but to double their diligence. The fewer
hands there are to work the more industrious those hands must be that
are at work.

(2.) "I have done the work of my day and generation; do thou in like
manner do the work of thy day and generation."

(3.) The comfort and cheerfulness of Paul, in the prospect of his
approaching departure, might encourage Timothy to the utmost industry,
and diligence, and seriousness in his work. Paul was an old soldier of
Jesus Christ, Timothy was but newly enlisted. "Come," says Paul, "I have
found our Master kind and the cause good; I can look back upon my
warfare with a great deal of pleasure and satisfaction; and therefore be
not afraid of the difficulties thou must meet with. The crown of life is
as sure to thee as if it were already upon thy head; and therefore
endure afflictions, and make full proof of thy ministry." The courage
and comfort of dying saints and ministers, and especially dying martyrs,
are a great confirmation of the truth of the Christian religion, and a
great encouragement to living saints and ministers in their work. Here
the apostle looks forward, upon his death approaching: I am now ready to
be offered. The Holy Ghost witnessed in every city that bonds and
afflictions did abide him, [Act 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#023).
He was now at Rome, and it is probable that he had particular
intimations from the Spirit that there he should seal the truth with his
blood; and he looks upon it now as near at hand: I am already poured
out; so it is in the original, ēdē spendomai; that is, I am already a
martyr in affection. It alludes to the pouring out of the
drink-offerings; for the blood of the martyrs, though it was not a
sacrifice of atonement, was a sacrifice of acknowledgment to the honour
of the grace of God and his truths. Observe,

\[1.\] With what pleasure he speaks of dying. He calls it his departure;
though it is probable that he foresaw he must die a violent bloody
death, yet he calls it his departure, or his release. Death to a good
man is his release from the imprisonment of this world and his departure
to the enjoyments of another world; he does not cease to be, but is only
removed from one world to another.

\[2.\] With what pleasure he looks back upon the life he had lived ([Ti2
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#007)): I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, etc. He did not fear death, because he had the
testimony of his conscience that by the grace of God he had in some
measure answered the ends of living. As a Christian, as a minister, he
had fought a good fight. He had done the service, gone through the
difficulties of his warfare, and had been instrumental in carrying on
the glorious victories of the exalted Redeemer over the powers of
darkness. His life was a course, and he had now finished it; as his
warfare was accomplished, so his race was run. "I have kept the faith. I
have kept the doctrines of the gospel, and never betrayed any of them."
Note, First, The life of a Christian, but especially of a minister, is a
warfare and a race, sometimes compared to the one in the scripture, and
sometimes to the other. Secondly, It is a good fight, a good warfare;
the cause is good, and the victory is sure, if we continue faithful and
courageous. Thirdly, We must fight this good fight; we must fight it
out, and finish our course; we must not give over till we are made more
than conquerors through him who hath loved us, [Rom
8:37](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#037). Fourthly, It is a great comfort
to a dying saint, when he can look back upon his past life and say with
our apostle, "I have fought, etc. I have kept the faith, the doctrine of
faith and the grace of faith." Towards the end of our days to be able to
speak in this manner, what comfort, unspeakable comfort, will it afford!
Let it then be our constant endeavour, by the grace of God, that we may
finish our course with joy, [Act
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#024).

\[3.\] With what pleasure he looks forward to the life he was to live
hereafter ([Ti2 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)): Henceforth there
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, etc. He had lost for Christ,
but he was sure he should not lose by him, [Phi
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008). Let this encourage Timothy to
endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ that there is a crown
of life before us, the glory and joy of which will abundantly recompense
all the hardships and toils of our present warfare. Observe, It is
called a crown of righteousness, because it will be the recompence of
our services, which God is not unrighteous to forget; and because our
holiness and righteousness will there be perfected, and will be our
crown. God will give it as a righteous Judge, who will let none love by
him. And yet this crown of righteousness was not peculiar to Paul, as if
it belonged only to apostles and eminent ministers and martyrs, but to
all those also that love his appearing. Observe, It is the character of
all the saints that they love the appearing of Jesus Christ: they loved
his first appearing, when he appeared to take away sin by the sacrifice
of himself ([Heb 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026)); they love to
think of it; they love his second appearing at the great day; love it,
and long for it: and, with respect to those who love the appearing of
Jesus Christ, he shall appear to their joy; there is a crown of
righteousness reserved for them, which shall then be given them, [Heb
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028). We learn hence, First, The Lord
is the righteous Judge, for his judgment is according to truth.
Secondly, The crown of believers is a crown of righteousness, purchased
by the righteousness of Christ, and bestowed as the reward of the
saints' righteousness. Thirdly, This crown, which believers shall wear,
is laid up for them; they have it not at present, for here they are but
heirs; they have it not in possession, and yet it is sure, for it is
laid up for them. Fourthly, The righteous Judge will give it to all who
love, prepare, and long for his appearing. Surely I come quickly. Amen,
even so come, Lord Jesus.

[2 Timothy 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti2 4:9</span></span>

Here are divers particular matters which Paul mentions to Timothy, now
at the closing of the epistle. 1. He bids him hasten to him, if possible
([Ti2 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009)): So thy diligence to come
shortly to me. For Timothy was an evangelist, one who was not a fixed
pastor of any one place, but attended the motions of the apostles, to
build upon their foundation. Paul wanted Timothy's company and help; and
the reason he gives is because several had left him ([Ti2
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010)); one from an ill principle,
namely, Demas, who abides under an ill name for it: Demas hath forsaken
me, having loved this present world. He quitted Paul and his interest,
either for fear of suffering (because Paul was now a prisoner, and he
was afraid o coming into trouble upon his account) or being called off
from his ministry by secular affairs, in which he entangled himself; his
first love to Christ and his gospel was forsaken and forgotten, and he
fell in love with the world. Note, Love to this present world is often
the cause of apostasy from the truths and ways of Jesus Christ. He has
gone off, has departed to Thessalonica, called thither perhaps by trade,
or by some other worldly business. Crescens had gone one way and Titus
another way. Luke however remained with Paul ([Ti2
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011), [Ti2
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#012)), and was not this enough? Paul
did not think it so; he loved the company of his friends. 2. He speaks
respectfully concerning Mark: He is profitable to me for the ministry.
It is supposed that this Mark was he about whom Paul and Barnabas had
contended, [Act 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039). Paul would not
take him with him to the work, because he had once flinched and drawn
back: but now, says he, Take Mark, and bring him with thee. By this it
appears that Paul was now reconciled to Mark, and had a better opinion
of him than he had had formerly. This teaches us to be of a forgiving
spirit; we must not therefore disclaim for ever making use of those that
are profitable and useful, though they may have done amiss. 3. Paul
orders Timothy to come to him, bids him as he came through Troas to
bring with him thence those things which he had left behind him there
([Ti2 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#013)), the cloak he had left
there, which, it may be, Paul had the more occasion for in a cold
prison. It is probable that it was the habit Paul usually wore, a plain
dress. Some read it, the roll of parchment I left at Troas; others, the
desk that I left. Paul was guided by divine inspiration, and yet he
would have his books with him. Whereas he had exhorted Timothy to give
attendance to reading, so he did himself, though he was now ready to be
offered. As long as we live, we must be still learning. But especially
the parchments, which some think were the originals of his epistles;
others think they were the skins of which he made his tents, whereby he
obtained a livelihood, working with his own hands. 4. He mentions
Alexander, and the mischief that he had done him, [Ti2
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#014), [Ti2
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#015). This is he who is spoken of [Act
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#033). It should seem, he had been a
professor of the Christian religion, a forward professor, for he was
there particularly maligned by the worshippers of Diana, and yet he did
Paul much evil. Paul was in as much danger from false brethren ([Co2
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#026)) as from open enemies. Paul
foretels that God would reckon with him. It is a prophetical
denunciation of the just judgment of God that would befall him: The Lord
will reward him according to his works. He cautions Timothy to take heed
of him: "Of whom be thou aware also, that he do not, under pretence of
friendship, betray thee to mischief." It is dangerous having any thing
to do with those who would be enemies to such a man as Paul. Observe,
(1.) Some who were once Paul's hearers and admirers did not give him
reason to remember them with much pleasure; for one forsook him, and
another did him much evil, and greatly withstood his words. Yet, (2.) At
the same time he mentions some with pleasure; the badness of some did
not make him forget the goodness of others; such as Timothy, Titus,
Mark, and Luke. (3.) The apostle has left a brand on the names and
memory of two persons; the one is Demas, who forsook him, having loved
the present world, and the other is Alexander, who greatly withstood his
words. (4.) God will reward evil-doers, particularly apostates,
according to their works. (5.) Of such as are of Alexander's spirit and
temper we should beware; for they will do us no good, but all the
mischief that is in their power.

[2 Timothy 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti2 4:16</span></span>

Here, I. He gives Timothy an account of his own present circumstances.

1\. He had lately been called to appear before the emperor, upon his
appeal to Caesar; and then no man stood with him ([Ti2
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016)), to plead his cause, to bear
testimony for him, or so much as to keep him in countenance, but all men
forsook him. This was strange, that so good a man as Paul should have
nobody to own him, even at Rome, where there were many Christians, whose
faith was spoken of throughout the world, [Rom
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008). But men are but men. The
Christians at Rome were forward to go and meet him (Acts 28); but when
it came to the pinch, and they would be in danger of suffering with him,
then they all forsook him. He prays that God would not lay it to their
charge, intimating that it was a great fault, and God might justly be
angry with them, but he prays God to forgive them. See what a
distinction is put between sins of presumption and sins of infirmity.
Alexander the coppersmith, who maliciously withstood Paul, he prays
against: The Lord reward him according to his works; but respecting
these Christians, who through weakness shrunk from Paul in time of
trial, he says, The Lord lay it not to their charge. Observe, (1.) Paul
had his trials in his friends' forsaking him in a time of danger as well
as in the opposition made by enemies: all forsook him. (2.) It was their
sin not to appear for the good apostle, especially at his first answer;
but it was a sin of weakness, and therefore the more excusable. Yet,
(3.) God might lay it to their charge, but Paul endeavours to prevent it
by his earnest prayers: Let it not be laid to their charge.

2\. Notwithstanding this God stood by him ([Ti2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017)), gave him extraordinary wisdom
and courage, to enable him to speak so much the better himself. When he
had nobody to keep him in countenance, God made his face to shine. -
That by me the preaching might be fully known, that is, "God brought me
out from that difficulty that I might preach the gospel, which is my
business." Nay, it should seem, that he might preach the gospel at that
time; for Paul knew how to preach at the bar as well as in the pulpit.
And that all the Gentiles might hear; the emperor himself and the great
men who would never have heard Paul preach if he had not been brought
before them. And I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion, that is,
of Nero (as some think) or some other judge. Some understand it only as
a proverbial form of speech, to signify that he was in imminent danger.
And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work. See how Paul
improved his experiences: "He that delivered doth deliver, and we trust
he will yet deliver, will deliver me from every evil work, from any ill
done to me by others. And shall preserve me to his heavenly kingdom."
And for this he gives glory to God, rejoicing in hope of the glory of
God. Observe, (1.) If the Lord stand by us, he will strengthen us, in a
time of difficulty and danger, and his presence will more than supply
every one's absence. (2.) When the Lord preserves his servants from
great and imminent danger, it is for eminent work and service. Paul was
preserved that by him the preaching might be fully known, etc. (3.)
Former deliverances should encourage future hopes. (4.) There is a
heavenly kingdom, to which the Lord will preserve his faithful
witnessing or suffering servants. (5.) We ought to give God the glory of
all past, present, and future deliverances: To whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

II\. He sends salutations to Aquila, and Priscilla, and the household of
Onesiphorus, [Ti2 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#019). He mentions
his leaving Trophimus sick at Miletum ([Ti2
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#020)), by which it appears that though
the apostles healed all manner of diseases miraculously, for the
confirmation of their doctrine, yet they did not exert that power upon
their own friends, lest it should have looked like a collusion.

III\. He hastens Timothy to come to him before winter ([Ti2
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#021)), because he longed to see him,
and because in the winter the journey or voyage would be more dangerous.

IV\. He sends commendations to him from Eubulus, Pudens, Linus, Claudia,
and all the brethren. One of the heathen writers at this time mentions
one Pudens and his wife Claudia, and says the Claudia was a Briton,
whence some have gathered that it was this Pudens, and that Claudia here
was his wife, and that they were eminent Christians at Rome.

V. He concludes with a prayer, that the Lord Jesus would be with his
spirit. We need no more to make us happy than to have the Lord Jesus
Christ with our spirits; for in him all spiritual blessings are summed
up. And it is the best prayer we can put up for our friends, that the
Lord Jesus Christ may be with their spirits, to sanctify and save them,
and at last to receive them to himself; as Stephen the proto-martyr
prayed, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit, [Act
7:59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059). "Lord Jesus, receive that spirit
which thou hast been with while it was united to the body; do not now
leave it in its separate state." Grace be with you. Amen. This was our
apostle's token in every epistle; so he wrote. The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen, [Th2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017), [Th2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#018). And if grace be with us here to
convert and change us, to make us holy, to keep us humble, and to enable
us to persevere to the end, glory will crown us hereafter: for the Lord
is a sun, and a shield; the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good
thing will he withhold from those that walk uprightly. O Lord of hosts,
blessed is the man that trusteth in thee, [Psa
84:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#011), [Psa
84:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#012). Now unto the King eternal,
immortal, invisible, the only wise God our Saviour, be honour and glory
for ever and ever. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus Introduction](tit000)

</div>
