<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Timothy Index](ti2)  
  [Previous](ti2002)  [Next](ti2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Timothy Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001)

[2 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti2 3:0</span></span>

I. The apostle forewarns Timothy what the last days would be, with the
reasons thereof ([Ti2 3:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001)). II.
Prescribes various remedies against them ([Ti2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010) to the end), particularly his own
example ("But thou hast fully known my doctrine," etc.) and the
knowledge of the holy scriptures, which are able to make us wise unto
salvation, and will be the best antidote against the corruptions of the
times we live in. In this chapter Paul tells Timothy how bad others
would be, and therefore how good he should be; and this use we should
make of the badness of others, thereby to engage us to hold our own
integrity so much the firmer.

[2 Timothy 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti2 3:1</span></span>

Timothy must not think it strange if there were in the church bad men;
for the net of the gospel was to enclose both good fish and bad, [Mat
13:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#047), [Mat
13:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#048). Jesus Christ had foretold (Mt.
24) that there would come seducers, and therefore we must not be
offended at it, nor think the worse of religion or the church for it.
Even in gold ore there will be dross, and a great deal of chaff among
the wheat when it lies on the floor.

I. Timothy must know that in the last days ([Ti2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001)), in gospel times, there would
come perilous times. Though gospel times were times of reformation in
many respects, let him know that even in gospel times there would be
perilous times; not so much on account of persecution from without as on
account of corruptions within. These would be difficult times, wherein
it would be difficult for a man to keep a good conscience. He does not
say, "Perilous times shall come, for both Jews and Gentiles shall be
combined to root out Christianity;" but "perilous times shall come, for
such as have the form of godliness ([Ti2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#005)) shall be corrupt and wicked, and
do a great deal of damage to the church." Two traitors within the
garrison may do more hurt to it than two thousand besiegers without.
Perilous times shall come, for men shall be wicked. Note, 1. Sin makes
the times perilous. When there is a general corruption of manners, and
of the tempers of men, this makes the times dangerous to live in; for it
is hard to keep our integrity in the midst of general corruption. 2. The
coming of perilous times is an evidence of the truth of
scripture-predictions; if the event in this respect did not answer to
the prophecy, we might be tempted to question the divinity of the Bible.
3. We are all concerned to know this, to believe and consider it, that
we may not be surprised when we see the times perilous: This know also.

II\. Paul tells Timothy what would be the occasion of making these times
perilous, or what shall be the marks and signs whereby these times may
be known, [Ti2 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#002), etc. 1. Self-love
will make the times perilous. Who is there who does not love himself?
But this is meant of an irregular sinful self-love. Men love their
carnal selves better than their spiritual selves. Men love to gratify
their own lusts, and make provision for them, more than to please God
and do their duty. Instead of Christian charity, which takes care for
the good of others, they will mind themselves only, and prefer their own
gratification before the church's edification. 2. Covetousness. Observe,
Self-love brings in a long train of sins and mischiefs. When men are
lovers of themselves, no good can be expected from them, as all good may
be expected from those who love God with all their hearts. When
covetousness generally prevails, when every man is for what he can get
and for keeping what he has, this makes men dangerous to one another,
and obliges every man to stand on his guard against his neighbour. 3.
Pride and vain-glory. The times are perilous when men, being proud of
themselves, are boasters and blasphemers, boasters before men whom they
despise and look upon with scorn, and blasphemers of God and of his
name. When men do not fear God they will not regard man, and so vice
vers. 4. When children are disobedient to their parents, and break
through the obligations which they lie under to them both in duty and
gratitude, and frequently in interest, having their dependence upon them
and their expectation from them, they make the times perilous; for what
wickedness will those stick at who will be abusive to their own parents
and rebel against them? 5. Unthankfulness and unholiness make the times
perilous, and these two commonly go together. What is the reason that
men are unholy and without the fear of God, but that they are unthankful
for the mercies of God? Ingratitude and impiety go together; for call a
man ungrateful, and you can call him by no worse name. Unthankful, and
impure, defiled with fleshly lusts, which is an instance of great
ingratitude to that God who has provided so well for the support of the
body; we abuse his gifts, if we make them the food and fuel of our
lusts. 6. The times are perilous when men will not be held by the bonds
either of nature or common honesty, when they are without natural
affection, and truce-breakers, [Ti2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#003). There is a natural affection due
to all. Wherever there is the human nature, there should be humanity
towards those of the same nature, but especially between relations.
Times are perilous when children are disobedient to their parents ([Ti2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#002)) and when parents are without
natural affection to their children, [Ti2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#003). See what a corruption of nature
sin is, how it deprives men even of that which nature has implanted in
them for the support of their own kind; for the natural affection of
parents to their children is that which contributes very much to the
keeping up of mankind upon the earth. And those who will not be bound by
natural affection, no marvel that they will not be bound by the most
solemn leagues and covenants. They are truce-breakers, that make no
conscience of the engagements they have laid themselves under. 7. The
times are perilous when men are false accusers one of another, diaboloi
- devils one to another, having no regard to the good name of others, or
to the religious obligations of an oath, but thinking themselves at
liberty to say and do what they please, [Psa
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004). 8. When men have no government
of themselves and their own appetites: not of their own appetites, for
they are incontinent; not of their own passions, for they are fierce;
when they have no rule over their own spirits, and therefore are like a
city that is broken down, and has no walls; they are soon fired, upon
the least provocation. 9. When that which is good and ought to be
honoured is generally despised and looked upon with contempt. It is the
pride of persecutors that they look with contempt upon good people,
though they are more excellent than their neighbours. 10. When men are
generally treacherous, wilful, and haughty, the times are perilous ([Ti2
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#004)) - when men are traitors, heady,
high-minded. Our Saviour has foretold that the brother shall betray the
brother to death and the father the child ([Mat
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#021)), and those are the worst sort
of traitors: those who delivered up their Bibles to persecutors were
called traditores, for they betrayed the trust committed to them. When
men are petulant and puffed up, behaving scornfully to all about them,
and when this temper generally prevails, then the times are perilous.
11. When men are generally lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God.
When there are more epicures than true Christians, then the times are
bad indeed. God is to be loved above all. That is a carnal mind, and is
full of enmity against him, which prefers any thing before him,
especially such a sordid thing as carnal pleasure is. 12. When,
notwithstanding all this, they have the form of godliness ([Ti2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#005)), are called by the Christian
name, baptized into the Christian faith, and make a show of religion;
but, how plausible soever their form of godliness is, they deny the
power of it. When they take upon them the form which should and would
bring along with it the power thereof, they will put asunder what God
hath joined together: they will assume the form of godliness, to take
away their reproach; but they will not submit to the power of it, to
take away their sin. Observe here, (1.) Men may be very bad and wicked
under a profession of religion; they may be lovers of themselves, etc.,
yet have a form of godliness. (2.) A form of godliness is a very
different thing from the power of it; men may have the one and be wholly
destitute of the other; yea, they deny it, at least practically in their
lives. (3.) From such good Christians must withdraw themselves.

III\. Here Paul warns Timothy to take heed of certain seducers, not only
that he might not be drawn away by them himself, but that he might arm
those who were under his charge against their seduction. 1. He shows how
industrious they were to make proselytes ([Ti2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#006)): they applied themselves to
particular persons, visited them in their houses, not daring to appear
openly; for those that do evil hate the light, [Joh
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020). They were not forced into
houses, as good Christians often were by persecution; but they of choice
crept into houses, to insinuate themselves into the affections and good
opinion of people, and so to draw them over to their party. And see what
sort of people those were that they gained, and made proselytes of; they
were such as were weak, silly women; and such as were wicked, laden with
sins, and led away with divers lusts. A foolish head and a filthy heart
make persons, especially women, an easy prey to seducers. 2. He shows
how far they were from coming to the knowledge of the truth, though they
pretended to be ever learning, [Ti2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#007). In one sense we must all be ever
learning, that is, growing in knowledge, following on to know the Lord,
pressing forward; but these were sceptics, giddy and unstable, who were
forward to imbibe every new notion, under pretence of advancement in
knowledge, but never came to a right understanding of the truth as it is
in Jesus. 3. He foretels the certain stop that should be put to their
progress ([Ti2 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008), [Ti2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#009)), comparing them to the Egyptian
magicians who withstood Moses, and who are here named, Jannes and
Jambres; though the names are not to be met with in the story of the Old
Testament, yet they are found in some old Jewish writers. When Moses
came with a divine command to fetch Israel out of Egypt, these magicians
opposed him. Thus those heretics resisted the truth and like them were
men of corrupt minds, men who had their understandings perverted,
biassed and prejudiced against the truth, and reprobate concerning the
faith, or very far from being true Christians; but they shall proceed no
further, or not much further, as some read it. Observe, (1.) Seducers
seek for corners, and love obscurity; for they are afraid to appear in
public, and therefore creep into houses. Further, They attack those who
are the least able to defend themselves, silly and wicked women. (2.)
Seducers in all ages are much alike. Their characters are the same -
namely, Men of corrupt minds, etc.; their conduct is much the same -
they resist the truth, as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses; and they
will be alike in their disappointment. (3.) Those who resist the truth
are guilty of folly, yea, of egregious folly; for magna est veritas, et
praevalebit - Great is the truth, and shall prevail. (4.) Though the
spirit of error may be let loose for a time, God has it in a chain.
Satan can deceive the nations and the churches no further and no longer
than God will permit him: Their folly shall be manifest, it shall appear
that they are imposters, and every man shall abandon them.

[2 Timothy 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti2 3:10</span></span>

Here the apostle, to confirm Timothy in that way wherein he walked,

I. Sets before him his own example, which Timothy had been an
eye-witness of, having long attended Paul ([Ti2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010)): Thou hast fully known my
doctrine. The more fully we know the doctrine of Christ and the
apostles, the more closely we shall cleave to it; the reason why many
sit loose to it is because they do not fully know it. Christ's apostles
had no enemies but those who did not know them, or not know them fully;
those who knew them best loved and honoured them the most. Now what is
it that Timothy had so fully known in Paul? 1. The doctrine that he
preached. Paul kept back nothing from his hearers, but declared to them
the whole counsel of God ([Act 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#027)),
so that if it were not their own fault they might fully know it. Timothy
had a great advantage in being trained up under such a tutor, and being
apprised of the doctrine he preached. 2. He had fully known his
conversation: Thou hast fully know my doctrine, and manner of life; his
manner of life was of a piece with his doctrine, and did not contradict
it. He did not pull down by his living what he built up by his
preaching. Those ministers are likely to do good, and leave lasting
fruits of their labours, whose manner of life agrees with their
doctrine; as, on the contrary, those cannot expect to profit the people
at all that preach well and live ill. 3. Timothy fully knew what was the
great thing that Paul had in view, both in his preaching and in his
conversation: "Thou hast known my purpose, what I drive at, how far it
is from any worldly, carnal, secular design, and how sincerely I aim at
the glory of God and the good of the souls of men." 4. Timothy fully
knew Paul's good character, which he might gather from his doctrine,
manner of life, and purpose; for he gave proofs of his faith (that is,
of his integrity and fidelity, or his faith in Christ, his faith
concerning another world, by which Paul lived), his long-suffering
towards the churches to which he preached and over which he presided,
his charity towards all men, and his patience. These were graces that
Paul was eminent for, and Timothy knew it. 5. He knew that he had
suffered ill for doing well ([Ti2
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#011)): "Thou hast fully known the
persecutions and afflictions that came unto me" (he mentions those only
which happened to him while Timothy was with him, at Antioch, at
Iconium, at Lystra); "and therefore let it be no surprise to thee if
thou suffer hard things, it is no more than I have endured before." 6.
He knew what care God had taken of him: Notwithstanding out of them all
the Lord delivered me; as he never failed his cause, so his God never
failed him. Thou hast fully known my afflictions. When we know the
afflictions of good people but in part, they are a temptation to us to
decline that cause which they suffer for; when we know only the
hardships they undergo for Christ, we may be ready to say, "We will
renounce that cause that is likely to cost us so dear in the owning of
it;" but when we fully know the afflictions, not only how they suffer,
but how they are supported and comforted under their sufferings, then,
instead of being discouraged, we shall be animated by them, especially
considering that we are told before that we must count upon such things
([Ti2 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012)): All that will live godly
in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution: not always alike; at that time
those who professed the faith of Christ were more exposed to persecution
than at other times; but at all times, more or less, those who will live
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. They must expect to be
despised, and that their religion will stand in the way of their
preferment; those who will live godly must expect it, especially those
who will live godly in Christ Jesus, that is, according to the strict
rules of the Christian religion, those who will wear the livery and bear
the name of the crucified Redeemer. All who will show their religion in
their conversation, who will not only be godly, but live godly, let them
expect persecution, especially when they are resolute in it. Observe,
(1.) The apostle's life was very exemplary for three things: for his
doctrine, which was according to the will of God; for his life, which
was agreeable to his doctrine; and for his persecutions and sufferings.
(2.) Though his life was a life of great usefulness, yet it was a life
of great sufferings; and none, I believe, came nearer to their great
Master for eminent services and great sufferings than Paul: he suffered
almost in every place; the Holy Ghost witnessed that bonds and
afflictions did abide him, [Act 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#023).
Here he mentions his persecutions and afflictions at Antioch, at
Iconium, at Lystra, besides what he suffered elsewhere. (3.) The apostle
mentions the Lord's delivering him out of them all, for Timothy's and
our encouragement under sufferings. (4.) We have the practice and
treatment of true Christians: they live godly in Jesus Christ - this is
their practice; and they shall suffer persecution - this is the usage
they must expect in this world.

II\. He warns Timothy of the fatal end of seducers, as a reason why he
should stick closely to the truth as it is in Jesus: But evil men and
seducers shall wax worse and worse, etc., [Ti2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#013). Observe, As good men, by the
grace of God, grow better and better, so bad men, through the subtlety
of Satan and the power of their own corruptions, grow worse and worse.
The way of sin is down-hill; for such proceed from bad to worse,
deceiving and being deceived. Those who deceive others do but deceive
themselves; those who draw others into error run themselves into more
and more mistakes, and they will find it so at last, to their cost.

III\. He directs him to keep close to a good education, and particularly
to what he had learned out of the holy scriptures ([Ti2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#014), [Ti2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015)): Continue thou in the things
which thou hast learned. Note, It is not enough to learn that which is
good, but we must continue in it, and persevere in it unto the end. Then
are we Christ's disciples indeed, [Joh
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031). We should not be any more
children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the sleight of men and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie
in wait to deceive, [Eph 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014). Be not
carried about with divers and strange doctrines; for it is a good thing
that the heart be established with grace, [Heb
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#009). And for this reason we should
continue in the things we have learned from the holy scriptures; not
that we ought to continue in any errors and mistakes which we may have
been led into, in the time of our childhood and youth (for these, upon
an impartial enquiry and full conviction, we should forsake); but this
makes nothing against our continuing in those things which the holy
scriptures plainly assert, and which he that runs may read. If Timothy
would adhere to the truth as he had been taught it, this would arm him
against the snares and insinuations of seducers. Observe, Timothy must
continue in the things which he had learned and had been assured of.

1\. It is a great happiness to know the certainty of the things wherein
we have been instructed ([Luk 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#004));
not only to know what the truths are, but to know that they are of
undoubted certainty. What we have learned we must labour to be more and
more assured of, that, being grounded in the truth, we may be guarded
against error, for certainty in religion is of great importance and
advantage: Knowing, (1.) "That thou hast had good teachers. Consider of
whom thou hast learned them; not of evil men and seducers, but good men,
who had themselves experienced the power of the truths they taught thee,
and been ready to suffer for them, and thereby would give the fullest
evidence of their belief of these truths." (2.) "Knowing especially the
firm foundation upon which thou hast built, namely, that of the
scripture ([Ti2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015)): That from a
child thou hast known the holy scriptures."

2\. Those who would acquaint themselves with the things of God, and be
assured of them, must know the holy scriptures, for these are the
summary of divine revelation.

3\. It is a great happiness to know the holy scriptures from our
childhood; and children should betimes get the knowledge of the
scriptures. The age of children is the learning age; and those who would
get true learning must get it out of the scriptures.

4\. The scriptures we are to know are the holy scriptures; they come
from the holy God, were delivered by holy men, contain holy precepts,
treat of holy things, and were designed to make us holy and to lead us
in the way of holiness to happiness; being called the holy scriptures,
they are by this distinguished from profane writings of all sorts, and
from those that only treat morality, and common justice and honesty, but
do not meddle with holiness. If we would know the holy scriptures, we
must read and search them daily, as the noble Bereans did, [Act
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#011). They must not lie by us
neglected, and seldom or never looked into. Now here observe,

(1.) What is the excellency of the scripture. It is given by inspiration
of God ([Ti2 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016)), and therefore is
his word. It is a divine revelation, which we may depend upon as
infallibly true. The same Spirit that breathed reason into us breathes
revelation among us: For the prophecy came not in old time by the will
of man, but holy men spoke as they were moved or carried forth by the
Holy Ghost, [Pe2 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021). The prophets
and apostles did not speak from themselves, but what they received of
the Lord that they delivered unto us. That the scripture was given by
inspiration of God appears from the majesty of its style, - from the
truth, purity, and sublimity, of the doctrines contained in it, - from
the harmony of its several parts, - from its power and efficacy on the
minds of multitudes that converse with it, - from the accomplishment of
many prophecies relating to things beyond all human foresight, - and
from the uncontrollable miracles that were wrought in proof of its
divine original: God also bearing them witness, both with signs and
wonders, and with divers miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according
to his own will, [Heb 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#004).

(2.) What use it will be of to us. \[1.\] It is able to make us wise to
salvation; that is, it is a sure guide in our way to eternal life. Note,
Those are wise indeed who are wise to salvation. The scriptures are able
to make us truly wise, wise for our souls and another world. "To make
thee wise to salvation through faith." Observe, The scriptures will make
us wise to salvation, if they be mixed with faith, and not otherwise,
[Heb 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002). For, if we do not believe
their truth and goodness, they will do us no good. \[2.\] It is
profitable to us for all the purposes of the Christian life, for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness.
It answers all the ends of divine revelation. It instructs us in that
which is true, reproves us for that which is amiss, directs us in that
which is good. It is of use to all, for we all need to be instructed,
corrected, and reproved: it is of special use to ministers, who are to
give instruction, correction, and reproof; and whence can they fetch it
better than from the scripture? \[3.\] That the man of God may be
perfect, [Ti2 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#017). The Christian, the
minister, is the man of God. That which finishes a man of God in this
world is the scripture. By it we are thoroughly furnished for every good
work. There is that in the scripture which suits every case. Whatever
duty we have to do, whatever service is required from us, we may find
enough in the scriptures to furnish us for it.

(3.) On the whole we here see, \[1.\] That the scripture has various
uses, and answers divers ends and purposes: It is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction of all errors in judgment and
practice, and for instruction in righteousness. \[2.\] The scripture is
a perfect rule of faith and practice, and was designed for the man of
God, the minister as well as the Christian who is devoted to God, for it
is profitable for doctrine, etc. \[3.\] If we consult the scripture,
which was given by inspiration of God, and follow its directions, we
shall be made men of God, perfect, and thoroughly furnished to every
good work. \[4.\] There is no occasion for the writings of the
philosopher, nor for rabbinical fables, nor popish legends, nor
unwritten traditions, to make us perfect men of God, since the scripture
answers all these ends and purposes. O that we may love our Bibles more,
and keep closer to them than ever! and then shall we find the benefit
and advantage designed thereby, and shall at last attain the happiness
therein promised and assured to us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Chapter 4](ti2004)

</div>
