<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Titus Index](tit)  
  [Previous](tit002)  [Next](plm000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Titus Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#001)

[Titus](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">tit 3:0</span></span>

Of duties which concern Christians more in common, and the reasons of
them ([Tit 3:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#001)). What Titus in
teaching should avoid, and how he should deal with a heretic, with some
other directions ([Tit 3:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009)), and
salutations in the close ([Tit 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#015)).

[Titus 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">tit 3:1</span></span>

Here is the fourth thing in the matter of the epistle. The apostle had
directed Titus in reference to the particular and special duties of
several sorts of persons; now he bids him exhort to what concerned them
more in common, namely, to quietness and submission to rulers, and
readiness to do good, and to equitable and gentle behaviour towards all
men - things comely and ornamental of religion; he must therefore put
them in mind of such things. Ministers are people's remembrancers of
their duty. As they are remembrancers for the people to God in prayers
([Isa 62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006)), so are they from God to
them in preaching: I will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance, [Pe2 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012). Forgetfulness
of duty is a common frailty; there is need therefore of reminding and
quickening them thereto. Here are the duties themselves, and the reasons
of them.

I. The duties themselves, which they were to be reminded of. 1. Put them
in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates.
Magistracy is God's ordinance for the good of all, and therefore must be
regarded and submitted to by all; not for wrath and by force only, but
willingly and for conscience' sake. Principalities, and powers, and
magistrates, that is, all civil rulers, whether supreme and chief or
subordinate, in the government under which they live, of whatever form
it be; that they be subject to them and obey them in things lawful and
honest, and which it belongs to their office to require. The Christian
religion was misrepresented by its adversaries as prejudicial to the
rights of princes and civil powers, and tending to faction and sedition,
and to rebellion against lawful authority; therefore to put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men, and stop the mouths of malicious enemies,
Christians must be reminded to show themselves examples rather of all
due subjection and obedience to the government that is over them.
Natural desire of liberty must be guided and bounded by reason and
scripture. Spiritual privileges do not make void or weaken, but confirm
and strengthen, their obligations to civil duties: "Remind them
therefore to be subject to principalities and powers and to obey
magistrates." And, 2. To be ready to every good work. Some refer this to
such good works as are required by magistrates and within their sphere:
"Whatever tends to good order, and to promote and secure public
tranquility and peace, be not backward, but ready, to promote such
things." But, though this be included, if not first intended, yet is it
not to be hereto restrained. The precept regards doing good in all
kinds, and on every occasion that may offer, whether resecting God,
ourselves, or our neighbour - what may bring credit to religion in the
world. Whatsoever things are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, of good
report: if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these
things ([Phi 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008)), to do and follow
and further them. Mere harmlessness, or good words and good meanings
only, are not enough without good works. Pure religion and undefiled
before God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless, and the
widow in their affliction, and keep unspotted from the world. "Not only
take, but seek, occasion for doing good, keep fitness and readiness that
way; put it not off to others, but embrace and lay hold on it thyself,
delight and rejoice therein, put all in mind of this." And, 3. To speak
evil of no man: mēdena blasphēmein, to revile, or curse, or blaspheme
none: or (as our translation more generally) to speak evil of none,
unjustly and falsely, or unnecessarily, without call, and when it may do
hurt but no good to the person himself or any other. If no good can be
spoken, rather than speak evil unnecessarily, say nothing. We must never
take pleasure in speaking ill of others, nor make the worst of any
thing, but the best we can. We must not go up and down as tale-bearers,
carrying ill-natured stories, to the prejudice of our neighbour's good
name and the destruction of brotherly love. Misrepresentations, or
insinuations of bad intentions, or of hypocrisy in what is done, things
out of our reach or cognizance, these come within the reach of this
prohibition. As this evil is too common, so it is of great malignity. If
any man seemeth to be religious and bridleth not his tongue, that man's
religion is vain, [Jam 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#026). Such
loose uncharitable talk is displeasing to God, and hurtful among men.
[Pro 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#009), He that covereth a
transgression seeketh love (that is, to himself by this tenderness and
charity, or rather to the transgressor); but he that repeateth a matter
(that blazes and tells the faults of another abroad) separateth very
friends; he raises dissensions and alienates his friend from himself,
and perhaps from others. This is among the sins to be put off ([Eph
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#031)); for, if indulged, it unfits for
Christians communion here and the society of the blessed in heaven, [Co1
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#010). Remind them therefore to avoid
this. And, 4. To be no brawlers; amachous einai - no fighters, either
with hand or tongue, no quarrelsome contentious persons, apt to give or
return ill and provoking language. A holy contending there is for
matters good and important, and in a manner suitable and becoming, not
with wrath nor injurious violence. Christian must follow the things that
are conducive to peace, and that in a peaceful, not a rough and
boisterous and hurtful way, but as becomes the servants of the God of
peace and love ([Rom 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019)), Dearly
beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto wrath; this
is the Christian's wisdom and duty. The glory of a man is to pass over a
transgression; it is the duty of a reasonable, and therefore certainly
of a Christian man, whose reason is improved and advanced by religion;
such may not, and will not, presently fall foul on one who has offended
him, but, like God, will be slow to anger, and ready to forgive.
Contention and strife arise from men's lusts, and exorbitant unruly
passions, which must be curbed and moderated, not indulged; and
Christians need to be reminded of these things, that they do not by a
wrathful contentious spirit and behaviour displease and dishonour God
and discredit religion, promoting feuds in the places where they live.
He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and he that ruleth
his spirit than he that taketh a city. Wherefore it follows, 5. But
gentle; epieikeis, equitable and just, or candid and fair in
constructions of things, not taking words or actions in the worst sense;
and for peace sometimes yielding somewhat of strict right. And, 6.
Showing all meekness to all men. We must be of a mild disposition, and
not only have meekness in our hearts, but show it in our speech and
conduct. All meekness - meekness in all instances and occasions, not
towards friends only, but to all men, though still with wisdom, as James
admonishes, [Jam 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#013). "Distinguish
the person and the sin; pity the one and hate the other. Distinguish
between sin and sin; look not on all alike, there are motes and beams.
Distinguish also between sinner and sinner: of some have compassion,
others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, thus making a
difference, [Jde 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#022), [Jde
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#023). Mind these things; the wisdom
that is from above is pure and peaceable, gentle and easy to be
entreated." Meekness of spirit and demeanour renders religion amiable;
it is a commanded imitation of Christ the grand exemplar, and what
brings it own reward with it, in the ease and comfort of the disposition
itself and the blessings accompanying it. These shall be glad and
rejoice, shall be taught and guided in their way, and satisfied with
bread, and beautified with salvation. Thus of the duties themselves,
which Titus was to put people in mind of: for which,

II\. He adds the reasons, which are derived

1\. From their own past condition. Consideration of men's natural
condition is a great means and ground of equity and gentleness, and all
meekness, towards those who are yet in such a state. This has a tendency
to abate pride and work pity and hope in reference to those who are yet
unconverted: "We ourselves also were so and so, corrupt and sinful,
therefore we should not be impatient and bitter, hard and severe,
towards those who are but as ourselves once were. Should we then have
been willing to be contemned, and proudly and rigorously dealt with? No,
but treated with gentleness and humanity; and therefore we should now so
treat those who are unconverted, according to that rule of equity: Quod
tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne feceris - What you would not have done to
you that do not you to another." Their past natural condition is set
forth in divers particulars. We ourselves also were sometimes, (1.)
Foolish; without true spiritual understanding and knowledge, ignorant of
heavenly things. Observe, Those should be most disposed to bear with
others' follies who may remember many of their own; those should be meek
and gentle, and patient towards others, who once needed and doubtless
then expected the same. We ourselves also were sometimes foolish. And,
(2.) Disobedient; heady and unpersuadable, resisting the word, and
rebellious even against the natural laws of God, and those which human
society requires. Well are these set together, foolish and obedient. For
what folly like this, to disobey God and his laws, natural or revealed?
This is contrary to right reason, and men's true and greatest interests;
and what so foolish as to violate and go counter to these? (3.)
Deceived, or wandering; namely, out of the ways of truth and holiness.
Man in this his degenerate state is of a straying nature, thence
compared to a lost sheep; this must be sought and brought back, and
guided in the right way, [Psa 119:176](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#176).
He is weak, and ready to be imposed upon by the wiles and subtleties of
Satan, and of men lying in wait to seduce and mislead. (4.) Serving
divers lusts and pleasures; namely, as vassals and slaves under them.
Observe, Men deceived are easily entangled and ensnared; they would not
serve divers lusts and pleasures as they do, were they not blinded and
beguiled into them. See here too what a different notion the word gives
of a sensual and fleshly life from what the world generally has of it.
Carnal people think they enjoy their pleasures; the word calls it
servitude and vassalage: they are very drudges and bond slaves under
them; so far are they from freedom and felicity in them that they are
captivated by them, and serve them as taskmasters and tyrants. Observe
further, It is the misery of the servants of sin that they have many
masters, one lust hurrying them one way, and another; pride commands one
thing, covetousness another, and often a contrary. What vile slaves are
sinners, while they conceit themselves free! the lusts that tempt them
promise them liberty, but in yielding they become the servants of
corruption; for of whom a man is overcome of the same is he brought into
bondage. (5.) Living in malice, one of those lusts that bear rule in
them. Malice desires hurt to another and rejoices in it. (6.) And envy,
which grudges and repines at another's good, frets at his prosperity and
success in any thing: both are roots of bitterness, whence many evils
spring: evil thoughts and speeches, tongues set on fire of hell,
detracting from and impairing the just and due praises of others. Their
words are swords, wherewith they slay the good name and honour of their
neighbour. This was the sin of Satan, and of Cain who was of that evil
one, and slew his brother; for wherefore slew he him, but of this envy
and malice, because his own works were evil, and his brother's
righteous? These were some of the sins in which we lived in our natural
state. And, (7.), Hateful, or odious - deserving to be hated. (8.) And
hating one another. Observe, Those that are sinful, living and allowing
themselves in sin, are hateful to God and all good men. Their temper and
ways are so, though not simply their persons. It is the misery of
sinners that thy hate one another, as it is the duty and happiness of
saints to love one another. What contentions and quarrels flow from
men's corruptions, such as were in the nature of those who by conversion
are now good, but in their unconverted state made them ready to run like
furious wild beasts one upon another! The consideration of its having
been thus with us should moderate our spirits, and dispose us to be more
equal and gentle, meek and tenderhearted, towards those who are such.
This is the argument from their own past condition here described. And
he reasons,

2\. From their present state. "We are delivered out of that our
miserable condition by no merit nor strength of our own; but only by the
mercy and free grace of God, and merit of Christ, and operation of his
Spirit. Therefore we have no ground, in respect of ourselves, to condemn
those who are yet unconverted, but rather to pity them, and cherish hope
concerning them, that they, though in themselves as unworthy and unmeet
as we were, yet may obtain mercy, as we have:" and so upon this occasion
the apostle again opens the causes of our salvation, [Tit
3:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004).

(1.) We have here the prime author of our salvation - God the Father,
therefore termed here God our Saviour. All things are of God, who hath
reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, [Co2
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018). All things belonging to the new
creation, and recovery of fallen man to life and happiness, of which the
apostle is there speaking, all these things are of God the Father, as
contriver and beginner of this work. There is an order in acting, as in
subsisting. The Father begins, the Son manages, and the Holy Spirit
works and perfects all. God (namely, the Father) is a Saviour by Christ,
through the Spirit. [Joh 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016), God so
loved the world as to give his only begotten Son, that whoever believes
in him might not perish, but have everlasting life. He is the Father of
Christ, and through him the Father of mercies; all spiritual blessings
are by Christ from him, [Eph 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003). We
joy in God through Jesus Christ, [Rom
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011). And with one mind, and one
mouth, glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, [Rom
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#005).

(2.) The spring and rise of it - the divine philanthropy, or kindness
and love of God to man. By grace we are saved from First to last. This
is the ground and motive. God's pity and mercy to man in misery were the
first wheel, or rather the Spirit in the wheels, that sets and keeps
them all in motion. God is not, cannot be, moved by any thing out of
himself. The occasion is in man, namely, his misery and wretchedness.
Sin bringing that misery, wrath might have issued out rather than
compassion; but God, knowing how to adjust all with his own honour and
perfections, would pity and save rather than destroy. He delights in
mercy. Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound. We read of riches
of goodness and mercy, [Rom 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004); [Eph
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#007). Let us acknowledge this, and give
him the glory of it, not turning it to wantonness, but to thankfulness
and obedience.

(3.) Here is the means, or instrumental cause - the shining out of this
love and grace of God in the gospel, after it appeared, that is, in the
word. The appearing of love and grace has, through the Spirit, great
virtue to soften and change and turn to God, and so is the power of God
to salvation to every one that believeth. Thus having asserted God to be
the author, his free grace the spring, and the manifestation of this in
the gospel the means of salvation, that the honour of all still may be
the better secured to him,

(4.) False grounds and motives are here removed: Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy, he saved
us; not for foreseen works of ours, but his own free grace and mercy
alone. Works must be in the saved (where there is room for it), but not
among the causes of his salvation; they are the way to the kingdom, not
the meriting price of it; all is upon the principle of undeserved favour
and mercy from first to last. Election is of grace: we are chosen to be
holy, not because it was antecedently seen that we should be so, [Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004). It is the fruit, not the cause,
of election: God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation through
sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth, [Th2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#013). So effectual calling, in which
election breaks out, and is first seen: He hath saved us, and called us
with a holy calling; not according to our works, but according to his
own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the
world began, [Ti2 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009). We are
justified freely by grace ([Rom 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024)),
and sanctified and saved by grace: By grace you are saved, through
faith; and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God, [Eph
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008). Faith and all saving graces are
God's free gift and his work; the beginning, increase, and perfection of
them in glory, all are from him. In building men up to be a holy temple
unto God, from the foundation to the top-stone, we must cry nothing but
Grace, grace unto it. It is not of works, lest any man should boast; but
of grace, that he who glorieth should glory only in the Lord. Thus the
true cause is shown, and the false removed.

(5.) Here is the formal cause of salvation, or that wherein it lies, the
beginnings of it at least - in regeneration or spiritual renewing, as it
is here called. Old things pass away, and all things become new, in a
moral and spiritual, not in a physical and natural, sense. It is the
same man, but with other dispositions and habits; evil ones are done
away, as to the prevalency of them at present; and all remains of them
in due time will be so, when the work shall be perfected in heaven. A
new prevailing principle of grace and holiness is wrought, which
inclines, and sways, and governs, and makes the man a new man, a new
creature, having new thoughts, desires, and affections, a new and holy
turn of life and actions; the life of God in man, not only from God in a
special manner, but conformed and tending to him. Here is salvation
begun, and which will be growing and increasing to perfection; therefore
it is said, He saved us. What is so begun, as sure to be perfected in
time, is expressed as if it already were so. Let us look to this
therefore without delay; we must be initially saved now, by
regeneration, if on good ground we would expect complete salvation in
heaven. The change then will be but in degree, not in kind. Grace is
glory begun, as glory is but grace in its perfection. How few mind this!
Most act as if they were afraid to be happy before the time; they would
have heaven, they pretend, at last, yet care not for holiness now; that
is, they would have the end without the beginning; so absurd are
sinners. But without regeneration, that is, the first resurrection,
there is no attaining the second glorious one, the resurrection of the
just. Here then is formal salvation, in the new divine life wrought by
the gospel.

(6.) Here is the outward sign and seal thereof in baptism, called
therefore the washing of regeneration. The work itself is inward and
spiritual; but it is outwardly signified and sealed in this ordinance.
Water is of a cleansing and purifying nature, does away the filth of the
flesh, and so was apt to signify the doing away of the guilt and
defilement of sin by the blood and Spirit of Christ, though that aptness
alone, without Christ's institution, would not have been sufficient.
This it is that makes it of this signification on God's part, a seal of
righteousness by faith, as circumcision was, in the place of which it
succeeds; and on ours an engagement to be the Lord's. Thus baptism saves
figuratively and sacramentally, where it is rightly used. Arise, and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling upon the name of the Lord,
[Act 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#016). So [Eph
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#026), That he might sanctify and
cleanse us by the washing of water by the word. Slight not this outward
sign and seal, where it may be had according to Christ's appointment;
yet rest not in the outward washing, but look to the answer of a good
conscience, without which the external washing will avail nothing. The
covenant sealed in baptism binds to duties, as well as exhibits and
conveys benefits and privileges; if the former be not minded, in vain
are the latter expected. Sever not what God has joined; in both the
outer and inner part is baptism complete; as he that was circumcised
became debtor to the whole law ([Gal
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#003)), so is he that is baptized to the
gospel, to observe all the commands and ordinances thereof, as Christ
appointed. Disciple all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever I have commanded you, [Mat
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019), [Mat
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020). This is the outward sign and
seal of salvation, baptism, called here the washing of regeneration.

(7.) Here is the principal efficient, namely, the Spirit of God; it is
the renewing of the Holy Ghost; not excluding the Father and the Son,
who in all works without themselves are concurring; nor the use of
means, the word and sacraments, by which the Spirit works; through his
operation it is that they have their saving effect. In the economy of
our salvation, the applying and effecting part is especially attributed
to the Holy Spirit. We are said to be born of the Spirit, to be
quickened and sanctified by the Spirit, to be led and guided,
strengthened and helped, by the Spirit. Through him we mortify sin,
perform duty, walk in God's ways; all the acts and operations of the
divine life in us, the works and fruits of righteousness without us, all
are through this blessed and Holy Spirit, who is therefore called the
Spirit of life, and of grace and holiness; all grace is from him.
Earnestly therefore is he to be sought, and greatly to be heeded by us,
that we quench not his holy motions, nor resist and oppose him in his
workings. Res delicatula est Spiritus - The Spirit is a tender thing. As
we act towards him, so may we expect he will to us; if we slight, and
resist, and oppose his workings, he will slacken them; if we continue to
vex him, he will retire. Grieve not therefore the Holy Spirit of God,
whereby you are sealed to the day of redemption, [Eph
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030). The Spirit seals by his renewing
and sanctifying, his witnessing and assuring work; he distinguishes and
marks out for salvation, and fits for it; it is his work: we could not
turn to God by any strength of our own, any more than we can be
justified by any righteousness of our own.

(8.) Here is the manner of God's communicating this Spirit in the gifts
and graces of it; not with a scanty and niggardly hand, but most freely
and plentifully: Which he shed on us abundantly. More of the Spirit in
its gifts and graces is poured out under the gospel than was under the
law, whence it is eminently styled the ministration of the Spirit, [Co2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008). A measure of the Spirit the
church has had in all ages, but more in gospel times, since the coming
of Christ, than before. The law came by Moses, but grace and truth by
Jesus Christ; that is, a more plentiful effusion of grace, fulfilling
the promises and prophecies of old. [Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003), I will pour water upon him that
is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground. I will pour my Spirit upon
thy seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring: this greatest and best of
blessings, an effusion of grace, and of the sanctifying gifts of the
Spirit. [Joe 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028), I will pour out my
Spirit upon all flesh; not on Jews only, but Gentiles also. This was to
be in gospel times; and accordingly ([Act
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017), [Act
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#018), [Act
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033)), speaking of Christ risen and
ascended, having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost,
he hath shed forth (says Peter) this that you now see and hear: and [Act
10:44](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044), [Act
10:45](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#045), The Holy Ghost fell on all
those that heart the word, Gentiles as well as Jews. This indeed was, in
a great measure, in the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, but not
without his sanctifying graces also accompanying many if not all of
them. There was then great abundance of common gifts of illumination,
outward calling and profession, and general faith, and of more special
gifts of sanctification too, such as faith, and hope, and love, and
other graces of the Spirit. Let us get a share in these. What will it
signify if much be shed forth and we remain dry? Our condemnation will
but be aggravated the more if under such a dispensation of grace we
remain void of grace. Be filled with the Spirit, says the apostle; it is
duty as well as privilege, because of the means which God in the gospel
is ready to bless and make effectual; this is the manner of God's
communicating grace and all spiritual blessings under the gospel -
plentifully; he is not straitened towards us, but we towards him and in
ourselves.

(9.) Here is the procuring cause of all, namely, Christ: Through Jesus
Christ our Saviour. He it is who purchased the Spirit and his saving
gifts and graces. All come through him, and through him as a Saviour,
whose undertaking and work it is to bring to grace and glory; he is our
righteousness and peace, and our head, from whom we have all spiritual
life and influences. He is made of God to us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. Let us praise God for him above all; let
us go to the Father by him, and improve him to all sanctifying and
saving purposes. Have we grace? Let us thank him with the Father and
Spirit for it: account all things but loss and dung for the excellency
of the knowledge of him, and grow and increase therein more and more.

(10.) Here are the ends why we are brought into this new spiritual
condition, namely, justification, and heirship, and hope of eternal
life: That, being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life. Justification in the gospel sense
is the free remission of a sinner, and accepting him as righteous
through the righteousness of Christ received by faith. In it there is
the removing of guilt that bound to punishment, and the accepting and
dealing with the person as one that now is righteous in God's sight.
This God does freely as to us, yet through the intervention of Christ's
sacrifice and righteousness, laid hold on by faith ([Rom
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020), etc.): By the deeds of the law
shall no flesh be justified; but through the righteousness of God, which
is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all those that believe,
whence ([Rom 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024)) we are said to be
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in
his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins, that
he might be just, and the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus. God,
in justifying a sinner in the way of the gospel, is gracious to him, and
yet just to himself and his law, forgiveness being through a perfect
righteousness, and satisfaction made to justice by Christ, who is the
propitiation for sin, and not merited by the sinner himself. So it is
here: Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to
his mercy he saved us, that, being justified by his grace, we should be
made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. It is by grace, as the
spring and rise (as was said), though through the redemption that is in
Christ as making the way, God's law and justice being thereby satisfied,
and by faith applying that redemption. By him (by Christ) all that
believe are justified from all things from which they could not be
justified by the law of Moses, [Act
13:39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#039). Hence the apostle desires to be
found in him, not having his own righteousness, which was of the law,
but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which
is of God by faith. Let us not trust therefore in our own righteousness
or merit of good works, but in Christ's righteousness alone, received by
faith for justification and acceptance with God. Inherent righteousness
we must have, and the fruits of it in works of obedience; not however as
our justifying righteousness before God, but as fruits of our
justification, and evidences of our interest in Christ and qualification
for life and happiness, and the very beginning and part of it; but the
procuring of all this is by Christ, that, being justified by his grace,
we should be made heirs. Observe, Our justification is by the grace of
God, and our justification by that grace is necessary in order to our
being made heirs of eternal life; without such justification there can
be no adoption and sonship, and so no right of inheritance. [Joh
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012), Whoever received him (namely,
Christ), to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to those
that believed on his name. Eternal life is set before us in the promise,
the Spirit works faith in us and hope of that life, and so are we made
heirs of it and have a kind of possession of it even now; faith and hope
bring it near, and fill with joy in the well-grounded expectation of it.
The meanest believer is a great heir. Though he has not his portion in
hand, he has good hope through grace, and may bear up under all
difficulties. There is a better state in view. He is waiting for an
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved
in heaven for him. How well may such comfort themselves with these
words! And now all this gives good reason why we should show all
meekness to all men, because we have experienced so much benefit by the
kindness and love of God to us, and may hope that they, in God's time,
may be partakers of the like grace as we are. And thus of the reasons of
equal and gentle, meek and tender behaviour to wards others, from their
own bad condition in time past, and the present more happy state into
which they are brought, without any merit or deservings of their own,
and whereinto by the same grace others may be brought also.

III\. The apostle, having opened the duties of Christians in common,
with the reasons respecting themselves, adds another from their goodness
and usefulness to men. Observe, When he has opened the grace of God
towards us, he immediately presses the necessity of good works; for we
must not expect the benefit of God's mercy, unless we make conscience of
our duty ([Tit 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008)): This is a
faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly
(this is a true Christian doctrine of highest importance, and which
ministers must most earnestly and constantly press and inculcate), that
those who have believed in God do not think that a bare naked faith will
save them; but it must be an operative working faith, bringing forth the
fruit of righteousness; they must make it their care to maintain good
works, not to do them occasionally only, and when opportunities come in
their way, but to seek opportunities for doing them. These things are
good and profitable unto men: these good works, say some, or the
teaching of these things, rather than idle questions, as follows. These
things are good in themselves and the teaching of them useful to
mankind, making persons a common good in their places. Note, Ministers,
in teaching, must see that they deliver what is sound and good in
itself, and profitable to those that hear: all must be to the use of
edifying both of persons and societies.

[Titus 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">tit 3:9</span></span>

Here is the fifth and last thing in the matter of the epistle: what
Titus should avoid in teaching; how he should deal with a heretic; with
some other directions. Observe,

I. That the apostle's meaning might be more clear and full, and
especially fitted to the time and state of things in Crete, and the many
judaizers among them, he tells Titus what, in teaching, he should shun,
[Tit 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009). There are needful questions
to be discussed and cleared, such as make for improvement in useful
knowledge; but idle and foolish enquiries, tending neither to God's
glory nor the edification of men, must be shunned. Some may have a show
of wisdom, but are vain, as many among the Jewish doctors, as well as of
later schoolmen, who abound with questions of no moment or use to faith
or practice; avoid these. - And genealogies (of the gods, say some, that
the heathen poets made such noise about; or rather those that the Jews
were so curious in): some lawful and useful enquiries might be made into
these things, to see the fulfilling of the scriptures in some cases, and
especially in the descent of Christ the Messiah; but all that served to
pomp only, and to feed vanity, in boasting of a long pedigree, and much
more such as the Jewish teachers were ready to busy themselves in and
trouble their hearers with, even since Christ had come, and that
distinction of families and tribes had been taken away, as if they would
build again that policy which now is abolished, these Titus must
withstand as foolish and vain. - And contentious, and strivings about
the law. There were those who were for the Mosaic rites and ceremonies,
and would have them continued in the church, though by the gospel and
the coming of Christ they were superseded and done away. Titus must give
no countenance to these, but avoid and oppose them; for they are
unprofitable and vain: this is to be referred to all those foolish
questions and genealogies, as well as those strivings about the law.
They are so far from instructing and building up in godliness, that they
are hindrances of it rather: the Christian religion, and good works,
which are to be maintained, will hereby be weakened and prejudiced, the
peace of the church disturbed, and the progress of the gospel hindered.
Observe, Ministers must not only teach things good and useful, but shun
and oppose the contrary, what would corrupt the faith, and hinder
godliness and good works; nor should people have itching ears, but love
and embrace sound doctrine, which tends most to the use of edifying.

II\. But because, after all, there will be heresies and heretics in the
church, the apostle next directs Titus what to do in such a case, and
how to deal with such, [Tit 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010). He
who forsakes the truth as it is in Christ Jesus, who broaches false
doctrines and propagates them to the corrupting of the faith in weighty
and momentous points, and breaks the peace of the church about them,
after due means used to reclaim him, must be rejected. "Admonish him
once and again, that, if possible, he may be brought back, and thou
mayest gain thy brother; but, if this will not reduce him, that others
be not hurt, cast him out of the communion, and warn all Christians to
avoid him." - Knowing that he that is such is subverted (turned off from
the foundation) and sinneth grievously, being self-condemned. Those who
will not be reclaimed by admonitions, but are obstinate in their sins
and errors, are subverted and self-condemned; they inflict that
punishment upon themselves which the governors of the church should
inflict upon them: they throw themselves out of the church, and throw
off its communion, and so are self-condemned. Observe, 1. How great an
evil real heresy is, not lightly therefore to be charged upon any,
though greatly to be taken heed of by all. Such a one is subverted or
perverted - a metaphor from a building so ruined as to render it
difficult if not impossible to repair and raise it up again. Real
heretics have seldom been recovered to the true faith: not so much
defect of judgment, as perverseness of the will, being in the case,
through pride, or ambition, or self-willedness, or covetousness, or such
like corruption, which therefore must be taken heed of: "Be humble, love
the truth and practise it, and damning heresy will be escaped." 2. Pains
and patience must be used about those that err most grievously. They are
not easily and soon to be given up and cast off, but competent time and
means must be tried for their recovery. 3. The church's means even with
heretics are persuasive and rational. They must be admonished,
instructed, and warned; so much nouthesia imports. 4. Upon continued
obstinacy and irreclaimableness, the church has power, and is obliged,
to preserve its own purity, by severing such a corrupt member which
discipline may by God's blessing become effectual to reform the
offender, or if not it will leave him the more inexcusable in his
condemnation.

III\. The apostle subjoins some further directions, [Tit
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012), [Tit
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#013). Here are two personal things
enjoined: -

1\. That Titus should hold himself ready to come to Paul at Nicopolis (a
city of Thrace, as is reckoned, on the borders of Macedonia), as soon as
Artemas or Tychicus should be sent to Crete, to supply his place, and
take care of the churches there when he should leave them. The apostle
would not have them in their young and weak state be without one or
other of chief sufficiency, to guide and help them. Titus, it seems, was
not their ordinary fixed bishop or pastor, but an evangelist, otherwise
Paul would not have called him so much from his charge. Of Artemas we
read little, but Tychicus is mentioned on many occasions with respect.
Paul calls him a beloved brother, and faithful minister, and
fellow-servant in the Lord: one fit therefore for the service intimated.
When Paul says to Titus, Be diligent to come to me to Nicopolis, for I
have determined there to winter, it is plain that the epistle was not
written from Nicopolis, as the postcript would have it, for then he
would have said, I determined here, not there, to winter.

2\. The other personal charge to Titus is that he would bring two of his
friends on their journey diligently, and see them furnished, so that
nothing should be wanting to them. This was to be done, not as a piece
of common civility only, but of Christian piety, out of respect both to
them and the work they were sent about, which probably was to preach the
gospel, or to be in some way serviceable to the churches. Zenas is
styled the lawyer, whether in reference to the Roman or the Mosaic law,
as having some time been his profession, is doubtful. Apollos was an
eminent and faithful minister. Accompanying such persons part of their
way, and accommodating them for their work and journeys, was a pious and
needful service; and to further this, and lay in for it, what the
apostle had before exhorted Titus to teach ([Tit
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008)) he repeats here: Let ours also
learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, that they be not
unfruitful, [Tit 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#014). Let Christians,
those who have believed in God, learn to maintain good works, especially
such as these, supporting ministers in their work of preaching and
spreading the gospel, hereby becoming fellow-helpers to the truth, [Jo3
1:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#005). That they be not unfruitful.
Christianity is not a fruitless profession; the professors of it must be
filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, to
the glory and praise of God. It is not enough that they be harmless, but
they must be profitable, doing good, as well as eschewing evil. - "Let
ours set up and maintain some honest labour and employment, to provide
for themselves and their families, that they be not unprofitable burdens
on the earth;" so some understand it. Let them not think that
Christianity gives them a writ of ease; no, it lays an obligation upon
them to seek some honest work and calling, and therein to abide with
God. This is of good report, will credit religion and be good to
mankind; they will not be unprofitable members of the body, not
burdensome and chargeable to others, but enabled to be helpful to those
in want. To maintain good works for necessary uses; not living like
drones on the labours of others, but themselves fruitful to the common
benefit.

IV\. The apostle concludes with salutations and benedictions, [Tit
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005). Though perhaps not personally
known (some of them at least), yet all by Paul testify their love and
good wishes to Titus, owning him thereby in his work, and stimulating
him to go on therein. Great comfort and encouragement it is to have the
heart and prayers of other Christians with and for us. Greet those that
love us in the faith, or for the faith, who are our loving
fellow-christians. Holiness, or the image of God in any, is the great
endearing thing that gives strength to all other bonds, and is itself
the best. Grace be with you all. Amen. This is the closing benediction,
not to Titus alone, but to all the faithful with him, which shows that
though the epistle bears the single name of Titus in the inscription,
yet it was for the use of the churches there, and they were in the eye,
and upon the heart, of the apostle, in the writing of it. "Grace be with
you all, the love and favour of God, with the fruits and effects
thereof, according to need, spiritual ones especially, and the increase
and feeling of them more and more in your souls." This is the apostle's
wish and prayer, showing his affection to them, his desire of their
good, and a means of obtaining for them, and bringing down upon them,
the thing requested. Observe, Grace is the chief thing to be wished and
begged for, with respect to ourselves or others; it is, summarily, all
good. Amen shuts up the prayer, expressing desire and hope, that so it
may, and so it shall be.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon Introduction](plm000)

</div>
