<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zephaniah Index](zep)  
  [Previous](zep002)  [Next](hag000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zephaniah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001)

[Zephaniah](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zep 3:0</span></span>

We now return to Jerusalem, and must again hear what God has to say to
her, I. By way of reproof and threatening, for the abundance of
wickedness that was found in her, of which divers instances are given,
with the aggravations of them ([Zep
3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001)). II. By way of promise of mercy
and grace, which God had yet in reserve for them. Two general heads of
promises here are: - 1. That God would bring in a glorious work of
reformation among them, cleanse them from their sins, and bring them
home to himself; many promises of this kind here are ([Zep
3:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#008)). 2. That he would bring about
a glorious work of salvation for them, when he had thus prepared them
for it ([Zep 3:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#014)). Thus the
"Redeemer shall come to Zion," and to clear his own way, shall "turn
away ungodliness from Jacob." These promises were to have their full
accomplishment in gospel-times and gospel-graces.

[Zephaniah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zep 3:1</span></span>

One would wonder that Jerusalem, the holy city, where God was known, and
his name was great, should be the city of which this black character is
here given, that a place which enjoyed such abundance of the means of
grace should become so very corrupt and vicious, and that God should
permit it to be so; yet so it is, to show that the law made nothing
perfect; but if this be the true character of Jerusalem, as no doubt it
is (for God's judgments will make none worse than they are), it is no
wonder that the prophet begins with woe to her. For the holy God hates
sin in those that are nearest to him, nay, in them he hates it most. A
sinful state is, and will be, a woeful state.

I. Here is a very bad character given of the city in general. How has
the faithful city become a harlot! 1. She shames herself; she is filthy
and polluted ([Zep 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001)), has made
herself infamous (so some read it), the gluttonous city (so the margin),
always cramming, and making provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts
of it. Sin is the filthiness and pollution of persons and places, and
makes them odious in the sight of the holy God. 2. She wrongs her
neighbours and inhabitants; she is the oppressing city. Never any place
had statutes and judgments so righteous as this city had, and yet, in
the administration of the government, never was more unrighteousness. 3.
She is very provoking to her God, and in every respect walks contrary to
him, [Zep 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#002). He had given his law,
and spoken to her by his servants the prophets, telling her what was the
good she should do and what the evil she should avoid; but she obeyed
not his voice, nor made conscience of doing as he commanded her, in any
thing. He had taken her under an excellent discipline, both of the word
and of the rod; but she did not receive the instruction of the one nor
the correction of the other, did not submit to God's will nor answer his
end in either. He encouraged her to depend upon him, and his power and
promise, for deliverance from evil and supply with good; but she trusted
not in the Lord; her confidence was placed in her alliances with the
nations more than in her covenant with God. He gave her tokens of his
presence, and instituted ordinances of communion for her with himself;
but she drew not near to her God, did not meet him where he appointed
and where he promised to meet her. She stood at a distance, and said to
the Almighty, Depart.

II\. Here is a very bad character of the leading men in it; those that
should by their influence suppress vice and profaneness there are the
great patterns and patrons of wickedness, and those that should be her
physicians are really her worst disease. 1. Her princes are ravenous and
barbarous as roaring lions that make a prey of all about them, and they
are universally feared and hated; they use their power for destruction,
and not for edification. 2. Her judges, who should be the protectors of
injured innocence, are evening wolves, rapacious and greedy, and their
cruelty and covetousness both insatiable: They gnaw not the bones till
the morrow; they take so much delight and pleasure in cruelty and
oppression that when they have devoured a good man they reserve the
bones, as it were, for a sweet morsel, to be gnawed the next morning,
[Job 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#031). 3. Her prophets, who
pretend to be special messengers from heaven to them, are light and
treacherous persons, fanciful, and of a vain imagination, frothy and
airy, and of a loose conversation, men of no consistency with
themselves, in whom one can put no confidence. They were so given to
bantering that it was hard to say when they were serious. Their
pretended prophecies were all a sham, and they secretly laughed at those
that were deluded by them. 4. Her priests, who are teachers by office
and have the charge of the holy things, are false to their trust and
betray it. They were to preserve the purity of the sanctuary, but they
did themselves pollute it, and the sacred offices of it, which they were
to attend upon - such priests as Hophni and Phinehas, who by their
wicked lives made the sacrifices of the Lord to be abhorred. They were
to expound and apply the law, and to judge according to it; but, in
their explications and applications of it, they did violence to the law;
they corrupted the sense of it, and perverted it to the patronising of
that which was directly contrary to it. By forced constructions, they
made the law to speak what they pleased, to serve a turn, and so, in
effect, made void the law.

III\. We have here the aggravations of this general corruption of all
orders and degrees of men in Jerusalem.

1\. They had the tokens of God's presence among them, and all the
advantages that could be of knowing his will, with the strongest
inducements possible to do it, and yet they persisted in their
disobedience, [Zep 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#005). (1.) They had
the honour and privilege of the Shechinah, God's dwelling in their land,
so as he dwelt not with any other people: "The just Lord is in the midst
of thee, to take cognizance of all thou doest amiss and give countenance
to all thou doest well; he is in the midst of thee as a holy God, and
therefore thy pollutions are the more offensive, [Deu
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#014). He is in the midst of you as a
just God, and therefore will punish the affronts you put upon him, and
the wrongs and injuries you do to one another." (2.) They had God's own
example set before them, in the discovery he made of himself to them,
that they might conform to it: "He will not do iniquity, and therefore
you should not;" for this was the great rule of their institution, "Be
you holy, for I am holy. God will be true to you; be not you then false
to him." (3.) He sent to them his prophets, rising up early and sending
them: Every morning he brings his judgment to light, as duly as the
morning comes; he fails not. He shows them plainly what the good is
which he requires of them, and puts them in mind of it; he wakens
morning by morning ([Isa 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004)), wakens
his prophets with the rising sun, to bring to light the things which
belong to their peace. So that, upon the whole matter, what more could
have been done to his vineyard, to make it fruitful? [Isa
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004). And yet, after all, the unjust
know no shame; those that have been unjust are unjust still, and are not
ashamed of their unrighteousness, neither can they blush. If they had
any sense of honour, any shame left in them, they would not go so
directly contrary to their profession and to the instructions given
them. But those that are past shame are past cure.

2\. God had set before their eyes some remarkable monuments of his
justice, which were designed for warning to them ([Zep
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#006)): I have cut off the nations, the
seven nations of Canaan, which the land spewed out for their wickedness,
upon which they had this caution given them, to take heed lest it spew
them out also, [Lev 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#028). Or it may
refer to some of the neighbouring nations that were made desolate for
their wickedness, especially to the nations of Israel, the ten tribes.
Their towers were desolate, their high towers, their strong towers,
their pride and power broken; their streets were wasted, so that none
passed along through them; their cities were destroyed and laid in
ruins; no man was to be found in them, no inhabitant, all were slain or
carried into captivity. The enemies did it, but God avows it: I cut them
off, says he. And God designed this for an admonition to Jerusalem ([Eze
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#009), [Eze
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#011)): "I said, Surely thou wilt fear
me; surely these judgments upon others will deter thee from the like
wicked practices; surely thou wilt receive instruction by these
providences; it ought to be expected that thou wouldst not continue to
sin like the nations when thou seest the ruin which their sin brought
upon them." They could not but see their own house in danger when their
neighbour's was on fire; and, when we are frightened, God should be
feared.

3\. He had set before them life and death, good and evil, both in his
word and in his providence. (1.) He had assured them of the continuance
of their prosperity if they would fear him and receive instruction, for
so their dwelling would not be cut off as their neighbour's was; if they
took the warning given them, and reformed, what was past should be
pardoned, and their tranquility lengthened out. (2.) He had made them
feel the smart of the rod, though he reprieved them from the sword:
Howsoever I punished them, that, being chastened, they might not be
condemned. Such various methods did God take with them, to reclaim them,
but all in vain; they were not won upon by gentle methods, nor had
severe ones any effect, for they rose early, and corrupted all their
doings; they were more resolute and eager in their wicked courses than
ever, more studious and solicitous in making provision for their lusts,
and let slip no opportunity for the gratification of them. God rose up
early, to send them his prophets, to reduce and reclaim them, but they
were up before him, to shut and bolt the door against them. Their
wickedness was universal: All their doings were corrupted; and it was
all owing to themselves; they could not lay the blame upon the tempter,
but they alone must bear it; they themselves wilfully and designedly
corrupted all their doings; for every man is tempted when he is drawn
aside of his own lust and enticed.

[Zephaniah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zep 3:8</span></span>

Things looked very bad with Jerusalem in the foregoing verses; she has
got into a very bad name, and seems to be incorrigible, incurable,
mercy-proof and judgment-proof. Now one would think it should follow,
Therefore expect no other but that she should be utterly abandoned and
rejected as reprobate silver; since they will not be wrought upon by
prophets or providences, let them be made a desolation as their
neighbours have been. But behold and wonder at the riches of divine
grace, which takes occasion from man's badness to appear so much the
more illustrious. They still grew worse and worse, therefore wait you
upon me, saith the Lord, [Zep 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#008).
"Since the law, it seems, will make nothing perfect, the bringing in of
a better hope shall. Let those that lament the corruptions of the church
wait upon God, till he send his Son into the world, to save his people
from their sins, till he send his gospel to reform and refine his
church, and to purify to himself a peculiar people both of Jews and
Gentiles." And there were those who, according to this direction and
encouragement, waited for redemption, for this redemption in Jerusalem;
and long-looked-for came at last, [Luk
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#038). For judgment Christ will come
into this world, [Joh 9:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039).

I. To avenge what has been done amiss against his church, to bring down
and destroy the enemies of it, its spiritual enemies, of which the
destruction of Babylon, and other oppressors of God's people, in the Old
Testament times, was a type, and would be a happy presage. He will rise
up to the prey, to lead captivity captive ([Psa
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)), to conquer and spoil the
powers of darkness, and the powers on earth that set themselves against
the Lord and his anointed; he will break them with a rod of iron ([Psa
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005), [Psa
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009); [Psa
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005), [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006)); his determination is to gather
the nations and to assemble the kingdoms. By the gospel of Christ
preached to every creature all nations are summoned, as it were, to
appear in a body before the Lord Jesus, who is about to set up his
kingdom in the world. But, since the greatest part of mankind will not
obey the summons, he will pour upon them his indignation, for he that
believes not is condemned already. At the time of the setting up of the
kingdom of the Messiah, there shall be on earth distress of nations with
perplexity ([Luk 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#025)), great
tribulation, such as never was, nor ever shall be, [Mat
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021). Then God pours upon the nations
his indignation, even all his fierce anger, for their indignation and
fierce anger against the Messiah and his kingdom, [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001), [Psa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002). Then all the earth shall be
devoured with the fire of his jealousy; both Jews and Gentiles shall be
reckoned with for their enmity to the gospel. Principalities and powers
shall be spoiled, and made a show of openly, and the victorious Redeemer
shall triumph over them. The end of those that continue to be of the
earth, and to mind earthly things, after God has set up the kingdom of
heaven among men, shall be destruction ([Phi
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)); they shall be devoured with the
fire of God's jealousy.

II\. To amend what he finds amiss in his church. When God intends the
restoration of Israel, and the revival of their peace and prosperity, he
makes way for the accomplishment of his purpose by their reformation and
the revival of their virtue and piety; for this is God's method, both
with particular persons and with communities, first to make them holy
and then to make them happy. These promises were in part accomplished
after the return of the Jews out of Babylon, when by their captivity
they were thoroughly cured of their idolatry; and this was all the
fruit, even the taking away of sin. But they look further, to the
blessed effects of the gospel and the grace of it, to those times of
reformation in which we live, [Heb
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010).

1\. It is promised that there shall be a reformation in men's discourse,
which had been generally corrupt, but should now be with grace seasoned
with salt ([Zep 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009)): "Then will I
turn to the people a pure language; I will turn the people to such a
language from that evil communication which has almost ruined all good
manners among them." Note, Converting grace refines the language, not by
making the phrases witty, but the substance wise. Among the Jews, after
the captivity, there needed a reformation of the dialect, for they had
mingled the language of Canaan with that of Ashdod ([Neh
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#024)), and that grievance shall be
redressed. But that is not all: their language shall be purified from
all profaneness, filthiness, and falsehood. I will turn them to a choice
language (so some read it); they shall not speak rashly, but with
caution and deliberation; they shall choose out their words. Note, An
air of purity and piety in common conversation is a very happy omen to
any people; other graces, other blessings, shall be given where God
gives a pure language to those who have been a people of unclean lips.

2\. That the worship of God, according to his will, shall be more
closely applied to, and more unanimously concurred in. Instead of
sacrifice and incense, they shall call upon the name of the Lord. Prayer
is the spiritual offering with which God must be honoured; and, to
prepare and fit us for that duty, it is necessary that we have a pure
language. We are utterly unfit to take God's name into our lips, unless
they be pure lips. The purifying of the language in common conversation
is necessary to the acceptableness of the words of our mouth and the
meditation of our heart on our devotion; for how can sweet waters and
bitter come out of the same fountain? [Jam
3:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#009). It is likewise promised that
their language being thus purified they shall serve God with one
consent, with one shoulder (so the word is), alluding to oxen in the
yoke, that draw even. When Christians are unanimous in the service of
God the work goes on cheerfully. This is the effect of the pure
language, purified from passion, envy, and censoriousness. Note, Purity
is the way to unity; the reformation of manners is the way to a
comprehension. The wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable.

3\. That those that were driven from God shall return to him and be
accepted of him ([Zep 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#010)): From
beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, that is, from Egypt (so described, [Isa
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001)) or from some other very remote
country - my suppliants, even the daughter of my dispersed, shall bring
my offering. Those that by reason of their distance had almost forgotten
God, their obligations to him, shall be put in mind of him, as the
prodigal son was of his father's house, in the far country. Those that
by reason of their dispersion, under the tokens of his displeasure,
might be afraid of coming to him, yet even they shall be gathered under
his wings; the daughter of his dispersed, that is afar off, will be
found among those whom the Lord our God shall call; and, though they are
dispersed, he will own them for his; his calling them my dispersed puts
honour upon them, sufficient to counterbalance all the disgrace of their
dispersion. These shall come, (1.) With their humble petitions: They are
my suppliants. Note, True converts are suppliants to God; they do not
plead, but make supplication to their Judge ([Job
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#015)); and wherever they are, though
beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, a great way off from his house of prayer,
he has his eye upon them and his ear open to them; they are his
suppliants. (2.) With their spiritual sacrifices: They shall bring my
offering, shall bring themselves as spiritual sacrifices to God ([Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)); the conversion of the Gentiles
is called the offering up of the Gentiles ([Rom
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016)); and with themselves they shall
bring the gospel-sacrifices of prayer, and praise, and alms, with which
God is well pleased.

4\. That sin and sinners shall be purged out from among them, [Zep
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#011). God will take away, (1.) Their
just reproach: In that day shalt thou not be ashamed for all thy doings.
They shall be ashamed as penitents, and shall continue to be so (see
[Eze 16:63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#063)), but they shall not be
ashamed as sinners that return to folly again. "Thou shalt not be
ashamed, that is, thou shalt no more do a shameful thing, as thou hast
done." The guilt of sin being taken away by pardoning mercy, the
reproach of it shall be rolled away from the sinner's own conscience,
that being purified, and pacified, and cleansed from dead works. When
wickedness and wicked people abound in a nation those few in it that are
good are ashamed of them and of their land; but when sinners are
converted, and the land reformed, that shame and the cause of it are
removed. (2.) Their unjust glorying: "I will take away out of the midst
of thee, not only the profane, who are a shame to thy land, but the
hypocrites, who appear beautiful outwardly, and rejoice in thy pride, in
the holy city, the holy house." These were indeed Israel's glory, but
they made them their pride, and rejoiced in them, as if they were an
invincible bulwark to secure them in their sinful ways; they relied on
them as their righteousness and strength, boasting of the temple of the
Lord, the temple of the Lord ([Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)); they were haughty because of the
holy mountain, were conceited of themselves, scornful of others, and set
even the judgments of God at defiance. Note, Church-privileges, when
they are not duly improved as they ought to be, are often made the
matter of men's pride and the ground of their security. But that
haughtiness is the most offensive to God which is supported and fed by
the pretensions of holiness. This God will silence and take away.

5\. That God will have a remnant of holy, humble, serious people among
them, that shall have the comfort of their relation to him and interest
in him ([Zep 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#012)): I will leave in
the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people. When the Chaldeans
carried away the Jews into captivity they left of the poor of the land
for vine-dressers and husbandmen, a type and figure of God's
distinguished remnant, whom he sets apart for himself. They are
afflicted and poor, low in the world; such God has chosen, [Jam
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005). The poor are evangelized, low in
their own eyes, afflicted for sin, poor in spirit. They are God's
leaving, for it is a remnant according to the election of grace. I have
reserved them to myself, says God ([Rom
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#004), [Rom
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005)), and they shall trust in the
name of the Lord. Note, Those whom God designs for the glory of his name
he enables to trust in his name; and the greater their affliction and
poverty in the world are the more reason they see to trust in God,
having nothing else to trust to, [Ti1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005).

6\. That this select remnant shall be blessed with purity and peace,
[Zep 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#013). (1.) They shall be blessed
with purity, both in words and actions: They shall neither do iniquity
nor speak lies. Justice and veracity shall command them and govern them,
though they be ever so much against their secular interest. They shall
not only not speak a direct deliberate lie, but there shall not be a
deceitful tongue found in their mouth, not in the mouth of any of them;
not the least equivocation shall come from them. (2.) They shall be
blessed with peace. They shall, as the sheep of God's pasture, feed and
lie down, and none shall make them afraid. They shall not be fearful
themselves, nor shall any about them be frightful to them. Note, Those
that are careful not to do iniquity need not be afraid of any calamity,
for it cannot hurt them, and therefore should not terrify them.

[Zephaniah 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zep 3:14</span></span>

After the promises of the taking away of sin, here follow promises of
the taking away of trouble; for when the cause is removed the effect
will cease. What makes a people holy will make them happy of course. The
precious promises here made to the purified people were to have their
full accomplishment in the comforts of the gospel, in the hope, and much
more in the enjoyment, of which, they are here called upon, 1. To
rejoice and sing ([Zep 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#014)): Sing, O
daughter of Zion! sing for joy; Shout, O Israel! in a holy transport and
exultation; be glad and rejoice with all the heart; let the joy be
inward, let it be great. Those that love God with all their heart have
occasion with all their heart to rejoice in him. It was promised ([Zep
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#013)) that their sins should be
mortified and their fears silenced, and then follows, Sing and rejoice.
Note, Those that reform have cause to rejoice, whereas Israel cannot
rejoice for joy as other people, while she goes a whoring from her God.
God's promises, applied by faith, furnish the saints with constant and
abundant matter for joy; they are filled with joy and peace in believing
them. 2. To throw off all their discouragements ([Zep
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#016)): In that day it shall be said to
Jerusalem (God will say it by his prophets, by his providences, their
neighbours shall say it, they shall say it to one another), "Fear thou
not, be not disposed to fear, do not easily admit the impressions of it;
when things are bad, fear not their being worse, but hope they will
mend; frighten not thyself upon every occasion. Let not thy hands be
slack or faint; wring not thy hands in despair; drop not thy hands in
despondence; disfit not thyself for thy work and warfare by giving way
to doubts and fears. Pluck up thy spirits, and, in token of that, lift
up thy hands, the hands that hung down, [Heb
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#012); [Isa
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003). Lift up thy hands in prayer to
God; lift up thy hands to help thyself." Fear makes the hands slack, but
faith and hope make them vigorous, and the joy of the Lord will be our
strength both for doing and suffering.

Let us now see what these precious promises are which are here made to
the people of God, for the banishing of their griefs and fears and the
encouraging of their hopes and joys; and to us are these promises made
as well as to them.

I. An end shall be put to all their troubles and distresses ([Zep
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#015)): "The Lord has taken away thy
judgments, has removed all the calamities thou hast been groaning under,
which were the punishments of thy sin; the noise of war shall be
silenced, the reproach of famine done away, and the captivity brought
back. Though some grievances remain, they shall be only afflictions, and
not judgments, for sin shall be pardoned. He has cast out thy enemy,
that has thrust himself into thy land, and triumphed over thee. He has
swept out thy enemy" (so some read it), "as dirt is swept out of the
house to the dunghill." When they sweep out their sins with the besom of
reformation God will sweep out their enemies with the besom of
destruction. If they should need correction, they shall fall into the
hands of the Lord, whose mercies are great, and shall not again fall
into the hands of man, whose tender mercies are cruel: "Thou shalt not
see evil any more, not such evil days as thou hast seen." Note, The way
to get clear of the evil of trouble is to keep clear from the evil of
sin; and to those that do so trouble has no real evil in it.

II\. God will give them the tokens of his presence with them; though he
has long seemed to stand at a distance (they having provoked him to
withdraw), he will make it to appear that he is with them of a truth:
"The Lord is in the midst of thee, O Zion! of thee, O Jerusalem! as the
sun in the centre of the universe, to diffuse his light and influence
upon every part. He is in the midst of thee, to preside in all thy
affairs and to take care of all thy interests." And, 1. "He is the King
of Israel ([Zep 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#015)) and is in the
midst of thee as a king in the midst of his people." With an eye to
this, our Lord Jesus is called the King of Israel ([Joh
1:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#049)); and he is, and will be, in the
midst of his church always, even to the end of the world, to receive the
homage of his subjects, and to give out his favours to them, even where
but two or three are gathered together in his name. 2. "He is the Lord
thy God, thine in covenant, and he is in the midst of thee as thy God,
whom thou hast an interest in and whose own thou art. He has put himself
into dear relations to thee, laid himself by promise under obligations
to thee, and, that thou mayest have abundant comfort in both, he is in
the midst of thee, nigh at hand to answer both." 3. "He that is in the
midst of thee as thy God and King is mighty, is almighty, is able to do
all that for thee that thou needest and canst desire." 4. "He has
engaged his power for thy succour: He will save. He will be Jesus, will
answer the name, for he will save his people from their sins."

III\. God will take delight in them, and in doing them good. The
expressions of this are very lively and affecting ([Zep
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#017)): He will rejoice over thee with
joy, will not only be well pleased with thee, upon thy repentance and
reformation, and take thee into favour, but will take a complacency in
thee, as the bridegroom does in his bride, or the bride in her
ornaments, [Isa 62:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#003). The conversion
of sinners and the consolation of saints are the joy of angels, for they
are the joy of God him-self. The church should be the joy of the whole
earth ([Psa 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002)), for it is the joy
of the whole heaven. He will rest in his love, will be silent in his
love, so the word is. "I will not rebuke thee as I have done, for thy
sins; I will acquiesce in thee, and in my relation to thee." I know not
where there is the like expression of Christ's love to his church,
unless in that song of songs, [Sol
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#009), Thou hast ravished my heart, my
sister, my spouse, with one of thy eyes. O the condescensions of divine
grace! The great God not only loves his saints, but he loves to love
them, is pleased that he has pitched upon these objects of his love. He
will joy over them with singing. He that is grieved for the sin of
sinners rejoices in the graces and services of the saints, and is ready
to express that joy by singing over them. The Lord takes pleasure in
those that fear him, and in them Jesus Christ will shortly be glorified
and admired.

IV\. God will comfort Zion's mourners, who sympathize with her in her
griefs, and will wipe away their tears ([Zep
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#018)): I will gather those who are
sorrowful for the solemn assemblies, to whom the reproach of it was a
burden. See, 1. Who those are whom God will rejoice in and make to
rejoice. They are such as are sorrowful. Those only must expect to reap
in joy that sow in tears. The sorrowful now shall be for ever joyful. 2.
What is the great matter of sorrow to Zion's mourners, when Zion is in
mourning. Many are her calamities. The city is ruined, and the palaces
are demolished; trade is at an end, and the administration of public
justice; but all these are nothing to them in comparison with the
desolations of the sanctuary, the destruction of the temple and the
altar, to attend on which, in solemn feasts, all Israel used to come
together three times a year. It is for those sacred solemn assemblies
that they are sorrowful, (1.) Because they are dispersed; there is no
temple to come up to, or, if there were, no people to come up to it; so
that the solemn feasts and sabbaths are forgotten in Zion, [Lam
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#006). Note, The restraining of public
assemblies for religious worship, the scattering of them by their
enemies, or the forsaking of them by their friends, so that either there
are no assemblies or not solemn ones, is a very sorrowful thing to all
good people. If the ways of Zion mourn, the sons of Zion mourn too. And
hereby they make it to appear that they are indeed of Zion, living
members of that body with the grievances of which they are so sensibly
affected. (2.) Because they are despised; the reproach of the solemn
assemblies is a burden to them. It had been the lot of the solemn
assemblies to lie under a great deal of reproach. Satan and his
instruments having a particular spite at them, as the great support of
the interest of God's kingdom among men. Black and odious characters
have been put upon those assemblies; and this is a burden to all those
that have a cordial concern for the glory of God and the welfare of the
souls of men. They reckon that the reproaches of those who reproach the
solemn assemblies fall upon them, fall foul upon them.

V. God will recover the captives out of the hands of their oppressors,
and bring home the banished that seemed to be expelled, [Zep
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#019), [Zep
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#020). 1. Their enemies shall be
disabled to detain them in bondage: "At that time I will undo all that
afflict thee, will break their power, and blast their counsels, so that
they shall be forced to surrender the prey they have taken." Conficiam -
I will take them to task; "I will be doing with them shortly, and so as
to make an end of them." Note, Those that abuse and oppress God's people
take the ready way to undo themselves. 2. They shall be enabled to
assert and recover their liberty, and all the difficulties in the way of
it shall be surmounted. Is the church weak and wounded? I will save her
that halts, as was promised, [Mic 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#007).
He will help her when she cannot help herself; even the lame shall take
the prey, [Isa 33:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#023). Is she
dispersed, and not likely to incorporate for her common benefit? I will
gather her that was driven out, and bring her again at the time that I
gather her. One act of mercy and grace shall serve both to collect them
out of their dispersions and to conduct them to their own land. When the
people's hearts are prepared, the work will be done suddenly; and who
can hinder it if God undertake to effect it? "I will turn back your
captivity before your eyes, saith the Lord; you shall plainly discern
the hand of God in it, and say, This is the Lord's doing."

VI\. God will by all this put honour upon them and gain them respect
from all about them. Israel was at first made high above all nations in
praise and fame, [Deu 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#019). The
reproach brought upon them was therefore one of the sorest of their
grievances (nothing cuts deeper to those that are in honour than
disgrace does); and therefore when God returns, in mercy, to his church,
it is here promised that she shall regain her credit; all the reproach
shall be for ever rolled way, as Israel's at Gilgal, [Jos
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#009). The church shall be as honourable
as ever she had been despicable. 1. Even those that reproached her shall
be made to respect her: "I will get them praise and fame in every land,
where they have been put to shame, that the same who were the witnesses
of their disgrace may see cause to change their mind concerning them."
Those that said, "This is Zion whom no man looks after," shall say,
"This is Zion whom the great God looks after." And she that was looked
upon to be the offscouring of the earth now appears to be the darling of
heaven. 2. Even those that never knew her shall be brought to honour her
([Zep 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#020)): I will make you a name
and a praise among all people of the earth. So the Jewish church was
when the fear of the Jews fell upon their neighbours ([Est
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#017)), and some of all nations said,
we will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you, [Zac
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023). So the Christian church was when
it was made to flourish in the world, for there is that in it which may
justly recommend it to the value and esteem of all the people of the
earth. And so the universal church of the firstborn will be in the great
day, when the saints shall be brought together to Christ, that he may be
admired and glorified in them, and they admired and glorified in him
before angels and men. Then will God's Israel be made a name and a
praise to eternity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Haggai Introduction](hag000)

</div>
