<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zephaniah Index](zep)  
  [Previous](zep001)  [Next](zep003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, \[1706\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zephaniah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#001)

[Zephaniah](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zep 2:0</span></span>

In this chapter we have, I. An earnest exhortation to the nation of the
Jews to repent and make their peace with God, and so to prevent the
judgments threatened before it was too late ([Zep
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#001)), and this inferred from the
revelation of God's wrath against them in the foregoing chapter. II. A
denunciation of the judgments of God against several of the neighbouring
nations that had assisted, or rejoiced in, the calamity of Israel. 1.
The Philistines ([Zep 2:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#004)). 2. The
Moabites and Ammonites ([Zep 2:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008)).
3. The Ethiopians and Assyrians ([Zep
2:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#012)). All these shall drink of the
same cup of trembling that is put into the hands of God's people, as was
also foretold by other prophets before and after.

[Zephaniah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zep 2:1</span></span>

Here we see what the prophet meant in that terrible description of the
approaching judgments which we had in the foregoing chapter. From first
to last his design was, not to drive the people to despair, but to drive
them to God and to their duty - not to frighten them out of their wits,
but to frighten them out of their sins. In pursuance of that he here
calls them to repentance, national repentance, as the only way to
prevent national ruin. Observe,

I. The summons given them to a national assembly ([Zep
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#001)): Gather yourselves together. He
had told them, in the last words of the foregoing chapter, that God
would make a speedy riddance of all that dwelt in the land, upon which,
one would think, it should follow, "Disperse yourselves, and flee for
shelter where you can find a place." When the decree had absolutely gone
forth for the last destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, that was the
advice given ([Mat 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#016)), Then let
those who are in Judea flee into the mountains; but here it is
otherwise. God warns, that he may not wound, threatens, that he may not
strike, and therefore calls to the people to use means for the turning
away of his wrath. The summons is given to a nation not desired. The
word signifies either, 1. Not desiring, that has not any desires towards
God or the remembrance of his name, is not desirous of his favour or
grace, but very indifferent to it, has no mind to repent and reform.
"Yet come together, and see if you can stir up desires in one another."
Thus God is often found of those that sought him not, nor asked for him,
[Isa 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001). Or, 2. Not desirable, no
ways lovely, nor having any thing in them amiable, or which might
recommend them to God. The land of Israel had been a pleasant land, a
land of delight ([Dan 11:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#041)); but now
it is unlovely, it is a nation not desired, to which God might justly
say, Depart from me; but he says, "Gather together to me, and let us see
if any expedient can be found out for the preventing of the ruin. Gather
together, that you may in a body humble yourselves before God, may fast,
and pray, and seek his face. Gather together, to consult among
yourselves what is to be done in this critical juncture, that every one
may consider of it, may give and take advice, and speak his mind, and
that what is done may be done by consent and so may be a national act."
Some read it, "Enquire into yourselves, yea, enquire into yourselves;
examine your consciences; look into your hearts; search and try your
ways; enquire into yourselves, that you may find out the sin by which
God has been provoked to this displeasure against you, and may find out
the way of returning to him." Note, When God is contending with us it
concerns us to enquire into ourselves.

II\. Arguments urged to press them to the utmost seriousness and
expedition herein ([Zep 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#002)): "Do it
in earnest; do it with all speed before it is too late, before the
decree bring forth, before the day pass." The manner of speaking here is
very lively and awakening, designed to make them apprehensive, as all
sinners are concerned to be, 1. That their danger is very great, that
their all lies at stake, that it is a matter of life and death, which
therefore well requires and well deserves the closest application of
mind that can be. It is not a trifle, and therefore is not a thing to be
trifled about. It is the fierce anger of the Lord that is kindled
against them, and is just ready to kindle upon them, that devouring fire
which none can dwell with, which none can make head against or hold up
their head under. "It is the day of the Lord's anger, the day set for
the pouring out of the full vials of it, that you are threatened with,
that great day of the Lord" spoken of, [Zep
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014). "Are you not concerned to
prepare for that day?" 2. That it is very imminent: "Bestir yourselves
now quickly, before the decree bring forth, and then it will be too
late, the opportunity will be lost and never retrieved. The decree is as
it were big with child, and it will bring forth the day, the terrible
day, which shall pass as chaff, which shall hurry you away into
captivity as chaff before the wind." We know not what a day may bring
forth ([Pro 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#001)), but we do know what
the decree will bring forth against impenitent sinners, whom therefore
it highly concerns to repent in time, in the accepted time. Note, It is
the wisdom of those whom God has a controversy with to agree with him
quickly, while they are in the way, before his fierce anger comes upon
them, not to be turned away. In a case of this nature delays are highly
dangerous and may be fatal; they will be so if by them the heart is
hardened. How solicitous should we all be to make our peace with God
before the Spirit withdraw from us, or cease to strive with us, before
the day of grace be over or the day of life, before our everlasting
state shall be determined on the other side of the great gulf fixed!

III\. Directions prescribed for the doing of this effectually. It is not
enough to gather together in a consternation, but they must seriously
and calmly apply to the duty of the day ([Zep
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#003)): Seek you the Lord. That they
might find mercy with God, they are here put upon seeking; for so is the
rule - Seek, and you shall find. A general call was given to the whole
nation to gather together, but little good is to be expected from the
far greater part of them; if the land be saved, it must be by the
interest and intercession of the pious few, and therefore to them the
exhortation here is particularly directed. And observe, 1. How they are
described - they are the meek of the earth, or of the land. It is the
distinguishing character of the people of God that they are the meek
ones of the earth; this is their badge; it is their livery. They are
modest, and humble, and low in their own eyes; they are mild, and
gentle, and yielding to others, not soon angry, not very angry, not long
angry; they are the quiet in the land, [Psa
35:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#020). And they are subject and
submissive to their God, to all his precepts and all his providences.
Actuated by this principle and disposition, they have wrought his
judgments, that is, have obeyed his laws, observed his institutions,
have made conscience of their duty to him, and have laid out themselves
for the advancement of his honour and interest in the world. 2. What
they are required to do; they must seek, which denotes both a careful
enquiry and a constant endeavour, that they may know and do their duty.
(1.) They must seek the Lord, seek his favour and grace, address him
upon all occasions, ask of him what they need, seek him early, seek him
diligently, and continue seeking him. (2.) They must seek righteousness.
"Seek to God for the performance of his promises to you, and see to it
that you abound yet more in duty to him; seek for the righteousness of
Christ to be imputed to you, for the graces of God's Spirit to be
implanted in you; hunger and thirst after them." (3.) They must seek
meekness. This is a grace they were so eminent for that they were
denominated the meek of the land, and yet this they must seek. Note,
Those that are ever so good must still strive to be better, those that
have ever so much grace must be still praying and labouring for more.
Nay, those that excel in any particular grace must still seek to excel
yet more in that, because in that most assaults will be made upon them
by their enemies, in that most is expected from them by their friends,
and in that they are most apt to be themselves secure. Si dixisti,
Sufficit, periisti - Say but, I am all that I ought to be, and you are
undone. In the difficult trying times approaching, the meek will find
exercise for all the meekness they have, and all little enough, and
therefore should seek it earnestly, and pray that when God in his
providence gives them occasion for it he would by his grace enable them
to exercise it, to show all meekness to all men, in all instances, that,
as the day is, so may the strength be.

IV\. Encouragements given to take these directions: It may be, you shall
be hid in the day of the Lord's anger. 1. "You particularly that are the
meek of the earth. Though the day of the Lord's anger do come upon the
land, yet you shall be safe, you shall be taken under special
protection. Verily it shall be well with thy remnant, [Jer
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#011). Thy life will I give unto thee
for a prey, [Jer 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#005). I will deliver
thee in that day, [Jer 39:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#017). It may
be, you shall be hid; if any be hid, you shall." Good men cannot be sure
of temporal preservation, for all things come alike to all, but they are
most likely to be hid, and stand fairest for a distinguishing care of
Providence. It is expressed thus doubtfully to try if they will trust
the goodness of God's nature, though they have but the it may be of a
promise, and to keep up in them a holy fear and watchfulness lest they
should seem to come short, and should do any thing to throw themselves
out of the divine protection. Note, those that hold fast their
integrity, in times of common iniquity, have reason to hope that God
will find out a hiding-place for them, where they shall be safe and
easy, in times of common calamity. They shall be hid (as Luther says)
aut in coelo, aut sub coelo - either in heaven or under heaven, either
in the possession of heaven or under the protection of heaven. Or, 2.
"You of this nation, though it be a nation not desired, yet, in the day
of the Lord's anger with the neighbouring nations, when his judgments
are abroad, you shall be hid; your land shall be preserved for the sake
of those few meek ones that stand in the gap to turn away the wrath of
God." It concerns us all to make it sure to ourselves that we shall be
hid in the great day of God's wrath; and, if we hide ourselves in the
chambers of duty, God will hide us in chambers of safety, [Isa
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020). If we prepare an ark, that
shall be our hiding-place, [Gen 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001).

[Zephaniah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zep 2:4</span></span>

The prophet here comes to foretel what share the neighbouring nations
should have in the destruction made upon those parts of the world by
Nebuchadnezzar and his victorious Chaldees, as others of the prophets
did at that time, which is designed, 1. To awaken the people of the
Jews, by making them sensible how strong, how deep, how large, the
inundation of calamities should be, that the day of the Lord, which was
near, might appear the more dreadful, and they might thereby be
quickened to prepare for it as for a general deluge. 2. To comfort them
with this thought, that their case, though sad, should not be singular
(Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris - The wretched find it
consolatory to have companions of their woe), and much more with this,
that though God had seemed to be their enemy, and to fight against them,
yet he was still so far their friend, and an enemy to their enemies,
that he resented, and would revenge, the indignities done them.

In these verses we have the doom of the Philistines, who were near
neighbours, and old enemies, to the people of Israel. Five lordships
there were in that country; only four are here named - Gaza and
Ashkelon, Ashdod and Ekron; Gath, the fifth, is not named, some think
because it was now subject to Judah. They were the inhabitants of the
sea-coasts ([Zep 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005)), for their
country lay upon the Great Sea. The nation of the Cherethites is here
joined with them, which bordered upon them ([Sa1
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#014)) and fell with them, as is
foretold also, [Eze 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#016). The
Philistines' land is here called Canaan, for it belonged to that country
which God gave to his people Israel, and was inserted in the grant made
to them, [Jos 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003). This land is yet
to be possessed (five lords of the Philistines), so that they wrongfully
kept Israel out of the possession of it ([Jdg
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#003)), which is now remembered against
them. For, though the rights of others may be long detained unjustly,
the righteous God will at length avenge the wrong.

I. It is here foretold that the Philistines, the usurpers, shall be
dispossessed and quite extirpated. In general, here is a woe to them
([Zep 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005)), which, coming from God,
denotes all misery: The word of the Lord is against them - the word of
the former prophets, which, though not yet accomplished, will be in its
season, [Isa 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#031). This word, now by
this prophet, is against them. Note, Those are really in a woeful
condition that have the word of the Lord against them, for no word of
his shall fall to the ground. Those that rebel against the precepts of
God's word shall have the threatenings of the word against them. The
effect will be no less than their destruction, 1. God himself will be
the author of it: "I will even destroy thee, who can make good what I
say and will." 2. It shall be a universal destruction; it shall extend
itself to all parts of the land, both city and country: Gaza shall be
forsaken, though now a populous city. It was foretold ([Jer
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#006)) that baldness should come upon
Gaza; Alexander the Great razed that city, and we find ([Act
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026)) that Gaza was a desert. Ashkelon
shall be a desolation, a pattern of desolation. Ashdod shall be driven
out at noon-day; in the extremity of the scorching heat they shall have
no shade, no shelter to protect them; but then, when most incommoded by
the weather, they shall be forced away into captivity, which will be an
aggravating circumstance of it. Ekron likewise shall be rooted up, that
had been long taking root. The land of the Philistines shall be
dispeopled; there shall be no inhabitant, [Zep
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005). God made the earth to be
inhabited ([Isa 45:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#018)), otherwise he
would have made it in vain; but, if men do not answer the end of their
creation in serving God, it is just with God that the earth should not
answer the end of its creation in serving them for a habitation; man's
sin has sometimes subjected it to this vanity. 3. It shall be an utter
destruction. The sea-coast, which used to be a harbour for ships and a
habitation for merchants, shall now be deserted, and be only cottages
for shepherds and folds for flocks ([Zep
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#006)), and then perhaps put to better
use than when it was possessed by the lords of the Philistines.

II\. It is here foretold that the house of Judah, the rightful owners,
shall recover the possession of it, [Zep
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#007). The remnant of those that shall
return out of captivity, when God visits them, shall be made to lie down
in safety in the houses of Ashkelon, to lie down in the evening, when
they are weary and sleepy. There they shall feed themselves and their
flocks. Note, God will at length restore his people to their rights,
though they may be long kept out from them.

[Zephaniah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zep 2:8</span></span>

The Moabites and Ammonites were both of the posterity of Lot; their
countries joined, and, both adjoining to Israel, they are here put
together in the prophecy against them.

I. They are both charged with the same crime, and that was reproaching
and reviling the people of God and triumphing in their calamities ([Zep
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008)): They have reproached my people;
while God's people kept close to their duty it is probable that they
reproached them for the singularities of their religion; and now that
they had revolted from God, and fallen under his displeasure, they
reproached them for that too. It has been the common lot of God's people
in all ages to be reproached and reviled upon one account or other. Thus
the old serpent spits his venom; and pride is at the bottom of it; it is
in their pride that they have magnified themselves against the people of
the Lord of hosts, thinking themselves as good as they, as great, and
every way as happy. It is the comtempt of the proud that God's people
are filled with, [Psa 123:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#004). They have
spoken big (so some read it, magna locuti sunt - they have spoken great
things) against their border ([Zep
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008)), against those of them that
bordered upon their country, whom upon all occasions they insulted, or
against the property they claimed, which they disputed, or the
protection they boasted of, which they ridiculed; they spoke big against
the people of the Lord of hosts as a deserted abandoned people. Great
swelling words of vanity are the genuine language of the church's
enemies. "But I have heard them" (says God), "and will let you know that
I have heard them. I have heard, and I will reckon for them," [Jde
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015). And, if God hears the reproaches
and revilings we are under, it is a good reason why we should be as a
deaf man that hears not, [Psa 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#014),
[Psa 38:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#015). Nay, God not only takes
notice of, but interests himself in the reproaches cast on his people,
because they are his; and it is certain that those who look with disdain
upon the people of the Lord of hosts thereby dishonour the Lord of hosts
himself. See this very thing charged on Moab and Ammon, [Eze
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#003), [Eze
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#008).

II\. They are both laid under the same doom. Associates in iniquity may
expect to be such in desolation. See with what solemnity sentence is
pronounced upon them, [Zep 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#009). It is
the Lord of hosts, the sovereign Lord of all, who has authority to pass
this sentence and ability to execute it; it is the God of Israel, who is
jealous for their honour; it is he that has said it, nay, he has sworn
it, As I live, saith the Lord. The sentence is, 1. That the Moabites and
Ammonites shall be quite destroyed; they shall be as Sodom and Gomorrah,
the marks of whose ruins in the Dead Sea lay near adjoining to the
countries of Moab and Ammon; they shall, though not by the same means
(even fire from heaven), Yet almost in the same manner, be laid waste;
not again to be inhabited, or not of a long time. The country shall
produce nothing but nettles, instead of corn; and there shall be
brine-pits, instead of the pleasant fountains of water with which the
country had abounded. 2. That Israel shall be too hard for them, shall
spoil them of their goods and possess their country by lawful war. Note,
Proud men sometimes, by the just judgment of God, fall under the
mortification of being trampled upon themselves by those whom once they
haughtily trampled upon. And this shall they have for their pride.

III\. Other nations shall in like manner be humbled, that the Lord alone
may be exalted ([Zep 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#011)): The Lord
will be terrible unto the Moabites and Ammonites in particular, who have
made themselves a terror to his Israel. For, 1. Heathen gods must be
abolished. They have long had possession, and their worshippers have
both glorified them and gloried in them. But the Lord will famish all
the gods of the earth, will starve them out of their strong-holds. The
Pagans had a fond conceit that their idols were regaled by their
offerings, and did eat the fat of their sacrifices, [Deu
32:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#038). Omnia comesta Belo - Bel has
eaten all. But it is here promised that when the Christian religion is
set up in the world men shall be turned from the service of these dumb
idols, shall forsake their altars, and bring no more sacrifices to them,
and thus they shall be famished, or made lean (as the word is), their
priests shall. This intimates the vanity of those idols; it lies in the
power of their worshippers to famish them; whereas the true God says, If
I were hungry, I would not tell thee. It intimates also the victory of
the God of Israel over them. Now know we that he is greater than all
gods. 2. Heathen nations must be converted; when the gospel gets ground,
by it men shall be brought to worship him who lives for ever (for that
is the command of the everlasting gospel, [Rev
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#007)), every one from his place; they
shall not need to go up to Jerusalem to worship the God of Israel, but
wherever they are, they may have access to him. I will that men pray
every where. God shall be worshipped, not only by all the tribes of
Israel and the strangers who join themselves to them, but by all the
isles of the heathen. This is a promise which looks favourably upon our
native country, for it is one of the most considerable of the isles of
the Gentiles, by which God will be glorified.

[Zephaniah 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zep 2:12</span></span>

The cup is going round, when Nebuchadnezzar is going on conquering and
to conquer; and not only Israel's near neighbours, but those that lay
more remote, must be reckoned with for the wrongs they have done to
God's people; the Ethiopians and the Assyrians are here taken to task.
1. The Ethiopians, or Arabians, that had sometimes been a terror to
Israel (as in Asa's time, [Ch2 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#009)),
must now be reckoned with: They shall be slain by my sword, [Zep
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#012). Nebuchadnezzar was God's sword,
the instrument in his hand with which these and other enemies were
subdued and punished, [Psa 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014). 2.
The Assyrians, and Nineveh the head city of their monarchy, are next set
to the bar, to receive their doom: He that is God's sword will stretch
out his hand against the north, and destroy Assyria, and make himself
master of it. Assyria had been the rod of God's anger against Israel,
and now Babylon is the rod of God's anger against Assyria, [Isa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005). He will make Nineveh a
desolation, as was lately and largely foretold by the prophet Nahum.
Observe, (1.) How flourishing Nineveh's state had formerly been ([Zep
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#015)): This is the rejoicing city that
dwelt carelessly. Nineveh was so strong that she feared no evil, and
therefore dwelt carelessly and set danger at defiance; she was so rich
that she thought herself sure of all good, and therefore was a rejoicing
city, full of mirth and gaiety; and she had such a dominion that she
admitted no rival, but said in her heart, "I am, and there is none
besides me that can compare with me, no city in the world that can
pretend to be equal with me." God can with his judgments frighten the
most secure, humble the most haughty, and mar the mirth of those that
most laugh now. (2.) How complete Nineveh's ruin shall now be; it shall
be made a desolation, [Zep 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#013). Such
a heap of ruins shall this once pompous city be that it shall be, \[1.\]
A receptacle for beasts, such a wilderness that flocks shall lie down in
it; nay, such a waste, desolate, frightful place, that wild beasts,
shall take up their abode there; the melancholy birds, as the cormorant
and bittern, shall make their nests in what remains of the houses, as
they sometimes do in old ruinous buildings that are uninhabited and
unfrequented. The lintels, or chapiters of the pillars, the windows and
thresholds, and all the fine cedar-work curiously engraven, shall lie
exposed; and on them these rueful ominous birds shall perch, and their
voice shall sing. How are the songs of mirth turned into hideous horrid
noises! What little reason have men to be proud of stately buildings,
and rich furniture, when they know not what all the pomp of them may
come to at last! \[2.\] A derision to travellers. Those that had come
from far, to gratify their curiosity with the sight of Nineveh's
splendour, shall now look on her with as much contempt as ever they
looked upon her with admiration ([Zep
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#015)): Every one that passes by shall
hiss at her, and wag his hand, making light of her desolations, nay, and
making sport with them - "There is an end of proud Nineveh." They shall
not weep, and wring their hands (the adversities of those are unpitied
and unlamented who were insolent and haughty in their prosperity), but
they shall hiss and wag their hands, forgetting that perhaps their own
ruin is not far off.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah Chapter 3](zep003)

</div>
