[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](anim10)  [Next](anim12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# IX

### DEATH NOT ALWAYS REGARDED AS INEVITABLE

A FACT that has been before us incidentally, though not the subject of
specific remark, is the age-long belief in the continued existence of
the soul. We have noted that the soul is "the separable factor" in man's
duality, "with a life all its own." It would be normal then next to
examine this continuance of life beyond death, to determine its
character. But before discussing primitive conceptions concerning the
dead, their state and powers, it is important to note that there are
hints from widely separated regions which suggest that once there was a
belief nearly or quite universal that death is not inevitable. It is
likely that in the youth of the race, death was practically always the
result of violence--from man or beast--or of accident. And it follows
from what we have just noticed of the parity of being and the
attribution of life to insensate objects, that even accidents would not
be recognized as such but would be interpreted as the result of
purposive activities. Moreover, evidence is abundant that, in a somewhat
advanced stage of human history, man was a contemporary of huge and
ferocious animals which have become extinct. While cave deposits reveal
that he knew how to master some of these, on the other hand it must be
conceded that cave men must often have succumbed, if all did not
eventually lose their lives, to the attacks or have come off second best
in the encounters which they themselves brought on. The increase in the
numbers of human beings is always attended by the mastery and extinction
of beasts of prey. In the days when men were few and beasts were present
in numbers now hardly conceivable, the number of casualties to men
either in the bunt or when themselves hunted must have been great. We
have to take into account also feuds among men in the undisciplined
state. When the stage of culture was low, feuds between tribes and
clans, which, be it remembered, were small in those days, were often
waged to extinction. Within the memory of man the sparseness of
population in Australia has been with high probability of correctness
ascribed to the feuds which for a single reason raged between different
tribes. The mortality from this cause must have been great. And how
complete may have been the slaughter in such cases is seen when we
remember that so late as the time of Samuel a numerous people was
devoted to extinction in the name of religion--in this case religion
being the mask for human animosities.\[1\] Under circumstances perhaps
more numerous than we can imagine, men, women, and children were
slaughtered to the last individual.

From what has preceded in the way of showing early man's conceptions of
the potency of things about him, what would now be regarded as accident
was by him regarded as the result of purposive action by the objects
which seemed to work disaster. If a limb fell from a tree in a storm and
killed a man, the explanation was that the tree had cast its weapon in
anger, or the wind had, with intent, flung this missile with deadly aim.
Stories have passed in recent times of African tribes that hewed down
and chopped to bits a tree, a limb from which had caused the death of
one

\[1. 1 Sam. 15.\]

of their number. Similarly, if a man were drowned by river or ocean, it
was the angry flood or the offended sea which bad removed from this life
the deceased human.

Recalling once more the steadfastness with which man holds to
convictions once entertained, remembering that the new has always had to
fight, and fight hard, for entrance into his mind, we may regard the
instances to be adduced in which the belief that death is always an *ab
extra* event, to be accounted for by causes other than "natural," as
illustrative of and probably presumptive of the existence of the same
belief in much wider circles than those in which it now obtains. It is
best accounted for as a "superstition," i.e., as "something left over
from earlier times." To be sure, in some cases, perhaps in all, the
belief has taken on the complexion of a more advanced culture, it
explains the death by "spiritual" means instead of by mere brute or
physical force. This is a way that superstitions have. They fit
themselves to the environment, mental or physical, which has wrapped
itself about them.

From Australia quite concordant testimony from competent observers is
accessible. Thus R. B. Smyth cites the statement of Mr. Daniel Bunce
(curator of the Botanical Gardens at Geelong), a man well acquainted
with the blacks, to the effect that "no tribe be has ever met with
believe in the possibility of a man's dying a natural death. If a man is
taken ill, it is at once assumed that some member of a hostile tribe has
stolen some of his hair. This is quite enough to cause serious illness.
If the man continues sick and gets worse, it is assumed that the hair
has been burned by his enemy. Such an ad, they say, is sufficient to
imperil his life. If the man dies, it is assumed that the thief has
choked his victim and taken away his kidney fat."

Mr. Smyth continues: "Mr. John Green says that the men of the Yarrow
tribe firmly believe that no one ever dies a natural death. A man or a
woman dies because of the wicked arts practised by some member of a
hostile tribe."\[2\]

In Appendix 3 to the same work (ii. 289-290) Albert A. C. Le Souef
accounts for the paucity of population in part by the fad that a death
by disease involves the death of others, because the first case was
believed to be

\[2. Aborigines of Victoria, i. 110.\]

caused by sorcery, and a murdering expedition is at once carried out for
vengeance. (This in turn starts a blood feud, and so on.)

Taplin remarks of the Narrinyeri: "When a man dies they conclude at once
that sorcery has been the cause of the mournful event, and that either
*ngadhungi* or *millin* \[two methods of sorcery\] have been practised
against him."\[3\]

Spencer and Gillen testify that "no such thing as natural death is
realized by the native; a man who dies has of necessity been killed by
some other man, or perhaps even by a woman."\[4\]

Dawson's affirmation is quite concordant: "Natural deaths are
generally--but not always--attributed to the malevolence and the spells
of an enemy belonging to another tribe."\[5\]

In New Guinea the same belief holds, as witnessed by Newton.

"About Wedau and Wamira the spirits of the dead go eventually to some
place to the eastward of Cape Frere, in a valley in the mountains called
Iola, the approach to the

\[1. *Narrinyeri*, in *Native Tribes of South Australia*, p. 19.

2\. *Native Tribes of Central Australia*, p. 48.

3\. Dawson, *Australian Aborigines*, p. 63.\]

abode of the spirits being through a hole in the ground. When the spirit
arrives it is questioned at once, 'Where have you come from?' 'What have
you come for?' just as every time you go into a village every one who
meets you asks you (these questions). The newly arrived one says, 'I
have come from Wedau' or 'Wamira,' as the case may be, or the answer may
state more explicitly the section of the village, and 'Where else should
I go except to my own people?' Then the question is asked, 'Who sent
you?' and for answer the name of some sorcerer or witch is given, the
one responsible for the death."\[6\]

Indirect testimony is furnished by Neuhass to the same effect for German
New Guinea, whose people separate souls with reference to post mortem
continuance according as they died by the sword or by magic--the two
methods which they recognize of passing from this life. The Mafulu of
this island regard a death otherwise unaccounted for as due to spirits
acting under sorcerers. An exception is conceived, however, in the case
of very old persons, which seems to show the transition

\[6. *In Far New Guinea*, p. 219.\]

to a more advanced knowledge.\[7\] And in Hood Peninsula, British New
Guinea, death is the result of the activities of spirits or
magicians.\[8\] Gomes asserts that in Borneo all sickness (and therefore
death not otherwise accounted for) by external means is caused by spirit
possession.\[9\] Among Melanesians: "It must . . . be remembered that .
. . death is not admitted to occur without some obvious cause such as a
spear thrust. Therefore when vigorous and active members of the
community die, it becomes necessary to explain their fate, and such
deaths are firmly believed to be produced by sorcery."\[10\] In far away
Africa "nearly all diseases, bad luck, misfortune, sorrow, and death are
caused by witchcraft, i.e., by some one using a fetish to curse a
person."\[11\]

Among the Indians of Guiana, "Every death, every illness, is regarded
not as the result of natural law, but as the work of a kenaima (i.e., a
man possessed by a spirit for the purpose of blood revenge, and able to

\[7. Williamson, *Ways of South Sea Savage*, p. 286.

8\. *JAI*, xxviii (1899), 216 ff.

9\. *Sea Dyaks of Borneo*, p. 183.

10\. Seligmann, *Melanesians*, p. 779.

11\. Weeks, *Primitive Bakongo*, p. 219.\]

send his spirit forth to inflict evil). Such a kenaima is . . . the real
or supposed cause of almost every evil, and especially of every
death."\[12\]

Concordant testimony is given by Brett:\[13\] "A person dies--and it is
supposed that an enemy has secured the agency of an evil spirit to
compass his death." A sorcerer is employed to discover the guilty
individual, and a relative of the deceased is charged with the work of
vengeance. He is a kenaima, possessed by the spirit of destruction.

It is the "left-overs" that often reveal to the discriminating observer
the conditions which are implied, which surrounded the full bloom of
what have become survivals. It is not difficult to imagine, and it is in
accord with primitive psychology to presume, that the few cases here
brought together, which might conceivably be much extended by definite
research, suppose a much larger area over which such ideas were regnant.

\[12. Im Thum, *Among the Indians of Guiana*, p. 329.

13\. *Indian Tribes of Guiana*, pp. 357 ff.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Continued Existence of the Soul](anim12)
