<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toa00)  [Next](toa02) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Treasure of Atlantis*, by J. Allan Dunn, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

### INTRODUCTION

All Around …

All Around … The New Magazine … New Story … half-fabled, near-legendary
magazine of the ’teens.

It began in November 1910 as The New Magazine, became New Story in
August 1911, and experienced one more title change—to All Around—in
December 1915, before combining with another Street & Smith pulp,
People's Magazine, in April 1917.

New Story was an exciting and robust magazine. In 1913 it succeeded in
obtaining the second novel of the immensely popular Tarzan series by
Edgar Rice Burroughs—in direct competition with The All-Story (the
Munsey magazine that had published "Tarzan of the Apes" in October
1912). "The Return of Tarzan" was published as a seven-part serial
beginning in June 1913. A month after it had ended, another Burroughs'
serial, historical and heroic, "The Outlaw of Torn," began in the
January 1914 issue. It was in good company, for the popular English
novelist H. Rider Haggard was represented with "Allan and the Holy
Flower" at the same time.

By the time the title had changed to All Around in December of 1915, the
magazine was basically one of fantastic and swashbuckling adventure, and
it is easy to believe that the [instantaneous](errata.htm#0) and
startling success [achieved](errata.htm#1) by Edgar Rice Burroughs
beginning in 1912 was influential in the pattern of stories adopted by
the magazine. Indeed, Burroughs was represented in the February 1916
issue with "Beyond Thirty," a fantastic which loomed as
near-unobtainable for a period approaching fifty years.

Other inclusions were in the same vein. Robert Ames Bennet who had
written the popular THYRA at the turn of the century was represented

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

with a fine serial, "The Bowl of Baal." This is set in the far reaches
of Arabia during World War I, and it involves a lost race, some fearsome
creatures, and enough high adventure to satisfy the most avid reader.
"The Buddha's Elephant" appeared in the August 1916 issue from the pen
of prolific H. Bedford-Jones writing under the name of Allan Hawkwood.
It is a tale of an ancient Greek city surviving in the Gobi. George B.
Rodney's fantastic, "The Underground Trail," appeared in the last (March
1917) issue of All Around. It was good enough to be published in book
form as BEYOND THE RANGE, and, even in 1970, it remains an attractive
book to the science-fantasy collector.

"The Treasure of Atlantis" appeared complete in one issue in December
1916. It reflected some of the news and theories of the day with its
Crete/Atlantis theme, and in many ways allies itself with the 1970
thinking which holds that Cretan civilization was destroyed by volcanic
eruption. As early as 1909, Atlantis had been identified with Crete in
some archeological circles, and the belief was popular in the ’teens.
But the fact, the theory behind "The Treasure of Atlantis" is
unimportant. It is enough to say that this story was written to
entertain—to quench the interest and appetite of the armchair
adventurer.

There is little doubt that "The Treasure of Atlantis" was written for
the same audience that had made the Burroughs’ stories popular. Morse,
its hero, is strong and silent, and despite his position of wealth and
influence in a world of more than fifty years ago, he is unhappy with
civilization. His partner in exploration, the great archeologist, is a
character that is part-Burroughs, part-Haggard, with more than a little
of Conan Doyle's famous Professor Challenger about him.

"The Treasure of Atlantis" combines the lure of the unknown, the
grandeur of the fabled past, and savage, swashbuckling action. As such,
it is' a fitting novel for the "Time-Lost" series.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](toa02)

</div>
