<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toa05)  [Next](toa07) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Treasure of Atlantis*, by J. Allan Dunn, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

### CHAPTER IV—CAXOEIRA CANYON

Vivid flashes of forked lightning, following hot puffs of wind,
illuminated the aisles of the Amazonian forest, inky black between the
intervals. The long line of carriers, tired of struggling over and under
the tough festoons of tree roots and ground vines and the trailing
lianas that disputed every inch of the trail, came to a sudden halt. The
two leaders, stumbling persistently behind the bearers, confirmed the
move, and the Morse-Laidlaw expedition tried to find secure shelter from
the coming storm that had driven night before it in such untimely
fashion.

There was little cover from the threatened hurricane that could be
considered satisfactory. The cargadores threw their burdens beneath the
heaviest undergrowth they could find, and, with their employers, leaned
against the tree trunks. Morse and Laidlaw ensconced themselves in a
fold of a great massaranduba (cow tree) as the first heavy drops fell.

"I'm not built for this trail, Morse," said Laidlaw, though his cheery
voice evinced no complaint. "I've tripped up in these infernal jungle
traps a dozen times. My nose is bleeding, and I've cracked both shins
falling on my rifle."

"And I've been swung off my feet with a noose about my neck about as
often," replied Morse. "We're due here till morning, anyway. By tomorrow
night I hope to reach Apara. Here it comes!"

They shrank against the mighty bole as the gale swept through the
forest, the roar of the wind intensified by the crackling of trees that
were literally up-rotted and tossed by the tempest as if they had been
so many wisps of straw. Two [sturdy](errata.htm#5) trunks crashed down
close to their feet, and only the giant spread of mighty bough above
them saved them from destruction. In the intermittent pauses of the
storm the shrieks of monkeys and the screeching of parrots and herons
joined the wailing of the bearers and machete men in an appalling din.
Birds flapped heavily to the branches overhead; animals shuffled in
among them; and once a wild cry of dismay went up as a great snake wound
its scaly length among the Indians, too disturbed for attack.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

The gale lasted two hours. It was the last effort of the rainy season,
and had not been unexpected by Morse, who had deliberately chosen the
time of the trip to take advantage of the high water in the rivers. They
had come by steamship to Para, at the mouth of the Amazon, traversed
eight hundred and seventy miles of the Flowing Road to the mouth of the
Madeira, and ascended that tributary nearly seven hundred miles in a
launch to the San Antonio Falls, above which the river raged in
continuous rapids for three hundred miles, impossible for upriver
travel. At San Antonio, they engaged their porters and machete men and
struck eastward across the great plateau broken up into subsidiary
chapadaos, crossing the Tapajos River at Taguaraizino, and its
tributary, the Manoel, at the border angle of Para and Matto Grosse
States, reaching the old, half-grown trail of Murdock, and arriving with
a few days’ march of Apara village, at a stream marked on the orchid
hunter's map as Caxoeira, in the beginning of May, with six months of
good weather in prospect.

It had been a hard trek, and the caravan showed signs of the trying-out
process. Morse had marveled at Laidlaw's adaptation to the trying
conditions. Once eggs disappeared inexorably from the menu, he made
neither murmur nor suggestion as to meals, accepting chameleon or monkey
with manioc for vegetable and banana for dessert with equanimity. The
drawback of his short legs was eliminated by his endurance.

Once, for sport, he had drawn himself up into the lianas and swung along
above ground for a hundred yards as easily as a gorilla, scaring the
prehensile-tailed monkeys that chattered above him and striking awe into
the hearts of the Indians. The quest well started, nothing seemed to
disturb a certain humorous equanimity that characterized him and made
him an ideal trail companion. Torrential rains soaked them; they steamed
in their own perspiration; gnats and gaudy-flied, heavy-shelled beetles,
all laden with poison sacs and natural hypodermic syringes, tormented
them, but they proved immune to the fevers, and their formidable numbers
and equipment secured them from hostile attacks.

Morse was in top condition. By dint of strict discipline and a general
knowledge of conditions, he kept his

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

train in similar shape, and they made unprecedented time. Across the
grassy summits of the chapadaos, the day's march was more often over
than under twenty miles, and a general spirit of confidence in their own
ability permeated the party. Morse had said nothing to the bearers
concerning the real object of the expedition. He had consulted with
Laidlaw, and they had decided to keep silent.

"We may not be welcome at Dor," Morse suggested, "and, according to
Murdock, the Indians seem inclined to be superstitious in the matter. We
don't want to lose them before we reach Apara."

In spare hours since they had left New York, Morse applied himself,
under the tutelage of Laidlaw, to acquiring facility in ancient Greek
and learning to decipher the symbols of Cretan pictorial and linear
script.

"There will be variations in the language, undoubtedly," said Laidlaw,
"but the roots may be the same, and present practice will prove a fine
working basis." So Morse resurrected the memories of his school and
college classics and pounded away until he was able to converse freely
with Laidlaw. Except where the Greek held no equivalents for the names
of modern articles, they practically adopted it in place of English.

"Dialects spring up and mother languages alter with change of location
and climate, much as we will undoubtedly find the old Cretan ceremonials
and customs, religious and social, dominated by local conditions,"
warned Laidlaw. "If the snow-capped cone mentioned by Murdock is a
volcano, it will undoubtedly have had its influence on their worship.
The old Minotaur legend will likely have become a myth unless they have
cattle, which I doubt. The volcanic fires will have an important part in
their ritual, I imagine. Though it is, of course, all theory on my
part."

With education and speculation, the time passed quickly, and it seemed
only a short time since Laidlaw had first burst into Morse's bedroom. A
genuine friendship, founded on mutual peril and respect for each other's
bearing and sturdy manhood, sprang up between the two men. Morse was
amazed at the resources of Laidlaw's learning, and Laidlaw treated the
other as a son of whom he was justly proud, relegating to him the

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

leadership by right of experience and capability.

The morning after the storm, Morse broke camp at daybreak. The hurricane
had blazed a broad trail of uprooted trees, torn undergrowth, and lianas
through the forest and strewn it with boughs and branches. Dead a birds
lay here and there, and one great limb had smashed to a pulp a great
anaconda fully thirty feet in length and as thick around as Morse's
thigh.

According to the map, they had crossed the last watercourse and had now
only to climb out of the valley to the highlands where Tagua ruled the
village of Apara. During the morning they made good progress, and at
sunset they arrived at the village and sent in word to its ruler with
gifts of bright-colored prints.

There was no surprise at their appearance; the jungle wireless had
announced them as it had elsewhere along the route. The bearers
fraternized with the half-naked pisanos of the village, and two headmen
escorted Morse and Laidlaw to a large bamboo hut which they speedily
made comfortable with their camp equipment.

Morse asked for Tagua by name. "Tell him," he said, "that we are friends
of Murdock to whom he made the present of the cup of gold."

The response from the chief took initial form in return presents of fat
capybaras, an agouti, and an armadillo, together with wild figs and
bananas. In half an hour the chief arrived, apologizing for his delay.
He had been in a mud bath for his rheumatism, and had waited to cleanse
himself. He limped badly, and was evidently in pain, though he beamed
with evident friendliness.

"You come from Senhor Mirradoche?" he asked in the flowing Indian
dialect. "Does he send greetings?"

"Greetings from beyond the trail, Tagua. The senhor is dead."

"Eyah! It is bad news. He was a good man. I linger like an old tree, but
he is taken."

He lapsed into silence which the Americans did not interrupt. At length
he asked: "What may I do for you?"

Morse repeated the story told by the orchid hunter.

"We would find the city and enter it," he concluded.

Tagua sank back in mingled incredulity and horror. "It is impossible!"
he exclaimed. "The way is closed, and they permit no strangers within
the city

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

save as bondmen. You cannot go alone. And none of the pisanos would dare
go with you. It is a land of ghosts who dwell sometimes on the land and
sometimes in the sky. Have I not seen it? Did not Mirradoche see the Sky
City and the people walking?"

"Nevertheless we will go," declared Morse, "even if we go alone. Where
is the way?"

"You are strong men and brave," said the chief thoughtfully, "and
friends of my friend. Therefore I warn you. But you men of other jungles
are all mad and most stubborn. Yet, maybe you are magicians. Have I not
heard of him who swings in the trees and talks to the apes like a
brother?"

It was somewhat of an exaggeration; but Laidlaw, who had long ago
mastered the key language of the Amazonian dialects, laughed.

"But that will not help you scale the walls," Tagua went on. "The way
leads by the stairs that Mirradoche told you of, but they are broken and
the ghosts have sealed the cliff. Give it up, senhors. Maybe tomorrow
you may see the Sky City from the campo. I myself will lead you opposite
the stairway. Then return while still your bodies hold your soul."

They quizzed him, but he could add nothing to the dim legend that once
the Indians had been forced to work in the Land of the Ghost People and
had been driven out at the end of their task, his ancestor bringing with
him the golden vase he had taken.

Morse opened a pack and produced it, setting it on the camp table. A
cover for the vase had been made at his direction, carefully designed to
conform with the original. This was soldered tightly to the bowl.

"This cup," he said, "was given me by our friend. In it are his ashes. I
shall give them burial within the city of Dor. I swear it!" he added,
setting one hand upon the urn.

Tagua looked at him with astonished admiration.

"If you say so, then I believe you will do it."

Outside the hut, the night was filled with weird noises when they
emerged. Tagua had declared a feast in his visitor's honor. Fires blazed
at the ends of the mud-caked street, and villagers dressed in gaudy
prints, bedecked with strings of alligator teeth, feathers, and

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

lustrous bird skins paraded up and down behind musicians beating loudly
on drums and blowing piercing notes through reed flutes in rude rhythm.
With them mingled the bearers and machete men. Native liquors were in
evidence, and the crowd sang and danced at will.

At the appearance of Tagua and his guests the crowd entered a big hut
decorated with fresh palm trees and lit by tallow dips along the walls.
The chief conducted Morse and Laidlaw to a platform at one end to watch
the dancing, which took place on the uneven mud floor with much stamping
of feet to the drums and flutes. It was evident that before long the
native ferments would be in full possession.

Morse took advantage of the first pause brought about by temporary
exhaustion and stated the object of the expedition. With the first
mention of the Sky City a silence fell upon the mob. He concluded with a
call for volunteers, promising a rifle to each man and other rewards
that would make them comparatively rich for life.

The men shuffled their feet and whispered among themselves, and Tagua
spoke.

"I am old and useless," he said. "Also I am afraid of the Ghost People.
Yet would I go with these two if only that shame should not be set upon
my village and Apara be called the abode of cowards. Maya"—he singled
out a tall warrior hung with rows of alligator teeth—"what say you?" The
men stepped forward. His chest bore the scars of close encounter with
some sharp-clawed jungle denizen; he carried his head high, and was
evidently regarded as a sub-chief.

"If I send an arrow against a jaguar or a man," he said, "I know when I
have hit. If I miss, it is my fault. But how can one fight against
ghosts when the arrow pierces a shadow and is lost in a cloud? Yet am I
no coward. What one dares I dare! Xolo! Will you follow these strangers
with me?"

Xolo, long and lean, streaks of gray in his black hair, not an ounce of
spare flesh on his body, naked save for a breechclout, corded with
stringy muscles, came to the side of Maya.

"I will go," he said simply.

But that was the end of the recruiting. The men who

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

had accompanied the expedition were paid, and neither Morse's offer of
high payment nor Tagua's persuasive powers could coax another warrior
into service. Maya and Xolo were the best hunters of the district, Tagua
said, and both had performed notable deeds in war against hostile
tribes. Better still, while both were adepts with spear and bow and blow
gun, Tagua had intrusted them from time to time with the use of the
rifle given him by Murdock, and they were accustomed to its use and
fairly good shots.

It was not Morse's idea to make an entry into the mystic city with any
force that might be construed as an attempt at invasion, but he had
hoped to secure enough men to bear the bulk of his equipment. With only
Maya and Xolo available, he and Laidlaw were forced to spend the morning
reducing their outfit to only the most necessary articles. The two
Indians were intrusted with rifles; Morse and Laidlaw, besides these,
armed themselves with automatic pistols. A few presents, a compass,
powerful flashlights, some few canned provisions, with ammunition, made
up the bulk of what they selected to take with them.

The rest Morse gave into Tagua's charge.

"If we do not return for these before the rainy season, they are yours,"
he said, after opening one bale that contained cotton goods of startling
color and design, which he gave outright to the chief.

They set out in mid-afternoon for the spot where Murdock had camped
across the canyon from the stone steps. Tagua accompanied them. Close to
sunset they came out of a clump of carrasco upon the edge of the
precipice. The wall dropped almost sheer five hundred feet to the
torrent, which, swollen by the recent rain, swirled and seethed from
bank to bank. The opposing cliff was far higher than the one they stood
upon, a perpendicular scarp of rock on the rim lifting up to almost a
thousand feet.

The setting sun was almost level with the flat summit of the plateau
behind them and painted the farther cliff with a broad band of rose.
Beneath their feet the canyon was in shadow, in which the foaming rapids
showed like a cavalry charge of gray horses.

Morse imagined that he could dimly make out the

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

stone steps leading halfway up the cliff. Laidlaw was gazing at the
summit of the opposing wall, sharp against the eastern sky of pale
turquoise-matrix green, flecked here and there with little rosy clouds,
the heralds of the gorgeous afterglow to follow.

Suddenly he drew in his breath sharply, and Morse looked up. Tagua,
Maya, and Xolo were on their hands and knees, their heads resting on the
ground.

In the sky, ethereal, slightly tremulous, but distinct, was the vision
of a city built upon the shores of a lake that held the reflections of
its stone buildings and of colonnaded temples that seemed to be hewn out
of the solid rock. On the lake, ships were being rowed shoreward with
banks of oars, some propelled by sails of striped material, a multitude
of people were passing along a paved highway by the edge of the water.
Luxuriant verdure set off the buildings, and, reared from the back
cliff, there rose a snow-capped dome with a plume of smoke lazily
curling from its peak.

As the sun dropped behind the western edge of the plateau, the colors of
the mirage blended with the afterglow, the waters of the lake seemed to
slowly rise and inundate the city, the plume of smoke became a floating
cloud, and the vision vanished.

Morse and Laidlaw turned in common impulse and clasped hands. There was
no need for words. It was the city of Dor, cloud-painted indeed, but a
sky canvas copied from an original that lay somewhere beyond the high
precipice that now bent a grim frown upon them, the rosy band vanished
with the descending sun.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V—Kiron](toa07)

</div>
