<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toa15)  [Next](toa17) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Treasure of Atlantis*, by J. Allan Dunn, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

### Advertisement

The following period advertisement followed the text of this book in the
proof edition. It has been transcribed for completeness.

## The Pathless Trail

##### SWASHBUCKLING JUNGLE ADVENTURE

In the year 1925, the controversial Englishman, Colonel P. H. Fawcett
disappeared into the remote mountain country of Brazil to a fate that
baffled a curious world. Colonel Fawcett had excited archeologists and
armchair adventurers with his quest for a lost prehistoric city which he
believed to exist in this unexplored hinterland.

Three years earlier, a lone American—a teller of tales and a searcher
after truth—ventured into the dangerous and unknown region of the
Brazilian-Venezuelan border on a quest of his own. The land that he
entered was the most fearsome in the world—the land of the sixty-foot
sucuruju (anaconda), ruthless cannibals, and jungle disease; a land
which a Conan or a Solomon Kane might think twice about entering. Yet
Arthur Olney Friel entered this world seeking the truth behind the many
legends and tales of white Indians in the back of beyond. And he
returned to chronicle his adventures and his deductions in the
poetically

(continued on next page)

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

titled non-fiction volume, THE RIVER OF SEVEN STARS.

But Friel was best known in those days for his fiction. A prolific and
accomplished writer, he wrote his novels of high adventure about the
fearsome jungle that he knew first hand, and which he flavored with his
own fertile imagination.

THE PATHLESS TRAIL is a fitting novel to initiate the "Time-Lost" series
from Centaur Press. It is a swashbuckler; heroic, fastmoving, and loaded
to the hilt with savage creatures and men of the unexplored jungle. It
is a book of conflict, and its heroes are men of conflict.

THE PATHLESS TRAIL is the first of a quartet of books that grow
progressively more imaginative with each title. Historically, these
novels appeared as long serials in the grand old pulp magazine of the
1920's, Adventure, prior to appearing in book form in both this country
and in England. Other Adventure stalwarts of the period included Talbot
Mundy, Harold Lamb, Hugh Pendexter, and Arthur D. Howden Smith; an array
that influenced a youthful Robert E. Howard and enthralled many
thousands of readers.

Featuring white Indians, weird creatures, and dreams of empire, the
series has lain half-forgotten, half-buried, its once great popularity
in the shadow of almost fifty years. But to this day it remains an
exciting and powerful series for the armchair adventurer.

Watch for these other Centaur Press books by Arthur O. Friel:

TIGER RIVER

THE KING OF NO MAN'S LAND

MOUNTAINS OF MYSTERY

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Back cover copy](toa17)

</div>
