[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tft06)  [Next](tft08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VKZPM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Tibetan Folk Tales*, by A.L. Shelton, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

## FOUR

#### The Story of the Donkey and the Rock

#### (A Black Tent Story)

<span class="small">Between iron and brass there is union if the welding
is skillful.  
                                  *Tibetan Proverb*.</span>

A Jg VERY long time ago, somewhere in that far A away land of Tibet,
away up so high that it seems a little nearer the sky than any other
land, in one corner was a country governed by a very just man. He was
noted in all parts of the dominion for his fair judgment in all cases.
In the city where this good king lived and had his home, dwelt two poor
men. Both were very good, did the very best they could every day and
each had an old mother to support.

One day one of the men started to a village high up in the mountains
carrying a jar of oil, selling it as he went. Walking along, he grew
very tired and set his jar of oil on a rock by the roadside while he sat
down to rest a while. As he sat there, his neighbor came down the
mountain driving his donkey in front of him. There were two big loads of
wood stacked one on each side of the little donkey, which almost covered
him. He didn't happen to see the jar, so came too near and knocked it
off, breaking it, and spilling all the oil.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The man who owned
the oil was very angry indeed, and the man who owned the donkey said it
wasn't he who had done the damage, but the donkey. So they quarreled and
quarreled and kept on quarreling. The man who owned the oil said he
couldn't afford to lose it, as it was all he had in the world to sell
for food for his mother and himself, and it couldn't have been his fault
the jar was broken. They both went to the king who questioned them very
carefully about the matter and finally said he couldn't see that either
one was to blame. They were both good men, took good care of their old
mothers and were honest in all their dealings, and so far as he could
see no one was at fault but the donkey and the rock, and he would judge
them. So the little donkey was chained with chains around his legs and
around his neck and led into prison, while five of the king's men were
sent out for the rock. As soon as they brought it in he ordered it
wrapped with chains and tied outside the prison door to a post. By this
time the news of this strange case and the queer doings of the king had
spread throughout the city. When the people heard their great king was
having a trial about a donkey and a rock they thought he had surely gone
mad. The next morning the king announced by his runners through the city
that the case would be tried. The idea that a donkey and a rock could
have a trial in court was more than the people could understand, but
early next day everybody in the city was at the courtyard to see

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span id="img_03100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE DONKEY, ALMOST
COVERED WITH THE LOAD OF WOOD, DID NOT SEE THE JAR, AND BROKE IT,
SPILLING ALL THE OIL.](tn/03100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03100.jpg.md)  
THE DONKEY, ALMOST COVERED WITH THE LOAD OF WOOD, DID NOT SEE THE JAR,
AND BROKE IT, SPILLING ALL THE OIL.  
</span>

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

the result of the trial. When the time arrived the judge came, took his
seat, instructed the door-keepers to shut and lock all the gates, thus
locking in everybody, and then proceeded to pronounce his judgment on
the case.

"As you very well know, there is no law by which a donkey and a rock can
be judged. Why have you all come to see so absurd a thing? Now, because
of your curiosity in the matter, every one of you shall pay a half-cent
before he gets out."

The people, looking much ashamed, and glad to get out, handed over this
bit of money and slipped through the gate. The cash taken in this way
was given to the man who had lost his oil, so he was happy, the debt was
paid, and the court closed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Five: Story of the Foolish Head-Man](tft08.md)
