[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tft09)  [Next](tft11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VKZPM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Tibetan Folk Tales*, by A.L. Shelton, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

#### SEVEN

## The Ingratitude of Man

<span class="small">Whatever you have promised make it not as changeable
as a loop in a string, but as firm as a line on a rock.  
                   *Tibetan Prover*b.</span>

ONCE upon a time in a far, far away land, in a very high, high land,
when the old world was very, very young and animals and men spoke and
lived together, such a thing as gratitude was known.

Away in the mountains was a narrow road that passed along the side of a
deep chasm. It was a dangerous place to travel, and along this path one
night, just at dark, when a man, a crow, a rat and a snake were walking
along together, a part of the road gave way and they fell into the
depths below. They were not hurt, but much shaken, and they sat there
waiting and thinking of their plight, wondering how they could get out,
or what they could do to keep from starving, when a traveler coming
along reached the broken road and looked down and saw them. They all at
one time began to clamor and beg to be helped out, so he threw a long
rope down to them and drew them all out one after the other. They all
professed great gratitude and said they would never forget him and never
forget the help he had given

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

them, and that some time they'd help him. The traveler, in his heart,
rather scorned the professions of friendship from the crow, the rat and
the snake, and really didn't believe they could do anything for him, but
thought possibly the man might be able to aid him some time.

A long time after this had taken place, in the palace of the king, in
this far away country, the queen was on the top of the flat roof washing
her hair. She took off her jeweled necklace and laid it down near her on
a low bench, and when her hair was dry went downstairs and forgot her
jewels. Near by in the top of a tree sat the crow who had been rescued
by the man a long time ago. He saw the necklace and said, "This will be
a good present to give to that man who saved me from the chasm," so he
flew down, picked it up in his bill, flew away with it and took it to
the man and told him where he got it.

The next day the traveler with the necklace met the man he had rescued
and said, "Look here. I didn't think that crow would be much of a
friend, but see, he has brought me these magnificent jewels that belong
to the queen."

The rescued man, hearing this, went at once to the king and said to him,
"The queen's necklace you will find in the house of such a man," and
gave the name of his rescuer. The king at once sent his men, arrested
the traveler and cast him into prison. In that dark old dungeon, with no
bed to lie on, the walls dripping moisture, no food to eat, and no
friend to bring him any, he

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span id="img_04100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![IN THAT DARK OLD
DUNGEON, WITH NO BED TO LIE ON, NO FOOD TO EAT, IN THE COLD AND DAMP, HE
WAS ABOUT TO STARVE, WHEN THE RAT HE HAD RESCUED CAME AND ASKED HIM HOW
HE HAPPENED TO BE IN THAT PLACE.](tn/04100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04100.jpg.md)  
IN THAT DARK OLD DUNGEON, WITH NO BED TO LIE ON, NO FOOD TO EAT, IN THE
COLD AND DAMP, HE WAS ABOUT TO STARVE, WHEN THE RAT HE HAD RESCUED CAME
AND ASKED HIM HOW HE HAPPENED TO BE IN THAT PLACE.  
</span>

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

was about to starve to death, when the rat he had rescued and who lived
there came and asked him how he happened to be in that place. He related
the story of his arrest and the ingratitude of the man he had saved and
said he was about to starve and would surely die unless help came very
soon. The rat went away, entered into the king's palace, stole the food
from his table, carried it to the man in the dungeon and saved him.

Another day the snake came in to see him and asked how it was that he
happened to be in the prison. He told him the story again and the snake
said, "Never mind, I'll get you free."

Now this snake was a magic snake, and making himself into a ghost wound
around and around the king's neck and almost choked him to death. He
could be felt but not seen. The king wildly called for his great men,
his wise men and his lamas who cast lots and told him that this ghost
that was choking him was one of the patron saints of the man in the
prison, and if he would loose the prisoner and treat him kindly, his
troubles would cease. So he called for the prisoner to be brought before
him, gave him much money and many jewels and sent him away speedily.

The king's misery stopped and the traveler was made happy by the
friendship of the three whom he had doubted and scorned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eight: Covetousness](tft11.md)
