[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tft16)  [Next](tft18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VKZPM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tibetan Folk Tales*, by A.L. Shelton, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

#### FOURTEEN

## The Story of the Two Devils

<span class="small">The golden eagle flying high you are not able to
bind, and great water running swiftly you are not able to dam.  
                              Tibetan Proverb.</span>

A LONG time ago in a country so high that it would make most boys and
girls tired if they tried to run and play, was a great flat table-land
entirely surrounded by a forest. On this table-land was located one
large city and several smaller ones, all ruled over by a king who had
seven sons. The sons went out in the forest to play one day and found a
beautiful girl, who was herding a yak. She told them she was the
daughter of the King of the west, that their yak had wandered away and
she had come to hunt it. The seven sons thought that she was very pretty
to look at, so they proposed to her that she become the wife of the
seven, which was the custom of the country. Now, in reality, the girl
was a she-devil and the yak was her husband. They could change their
form whenever they chose. She didn't tell the men that the yak was her
husband, but drove it away and consented to become the wife of the
brothers and went home with them.

Every year one of the sons died, beginning with the eldest, until all
were dead except the youngest,

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

and he became very ill and was about to die. The head-men of the
villages got together and wondered and wondered what could be done,
shaking their heads and muttering that this was a very queer affair,
that these six sons, whom they had cared for and to whom they had given
all the medicine they knew of, had all died. They thought the matter
over and decided to send for a man who they knew could tell fortunes,
and see if he could discover what was the matter. Four men were chosen
to go and see him. They traveled until they found him, told him all
about the death of the six brothers, and asked him to cast lots and see
what was the matter. He told them that he would lie down and sleep and
receive a vision on the affair and to-morrow would relate it. Actually
he didn't know what in the world to do nor what to say, for he was not a
really-truly fortune teller at all, but only a quack. That night he went
to ask his wife what to do, and she said, "You've told a lot of lies
about things before this, so it won't hurt you to lie some more. You
came out fairly well the other times, so I think that you can fix up a
plan for this affair."

The next morning when the four men came, he said, "My vision was fine, I
will get out my black clothes and black hat and read prayers for you. We
will all go back together and these charms that I read will make
everything all right in the palace."

So he took a big rosary in one hand and the skull of a hog in the other
and traveled along with

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

them. When they arrived the woman didn't know exactly what to think, and
wondered if this fellow really did know her and her husband and what
they had done. The fortune teller made a tsamba torma and placed it at
the head of the sick man, along with the hog's skull, and covered them
both with a cloth. When the she-devil left the room the sick man got a
little better and went to sleep. This scared the fortune teller so badly
he didn't know what to do. He thought the man was dying. Really the
man's soul had been about half eaten up before the woman left, and when
she went away it grew stronger. The fortune teller was badly scared and
called out two or three times for help and began to think he had better
step out and take his things and run off, but the door was locked and he
couldn't get it open. He wondered if he could hide some place until he
had a chance to slip away, so he sneaked upstairs to the top of the roof
and fell through the opening in the dark, astride the yak's horns, and
the yak went bucking and tearing away with him on its head.

The she-devil was down there too, because she was afraid. The yak called
out, "This man knows us all right, for he lit right on top of my head
and knows I am the he-devil, for his charm is in his hand and he is
beating me to death with it. What shall I do?"

His wife replied, "He knows me and I dare not come over and help you;
and just as sure as can be in the morning he will call all the people
together,

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

and they will be planning some scheme to get rid of us."

They thought in their hearts that perhaps he would call all the women to
carry wood and burn them in the fire, or kill them in some other
dreadful way.

"Truly," she said, "to try and find out if we are real they will hit us
with rocks to see if it will hurt, and cut us open to see what is inside
of us and put us in the fire to see if it will burn us."

The man in the meantime had rolled off the yak and heard all this, so he
knew now what to do. Slipping back upstairs he set up his tsamba torma
and hog's skull and began to read prayers again.

The King's son was awake by this time and the fortune teller asked him
if he wasn't better and he said "Yes."

"Well then," the man said, "in the morning you must call your head-men
together, have them tell all the people to bring their guns and swords
and some of the women to bring wood."

The next morning they were all there with the wood piled around the
center as if for an offering to an idol, as the fortune teller had
commanded them. He asked that his saddle be put on the yak. He donned
his black clothes and rode the yak all over the city until he came to
the pile of wood. He now grabbed his hog's head and hit the yak three
times saying, "I want to see the real body of this yak," and the yak
turned at once into a he-devil

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

with a hideous face, two of his upper teeth hanging down to his breast
and two lower ones extending up to his forehead. The men standing around
killed him with their swords and guns. Then the fortune teller called
for the woman to come. She came screaming, and he struck her with the
hog's skull and she turned into a terrible thing, with a most ugly face,
clawlike hands, a great long tongue and teeth like her husband's. The
people killed her with rocks and knives and burned them both in the
fire; then hastened to do great honor to the fortune teller, who had
gone back to the sick man.

The King's son got well right away and was so pleased he said to the
fortune teller, "Whatever you wish, ask, and I will give you."

"Well," said the fortune teller, "I would like some of those wooden
rings that are used to lead the yak around by their noses." (The reason
he wanted them was because his wife always said he couldn't make them
properly.) So the son gave him one hundred rings and enough goods to
make seven yak loads and he returned to his home.

His wife saw him coming, took some wine and went to meet him. That night
she asked him all about his adventures and he told her about the death
of the two devils and the recovery of the King's son.

"And is this all you have, some dried cheese and meat and a few rings
for the yak?" she said, and scolded him soundly. "To-morrow I will go
and see the King's son." But she wrote a letter

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

instead which said, "You have given my husband this little bit of stuff
and the nose rings which can have but one meaning, which is, that
perhaps your disease may return."

When the King's son received the letter he said, "That is all true. I
gave him all he asked for, but perhaps I should have given him more." So
the next day he went to visit the fortune teller and said to him, "You
have saved my life and done so much for me, now I will make you ruler of
half my kingdom." So he made him as powerful as himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fifteen: The Wise Woman](tft18)
