[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tft30)  [Next](tft32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VKZPM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tibetan Folk Tales*, by A.L. Shelton, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

#### TWENTY-EIGHT

## The Man with Five Friends with Different Colored Eyes

## (A Black Tent Story)

<span class="small">A man who can succeed is always sent--if there is
nothing to be done, it doesn't matter who goes.  
                                 *Tibetan Proverb*.</span>

ONE time there was a man who had a son.

The man was not wealthy and hadn't much to leave his son, but he said
there were just two things he wanted to tell him before he died; if he
heeded them he would be happy, if he didn't he would be very miserable.
The two things were these: first, when you are married never trust your
wife with your secrets until you have ten children; second: choose your
friends by their eyes. "Never choose for a friend a man with a light
colored eye," he said, "see that the inner corner of the eye is red and
that the white of the eye is pure white and not brownish or yellow, and
that the colored part is black. Now, if you will observe these two
things you will never get into trouble."

After his father's death he soon married, and as he was a very amiable
man, made many friends. It happened that one of his friends had blue
eyes, one yellow eyes, another brown eyes, another

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

black, and only one came up to the father's stipulations. He heeded his
father's warning about telling his wife his secrets until after his
first son was born, then he was so pleased and so happy, he told her
what his father had said, but re-marked, "I believe you will be
trustworthy though, so I will tell you some of my secrets." But he was a
bit doubtful still, and resolved to put her to the test.

One night, coming home late, he stopped at a man's place and bargained
for a hog for twenty rupees, and the man was to tell nobody to whom he
had sold the hog or where it had gone. He took the hog, killed it, drew
off his trousers and put the hog in them, threw it over his back and
carried it home. When he got there he called his wife in a loud whisper,
saying, "Let me in, let me in quick."

"Why, what is the matter?" she asked.

"I've killed a man, let us put him in the pond."

So she helped him and they tied rocks to the trousers and sank it in the
water. The man was all covered with blood, carrying the dead pig. He
went in and washed himself, taking off his soiled clothes, saying to his
wife, "You must never tell this to anybody, for it is as much as my life
is worth if you do."

One day he and his wife had a quarrel.

"You treat me this way, will you," she said, "I'll show you what about
yourself. You know that man you killed, well, I'll tell the official
about it." And she did. He sent an officer to come and

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

get the man and put him in chains until the time should come for his
beheading.

The man sent word now to his five friends. All came and listened to his
tale, and four of them said, "Well, you did this, you told your wife you
did, and you will have to take the consequences, for we can't help you."
Then the four left. His last friend came and after hearing his story
said, "This is terrible. I don't know what I can do, but I will save you
if I can."

So he went up to the official and told him that his friend had been a
very good man and must have been greatly provoked to kill any one, so,
if he would spare him, he would give him the man's weight in silver. The
official finally consented, had the silver weighed and the man was
released. The friend who had helped him was very happy and the man
seemed happy too. He turned to the official and said, "May I tell you a
good story, one of the best you ever heard?" His friends were all
standing near and heard him relate what his father had told him before
he died, how he resolved to test it, and how his wife at their first
disagreement had told on him to the official, and how his friends had
all deserted him but the one whose eyes were as his father said they
should be.

The official said, "You are one of the wisest men I ever heard of," and
sent men to take up the corpse of the pig, proving his tale to be true,
and was so pleased with him that he gave him many presents and made him
one of the chief men in all his realm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Twenty-Nine: The Story of the Violinist](tft32)
