[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tft32)  [Next](tft34.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VKZPM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Tibetan Folk Tales*, by A.L. Shelton, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

#### THIRTY

## How the Sacred Duck Got His Yellow Breast

<span class="small">When life ends you may arise and have peace with
Droma, but nevertheless it's a great calamity when the rock rolls down
the mountain and takes your life.  
                        *Tibetan Proverb*.</span>

ONCE upon a time, on the top of a mountain which was quite flat and
covered with grass and flowers, a frog and a rabbit were playing around,
having a good time. In the midst of their fun, they found a beautiful
golden pot. The frog exclaimed, "See what I have found. It's all mine!
What a lot of money I shall have."

The rabbit said angrily, "It's mine, I saw it first."

And soon they were fighting fiercely. But all at once the rabbit stopped
and remarked, "This won't do, let's go to the foot of the mountain and
race back to the top, and the one that gets here first and gets in the
pot shall have it, to-morrow to be the day of the race."

The rabbit was sure of success because he knew he could run and was
certain the frog couldn't. The frog knew well enough he couldn't
possibly win in that kind of race, so he thought of a

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

scheme. He found two of his friends exactly like himself in every way.
One, he took to the top of the mountain and put in the pot, the other he
placed half way down the mountain, and located himself at the base. When
the rabbit came next morning and they were ready to start on the race,
the frog gave a few hops while the rabbit skipped on ahead. Much to his
astonishment, when he got half way up the mountain, there was the frog
hopping wildly along in front of him. He said to himself, "I must do
better than this," and away he flew like the wind. But on reaching the
summit there sat the frog in the pot. The rabbit had lost the race and
also the gold.

Now, the frog didn't know how to get that big pot down the mountain, and
while he was puzzling over it, a big duck, very dark in color, with
mouse-colored breast, flew over him, stopped a minute, and asked his
trouble. The frog told him what was the matter and asked if he could
carry the pot to the bottom of the mountain. The duck said he could and
would do so if he might have half. As there was nothing else to be done,
the frog agreed and the duck carried it down for him, so there it was
divided and the duck thought it was so beautiful that he took his half
and smeared it on his breast, and that's where the sacred duck got his
beautiful golden breast.

 

Note: On the tops of the mountains in Tibet and near the lakes are found
these beautiful ducks.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

 

<span id="img_12500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![A BIG DUCK, VERY
DARK IN COLOR, FLYING OVER, STOPPED A MINUTE AND ASKED OF THE FROG HIS
TROUBLE.](tn/12500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12500.jpg.md)  
A BIG DUCK, VERY DARK IN COLOR, FLYING OVER, STOPPED A MINUTE AND ASKED
OF THE FROG HIS TROUBLE.  
</span>

 

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They are very tame
and have no fear of people, as they are held to be sacred by the
Tibetans, who believe them to be a reincarnation of some holy man
because of the beautiful yellow color, which is their sacred color.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thirty-One: The Two Little Cats](tft34.md)
