[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssug01)  [Next](ssug03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Self-Suggestion and the New Huna Theory of Mesmerism and Hypnosis*, by
Max Freedom Long, \[1958\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### Chapter 1

Back in the dawn ages, so we are told, everything lived in the seas
which covered most of the earth. Then some of the creatures began to
evolve and to come out onto the land. Amongst these was the serpent, and
while he failed to develop legs or wings in the many centuries which
followed, he managed to develop a most amazing method of capturing his
prey.

He became the first mesmerist.

In the very new and poorly constructed semi-science called "Psychology",
so little is known as yet of the nature of the forces of mind and
thought that no differentiation is made between mesmerism, such as is
used by the serpent, and hypnotism, in which suggestion is the key.

As all students of Huna now know, one can accumulate an extra supply of
vital force very easily, and this force, when converted to the "will"
type of energy of either the low or middle self, becomes a strange and
exceedingly potent thing.

The serpent evolved the ability to accumulate extra vital force and to
project it along the line of its vision toward a bird. The force had a
startling effect. The bird lost the power to control its actions, and
could only flutter helplessly in a state of "fascination" while the
serpent wriggled near, reached out, and began to devour it.

Close observers have noted that Mother Nature provides an anesthetic for
the prevention of pain in

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

many of her smaller creatures who must serve as food for the others. The
bird or the rabbit faints and becomes unconscious just as the snake
reaches it. It is popularly believed that this death is caused by
fright, but the evidence of Huna indicates that, with the close approach
of the mesmerist serpent, the full power of the surcharge of vital force
strikes the victim and causes the unconsciousness.

Human mesmerists have demonstrated similar powers by walking into a room
where volunteer subjects are seated and waiting. The mesmerist then
sweeps his gaze down the row, projects his mesmeric force, and the more
sensitive of the subjects tumble unconscious to the floor, lying there
for several minutes before returning to consciousness. No suggestion is
given. Both the serpent and the mesmerist rely on the impact as the
executioner does on the shock of the electrical current.

Another point which is not well understood by the psychologist is that
it is the low self (subconscious) which is affected by the vital force
shock which is directed and put into such violent action by the
mesmerist.

Birds and animals are all low self creatures. Only man has added to his
inherited animal or low self, a middle self (a conscious mind self)
which in turn has a connection with a still higher self (the
Superconscious) which still is not recognized in the text books.

Over a hundred years ago, mesmerism came to public notice because of the
healing work of a Dr. Anton Mesmer. He used it and it came to be named
for him. His healing was spectacular as well as successful. He soon
became famous through the

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

whole of Europe.

He called the force "animal magnetism", and believed that when he was
more highly charged with it than a patient, it would flow from his body
to that of the patient and would bring about healing. The very fact that
he expected this flow of the force, acted as a mental command to cause
it to flow, and it did.

But like the serpent, he sometimes caused so much vital force to enter
one who was waiting to be healed, that fluttering movements, hysteria or
even unconsciousness resulted. This unconsciousness was supposed to be
sleep, but it was something very different. However, it gave rise to the
belief that sleep and mesmerism were in some way related.

In England, some time after Dr. Mesmer was gone, Dr. James Braid,
working on this problem of mesmeric sleep, made what he considered a
very remarkable discovery. He found that "suggestion" could produce the
same artificial sleep. In addition he discovered that by having a
patient stare in a certain way at a small bright object held well above
the eye level, he could produce this form of sleep without (so he
thought) the use of either suggestion or anything resembling magnetic
force.

Not knowing what lay behind mesmerism, he did not realize that
suggestion always contains a slight amount of vital force—Mesmer's
"animal magnetism"—or that suggestion can be silently administered just
by expecting the subject to fall asleep when causing him to stare at a
bright eye-tiring object. (Simple tiring of the eyes causes natural
sleep. Given the element of suggestion or the impact of a charge of
vital force directed by the will,

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

the sleep produced is artificial.)

From Huna we learn that suggestion is the planting of a thought or idea
in the mind of the subject, either by vocal or telepathic means. We
further learn that an implanted idea has no mesmeric or hypnotic power
at all unless mesmeric force is added to the idea at the time it is
created or while it is being implanted. One may say to a friend, "Go
jump in the lake", but, lacking the mesmeric force to go with this idea
as it is given to the friend, he does not react to it even in the
slightest way. On the other hand, if a hypnotist gave this idea in the
form of a suggestion accompanied by enough mesmeric power, the subject
would obediently begin to look for a lake into which to jump.

We may well marvel that men as clever as were Mesmer and Braid, should
fail to unravel the mystery of what happens in mesmerism and suggestion.
For one who knows Huna, it seems so very simple. But overlook it they
did—and in doing so, they overlooked the most important element in the
whole matter.

This MOST IMPORTANT ELEMENT is the fact that a simple idea, when filled
with mesmeric force, will cause the low self of another to react in a
surprising way. MOREOVER, one's own low self will react in much the same
manner when given SELF-SUGGESTION.

One can give himself self-suggestion easily and quickly. It takes little
training and almost no physical exertion. Once it has been given, the
low self takes over and does all the work of putting the suggestion into
action. This furnishes us with a tool of the greatest value. What things
we fail to be able to do, no matter how we square our jaws and vow to

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

bring about the change, can be accomplished without strain for us by the
low self, once it has been given an idea heavily charged with mesmeric
force.

One other point needs to be noted. This is that when a suggestion is to
be given to the low self, it must have its normal charge of vital force
made inactive through relaxation of the body and its controlling part of
mind. In the course of this relaxation, its "will" must also be relaxed
and made almost inactive, otherwise the middle self, who acts as the
mesmerist-hypnotist in giving the force-charged idea as a suggestion,
will not be able to implant it in the low self where it will cause the
automatic reaction to begin.

Modern hypnotists have learned that slight tiring of the subject's eyes
causes a weariness which will soon bring bodily relaxation. (Actual
sleep is to be avoided.) This relaxed condition is needed to make the
subject ready to accept suggestion, but the whirling disk with its
painted spiral, now so popular, or the old bright point of light held
above the eye level of the subject, have little to do with actual
mesmerism or hypnosis. In the case of the factory hand who is put to
sleep by the eye strain of machine parts moving constantly before him,
that is sleep, not hypnosis. Nor is the beady eye of the serpent what
causes the bird to become mesmerized.

A popular misconception has been that sleep suggestion, when
administered by a phonograph or tape recorder is effective. There is no
mesmeric force in mechanically spoken words. Such words can be only a
reminder to the low self. True, if the low self is given self-suggestion
or is "conditioned" by being hypnotized by an operator and commanded to

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

accept the mechanically spoken words as true suggestion, results follow,
these coming as post hypnotic reactions. Sleep recordings have been at
their best as builders of memory impressions. In a state of light sleep
the low self will hear and often remember things if they are repeated
over and over—such as words and phrases in a foreign language.

Conversely, sleep suggestion administered by voice to a child or adult
can attract the attention of the sleeper and sink into his low self. The
breaking of childish habits has been easy with this method, while all
but impossible by scolding or other non-suggestive use of force when the
child is awake and its "will" is active and defensive.

In an article published some time ago, Howard Van Smith stated that Dr.
Boris Sidis, a psychologist and professor at Harvard University,
undertook to use suggestion on his sleeping son, Billy, in order to
determine the value of such methods in hastening education. The learning
process was not only hastened, it was made effortless in so far as
remembering things was concerned. At the age of three years the child
was using a typewriter. At four he was reading text books with
comprehension. At seven he had finished the elementary grades of public
school, taking but five months to go through all eight grades. At the
age of eight, he completed, in six weeks, the entire high school course,
and invented the perpetual calendar which is still much used. His
ability to reason as well as remember developed with the same swiftness
and he could grasp abstract ideas with ease. At the age of eleven he
lectured by invitation of the Harvard dons and discussed the theory of
the fourth dimension, also pointing out what he considered

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

a defect in the Einstein theory of relativity. Unfortunately, he died in
1944 before the full possibilities of the method could be determined.
His sister, Helene, was handled in a less intensive manner and did not
pass her college entrance examinations until her fifteenth year.

Neither of the Sidis children had unusual mental ability if judged by
the usual intelligence tests of the time, but work done with them
matches rapidly accumulating evidence which shows that, given the
properly charged and vitalized ideas when in a receptive condition, the
low self can and will memorize and otherwise react as by magic. We who
are the middle selves, and who live in the body with the low self, have
a natural reasoning power, but in order to use it, we must have the
proper material in the form of stored memories to work with—to recall
and to compare. Given a mass of such memories by suggestion, the
reasoning process will grow and the middle self learn swiftly to use the
stored knowledge.

There, in a largish nut shell, we have a brief outline of mesmerism and
suggestion as presented by Huna to add to and correct the little which
is generally known. Let us now consider some of the details.

First, it may be well to admit the fact that few of us wish to learn to
use mesmeric suggestion as professionals. Most of us will use
self-suggestion.

The goal and reward of self-suggestion is the control of the low self to
bring about its full cooperation in all the things, we, the middle
selves, decide should be done. There are some delightful and highly
valuable things which can come from such cooperation.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

To begin with we can break habits which have defied us for years. The
defiance always stems from the low self and not until it is caused to
make the correction itself, will it be done swiftly and effortlessly.

Then there are all the good things the low self can do in matters of
bettering health, stopping pain, developing better learning capacity,
and providing us with a cheery mood instead of the "blues". One gets
sound and restful sleep, a cessation from worry, and peace of mind. When
the low self is given the right suggestion it will respond by making the
tasks of the day something to be performed with pleasure and
cheerfulness instead of with wearisome effort.

Compared with the usual struggle to stop smoking, and the days and
nights of inner conflict which so often ends in failure, self-suggestion
is a telephone conversation in which the middle self gives orders before
hanging up and rushing away to the dance or theater, certain that the
orders will be faithfully and fully obeyed.

At this point Huna leaves the standard text books on suggestion and
takes one on and out into the realm where greater rewards begin to
materialize.

The most wonderful thing of all is that full cooperation can be obtained
from the low self in making contact with the High Self and inviting it
to take its proper part in the three-self, or normal, way of living.
This can gain us intuitive guidance and endless direct and indirect
help. This is where miracles become possible.

It is rather necessary that one come to understand the mysterious and
intangible things involved in any use of suggestion. To begin with we
can do

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

no better than to return to Dr. Mesmer and have a close look at what he
actually succeeded in doing. It makes little difference that he was
wrong in his early belief that he could draw animal magnetism (our vital
force, and the "mana" of Huna) from magnets which he held in his hands
or carried in his pockets, since we now know that magnetism in metals is
not what is found in the human body as vital force. We must ask what it
was that Mesmer used, and where it came from.

What he did is no secret. He made as strong a mental effort as he could
to attract magnetism into his body from magnets. He imagined himself
becoming fuller and fuller of the magnetism, until he carried a charge
that was very large indeed. This worked in a strange way. When he
imagined the magnetism as a living animal force, and imagined that he
was becoming more and more highly charged with it, he inadvertently
caused his low self to increase its supply of vital force. His low self
was able to add to the normal charge in his body in an unexpected way.

Once so charged, it must be remembered, his touch allowed the vital
force to enter the patients, to cause all the reactions that were later
recognized as signs that hypnosis was taking effect. But the reaction to
mesmerism was much greater than to later hypnosis. Patients often became
violently ill, fell down in fits, or seemed to lie for a time in trance
as if dead, only to recover, entirely cured.

We must not overlook what he was NOT doing. He was not consciously using
suggestion, at least not the kind of suggestion known later under the
heading of hypnosis. However, because he held the strong

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

intention and purpose of causing the magnetic force to leave him, enter
the body of the patient, and bring about a cure, there must have been a
certain amount of telepathic suggestion administered.

The mesmeric healings were made by the use of a large amount of vital
force combined with a small amount of suggestion. In the later hypnotic
healing efforts, almost no mesmeric force was used, but the amount of
suggestion was great. The first system worked much better than the
second. This was probably because a suggestion is an idea which is
planted in the low self of the patient by the operator. If this idea is
highly charged with the vital force under the direction of the "will" or
command of the middle self, it impresses the patient's low self greatly
and causes it to react in the desired manner. If the idea is barely
empowered with the force, it gets only a slight response.

Dr. Mesmer became the center of a storm in medical circles. It could not
be denied that he had brought about many cures, but his theory of animal
magnetism could be, and was, violently attacked by his enemies. They
demonstrated rather conclusively that holding a magnet in the hands did
not give one the mesmeric power. Even Dr. Mesmer eventually conceded the
point, but he laid stress on the fact that the force, while not of the
metallic magnet type, still was a similar animal force and that it could
be generated in the body.

His enemies would have none of his corrections. They were thoroughly
prejudiced. However, some of Mesmer's friends continued to experiment
with the force and to produce similar effects with resultant healing.
Moreover, there are recorded observations

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

of the fact that Mesmer and his followers could place their hands on
various things or objects and transfer the charge of vital force to
them. Tubs of water were charged in this way by Mesmer, and iron rods
were placed so that one end protruded from the water of the tub. Several
iron rods were placed in each large tub, and, when the patients came to
the charged tubs and grasped the rods, the force which was stored in the
water entered them through the rods and they reacted in the same way
that other patients had done when touched directly by the famous healer.

Baron Jules Du Potet, a friend of Mesmer, carrying on this experimental
transfer of the force, made a name for himself by charging certain
trees. His patients came to them, touched them or had themselves bound
to a tree with strong cords so that they would not fall away from it and
lose contact if rendered unconscious for a time by the thing we now call
"mesmeric shock". The healings were numerous.

Trees do not offer silent suggestion of the telepathic sort, or vocal
suggestion. Later critics of mesmerism as a healing system make much of
this, especially when they claim that all healing must come from the use
of hypnotic suggestion. Not in modern texts on psychology will the
answer to this puzzle be found, but in Huna. Furthermore, the answer
given by Huna at this juncture needs to be written in letters a foot
high to insure that it will be given full attention and that it will not
be forgotten.

Huna tells us that the large charges of vital force used in mesmerism or
suggestion MUST BE DIRECTED to cause them to act in the special ways,
otherwise the charges will soon be dissipated and will fade without
accomplishing a thing.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

The directing is done by the middle self, and its "will" is the tool
which it uses to give and enforce the direction. This is easily grasped
and accepted, but next comes something quite incredible, even if proven
true by what often happens when vital force is so directed and set to
work causing effects.

The middle self "will" which is vital force impregnated in some way with
an element of the conscious self, takes on a peculiar quality and shows
a strange and enduring power. It seems to mix with the vital force of
the body of the healer and to remain in the mixture. Note what happened
when the force was placed in the tubs of water by Mesmer or in trees by
Baron Du Potet. The surcharge of force stayed for a long time where it
was ordered to go, and with it went the directing element of "will" so
that when a patient touched the rods or the trees, the "will" caused the
force to go into the body of the patient. Not only that, but, when in
the body, to activate the very slight idea or suggestion of healing
imparted by the healer when placing the vital force in the object for
healing use.

There again we have the tiny element of suggestion made very great and
very powerful because of the overweening size of the charge of vital
force placed in it. But no one from the time of Mesmer to the present
has ever understood that there was a definite force guided by a definite
admixture of "will", placed in the water tubs of Mesmer or in the
charged trees—and made to stay there separated to all intents and
purposes from the healer who generated the original charge.

A thing never understood is that an idea—an immaterial thing which
cannot be seen even under a

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

microscope—is a material and actual thing capable of absorbing a large
amount of vital force and that the force in turn can carry in it a
directing amount of "will" energy from the middle self. Here are three
"nothings", at least in so far as modern psychology is concerned. They
are intangible, invisible and unidentifiable. By all test tube rules
they should not exist. But they do exist, and this is well proven
because we are able to observe them in action and to note the very
definite results which they produce when applied as the basic forces and
materials of suggestion—that is, a suggested idea plus a charge of vital
force directed by the "will".

It is quite possible that these unbelievable things might not have been
understood, or even guessed to exist, for a long time to come had not
the ancient Huna lore been rediscovered.

In passing, it may be well to remind ourselves of the Polynesian native
priests who were expert at the use of the shock charges of mesmeric
force. Not only did they, like some of the medicine men of the American
Indian tribes, know how to use the force to render a subject unconscious
by a touch of a finger, but they made a fine art of charging throwing
sticks with mesmeric force and using them in battle. The priests often
stood behind the spearsmen and tossed the charged sticks over their
heads to strike the body of an opposing [warrior](errata.htm#0)—the
contact knocking him out so that he was easily overcome. It has been
suggested that this practice was also known to the very old and
primitive civilization of the Aboriginals in Australia. In their
boomerangs they have the world's finest throwing sticks, and these,
returning to the thrower after striking the victim, would have been

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

ideal for the carrying of shock charges of mesmeric force.

There are many people who deny the possibility that suggestion exists or
that there is such a thing as genuine mesmerism or hypnosis. The slogan
of this school of thought has long been, "It is only the subject's
imagination at work."

A recent series of tests at Duke University did much to put this
negative school of thought out of the running. Rats and mice, who, we
suppose, lack characteristic human imagination which might make them
wish to imitate the hypnotic state and the hypnotic responses, were the
subjects of experiments. They were caged so that they would have to use
either of two exits to escape. An experimenter was hidden from their
sight some 8 to 15 feet away, but was able to look through a small hole
in a screen to see the rodents, select one, and to try to influence it
to leave by whichever exit hole was determined upon.

In the May, 1957 issue of "Fate" magazine, an experimenter, Dorothy Les
Tina, explained in a short article the nature of the tests and her own
experience with several tame mice purchased from a pet shop. The mice
were placed in a partitioned box so that when a string was pulled from a
distance, one mouse at a time would be released into a larger box in
which two exit holes had been cut. As each mouse was released, she
concentrated her gaze on it and tried to "will" it to leave by a
selected exit. At first she got little more than the results which could
be attributed to chance. Then her score began to rise, and in time she
was able to make scores of 10, 12, 14 and even 15 hits out of 15 tries.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

This experiment, carried out under the direction of Dr. Gardner Murphy,
was classified as a test of the power of "mind over matter" or the power
of mind to move matter—"psychokinesis". Tests had already shown that
some people could influence the fall of dice, supposedly with only the
power of their minds. In this case the influence was supposed to exert
itself on the movements of living creatures. The writer of the article
was left, she said, with some unanswered questions. Apparently she could
not determine whether she had established a form of rapport with the
mice and was able to influence them with telepathically transmitted
suggestion, or was in some way able to influence directly their muscular
movements to cause the mice to walk to the selected exit hole. In any
case, we can be quite certain that the mice did not realize that
attempts to influence them by suggestion were being made, and, because
of a fondness for the operator, used their imagination to try to pretend
a response which would match the suggestion given.

We may safely say that suggestion of the mesmeric-hypnotic sort is
something real and valid. It is not imagination. It produces predictable
results.

With this point settled, we may go a step farther, using Huna
information as our general basis, and give a fairly comprehensive
definition of suggestion—a definition which has been sadly lacking or
sadly defective for the past several decades.

Suggestion, of the mesmeric or hypnotic type, is composed of a central
idea which has been given the power to cause an appropriate reaction on
the part of the subject by charging it with more than the normal charge
of vital force. With the charge of vital force

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

there is added a directing force of "will", which is vital force
slightly changed and put to use by the middle self of man. The doubly
charged idea is introduced into the low self center of consciousness of
the subject, after which the reaction to it may begin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](ssug03)
