[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssug02)  [Next](ssug04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Self-Suggestion and the New Huna Theory of Mesmerism and Hypnosis*, by
Max Freedom Long, \[1958\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

### Chapter 2

In addition to the vital force used in all forms of mesmerism and
suggestion, one must consider the nature of THOUGHTS.

In modern psychological circles it is postulated that thoughts arc
chemical actions coupled with electrical charges in some way. The brain
can be stimulated by a probe which has been mildly electrified, and the
patient will then recall something that had happened earlier in his
life, a scene, a sound or a series of thoughts. These memories tend to
take on all the semblance of reality of a dream. The electrical
ingredient in the thought process is now measured by a very sensitive
instrument, the electroencephalograph, which charts the electrical
activities caused in the brain by thinking or even by dreaming. But
still, no one has decided what a thought maybe unless it something which
leaves a small imprint on certain tissues of the brain.

In Huna, things invisible and intangible are considered just as material
as things which register their qualities on one of the five senses. All
substance, tangible or not, is called "mea". We have no word in English
to match it.

So, to the kahunas from the earliest times, THOUGHTS WERE THINGS. And,
as they traveled about the world, they left this and other concepts
scattered among the peoples whom they visited.

In Asia, particularly in parts of what is now

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

India, there may still be found very definite indications that the
kahunas had passed that way. They taught that bringing the High Self
into close integration or union with the low and middle selves was the
true goal of living. In India, this belief gave rise to Yoga, "the
Science of Union".

From Yoga the idea of the three selves passed into Hinduism, and, with
the passage of time, became contaminated by other beliefs. Today in
India, the basic Huna beliefs can still be recognized, but they are
badly distorted. In Theosophy, which was made up largely of borrowings
from Yoga and Hinduism, one may often read, "Thoughts are things".

One may read of mana, or vital force under the name of "prana", but the
three selves have become "seven bodies", and vehicles and selves are
mixed together so that their true identity can no longer be recognized.

Psychology has been called "the science of consciousness", but it fails
dismally to recognize consciousness when it is found in the possession
of the spirits of the dead, the survival of which has been well proven
by the new science, Psychic Science, the outgrowth of earlier psychical
research.

The dead return—and this is the point of importance to our
discussion—THEY BRING BACK THEIR MEMORIES WITH THEM.

This fact has thrown all theories covering the nature of thought out of
line for the psychologists and physiologists. They cannot explain it, so
they prefer to ignore it. They are also forced to ignore the fact of the
human "will" although it shows itself in the activities of the spirits
who return.

If the modern materialistic psychologist would

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "strain over the
gnat" of the Huna conception of an idea charged with vital force and
"will" force from the middle self, he would certainly refuse to "swallow
the camel" which is now to be selected from Huna for presentation.

The kahunas not only taught that thoughts were things, but they also
explained that they were made of very real substance, even if this were
invisible as well as intangible. This was called "aka" or "shadowy"
substance. It was to be found in the invisible "double" surrounding and
interpenetrating the physical body. Each of the three selves was said to
have a body of the shadowy substance, and in these they lived as spirits
after death, as well as in life.

The shadowy double or "kino aka" was the mold of the body. It provided
the mold into which the seed or the embryo could grow, and it expanded
to match growth in size.

Science is taking slow steps in the direction of the rediscovery of the
shadowy body. It has now recognized it as a "field" which surrounds the
seed and guides its growth and expansion. But no scientist has yet
approached the Huna concept of a thought having a similar field—a
shadowy body made of the same shadowy substance, and carried as a
memory, not in the physical brain, but in the shadowy body of the man.
It goes without saying, that, even should a scientist accept the fact of
the shadowy bodies of thoughts, he would probably reject the idea that
such thought form structures were sturdy enough to survive physical
death and to be preserved as memories for use by man as a spirit.

The kahunas believed that the low self has a shadowy body which
replenishes its substance and

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

from which enough material may be taken at any time to form a very small
"body" to surround each thought as it is made by an action of the
consciousness of the selves and by the use of the vital force. As each
tiny idea in its new shadowy body is made, it is tied by a thread of the
shadowy material to the thoughts which have gone ahead and to those
still to come. In this way a "cluster" of thought forms is created to
embody each related set of ideas.

Once a cluster of ideas is given to the low self to preserve, it becomes
a memory.

The tiny threads of invisible shadowy substance which connect thought
forms, also connect the whole of the individual with things once
contacted. This point brings up a peculiar quality of the shadowy body
substance. It is STICKY and it can STRETCH almost indefinitely.

If a person touches the hand of another person, the shadowy body
substance of each may stick as if two blobs of soft taffy were pressed
together and then pulled apart. In pulling apart, a long thread of the
shadowy substance is drawn out and remains as an invisible attachment
connecting the two people.

Everything one touches becomes attached to one by an invisible shadowy
thread, much as a spider, upon touching a twig, fastens the end of a
strand of web to it before spinning out more of the strand.

These shadowy strands can also be formed when a thing is touched by the
sight of the eyes, and perhaps by hearing or smelling them. But the tiny
threads so formed amount to little or nothing unless they are
strengthened by being put to use.

If two people meet, plan experiments together in telepathic sending of
mental ideas or images, and

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

make a good contact, a cord or strand of threads connects the pair. When
they are apart and ready to experiment, their low selves (who have an
instinctive way of knowing how to do certain things, just as birds have
of knowing how to build nests) reach out, following the connecting
shadowy strands and find each other. Along the threads they cause a
current of vital force to flow, and with the flow of force can be sent
reproductions of the thoughts to be transmitted telepathically. The
original ideas must be remembered by the transmitter, so they are not
sent as messages. They are duplicated and the duplicates sent.

When a message sent by this telepathic method comes in, the low self of
the receiver takes the little thought forms and places them in the
center of consciousness where the middle self can sense them. When they
have been properly considered, they are stored in the memory.

As far back as the days of Mesmer, the French word "rapport" was used to
name the invisible, but unmistakable connection established between the
mesmerist and (1) the things he charged with his vital force and "will"
mixture, or (2) the subject into whom he had poured it to bring the
healing reaction.

This rapport, we learn from Huna, is made possible by the connecting
shadowy threads. It has been observed many times that a suggestion can
be given telepathically by an operator to a distant subject. Of course,
this is not within the ken of materialistic science, so the whole matter
of rapport has been attacked rather than met with an honest attempt at
understanding and explanation.

The vital force may be likened to an electrical

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

current, but it does not necessarily have to flow. It can fill a thing
and remain static. But when it is guided into flowing or moving in any
way by the consciousness of the low or middle self, it can flow
magnificently. Unlike electricity, which gets weaker and weaker as the
wire lengthens and resistance wears it out, the vital force finds in the
shadowy threads a perfect conductor which offers no resistance. It can
flow great distances and arrive as strong as when it started. The
shadowy substance as well as the vital force is ALIVE, and both are
capable of accepting guidance when it is built into them in the form of
an idea tinctured with the "will".

The shadowy substance has still another strange characteristic. When
rightly handled and filled with vital force, it can grow progressively
solid. It can remain invisible, or it can become visible. The spirits of
the dead, who have often returned to visit the living in spiritistic
seances, are often expert in manipulating their low self shadowy
bodies—these being taken across to the other side of life with them at
the time of physical death. Solidifying structures of shadowy body
substance are called "ectoplasm". They may appear as thin and hardly
visible outlines of "materializing" faces or forms at seances, or they
may act as molds and be filled solidly with substance and so be, to all
appearance, the dead returned temporarily to life.

Visible ectoplasmic hands may be produced by spirits to move objects, or
the projecting hands and arms (or simple "rods") may remain invisible
and still move objects. When heavily charged with vital force (usually
supplied by the living who are attending the seances) these ectoplasmic
structures can use up

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

all the vital force in an instant and so exert amazing strength. In this
way pianos, heavy tables, and even living human beings can be lifted.

All of which brings us back to the matter of the ideas or sets of
related ideas which are created by the middle self to be used as the
core of the suggestions which are to be given. We can better understand
how the low self takes these ideas, as they are produced, and surrounds
them with the invisible shadowy body substance drawn from its own
"double". Once the idea is encased in this substance, the charge of
vital force can be poured into its ectoplasmic mold and the further
charge of "will" force added to it. This will cause the low self of the
subject to react as to a stern command.

The mechanism is the same no matter whether a hypnotist has made ready
the suggestion and implanted it in the subject, or whether one is using
self-suggestion. In the latter case, the middle self, with the automatic
help of the low self, makes the suggestion and then implants it in the
hidden center of the low self consciousness. There it will be "out of
sight and out of mind" in so far as the middle self is concerned, but
very much to the fore for the low self, as it is already causing it to
begin to react.

This, very naturally, raises the question of where the middle self lives
and creates the ideas, and, where the low self lives and stores them.
Huna informs us that both selves have their own shadowy bodies. That of
the middle self is composed of thinner shadowy substance than that of
the low self. During normal waking life, the two selves blend their
invisible bodies, and thus the middle self, which has no physical body
of its own, comes in to live as a

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

guest and guide with the low self in the physical.

It must not be forgotten that the ideas are created by the middle self
by a process of reasoning based on remembered things—the memories being
supplied by the low self. But after the middle self has made the ideas
and charged them for use as a suggestion, these idea structures and
their charges must be given to the low self to examine, classify and
store as memories. Ordinarily, a set of ideas so passed down to the low
self to be stored as memories, is almost instantly classified and stored
where it can be found if needed. But, when a set of thought form ideas
has arrived carrying a heavy charge of vital force and a proper addition
of "will" force to command the low self to react in accordance with the
idea, the low self is compelled either to react or to reject the
donation before it can stow it away as a memory and stop paying
attention to it.

Yes, the low self can reject suggestion. Often it has a set of its own
unrationalized beliefs which holds ideas quite contrary to what the
command in the suggestion idea offers. Thereupon, the low self decides
for itself that its own idea is better, and refuses to react to the new
idea. Now and then a spirit of a dead person comes back and moves in
with the low self, fully or intermittently, or it edges in at times just
enough to impose its ideas on the low self. This condition falls under
the heading of Abnormal Psychology and is popularly mentioned as
"obsession" or multiple personality.

If there is this spirit influence behind the scenes with the low self it
may be responsible for the rejection of the suggestion just as is the
presence of a complexed belief.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

What is called a "posthypnotic suggestion" by the hypnotist is one in
which the low self is given a built-in time schedule for reaction in the
set of ideas implanted into it. The low self reasons imperfectly, but it
has a good understanding of the measurement of time and distance. When
the suggestion is given that an action will be performed at a given
future time, it will remain aware of the passage of time and will react
on schedule.

The question of whether or not the low self can recall events and even
words spoken in its presence at the time of birth has very little light
thrown upon it by Huna. The Dianetics theory of L. Ron Hubbard advances
the idea that one is influenced in later life by unconsciously
remembered events or spoken words, these exerting undiminished
compulsive power from the moment of birth onward through life. Such
obstructing sets of ideas have been given the name of "engrams", and the
devotees of Dianetics often spend much time trying to recall such
memories in order to render them harmless.

Not content with starting at birth to turn up harmful and coercive
command-memories, the "pre-clear" is often urged in Dianetics to pick up
memories of similar things all the way back to conception then, all the
way back through former incarnations.

While Huna advocates the belief that one usually has several
incarnations, these occur under circumstances quite unlike those
accepted by the standard Reincarnationists, little light being thrown on
bringing over memories of these experiences. No mechanism is indicated
or named which would make one think that memories made into shadowy body
substance units are carried over from a past incarnation

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

at the times of rebirth.

The Theosophists, who follow the lines of belief laid down by the
founders and by some of the later leaders, accept many things gleaned
from the beliefs of the people of India, especially from Vedanta, Yoga
and Brahmanism. One of the accepted beliefs is that memories of past
incarnations may be recovered, and, to explain how this is possible,
recourse is had to a theory that all events and all thoughts are
impressed on what might be called the shadowy body of the earth—the
"akasa". To recall events in a past incarnation, one has but to learn to
read or recall certain memories preserved in the "akasic records". The
success of making such readings, as reported by people over a period of
years, has not been too impressive. Too many have remembered an
incarnation as Napoleon or Cleopatra, and, sad to relate, the memories
have not matched.

In the years 1956–57, few literate Americans failed to hear about
"Bridey Murphy". Dr. Morey Bernstein hypnotized a housewife and
regressed her to past lives. She relived in detail a former life in
Ireland as Bridey Murphy. What she said during the periods of hypnotic
trance and regression made a book, and an investigator was dispatched by
the publisher to Ireland to see if evidence could be found to
substantiate the material.

A report was made in which the investigator presented a number of his
conclusions and told why he had reached them—mainly tending to show that
the conditions described in the hypnotic state had really existed. The
press discussed the pros and cons. Church authorities were interviewed,
and some of them bitterly attacked the belief in reincarnation

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

as well as the validity of the Bridey Murphy findings.

Later, a wordy battle was waged through the pages of magazines, some
writers trying to prove that the housewife had recalled, under hypnosis,
only things told her about Irish life of past years by a certain
acquaintance whose name was, actually, Bridey Murphy. The implication
was that there had been black fraud. There were rebuttals, and then
silence. No authority existed to render a decision one way or the other.

But the interest in hypnosis and possible regression which had been
aroused became general. Many amateur and professional hypnotists tried
their hands at it, and some subjects came up with variations on the
standard pattern of reaction. In Boulder, Colorado, Robert W. Huffman,
amateur hypnotist, and his collaborating subject, Irene Specht, were
responsible for the widest variation. Adding explanations to trance
statements recorded on tapes, they also produced a book. It was titled,
"Many Wonderful Things", and it told how Mrs. Specht, under hypnosis,
was regressed to a time between incarnations when her spirit was in a
"Place of rest". In the suggestions used to regress her to this point,
the word "love" was much used as a part of the trance producing formula.
Whether or not this caused the low self of Mrs. Specht to fasten upon
the theme of "love" or not is open to question. In any event, while in
hypnotic trance she described a condition in which her spirit was
resting between lives and was able to see the greater verities behind
living. The spirit called herself the "I am I" during trances, and
preached a doctrine of love with which she sought to solve many

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

problems which were laid before her. She took up passages from the Bible
and assigned new meanings to them—and once more there developed
controversy and antagonism. But for some reason or other the newspapers
gave this experiment scant notice.

What we do not understand, we fight and fear. This is true the world
around and it has been that way in all ages. Not understanding the
nature of suggestion or what makes it work, the public has come to
distrust it. Some religious organizations have condemned the use of
hypnosis, and the Theosophists have been issuing warnings against its
use for many years, although the founders advocated the use of mesmerism
for healing purposes and proudly told of how their Colonel Olcott had
healed fifty cases of paralysis in Ceylon by the use of that beneficial
power. Even the astute founder, Madame Helena Blavatsky, failed to
recognize the fact that mesmerism and hypnosis differ only in the matter
of how much or how little suggestion is mixed with how much or how
little vital force and "will" force.

Later Theosophists have usually preferred to take no chances. Accepting
the authority of the dictionaries rather than that of the founders, they
have chosen to consider mesmerism and hypnotism one and the same thing.

The main argument against hypnosis was, and continues to be, that if one
is once "dominated" by the will of another, the domination continues to
a large degree, and, worst of all, the rapport which is established
between operator and subject is a bond which cannot be broken. It ties,
it is explained, the dominated one to the operator for life, and
continues to tie him for, perhaps, all following incarnations.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The ability to
control a subject for evil purposes, over miles of distance and years of
time, is exaggerated and viewed with great alarm. The horrible example
of a black school of Yoga practitioners, who misuse hypnotic power is
often pointed out.

Little evidence of this master-slave relationship between operator and
subject has ever been produced, but the lack of understanding of what
really happens in the use of suggestion has fertilized the ground of
fear.

With the increase in the numbers of amateur hypnotists in recent years,
cries of alarm and indignation began to arise on every side. The
consensus of opinion seemed to be, "They shouldn't be allowed to tamper
with the human mind!" In response, the state legislatures set to work to
make laws forbidding the use of hypnotism-mesmerism to all who are not
trained to stringently high standards in the dental or healing
professions.

Fortunately, no laws are being passed to encroach on personal liberty
and to prevent the use of suggestion by oneself on oneself.

Self-suggestion is safe to use even if all the horrendous dangers of
hypnotism, pointed out by such Theosophical writers as William Q. Judge
and Dr. G. de Purucker, had been proven to be valid even to a small
degree.

Dr. de Purucker, as quoted in a recent book of gathered Theosophical
writings titled, "Hypnotism-Mesmerism and Reincarnation", (see page 76)
says, "Autosuggestion, which means suggestion practiced upon yourself,
is always right, and we should practice it continually, if it means
merely suggesting to oneself night and day and all the time pictures of

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

spiritual and moral and intellectual strength, self-control, and
improvement—things of beauty, of glory, of holiness, of purity, of
charity, of kindness; in short, all the great and noble virtues.
Autosuggestion in this sense is right because it is simply teaching
ourselves. . . ." (It will be noted that nothing is said here of the use
of autosuggestion to help heal ourselves. Some of the writers
represented in this book lean to the belief that healing may prevent
suffering and so the paying off of bad karma, but if this archaic belief
were to be followed to the logical extreme, all forward looking
Theosophists would at once set about torturing themselves.)

To sum up, we may conclude that suggestion made by a moral operator and
containing only beneficial and good ideas, cannot be harmful. If the
rapport between operator and subject should by chance remain unbroken
for many incarnations, then, by the same argument it would have to be
admitted that each of us builds thousands of strands of shadowy
substance connecting us with others in a definite form of rapport. If
this is so, it is unavoidable, and we will not go too far wrong in
adding one more strand to a good hypno-therapist.

In self-suggestion, there can be no danger of domination by anyone other
than oneself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](ssug04)
