[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc20018)  [Next](cc20020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 20: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part IV*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION OF

<span id="xx-p2"></span>CALVIN’S VERSION OF

<span id="xx-p3"></span>JEREMIAH

<span id="xx-p4"></span>CHAPTERS 30—47

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 30

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span>**1** The word which came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, saying, —

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span>**2** Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel,
saying, — Write thee all the words which I have spoken to thee in a
book;

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span>**3** For, be- hold, the days are coming,
saith Jehovah, when I shall restore the captivity of my people Israel
and Judah, saith Jehovah; and I will restore them to the land which I
gave to their fathers, and they shall possess it.

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span>**4** Even these are the words which Jehovah
hath spoken of Israel and Judah, —

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span>**5** Surely thus saith Jehovah, — A voice of
trembling have we heard, Of fear and not of peace.

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span>**6** Ask and see, can a male bring forth? Why
have I seen all men With their hands on their loins as a woman in
travail? Turned also are all faces into paleness.

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span>**7** Alas! for great that day, none like it,
Even a time of distress to Jacob; Yet from it shall he be saved:

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span>**8** And it shall be in that day, saith
Jehovah of hosts, *That* I will break the yoke from thy neck, And thy
bands will I burst asunder, And no more force thee to serve shall
strangers;

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span>**9** But serve shall they Jehovah their God,
And David their king, whom I will raise up for them.

<span id="xx.i-p12"></span>**10** And thou Jacob my servant, fear not,
saith Jehovah, And be not thou, Israel, afraid; For behold I will save
thee from far, And thy seed from the land of their captivity, And dwell
shall Jacob, and rest, and be secure, And none shall terrify him:

<span id="xx.i-p13"></span>**11** For I *shall be* with thee, saith
Jehovah, to save thee; For I will make an end of all the nations, Among
whom I shall scatter thee; Yet of thee I will not make an end: But I
will chastise thee in moderation, And I will not wholly cut thee off.

<span id="xx.i-p14"></span>**12** For thus saith Jehovah, Grievous thy
bruise, desperate thy wound!

<span id="xx.i-p15"></span>**13** No one undertakes thy cause; For a
cure, medicines and healing thou hast not.

<span id="xx.i-p16"></span>**14** All thy friends forget thee, they ask
not for thee; For with the stroke of an enemy have I struck thee, With
the chastisement of the cruel, On account of the multitude of thine
iniquity, Because prevailed have thy sins.

<span id="xx.i-p17"></span>**15** Why criest thou because of thy bruise?
Heavy is thy sorrow: For the multitude of thine iniquity. Because thy
sins have prevailed, Have I done these things to thee.

<span id="xx.i-p18"></span>**16** Therefore, all who devour thee shall
be devoured, And all thine enemies shall go into captivity, And they who
plunder thee shall become a plunder, And all who spoil thee shall be a
spoil:

<span id="xx.i-p19"></span>**17** For I will bring a healing to thee,
And from thy wounds will I heal thee, saith Jehovah; Because an outcast
have they called thee, Sion, Whom no one careth for.

<span id="xx.i-p20"></span>**18** Thus saith Jehovah, — Behold, I will
restore the captivity of Jacob’s tents, And his dwellings will I pity;
And built shall be the city on its heaps, And the palace in its own
place shall stand:

<span id="xx.i-p21"></span>**19** And go forth from them shall praise
and the voice of joy; And I will increase them, and they shall not be
lessened; And I will honor them, and they shall not be degraded;

<span id="xx.i-p22"></span>**20** And his children shall be as at the
beginning, And his assembly before me shall be established, And I will
visit all his oppressors:

<span id="xx.i-p23"></span>**21** And his valiant *man* shall be from
himself, And his ruler from his midst shall come forth; And I will bring
him nigh, and he shall come to me; For who is he who forms his heart,
That he may come to me, saith Jehovah!

<span id="xx.i-p24"></span>**22** And ye shall be my people, and I will
be your God.

<span id="xx.i-p25"></span>**23** Behold *as* a tempest shall Jehovah’s
wrath go forth, *As* an involving tempest; On the head of the ungodly
shall it settle:

<span id="xx.i-p26"></span>**24** Not return shall the fury of Jehovah’s
wrath, Till he performs it, and till he effects the thoughts of his
heart; In the latter days ye shall understand this.

<span id="xx.ii"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 31

<span id="xx.ii-p3"></span>**1** At that time, saith Jehovah, Will I be
a God to all the families of Israel; And they shall be my people.

<span id="xx.ii-p4"></span>**2** Thus saith Jehovah, — Found favor in
the desert Hath a people who had escaped the sword, By advancing till he
gave rest to Israel.

<span id="xx.ii-p5"></span>**3** Of old Jehovah appeared to me: Nay,
with perpetual love have I loved thee; Therefore have I prolonged to
thee mercy.

<span id="xx.ii-p6"></span>**4** I will yet build thee, And built shalt
thou be, virgin of Israel; Thou shalt yet be adorned with thy tabrets,
And go forth with the choir of players;

<span id="xx.ii-p7"></span>**5** Thou shalt yet plant vineyards On the
mountains of Samaria; Plant shall planters and eat the fruit.

<span id="xx.ii-p8"></span>**6** For the day shall be, when they shall
cry, The watchmen, on Mount Ephraim, — “Arise, and let us ascend into
Sion, To Jehovah our God.”

<span id="xx.ii-p9"></span>**7** For thus saith Jehovah, — Exult for
Jacob with joy, And shout at the head of the nations, Publish, give
thanks, and say, “Save, Jehovah, thy people, the remnant of Israel.”

<span id="xx.ii-p10"></span>**8** Behold, I will bring them from the
land of the north, And gather them from the ends of the earth; Among
them shall be the blind and the lame, The pregnant, and she that
travaileth; Together a great company shall they return thither.

<span id="xx.ii-p11"></span>**9** With weeping shall they come, And in
mercies will I lead them; I will lead them to streams of water, In a
straight way, where they shall not stumble: For I will be to Israel a
father, And Ephraim, my first-born is he.

<span id="xx.ii-p12"></span>**10** Hear the word of Jehovah, ye nations,
And tell *it* in islands afar off, and say, — “He who scattered Israel
will gather him, And will watch him as a shepherd his flock:”

<span id="xx.ii-p13"></span>**11** For redeem Jacob will Jehovah, And
free him from the hand of one stronger than himself;

<span id="xx.ii-p14"></span>**12** And come shall they, and shout on the
height of Sion; And flow together shall they to the bounty of Jehovah,
For corn and wine and oil, And for the young of the flock and the herd;
And their soul shall be as a watered garden, And they shall mourn no
more.

<span id="xx.ii-p15"></span>**13** Then rejoice shall the virgin in the
dance, And the youth and the aged together; And I will turn their
mourning to joy, And comfort them and cheer them after their sorrow;

<span id="xx.ii-p16"></span>**14** And I will fill the soul of the
priests with fatness, And my people with my goodness shall be satiated,
saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.ii-p17"></span>**15** Thus saith Jehovah, — A voice on high
is heard, The lamentation of bitter weeping; Rachel, weeping for her
children, Refused comfort for her children, because they are not,

<span id="xx.ii-p18"></span>**16** Thus saith Jehovah, Hold thy voice
from weeping, And thine eyes from tears; For a reward shall be to thy
work, saith Jehovah, And return shall they from the land of the enemy:

<span id="xx.ii-p19"></span>**17** Yea, there will be a hope in the
latter end, saith Jehovah; For return shall thy children to their own
border.

<span id="xx.ii-p20"></span>**18** Hearing I have heard Ephraim when
exiled, — “Thou hast chastised me, and I was instructed, Like a bullock
not trained; Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, For thou, Jehovah, art
my God.

<span id="xx.ii-p21"></span>**19** Verily, after thou hadst turned me, I
repented; And after I knew myself, I smote my thigh; I was ashamed and
even confounded, Because I bore the reproach of my youth.”

<span id="xx.ii-p22"></span>**20** Is Ephraim a son dear to me — Is he a
son delighted in Even from the time I spoke to him? Remembering I will
still remember him; Therefore sounded for him have my bowels; Pitying I
pitied him, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.ii-p23"></span>**21** Set up titles for thee, raise for
thee heaps,: Fix my heart on the pathway, On the way thou hast walked;
Return, virgin of Israel, return to these thy cities.

<span id="xx.ii-p24"></span>**22** How long wilt thou wander, rebellious
daughter! For create does Jehovah a new thing on the earth — A woman
shall surround a man.

<span id="xx.ii-p25"></span>**23** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel, — They shall again say this word in the land of Judah, And in
the cities, when I restore their captivity, — “Bless thee let Jehovah,
The habitation of righteousness, the mount of holiness.”

<span id="xx.ii-p26"></span>**24** And dwell in it shall Judah and all
his cities, Also husbandmen, and they shall go with the flock:

<span id="xx.ii-p27"></span>**25** For I will water the thirsty soul,
And every hungry soul will I fill.

<span id="xx.ii-p28"></span>**26** I then awoke and saw, And my sleep
had been sweet to me.

<span id="xx.ii-p29"></span>**27** Behold the days come, saith Jehovah,
That I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah, With the
seed of man and with the seed of beast:

<span id="xx.ii-p30"></span>**28** And it shall be, that as I have
watched over them, To root up and to break down, And to break in pieces
and to destroy and to afflict; So will I watch over them, To build and
to plant, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.ii-p31"></span>**29** In those days they shall no more say,
— Our fathers have eaten a sour grape, And the children’s teeth are
blunted;

<span id="xx.ii-p32"></span>**30** But every man, in his iniquity shall
he die; Every man, eating a sour grape, Blunted shall be his teeth.

<span id="xx.ii-p33"></span>**31** Behold, the days come, saith Jehovah,
That I will make with the house of Israel, And with the house of Judah,
a new covenant:

<span id="xx.ii-p34"></span>**32** Not according to the covenant I made
With their fathers, in the day I took their hand, To bring them out from
the land of Egypt; Because void have they made that covenant, Though I
ruled over them, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.ii-p35"></span>**33** But this is the covenant which I will
make With the house of Israel, after those days, saith Jehovah, — I will
put my law in their inward parts, And on their heart will I write it;
And I will be to them a God, And they shall be to me a people:

<span id="xx.ii-p36"></span>**34** And teach shall no one any more his
neighbor, And no one his brother, saying, — “Know ye Jehovah;” for all
shall know me, From the least to the greatest of them, saith Jehovah;
For I will forgive their sins, And their iniquities will I remember no
more.

<span id="xx.ii-p37"></span>**35** Thus saith Jehovah, — He who hath set
the sun for light by day, And the courses of the moon and stars for
light by night, Who moves the sea and its waves roar, — Jehovah of hosts
is his name:

<span id="xx.ii-p38"></span>**36** If removed shall be these ordinances
From my presence, saith Jehovah, Then also the seed of Israel shall
cease To be a nation before me continually:

<span id="xx.ii-p39"></span>**37** Thus saith Jehovah, — If measured can
be the heavens above, Or searched the foundations of the earth below,
Then also will I reject the whole seed of Israel For all that they have
done, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.ii-p40"></span>**38** Behold the days come, saith Jehovah,
That built shall be the city of Jehovah From the tower of Hananeel to
the corner gate;

<span id="xx.ii-p41"></span>**39** And go forth shall the measuring line
from before it, Even to the hill Gareb, and surround Goatha,

<span id="xx.ii-p42"></span>**40** And all the valley of carcasses and
ashes, And all the fields to the brook Kedron, Even to the corner gate
of the horses eastward: *Being* holiness to Jehovah, it shall not be cut
off, Nor destroyed any more for ever.

<span id="xx.iii"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 32

<span id="xx.iii-p3"></span>**1** The word which came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah in the tenth year of Zedekiah, king of Judah; this was the
eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar:

<span id="xx.iii-p4"></span>**2** And then the army of the king of
Babylon besieged Jerusalem, and Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the
court of the prison, which was in the palace of the king of Judah;

<span id="xx.iii-p5"></span>**3** For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut
him up, saying, Why hast thou prophesied, saying, — “Thus saith Jehovah,
Behold, I deliver this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he
wilt take it:

<span id="xx.iii-p6"></span>**4** And Zedekiah, king of Judah, shall not
escape from the hand of the Chaldeans; for delivering I will deliver him
into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall speak with him mouth
to mouth, and his eyes shall behold his eyes;

<span id="xx.iii-p7"></span>**5** And to Babylon will he bring Zedekiah,
and there shall he be until I visit him, saith Jehovah: when ye fight
with the Chaldeans, ye shall not prosper.”

<span id="xx.iii-p8"></span>**6** And Jeremiah said, the word of Jehovah
came to me, saying, —

<span id="xx.iii-p9"></span>**7** Behold, Hanameel, the son of Shallum
thine uncle, will come to thee and say, “Buy thee my field which is in
Anathoth, for thine is the right of affinity to buy.”

<span id="xx.iii-p10"></span>**8** And Hanameel, my uncle’s son, came to
me, as Jehovah had spoken, into the court of the prison, and said, “Buy,
I pray thee, my field which is in Anathoth, which is in the land of
Benjamin, for thine is the right of inheritance, and thine the
redemption; buy it for thyself.” Then I knew that it was the word of
Jehovah;

<span id="xx.iii-p11"></span>**9** And I bought the field from Hanameel,
my uncle’s son, who was in Anathoth, and I weighed money to him, seven
shekels and ten pieces of silver:

<span id="xx.iii-p12"></span>**10** When I had written in a book and
sealed it, and had taken witnesses and weighed the money in a balance;

<span id="xx.iii-p13"></span>**11** Then I took the book of the
purchase, the sealed according to the law and statute, and the open;

<span id="xx.iii-p14"></span>**12** And gave the book of the purchase to
Baruch, the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, before the eyes of
Hanameel, my uncle’s son, and before the eyes of the witnesses who were
written in the book of the purchase, and before the eyes of all the Jews
who sat in the court of the prison;

<span id="xx.iii-p15"></span>**13** And I commanded Baruch in their
presence, saying,

<span id="xx.iii-p16"></span>**14** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel, Take these books, the book of purchase, the sealed and the
open book, and put them in an earthen vessel, that they may continue for
many days;

<span id="xx.iii-p17"></span>**15** For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the
God of Israel, They shall again buy houses and fields and vineyards in
this land.

<span id="xx.iii-p18"></span>**16** And I prayed to Jehovah, after I
gave the book of the purchase to Baruch, the son of Neriah, saying, —

<span id="xx.iii-p19"></span>**17** “Ah! Lord Jehovah! behold thou hast
made the heavens and the earth by thy great power and by thine extended
arm;

<span id="xx.iii-p20"></span>**18** There is nothing difficult for thee:
thou shewest mercy to thousands, and recompensest the iniquity of
fathers into the bosom of their children after them:

<span id="xx.iii-p21"></span>**19** God, strong, mighty! Jehovah of
hosts is his name; great in counsel, mighty in work, whose eyes are open
on all the ways of the children of men, to render to every one according
to his ways and according to the fruit of his doings;

<span id="xx.iii-p22"></span>**20** Who hast wrought signs and wonders
in the land of Egypt even to this day, and in Israel and among men; and
hast made thyself a name as at this day;

<span id="xx.iii-p23"></span>**21** And hast brought forth thy people
Israel from the land of Egypt by signs and wonders, and with a strong
hand and an extended arm, and with great terror;

<span id="xx.iii-p24"></span>**22** And hast given them this land, which
thou didst swear to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk
and honey;

<span id="xx.iii-p25"></span>**23** And they entered in and possessed
it, but they have not hearkened to thy voice nor walked in thy law; all
that thou hast commanded them to do they have not done; therefore hast
thou made all this evil to befall them.

<span id="xx.iii-p26"></span>**24** “Behold, the mounts have come to the
city to take it, and the city is given to the hand of the Chaldeans, who
war against it by means of the sword, the famine, and the pestilence;
and what thou hast spoken has happened; and behold thou seest it.

<span id="xx.iii-p27"></span>**25** Yet thou, Lord Jehovah, hast said to
me, Buy thee the field for money, and make witnesses to attest, when yet
the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.”

<span id="xx.iii-p28"></span>**26** And the word of Jehovah came to
Jeremiah, saying, —

<span id="xx.iii-p29"></span>**27** Behold, I Jehovah, am the God of all
flesh, Will anything be hard for me?

<span id="xx.iii-p30"></span>**28** Therefore thus saith Jehovah, Behold
I give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans and into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and he shall take it;

<span id="xx.iii-p31"></span>**29** And enter in shall the Chaldeans who
war against the city, and shall set this city on fire and burn it, and
the houses on the roofs of which they have burned incense to Baal, and
poured out libations to alien gods, in order to provoke me.

<span id="xx.iii-p32"></span>**30** For the children of Israel and the
children of Judah have been only doing evil before me from their
childhood; for the children of Israel have been only provoking me by the
work of their hands, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.iii-p33"></span>**31** For to *provoke* my wrath and my
indignation has this city been to me from the day they built it to this
day, to cause me to remove it from my presence,

<span id="xx.iii-p34"></span>**32** For all the evil of the children of
Israel and of the children of Judah, which they have done to provoke me
to wrath, — they, their kings, their princes, their priests and
prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="xx.iii-p35"></span>**33** For they turned to me the back and
not the face; and when I taught them, rising up early and teaching them,
they hearkened not so as to receive correction:

<span id="xx.iii-p36"></span>**34** And they have set their abominations
in the house on which my name is called, to pollute it;

<span id="xx.iii-p37"></span>**35** And have built high places to Baal,
which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and
their daughters to pass to Molech, which I commanded them not, nor did
it come to my mind, to do this abomination so as to make Judah to sin.

<span id="xx.iii-p38"></span>**36** And now, therefore, thus saith
Jehovah, the God of Israel, concerning this city of which ye say, “Given
it is into the hand of the king of Babylon, by the sword, and famine,
and pestilence;”

<span id="xx.iii-p39"></span>**37** Behold I will gather them from all
the lands to which I shall have driven them in my wrath, and fury, and
great indignation, and will restore them to this land, and make them
dwell in safety;

<span id="xx.iii-p40"></span>**38** And they shall be to me a people,
and I will be to them a God.

<span id="xx.iii-p41"></span>**39** And I will give them one heart and
one way that they may fear me continually, that it may be well with them
and with their children after them;

<span id="xx.iii-p42"></span>**40** And I will make with them a
perpetual covenant, so as not to depart from them to do them good; and
my fear will I put in their hearts, that they may not depart from me;

<span id="xx.iii-p43"></span>**41** And I will rejoice over them in
doing them good, and will plant them in this land in truth, with all my
heart, and with all my soul.

<span id="xx.iii-p44"></span>**42** For thus saith Jehovah, As I have
brought on this people all this great evil, so will I bring on them all
the good which I have declared concerning them:

<span id="xx.iii-p45"></span>**43** And bought shall be fields in this
land of which ye say, “Forsaken it is by man and beast, *and* given into
the hand of the Chaldeans.”

<span id="xx.iii-p46"></span>**44** Fields with money shall they buy,
writing in a book and sealing, and attesting by witnesses, in the land
of Benjamin, and through the circuits of Jerusalem, and in the cities of
Judah, and in cities on the mountains, and in cities on the plains, and
in the cities of the south; for I will restore their captivity, saith
Jehovah.

<span id="xx.iv"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 33

<span id="xx.iv-p3"></span>**1** And the word of Jehovah came to
Jeremiah a second time, when he was as yet a captive in the court of the
prison, saying, —

<span id="xx.iv-p4"></span>**2** Thus saith Jehovah that made it,
Jehovah who formed it to establish it? Jehovah is his name, —

<span id="xx.iv-p5"></span>**3** Call to me and I will answer thee, And
declare to thee great things And hidden things which thou knowest not,

<span id="xx.iv-p6"></span>**4** For thus, saith Jehovah, the God of
Israel, — As to the houses of this city, And as to the houses of the
kings of Judah, Which have been thrown down By the warlike engines and
by the sword;

<span id="xx.iv-p7"></span>**5** They come to fight with the Chaldeans,
Even to fill them (houses) with the carcasses of men, Whom I have
smitten in my wrath and indignation. And because I hid my face from this
city On account of all its wickedness, —

<span id="xx.iv-p8"></span>**6** Behold I will bring to it restoration
and healing. And I will heal them and open for them An abundance of
peace and truth;

<span id="xx.iv-p9"></span>**7** And I will restore the captivity of
Judah And the captivity of Israel, And build them as at the beginning;

<span id="xx.iv-p10"></span>**8** And I will cleanse them from all their
iniquity, By which they have sinned against me, And will forgive all
their iniquities, By which they have sinned against me, And by which
they have acted wickedly towards me:

<span id="xx.iv-p11"></span>**9** And it shall be for me a name of joy,
A praise and glory, among all nations of the earth, Who shall hear of
all the good which I shall do to them, And fear shall they and tremble
for all the good And all the peace which I shall give them.

<span id="xx.iv-p12"></span>**10** Thus saith Jehovah, — Yet heard in
this place, of which ye say — “Desolate it is, without man and without
beast *Even* in the cities of Judah And in the streets of Jerusalem,
Which are reduced to solitude, without man, And without an inhabitant,
and without a beast,” —

<span id="xx.iv-p13"></span>**11** Shall be the voice of joy and the
voice of gladness, The bridegroom’s voice and the voice of the bride,
The voice of them who say, “Praise Jehovah of hosts, For good is
Jehovah, for his mercy is for ever,” — Of them who shall bring the
sacrifice of praise Into the house of Jehovah; For I will restore the
captivity of the land As at the first, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.iv-p14"></span>**12** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — There
shall yet be in this place, Desolate, without man and beast, And in all
its cities, the habitation Of shepherds making their flock to lie down:

<span id="xx.iv-p15"></span>**13** In the cities of the mountain and the
cities of the plain, And in the cities of the south and in the land of
Benjamin, And around Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, Shall sheep
yet pass under the hands Of a numberer, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.iv-p16"></span>**14** Behold, the days come, saith Jehovah,
That I will confirm my good word, Which I have spoken to the house of
Israel, And to the house of Judah:

<span id="xx.iv-p17"></span>**15** In those days and at that time I will
make to grow to David a branch of righteousness, And he will do judgment
and righteousness in the land.

<span id="xx.iv-p18"></span>**16** In those days saved shall be Judah,
And Jerusalem shall dwell in safety; And this is the name by which she
shall be called, Jehovah our Righteousness.

<span id="xx.iv-p19"></span>**17** For thus saith Jehovah, — Not fail to
David shall a man To sit on the throne of the house of Israel;

<span id="xx.iv-p20"></span>**18** And to the priests, the Levites, not
fail shall a man, To offer before me burnt-offerings, To burn an
oblation and to sacrifice continually.

<span id="xx.iv-p21"></span>**19** And the word of Jehovah came to
Jeremiah, saying, —

<span id="xx.iv-p22"></span>**20** Thus saith Jehovah, If void ye can
make My covenant as to the day, And my covenant as to the night, That
the day and night should not be in their seasons;

<span id="xx.iv-p23"></span>**21** Then void shall be made my covenant
With David my servant, That he should have no son to reign on his
throne, And with the Levites, the priests, my ministers.

<span id="xx.iv-p24"></span>**22** As the hosts of the heavens cannot be
numbered, Nor the sand of the sea be measured; So will I multiply the
seed of David my servant, And of the Levites my ministers.

<span id="xx.iv-p25"></span>**23** And the word of Jehovah came to
Jeremiah, saying, — Hast thou not seen how this people speak, saying, —
“There are two families whom Jehovah has chosen, But he has rejected
them;”

<span id="xx.iv-p26"></span>**24** And my people have they despised, So
as no more to regard them as a nation.

<span id="xx.iv-p27"></span>**25** Thus saith Jehovah, If I have not
settled My covenant with the day and the night, *And* the laws of the
heavens and the earth, Then I will reject the seed of Jacob And of David
my servant, So as not to take of his seed to be rulers Over the seed of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: For I will restore their captivity And will
shew mercy to them.

<span id="xx.v"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 34

<span id="xx.v-p3"></span>**1** The word which came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, when Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, and his whole army,
and all the kingdoms of the earth, which were under his dominion, and
all the nations, made war against Jerusalem and all the cities, saying,
—

<span id="xx.v-p4"></span>**2** Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel,
Go and say to Zedekiah, the king of Judah, yea, say to him, Thus saith
Jehovah, Behold I deliver this city into the hand of the king of
Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire;

<span id="xx.v-p5"></span>**3** And thou shalt not be saved from his
hand, for thou shalt surely be taken, and into his hands shalt thou be
delivered, and thine eyes shall see the eyes of the king of Babylon, and
his mouth shall speak to thy mouth, and to Babylon shalt thou go.

<span id="xx.v-p6"></span>**4** Yet hear the word of Jehovah, thou
Zedekiah king of Judah; Thus saith Jehovah of thee, Thou shalt not die
by the sword;

<span id="xx.v-p7"></span>**5** In peace shalt thou die, and with the
burnings of thy fathers, the former kings, who were before thee, so
shall they burn thee, and, “Ah! Lord!” shall they lament for thee: for
the word have I spoken, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.v-p8"></span>**6** And Jeremiah the prophet spake to
Zedekiah king of Judah all these words in Jerusalem,

<span id="xx.v-p9"></span>**7** When the armies of the king of Babylon
were fighting against Jerusalem and all the cities of Judah, which
remained, even Lachish and Azekah; for these remained of the cities of
Judah, being fortified cities.

<span id="xx.v-p10"></span>**8** The word which came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, after King Zedekiah made a covenant with all the people, who
were in Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty to them, —

<span id="xx.v-p11"></span>**9** That every one should let his servant
and every one his maid, a Hebrew and a Hebrewess, go free, so that no
one among the Jews might make his brother to serve.

<span id="xx.v-p12"></span>**10** And hear did all the princes and all
the people, who had come to the covenant to let each his servant and
each his maid go free, so as not to make them any more to serve, and
they obeyed and dismissed them.

<span id="xx.v-p13"></span>**11** But they changed afterwards, and
remanded their servants and maids whom they had set free, and forced
them to be servants and maids.

<span id="xx.v-p14"></span>**12** Then came the word of Jehovah to
Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying, —

<span id="xx.v-p15"></span>**13** Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel,
— I made a covenant with your fathers in the day when I brought them
from the land of Egypt, from the house of servants, saying, —

<span id="xx.v-p16"></span>**14** At the end of seven years ye shall let
free every one his brother, and Hebrew, who had been sold to thee and
served thee six years, yea, thou shalt let him depart free from thee;
but your fathers hearkened not to me nor inclined their ear.

<span id="xx.v-p17"></span>**15** But ye have turned this day and have
done what is right in mine eyes, by proclaiming liberty, every one to
his neighbor, and ye have made a covenant before me in the house on
which my name is called.

<span id="xx.v-p18"></span>**16** But ye have gone back and have
profaned my name, and ye have remanded every one his servant and every
one his maid, whom ye had set free to follow their own will, and forced
them to be servants and maids.

<span id="xx.v-p19"></span>**17** Therefore, thus saith Jehovah, Ye have
not hearkened to me in proclaiming liberty, every one to his brother and
every one to his neighbor; behold, I proclaim as to you, saith Jehovah,
liberty to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine; and I will
give you for a commotion to all the kingdoms of the earth;

<span id="xx.v-p20"></span>**18** Yea, I will give the men who have
transgressed my covenant, who have not confirmed the words of the
covenant which they had made before me by the calf which they cut into
two parts, and passed between its parts,

<span id="xx.v-p21"></span>**19** Even the princes of Judah and the
princes of Jerusalem, the chiefs and the priests and all the people, who
passed between the parts of the calf;

<span id="xx.v-p22"></span>**20** Yea, I will give them into the hand of
their enemies and into the hand of those who seek their life; and their
carcasses shall be food for the birds of the air and for the beasts of
the earth;

<span id="xx.v-p23"></span>**21** And Zedekiah king of Judah and his
princes will I give into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of
those who seek their life, even into the hand of the king of Babylon’s
army, which have gone up from you.

<span id="xx.v-p24"></span>**22** Behold, I will command, saith Jehovah,
and will make them to return to this city; and they shall take it and
burn it with fire, and make the cities of Judah a waste without an
inhabitant.

<span id="xx.vi"></span>

<span id="xx.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.vi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 35

<span id="xx.vi-p3"></span>**1** The word which came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, in the days of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, the king of Judah,
saying, —

<span id="xx.vi-p4"></span>**2** Go to the house of the Rechabites, and
speak to them, and bring them into the house of Jehovah, into one of the
chambers, and give them wine to drink.

<span id="xx.vi-p5"></span>**3** Then I took Jaazaniah, the son of
Jeremiah, the son of Habaziniah, and his brethren, and all his sons,
even the whole house of the Rechabites;

<span id="xx.vi-p6"></span>**4** And brought them into the house of
Jehovah, into the chamber of the sons of Hanan, the son of Igdaliah, a
man of God, which was nigh the chamber of the princes, which was above
the chamber of Maaseiah, the son of Shallum, the keeper of the treasury;

<span id="xx.vi-p7"></span>**5** And I set before the sons of the house
of the Rechabites pots full of wine and cups; and I said to them, Drink
wine.

<span id="xx.vi-p8"></span>**6** But they said, We will not drink wine,
for Jonadab the son of Rechab, our father, commanded us, saying, Ye
shall not drink wine, neither ye, nor your sons for ever;

<span id="xx.vi-p9"></span>**7** And houses ye shall not build, nor sow
seed, nor plant, a vineyard, nor have any such thing; but ye shall dwell
in tents all your days; that ye may live many days in the land where ye
are strangers.

<span id="xx.vi-p10"></span>**8** And we have obeyed the voice of
Jonadab the son of Rechab, our father, as to all the things which he
commanded us, that we should not drink wine all our days, we, our wives,
our sons, and our daughters;

<span id="xx.vi-p11"></span>**9** Nor build houses to dwell in, nor have
a vineyard, or a field, or seed;

<span id="xx.vi-p12"></span>**10** But we have dwelt in tents, and have
obeyed, and done according to all things which Jonadab our father hath
commanded us.

<span id="xx.vi-p13"></span>**11** But it was that, when Nebuchadnezzar,
the king of Babylon, came up into the land, we then said, Come, let us
enter into Jerusalem from the face of the army of the Chaldeans, and
from the face of the army of the Syrians; and we have dwelt in
Jerusalem.

<span id="xx.vi-p14"></span>**12** Then came the word of Jehovah to
Jeremiah, saying, —

<span id="xx.vi-p15"></span>**13** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel, Go and tell the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, Will ye not receive instruction, so as to obey my words?
saith Jehovah:

<span id="xx.vi-p16"></span>**14** Confirmed are the words of Jonadab
the son of Rechab, which he commanded his sons, that they should not
drink wine, for they have drunk none to this day, but they have obeyed
the commandment of their father: but I have spoken to you, rising up
early and speaking, yet ye have not obeyed me;

<span id="xx.vi-p17"></span>**15** And I have sent to you all my
servants the prophets, rising up early and sending, saying, Return, I
pray you, every one from his evil way, and make right your doings, and
walk not after foreign gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the
land which I have given to you and to your fathers: but ye inclined not
your ear nor obeyed me.

<span id="xx.vi-p18"></span>**16** Because the sons of Jonadab the son
of Rechab have performed the command of their father, which he had
commanded them, while this people have not obeyed me, —

<span id="xx.vi-p19"></span>**17** Therefore thus saith Jehovah, the God
of hosts, the God of Israel, Behold, I will bring on Judah, and on the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, all the evil which I have pronounced against
them; for I have spoken to them, and they have not hearkened; and I have
called them, but they have not answered.

<span id="xx.vi-p20"></span>**18** And to the house of the Rechabites
Jeremiah said, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, Because
ye have obeyed the command of Jonadab your father, and have kept all his
commandments, and have done according to all the things which he had
commanded you;

<span id="xx.vi-p21"></span>**19** Therefore thus saith Jehovah of
hosts, the God of Israel, There shall not fail a man from Jonadab the
son of Rechab to stand before me continually.

<span id="xx.vii"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 36

<span id="xx.vii-p3"></span>**1** And it was in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, that this word came to
Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying, —

<span id="xx.vii-p4"></span>**2** Take thee a roll of a book and write
in it all the words which I have spoken to thee concerning Israel and
concerning Judah, and concerning all the nations, from the day in which
I have spoken to thee, from the days of Josiah, even to this day.

<span id="xx.vii-p5"></span>**3** It may be that the house of Judah will
attend to all the evil which I purpose to do to them, so that they may
return, every one from his evil way, and that I may forgive their
iniquity and their sin.

<span id="xx.vii-p6"></span>**4** And Jeremiah called Baruch, the son of
Neriah: and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of
Jehovah, which he had spoken to him, in a roll of a book.

<span id="xx.vii-p7"></span>**5** And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying,
I am shut up, I cannot go to the house of Jehovah;

<span id="xx.vii-p8"></span>**6** But go thou and read in the roll what
thou hast written from my mouth, the words of Jehovah, in the ears of
the people, in the house of Jehovah, on a fast day; and also in the ears
of all Judah, who come from their cities shalt thou read them.

<span id="xx.vii-p9"></span>**7** It may be that they will prostrate
themselves before Jehovah, and return every one from his evil way; for
great is the indignation, and great is the wrath which Jehovah has
spoken against this people.

<span id="xx.vii-p10"></span>**8** And Baruch the son of Neriah did
according to all the things which Jeremiah the prophet had commanded
him, reading in the book the words of Jehovah in the house of Jehovah.

<span id="xx.vii-p11"></span>**9** And it was that in the fifth year of
Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, in the ninth month,
they proclaimed a fast before Jehovah to all the people in Jerusalem,
and to all the people who came from the cities of Judah to Jerusalem.

<span id="xx.vii-p12"></span>**10** And Baruch read in the book the
words of Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah, in the chamber of Gemariah,
the son of Shaphan the scribe, in the higher court, at the entrance of
the new gate of the house of Jehovah, in the ears of all the people.

<span id="xx.vii-p13"></span>**11** And Micah the son of Gemariah, the
son of Shaphan, heard all the words of Jehovah from the book;

<span id="xx.vii-p14"></span>**12** And he went down to the king’s
house, to the scribe’s chamber; and, lo, all the princes were sitting
there, Elishama the scribe, and Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, and
Elnathan the son of Achbor, and Gemariah the son of Shaphan, and
Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all the princes.

<span id="xx.vii-p15"></span>**13** And Micah declared to them all the
words which he had heard when Baruch read in the book in the ears of the
people.

<span id="xx.vii-p16"></span>**14** And all the princes sent Jehudi the
son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, unto Baruch,
saying, The roll in which thou didst read in the ears of the people,
take in thine hand and come: and Baruch the son of Neriah, took the roll
in his hand and came to them.

<span id="xx.vii-p17"></span>**15** And they said to him, Sit down now,
and read it in our ears.

<span id="xx.vii-p18"></span>**16** And it was that when they heard all
the words, they feared every one as to his neighbor, and said to Baruch,
Declaring we shall declare to the king all these words.

<span id="xx.vii-p19"></span>**17** And they asked Baruch, saying, Tell
us now, How didst thou write all these words from his month?

<span id="xx.vii-p20"></span>**18** And Baruch said to them, With his
mouth he pronounced these words to me, and I wrote them on a book with
ink.

<span id="xx.vii-p21"></span>**19** Then the princes said to Baruch, Go
and hide thyself, thou and Jeremiah, and let no one know where ye be.

<span id="xx.vii-p22"></span>**20** And they went to the king into the
court, but laid up the volume in the chamber of Elishama the scribe; and
they related all the words in the ears of the king;

<span id="xx.vii-p23"></span>**21** And the king sent Jehudi to fetch
the roll, and he took it out of the chamber of Elishama the scribe: and
Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the
princes who stood before the king.

<span id="xx.vii-p24"></span>**22** And the king was sitting in the
winter-house, in the ninth month, and there was a fire-hearth burning
before him:

<span id="xx.vii-p25"></span>**23** And it was that when Jehudi had read
three or four pages, he cut it with a penknife, and cast it into the
fire which was in the fire-hearth, until all the roll was consumed in
the fire which was in the fire-hearth.

<span id="xx.vii-p26"></span>**24** But neither the king nor any of his
servants feared, nor rent their garments, when they heard all these
words.

<span id="xx.vii-p27"></span>**25** Nevertheless Elnathan, and Delaiah,
and Gemariah, interceded with the king, that he should not burn the
roll; but he hearkened not to them.

<span id="xx.vii-p28"></span>**26** And the king commanded Jerahmeel the
son of Hammelech, and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son
of Abdeel, to take Baruch the scribe, and Jeremiah the prophet: but
Jehovah hid them.

<span id="xx.vii-p29"></span>**27** Then came the word of Jehovah to
Jeremiah, after the king had burned the roll, and the words which Baruch
had written from the mouth of Jeremiah, saying, —

<span id="xx.vii-p30"></span>**28** Take thee again another roll, and
write in it all the former words which were in the first roll, which
Jehoiakim, the king of Judah hath burned:

<span id="xx.vii-p31"></span>**29** And to Jehoiakim, the king of Judah,
shalt thou say, Thus saith Jehovah, Thou hast burned this book, saying,
Why hast thou written in it, saying, The king of Babylon shall surely
come and shall destroy this place, and cause to cease from it man and
beast?

<span id="xx.vii-p32"></span>**30** Therefore thus saith Jehovah
concerning Jehoiakim, the king of Judah, He shall have none to sit on
the throne of David; and his dead body shall be cast forth to the heat
by day, and to the frost by night;

<span id="xx.vii-p33"></span>**31** And I will visit on him and on his
seed, and on his servants, their iniquity; and I will bring on them, and
on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and on the men of Judah, all the evil
which I have denounced on them: but they hearkened not.

<span id="xx.vii-p34"></span>**32** Then Jeremiah took another roll and
gave it to Baruch, the son of Neriah, the scribe, who wrote in it from
the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim, the
king of Judah, had burnt in the fire; and added to them were many words
of the same kind.

<span id="xx.viii"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 37

<span id="xx.viii-p3"></span>**1** And king Zedekiah, the son of Josiah,
reigned instead of Coniah, the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadnezzar,
the king of Babylon, made king in the land of Judah:

<span id="xx.viii-p4"></span>**2** But neither he, nor his servants, nor
the people of the land, hearkened to the words of Jehovah, which he
spake by the Prophet Jeremiah.

<span id="xx.viii-p5"></span>**3** And king Zedekiah sent Jehucal, the
son of Shelemiah, and Zephaniah, the son of Maaseiah the priest, to
Jeremiah the prophet, saying, Pray now to Jehovah our God for us.

<span id="xx.viii-p6"></span>**4** Now Jeremiah came in and went out
among the people, and they had not yet put him in the house of the
prison;

<span id="xx.viii-p7"></span>**5** And the army of Pharaoh had come
forth from Egypt, and the Chaldeans besieging Jerusalem had heard of
them and had gone from Jerusalem.

<span id="xx.viii-p8"></span>**6** Then the word of Jehovah came to
Jeremiah the Prophet, saying, —

<span id="xx.viii-p9"></span>**7** Thus saith Jehovah, the God of
Israel, Thus shall ye say to the king of Judah, who sent you to me to
inquire of me, Behold, the army of Pharaoh, which has come forth for
your aid, shall return to the land of Egypt;

<span id="xx.viii-p10"></span>**8** And the Chaldeans shall return and
fight against this city, and take it and burn it with fire.

<span id="xx.viii-p11"></span>**9** Thus saith Jehovah, Deceive not
yourselves, saying, Going the Chaldeans shall go away from us, for they
shall not go away.

<span id="xx.viii-p12"></span>**10** For were you to smite the whole
army of the Chaldeans, who fight against you, and there remained of them
wounded men, they would rise up, each from his tent, and burn this city
with fire

<span id="xx.viii-p13"></span>**11** And it was that after the army of
the Chaldeans had gone up from Jerusalem because of Pharaoh’s army,

<span id="xx.viii-p14"></span>**12** Jeremiah went forth from Jerusalem,
to go to the land of Benjamin, that he might withdraw himself there
among the people.

<span id="xx.viii-p15"></span>**13** When he was at the gate of
Benjamin, the captain of the ward was there, whose name was Irijah, the
son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah, who laid hold on Jeremiah the
prophet, saying, Thou fallest away to the Chaldeans:

<span id="xx.viii-p16"></span>**14** And Jeremiah said, It is false, I
am not falling away to the Chaldeans; but he did not hearken to him. And
Irijah laid hold on Jeremiah and brought him to the princes.

<span id="xx.viii-p17"></span>**15** And the princes were incensed
against Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in the house of prison, in
the house of Jonathan the scribe, for they made that the house of
prison.

<span id="xx.viii-p18"></span>**16** When Jeremiah came into the dungeon
and into the cells, and had been there many days,

<span id="xx.viii-p19"></span>**17** Then Zedekiah the king sent and
took him out; and the king asked him privately and said, Is there a word
from Jehovah? and Jeremiah said, There is: and he hath said, Into the
hand of the king of Babylon shall thou be delivered.

<span id="xx.viii-p20"></span>**18** And Jeremiah said to King Zedekiah,
What sin have I done against thee and thy servants and this people, that
ye have delivered me into the house of prison?

<span id="xx.viii-p21"></span>**19** And where are your prophets who
have prophesied to you, saying, The king of Babylon shall not come
against you nor against this land?

<span id="xx.viii-p22"></span>**20** And now hear, I pray thee, O lord
my king; let my humble prayer be acceptable to thee, cause me not to
return into the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I should die there.

<span id="xx.viii-p23"></span>**21** And King Zedekiah commanded, and
they put Jeremiah in the court of the prison, and gave him a crust of
bread daily, from the street of the bakers, until all the bread of the
city was consumed: and Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison.

<span id="xx.ix"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.ix-p2"></span>CHAPTER 38

<span id="xx.ix-p3"></span>**1** And Shephatiah, the son of Mattan, and
Gedaliah, the son of Pashur, and Jucal, the son of Shelemiah, and
Pashur, the son Malchiah, heard the words which Jeremiah had spoken to
all the people, saying, —

<span id="xx.ix-p4"></span>**2** Thus saith Jehovah, He who remains in
this city shall die by the sword, famine, or pestilence; but he who
goeth forth to the Chaldeans shall live; and his life shall be to him a
prey, and he shall live.

<span id="xx.ix-p5"></span>**3** Thus saith Jehovah, Behold, this city
shall surely be delivered into the hand of the army of the king of
Babylon, and they shall take it.

<span id="xx.ix-p6"></span>**4** And the princes said to the king, Let
this man, we pray thee, die; for he thus weakens the hands of the men of
war who remain in this city, and the hands of the people, by speaking to
them according to these words: for this man seeketh not the peace of
this people but their ruin.

<span id="xx.ix-p7"></span>**5** And King Zedekiah said to them, Behold,
he is in your hands, for the king can do nothing against you.

<span id="xx.ix-p8"></span>**6** And they took Jeremiah and cast him
into the dungeon of Malchiah, the son of Hammelech, which was in the
court of the prison; and they let Jeremiah down with cords; and there
was no water in the dungeon, but mire, and Jeremiah sunk in the mire.

<span id="xx.ix-p9"></span>**7** Now Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, an
eunuch, heard that they had east Jeremiah into the dungeon; and the king
was sitting in the gate of Benjamin;

<span id="xx.ix-p10"></span>**8** And Ebedmelech went forth from the
king’s house and spake to the king, saying,

<span id="xx.ix-p11"></span>**9** O lord my king, these men have acted
wickedly, in all that they have done to Jeremiah the Prophet, in
throwing him into the dungeon, where if left alone he must die with
hunger; for there is no more bread in the city.

<span id="xx.ix-p12"></span>**10** Then the king commanded Ebedmelech
the Ethiopian, saying, Take with thee hence thirty men, and bring up
Jeremiah the Prophet from the dungeon before he die.

<span id="xx.ix-p13"></span>**11** And Ebedmelech took the men with him,
and went into the king’s house, even to a place under the store-room,
and took from thence rags torn and worn out, and let them down by cords
to Jeremiah in the dungeon.

<span id="xx.ix-p14"></span>**12** And Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, said to
Jeremiah, Put now these torn and worn-out rags under thine arm-holes
under the cords. And Jeremiah did so.

<span id="xx.ix-p15"></span>**13** Then they drew up Jeremiah by the
cords, and raised him up from the dungeon; and Jeremiah remained in the
court of the prison.

<span id="xx.ix-p16"></span>**14** And King Zedekiah sent and took
Jeremiah the Prophet with him to the third entrance, which is in the
house of Jehovah; and the king said to Jeremiah, “I ask thee a word;
hide not a word from me.”

<span id="xx.ix-p17"></span>**15** And Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, If I
tell thee, slaying, wilt thou not slay me? and if I give thee counsel
thou wilt not hearken to me.

<span id="xx.ix-p18"></span>**16** And Zedekiah the king swear to
Jeremiah in secret, saying, Live doth Jehovah, who made us this soul, I
will not slay thee, and I will not deliver thee unto the hand of those
who seek thy life.

<span id="xx.ix-p19"></span>**17** Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, Thus
saith Jehovah, the God of hosts, the God of Israel, If going thou wilt
go forth unto the chiefs of the king of Babylon, live shall thy life,
and this city shall not be burned with fire, but live shalt thou and thy
house:

<span id="xx.ix-p20"></span>**18** But if thou wilt not go forth to the
chiefs of the king of Babylon, delivered shall be this city into the
hand of the Chaldeans, and burn it shall they with fire, and thou shalt
not escape from their hand.

<span id="xx.ix-p21"></span>**19** And King Zedekiah said to Jeremiah, I
fear the Jews who have gone over to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me
into their hands and reproach me.

<span id="xx.ix-p22"></span>**20** Then Jeremiah said, They will not
deliver thee: hearken, I pray thee, to the voice of Jehovah which I
announce to thee, and it shall be well with thee, and live shall thy
soul:

<span id="xx.ix-p23"></span>**21** But if thou refuse to go forth, this
is the word which Jehovah has shewn to me, —

<span id="xx.ix-p24"></span>**22** Behold, even all the women who remain
in the house of the king of Judah, shall go forth to the chiefs of the
king of Babylon; and behold, they shall say, “Persuaded thee and
prevailed over thee have thy familiar friends; fixed are thy feet in the
mire, turned backward.”

<span id="xx.ix-p25"></span>**23** And all thy wives and thy children
shall they bring out to the Chaldeans, and thou shalt not escape from
their hand, for by the hand of the king of Babylon shalt thou be taken,
and this city wilt thou burn with fire.

<span id="xx.ix-p26"></span>**24** Then Zedekiah said to Jeremiah, Let
no man know of these words, and thou shalt not die:

<span id="xx.ix-p27"></span>**25** But if the princes hear that I have
spoken with thee, and come to thee and say to thee, Tell us now what
thou hast spoken to the king, hide nothing from us, and we will not kill
thee, and what the king hath said to thee;

<span id="xx.ix-p28"></span>**26** Then shalt thou say to them, I humbly
prayed the king that he would not make me to return to the house of
Jonathan to die there.

<span id="xx.ix-p29"></span>**27** And all the princes came to Jeremiah
and asked him; and he told them according to those words which the king
had commanded; and they said no more, for the conversation had not been
heard.

<span id="xx.ix-p30"></span>**28** And Jeremiah dwelt in the court of
the prison to the day when Jerusalem was taken: and it happened
according *to what he had said* that Jerusalem was taken.

<span id="xx.x"></span>

<span id="xx.x-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.x-p2"></span>CHAPTER 39

<span id="xx.x-p3"></span>**1** In the ninth year of Zedekiah, the king
of Judah, in the tenth month, came Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon
and

<span id="xx.x-p4"></span>**2** All his army to Jerusalem, and besieged
it; in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, on the ninth
of the month, the city was broken into;

<span id="xx.x-p5"></span>**3** And all the chiefs of the king of
Babylon entered and sat in the middle gate, even Nergal-sharezar,
Samgar-nebo, Sarsechim, Rab-saris, Nergal-sharezer, Rab-mag, and the
rest of the chiefs of the king of Babylon.

<span id="xx.x-p6"></span>**4** And it was that when Zedekiah, the king
of Judah, and all the men of war, saw them, they fled and went forth
from the city by night, by the way of the king’s garden, through the
gate between the two walls, and went forth by the way of the desert.

<span id="xx.x-p7"></span>**5** But the army of the Chaldeans pursued
them, and took Zedekiah in the desert of Jericho; and they took him and
brought him to Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, to Riblah, in the
land of Hamath, and he dealt judicially with him.

<span id="xx.x-p8"></span>**6** And the king of Babylon slew the sons of
Zedekiah at Riblah before his eyes; and all the nobles of Judah did the
king of Babylon slay:

<span id="xx.x-p9"></span>**7** And he blinded the eyes of Zedekiah, and
bound him with chains, to bring him to Babylon.

<span id="xx.x-p10"></span>**8** And the house of the king, and the
houses of the people, the Chaldeans burned with fire, and the walls of
Jerusalem they pulled down:

<span id="xx.x-p11"></span>**9** But the residue of the people who had
remained in the city, and the deserters who had gone over to him, even
the residue of the people who had been left, Nebuzar-adan, the prince of
the executioners, removed to Babylon.

<span id="xx.x-p12"></span>**10** But the poor of the people, who had
nothing, Nebuzar-adan, the prince of the executioners, left in the land
of Judah, and gave them in that day vineyards and fields.

<span id="xx.x-p13"></span>**11** Now Nebuchadnezzar, the king of
Babylon, had given a charge respecting Jeremiah by Nebuzar-adan, the
prince of the executioners, saying,

<span id="xx.x-p14"></span>**12** Take him, and set thine eyes on him,
and do him no harm; but as he shall say to thee do thou to him.

<span id="xx.x-p15"></span>**13** And Nebuzar-adan, the prince of the
executioners, sent, and Nebushasban, Rab-saris and Nergal-sharezar,
Rab-mag, and all the chiefs of the king of Babylon,

<span id="xx.x-p16"></span>**14** Yea, they sent and took Jeremiah from
the court of the prison, and delivered him to Gedaliah, the son of
Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, to lead him home; and so he dwelt among the
people.

<span id="xx.x-p17"></span>**15** But the word of Jehovah came to
Jeremiah when he was yet shut up in the court of the prison, saying,

<span id="xx.x-p18"></span>**16** Go and speak to Ebedmelech the
Ethiopian, saying, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel,
Behold I bring my words on this city for evil and not for good; and they
shall be before thy face that day:

<span id="xx.x-p19"></span>**17** But I will deliver thee in that day,
saith Jehovah, and thou shalt not be delivered into the hand of the men,
the face of whom thou fearest;

<span id="xx.x-p20"></span>**18** For I will surely rescue thee, by the
sword thou shalt not fall, and thy life shall be for a prey to thee,
because thou hast trusted in me, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.xi"></span>

<span id="xx.xi-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 40

<span id="xx.xi-p3"></span>**1** The word which came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, after Nebuzar-adan, the prince of the executioners, had let him
go from Ramah, when he had taken him; for he had been bound with chains
among all the captivity of Jerusalem and Judah, who were carried away to
Babylon.

<span id="xx.xi-p4"></span>**2** But the prince of the executioners took
Jeremiah, and said to him, —

<span id="xx.xi-p5"></span>**3** Jehovah thy God hath spoken this evil
as to this place: and Jehovah hath brought it and done as he had spoken,
because ye have sinned against Jehovah and hearkened not to his voice;
therefore hath this evil come upon you.

<span id="xx.xi-p6"></span>**4** Now, as to thee, be- hold, I have
loosed thee this day from the chains which were on thine hands; if it be
good in thine eyes to come to Babylon, come, and I will set mine eyes on
thee; but if it be evil in thine eyes to come to Babylon, forbear:
behold, the whole land is before thee; according to what is good and
right in thine eyes to go, thither go.

<span id="xx.xi-p7"></span>**5** (And he had not yet returned,) return
then to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, whom the king
of Babylon hath set over the cities of Judah, and dwell with him among
the people, or go to whatever place it seemeth good in thine eyes to go.
And the prince of the executioners gave him meat and a reward, and
dismissed him:

<span id="xx.xi-p8"></span>**6** And Jeremiah went to Gedaliah, the son
of Ahikam, to Mizpah, and dwelt with him among the people who had been
left in the land.

<span id="xx.xi-p9"></span>**7** When all the princes of the forces who
were in the field, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon
had set Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, over the land, and that he had
committed to him men, and women, and children, and the poor of the land,
who had not been removed to Babylon;

<span id="xx.xi-p10"></span>**8** Then came to Gedaliah to Mizpah,
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of
Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth; and Ephai the Netophathite,
and Jezaniah the son of a Maachathite, they and their men.

<span id="xx.xi-p11"></span>**9** And Gedaliah, the son of Shaphan,
swear to them and to their men, saying, Fear not to serve the Chaldeans,
but submit yourselves and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be
well with you:

<span id="xx.xi-p12"></span>**10** And I, behold, I will dwell at
Mizpah, to stand before the Chaldeans who may come to us; and gather ye
wine, and summer-fruits, and oil, and put into your vessels, and dwell
in the cities which ye have taken.

<span id="xx.xi-p13"></span>**11** When also all the Jews which were in
Moab, and among the children of Ammon, and in Edom, and those in all
countries, heard that the king of Babylon had dismissed a remnant of
Judah, and had set over them Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son of
Shaphan;

<span id="xx.xi-p14"></span>**12** Then all the Jews came from all those
places whither they had been driven, yea, they came to the land of
Judah, unto Gedaliah, to Mizpah; and they gathered wine and
summer-fruits in great abundance.

<span id="xx.xi-p15"></span>**13** And Johanan, the son of Kareah, and
all the leaders of the forces, who had been in the field, came to
Gedaliah to Mizpah, and said to him:

<span id="xx.xi-p16"></span>**14** “Knowing, dost thou know that Baalis,
the king of the children of Ammon, hath sent Ishmael, the son of
Nethaniah, to smite thy life?” But Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, believed
them not.

<span id="xx.xi-p17"></span>**15** And Johanan, the son of Kareah, said
privately to Gedaliah in Mizpah, saying, I will now go and will smite
Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, and no one shall know: why should he
smite thy life, and all Judah, who are gathered unto thee, be dispersed,
and the remnant of Judah perish?

<span id="xx.xi-p18"></span>**16** But Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, said
to Johanan, the son of Kareah, By no means do this thing; for thou
speakest falsely of Ishmael.

<span id="xx.xii"></span>

<span id="xx.xii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 41

<span id="xx.xii-p3"></span>**1** And it happened in the seventh month
that Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the royal
seed, and the chiefs of the king, even ten men, came with him to
Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, to Mizpah, and did eat bread there together
in Mizpah.

<span id="xx.xii-p4"></span>**2** Then Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah,
rose up, and the ten men who were with him, and smote Gedaliah, the son
of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, with the sword; yea, they slew him whom
the king of Babylon had set over the land:

<span id="xx.xii-p5"></span>**3** And the Jews who were with him, even
with Gedaliah, in Mizpah, and the Chaldeans who were found there, men of
war, did Ishmael smite.

<span id="xx.xii-p6"></span>**4** And it was the following day, after he
had killed Gedaliah, and no man knew it,

<span id="xx.xii-p7"></span>**5** That men came from Shechem, and from
Shiloh, and from Samaria, fourscore, having their heads shaven, and
their garments rent, and having cut themselves, with an oblation and
incense, to offer them in the house of Jehovah.

<span id="xx.xii-p8"></span>**6** And Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah,
went out from Mizpah to meet them, walking along and weeping; and it was
that when he met them, he said to them, Come to Gedaliah, the son of
Ahikam.

<span id="xx.xii-p9"></span>**7** And it was that when they had come to
the midst of the city, Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, slew them, nigh
the middle of the trench, he and the men who were with him.

<span id="xx.xii-p10"></span>**8** But ten men were found among them who
said to Ishmael, Slay us not; for we have hidden stores in the field,
wheat, and barley, and oil, and honey; and he forbare, and slew them not
among their brethren.

<span id="xx.xii-p11"></span>**9** Now the trench into which Ishmael
cast all the carcasses of the men whom he had smitten along with
Gedaliah, was that which King Asa had made on account of Baasha, the
king of Israel; this did Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, fill with the
slain.

<span id="xx.xii-p12"></span>**10** Then Ishmael took captive all the
remnant of the people who were in Mizpah, even the king’s daughters, and
all the people who had been left in Mizpah, whom Nebuzar-adan, the
prince of the executioners, had committed to the care of Gedaliah, the
son of Ahikam; yea, Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, took them and went,
that he might pass over to the children of Ammon.

<span id="xx.xii-p13"></span>**11** But Johanan, the son of Kareah, and
all the leaders of the forces who ere with him, heard of all the evil
which Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, had done;

<span id="xx.xii-p14"></span>**12** And they took all the men, and went
forth to right with Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, and found him at the
great waters which are in Gibeon.

<span id="xx.xii-p15"></span>**13** And it was that when all the people
who were with Ishmael saw Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the
leaders of the forces who were with him, they rejoiced:

<span id="xx.xii-p16"></span>**14** And all the people whom Ishmael had
taken captive from Mizpah, turned, and returned, and went with Johanan,
the son of Kareah;

<span id="xx.xii-p17"></span>**15** But Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah,
escaped with eight men from Johanan, and went to the children of Ammon.

<span id="xx.xii-p18"></span>**16** And Johanan the son of Kareah, and
all the leaders of the forces who were with him, took all the remnant of
the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah,
from Mizpah, after he had smitten Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, strong
men, men of war, and women, and children, and eunuchs, whom he had
recovered from Gibeon;

<span id="xx.xii-p19"></span>**17** And they went and dwelt in
Geruth-Chimham, which is near Bethlehem, that they might proceed to
enter into Egypt,

<span id="xx.xii-p20"></span>**18** On account of the Chaldeans, for
they feared them, because Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, had smitten
Gedaliah, whom the king of Babylon had set over the land.

<span id="xx.xiii"></span>

<span id="xx.xiii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xiii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 42

<span id="xx.xiii-p3"></span>**1** Then came near all the leaders of the
forces and Johanan, the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah, the son of
Hoshaiah, and all the people, from the least to the greatest,

<span id="xx.xiii-p4"></span>**2** And said to Jeremiah the prophet, —
Let our petition, we pray thee, be acceptable to thee; pray now for us
to Jehovah thy God in behalf of this remnant, for we are left a few out
of many, as thine eyes see us;

<span id="xx.xiii-p5"></span>**3** And let Jehovah thy God shew us the
way in which we are to walk, and the thing which we are to do.

<span id="xx.xiii-p6"></span>**4** And Jeremiah said to them, I have
heard; behold, I will pray to Jehovah your God according to your words;
and it shall be that whatsoever word Jehovah shall answer you, I will
declare it to you; I will hide nothing from you.

<span id="xx.xiii-p7"></span>**5** Then they said to Jeremiah, Let
Jehovah be between us a faithful and true witness, except we do
according to all the words which Jehovah thy God shall send to us:

<span id="xx.xiii-p8"></span>**6** Whether good or evil, the voice of
Jehovah our God, for which we send thee to him, will we obey: for well
will it be with us, when we obey the voice of Jehovah our God.

<span id="xx.xiii-p9"></span>**7** And it was that at the end of ten
days the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah;

<span id="xx.xiii-p10"></span>**8** And he called Johanan, the son of
Kareah, and all the leaders of the forces, who were with him, and all
the people, from the least to the greatest;

<span id="xx.xiii-p11"></span>**9** And said to them, — Thus saith
Jehovah, the God of Israel, to whom you sent me to lay humbly your
prayer before him,

<span id="xx.xiii-p12"></span>**10** If dwelling ye will dwell in this
land, then will I build you and not pull you down, and plant you and not
pluck you up; for I repent of the evil which I have brought on you.

<span id="xx.xiii-p13"></span>**11** Fear not the face of the king of
Babylon, whose face ye do fear; fear him not, saith Jehovah, for I am
with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand;

<span id="xx.xiii-p14"></span>**12** And I will shew mercies to you, and
he will have mercy on you, and cause you to dwell in your own land.

<span id="xx.xiii-p15"></span>**13** But if ye say, We will not dwell in
this land, nor obey the voice of Jehovah your God,

<span id="xx.xiii-p16"></span>**14** Saying, No, but to the land of
Egypt will we go, where we shall not see war, and the sound of the
trumpet we shall not hear, and for bread we shall not hunger, and there
will we dwell.

<span id="xx.xiii-p17"></span>**15** Now, therefore, hear the word of
Jehovah, ye remnant of Judah, for thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel, If setting ye set your face to enter into Egypt, and ye go
there to sojourn,

<span id="xx.xiii-p18"></span>**16** Then it shall be that the sword
which ye fear, shall overtake you there, even in the land of Egypt, and
the famine which ye dread shall lay hold on you there, even in the land
of Egypt, and there ye shall die:

<span id="xx.xiii-p19"></span>**17** And all the men who have set their
faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there, shall die by the sword, or by
famine, or by pestilence; and not one of them shall remain or escape
from the evil which I shall bring on them.

<span id="xx.xiii-p20"></span>**18** For thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
the God of Israel, As my wrath and mine indignation have been poured out
on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so mine indignation shall be poured out
on you when ye go into Egypt: and ye shall be an execration, and an
astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach; and ye shall no more see this
place.

<span id="xx.xiii-p21"></span>**19** Jehovah hath spoken against you, ye
remnant of Judah: go not into Egypt; knowing, know ye that I have made a
protest to you this day.

<span id="xx.xiii-p22"></span>**20** For ye *deceived* your own souls,
when ye sent me to Jehovah your God, saying, Pray for us to Jehovah our
God, and according to all that Jehovah our God shall say, so declare to
us and we will do so.

<span id="xx.xiii-p23"></span>**21** And I have declared to you this
day, but ye have not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah your God, and
according to all the things for which he hath sent me to you.

<span id="xx.xiii-p24"></span>**22** And now knowing, know ye, that by
the sword and by famine and by pestilence shall ye die in the place to
which ye desire to go, that ye may sojourn there.

<span id="xx.xiv"></span>

<span id="xx.xiv-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xiv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 43

<span id="xx.xiv-p3"></span>**1** And it was that when Jeremiah had
finished to speak to all the people all the words of Jehovah their God,
for which Jehovah their God had sent him to them all, even for these
words,

<span id="xx.xiv-p4"></span>**2** Then Azariah, the son of Hoshaiah, and
Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the proud men, said, speaking to
Jeremiah, Falsehood dost thou speak; Jehovah our God hath not sent thee
to say, Go not to Egypt to sojourn there;

<span id="xx.xiv-p5"></span>**3** But Baruch, the son of Neriah, rouses
thee against us, to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, to slay
us and to remove us to Babylon.

<span id="xx.xiv-p6"></span>**4** So Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all
the leaders of the forces and the whole people, did not hearken to the
voice of Jehovah, to dwell in the land of Judah:

<span id="xx.xiv-p7"></span>**5** But Johanan, the son of Kareah, and
all the leaders of the forces, took the remnant of Judah, who had
returned from all the nations, to which they had been driven, to dwell
in the land of Judah,

<span id="xx.xiv-p8"></span>**6** Even the men, and the women, and the
children, and the king’s daughters, and every soul which Nebuzar-adan,
the prince of the executioners, had left with Gedaliah, the son of
Ahikam, the son Shaphan, and with Jeremiah the prophet, and with Baruch,
the son of Neriah;

<span id="xx.xiv-p9"></span>**7** And they went into the land of Egypt;
for they did not obey the voice of Jehovah; and they came as far as
Tahpanhes.

<span id="xx.xiv-p10"></span>**8** And the word of Jehovah came to
Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying, —

<span id="xx.xiv-p11"></span>**9** Take in thine hand great stones, and
hide them in the clay in the brick-kiln, which is by the gate of
Pharaoh’s house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah;

<span id="xx.xiv-p12"></span>**10** And thou shalt say to them, Thus
saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, Behold, I will send and bring
Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, my servant, and will set his throne
on these stones, which I have hid, and he shall spread his tent over
them;

<span id="xx.xiv-p13"></span>**11** And he shall come and smite the land
of Egypt, those for death to death, and those for captivity to
captivity, and those for the sword to the sword;

<span id="xx.xiv-p14"></span>**12** And I will kindle a fire in the
houses of the gods of Egypt, and he shall burn them and carry them away
captive, and roll up the land of Egypt as a shepherd rolls up his
garment; and he shall go forth thence in peace:

<span id="xx.xiv-p15"></span>**13** And he shall break in pieces the
statues of Beth-shemesh, which is in the land of Egypt; and the houses
of the gods of Egypt shall he burn with fire.

<span id="xx.xv"></span>

<span id="xx.xv-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 44

<span id="xx.xv-p3"></span>**1** The word which came to Jeremiah
concerning all the Jews who dwelt in the land of Egypt, who dwelt at
Migdol and at Tahpanhes, and at Memphis, even in the land of Pathros,
saying, —

<span id="xx.xv-p4"></span>**2** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel, ye have seen all the evil which I have brought on Jerusalem and
on all the cities of Judah; and behold they are a waste this day, and no
one dwells in them,

<span id="xx.xv-p5"></span>**3** Because of the wickedness which they
had done to provoke me, by going to burn incense and to serve foreign
gods, whom they had not known, neither they nor their fathers:

<span id="xx.xv-p6"></span>**4** And I sent to them all my servants the
prophets, rising early and sending, saying, Do not, I pray you, the
thing of this abomination, which I hate;

<span id="xx.xv-p7"></span>**5** But they hearkened not, nor inclined
their car to turn from their wickedness and not to burn incense to
foreign gods.

<span id="xx.xv-p8"></span>**6** Then my indignation and my wrath were
poured out and were kindled in the cities of Judah and in the streets of
Jerusalem, and they became a waste as at this day.

<span id="xx.xv-p9"></span>**7** And now, thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
the God of Israel, Why do ye this great evil against your own souls, to
cut off from you man and woman, child and suckling, even from the midst
of Judah, so as to leave you no remnant remaining,

<span id="xx.xv-p10"></span>**8** To provoke me by the works of your
hands, by burning incense to foreign gods in the land of Egypt, to which
ye are gone to dwelt there, that ye may be cut off, and that ye may be a
curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth?

<span id="xx.xv-p11"></span>**9** Have ye forgotten the evils of your
fathers and the evils of the kings of Judah, and the evils of their
wives, and your own evils, and the evils of your wives, which they did
in the land of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem:

<span id="xx.xv-p12"></span>**10** And they have not humbled themselves
to this day, nor have they feared, nor walked in my law and in my
statutes, which I had set before you and before your fathers.

<span id="xx.xv-p13"></span>**11** Therefore thus saith Jehovah of
hosts, the God of Israel, Behold, I set my face against you for evil,
even to cut off all Judah;

<span id="xx.xv-p14"></span>**12** And I will take the remnant of Judah,
who have set their face to go into the land of Egypt to sojourn there,
and they shall all be consumed in the land of Egypt; they shall fall by
the sword, by famine shall they be consumed, from the least to the
greatest; by the sword and by famine shall they die, and they shall be
an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach:

<span id="xx.xv-p15"></span>**13** And I will visit them who dwell in
Egypt, as I visited Jerusalem, with the sword, and famine, and
pestilence.

<span id="xx.xv-p16"></span>**14** And there shall be none to escape
among the remnant of Judah who have come to sojourn here, even in the
land of Egypt, and to return to the land of Judah on returning to which
they set their minds to dwell there, for they shall not return except
those who have escaped.

<span id="xx.xv-p17"></span>**15** Then all the men answered Jeremiah,
even they who knew that their wives burned incense to foreign gods, and
all the women who stood by, a great company, and all the people who
dwelt in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, saying, —

<span id="xx.xv-p18"></span>**16** As to the word which thou hast spoken
to us in the name of Jehovah, we will not hearken to thee;

<span id="xx.xv-p19"></span>**17** But we shall do whatsoever that goeth
forth from our mouth, to burn incense to the frame-work of heaven, and
to pour out libations to it, as we did, we and our fathers, our kings,
and our princes, in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem,
and we were satisfied with bread, and were happy, and saw no evil:

<span id="xx.xv-p20"></span>**18** But from the time we left off to burn
incense to the frame-work of heaven, and to pour out libations to it, we
have been destitute of every- thing, and have been consumed by the sword
and famine.

<span id="xx.xv-p21"></span>**19** And when we burned incense to the
frame-work of heaven, and poured out libations to it, did we without our
men make cakes to it to worship it, and pour out libations to it?

<span id="xx.xv-p22"></span>**20** Then said Jeremiah to all the people,
to the men, and to the women, even to all the people who had returned to
him the answer, saying, —

<span id="xx.xv-p23"></span>**21** The incense which ye burned in the
cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, you and your fathers,
your kings and your princes, and all the people of the land, hath not
Jehovah remembered it?

<span id="xx.xv-p24"></span>**22** And hath it not come to his mind?
Nay, Jehovah could no longer bear *you* for the wickedness of your
doings, for the abominations which ye did; and reduced is your land to a
waste, and is become an astonishment and a curse, as it appears at this
day:

<span id="xx.xv-p25"></span>**23** Because ye burned incense and sinned
against Jehovah, and hearkened not to the voice of Jehovah, nor walked
in his law, and statutes, and testimonies, therefore hath this evil
happened to you, as it appears at this day.

<span id="xx.xv-p26"></span>**24** Jeremiah said again to all the people
and to all the women, — Hear the word of Jehovah, all ye Judah who are
in the land of Egypt, —

<span id="xx.xv-p27"></span>**25** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel, saying, Ye and your wives have spoken with your mouth and
fulfilled with your hands, saying, Doing we shall do our vows which we
have vowed, to burn incense to the frame-work of heaven and to pour out
libations to it: confirming ye will confirm your vows, and doing ye will
do your vows.

<span id="xx.xv-p28"></span>**26** Therefore hear the word of Jehovah,
all ye Judah who dwell in the land of Egypt, Behold, I have sworn by my
great name, saith Jehovah, that my name shall no more be called upon by
the mouth of any man of Judah, saying, “The Lord Jehovah liveth in all
the land of Egypt.”

<span id="xx.xv-p29"></span>**27** Behold I will watch over them for
evil and not for good, and consumed shall be all the men of Judah, who
are in the land of Egypt, by the sword and by famine, until they be
consumed:

<span id="xx.xv-p30"></span>**28** And they who shall escape from the
sword and return from the land of Egypt into the land of Judah, shall be
few in number; and all the remnant of Judah, who have entered into the
land of Egypt to dwell there, shall know whose word shall stand, mine or
theirs.

<span id="xx.xv-p31"></span>**29** And this shall be a sign to you,
saith Jehovah, that I will punish you in this place, that ye may know
that standing my words shall stand against you for evil, —

<span id="xx.xv-p32"></span>**30** Thus saith Jehovah, Behold, I will
deliver Pharaoh-Hophra into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand
of those who seek his life, as I delivered Zedekiah, the king of Judah,
into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, his enemy, and who
sought his life.

<span id="xx.xvi"></span>

<span id="xx.xvi-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xvi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 45

<span id="xx.xvi-p3"></span>**1** The word which Jeremiah the prophet
spake to Baruch, the son of Neriah, when he wrote these words in a book
from the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of
Josiah, the king of Judah, saying, —

<span id="xx.xvi-p4"></span>**2** Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel,
concerning thee, O Baruch:

<span id="xx.xvi-p5"></span>**3** Thou hast said, Woe now to me! for
Jehovah hath added grief to my sorrow; I am wearied with my sighing, and
rest have I not found.

<span id="xx.xvi-p6"></span>**4** Thus shalt thou say to him, Thus saith
Jehovah, Behold, what I builded I pull down, and what I planted I pluck
up, even this whole land;

<span id="xx.xvi-p7"></span>**5** And seekest thou great things for
thyself? seek not; for behold I am bringing evil on all flesh, saith
Jehovah; and I will give thee thy life as a prey in all the places
whither thou wilt go.

<span id="xx.xvii"></span>

<span id="xx.xvii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xvii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 46

<span id="xx.xvii-p3"></span>**1** The word of Jehovah which came to
Jeremiah the prophet concerning all the nations:

<span id="xx.xvii-p4"></span>**2** Of Egypt, concerning the army of
Pharaoh-Necho, the king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates, at
Carchemish, which Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, smote in the
fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, the king of Judah:

<span id="xx.xvii-p5"></span>**3** Prepare ye the buckler and shield,
And move on to battle;

<span id="xx.xvii-p6"></span>**4** Tie the horses, and go up, ye
horsemen; Stand in your helmets, Brighten the lances, put on the coats
of mail.

<span id="xx.xvii-p7"></span>**5** Why have I seen them broken, turned
backward! Even their valiants have been smitten, And by flight have they
fled and looked not back; Terror is on every side, saith Jehovah;

<span id="xx.xvii-p8"></span>**6** Let not the swift flee away, Nor the
valiant escape: In the north, on the bank of the river Euphrates, Shall
they stumble and fall.

<span id="xx.xvii-p9"></span>**7** Who is this that like a river riseth
up, Like floods swelling, its waters!

<span id="xx.xvii-p10"></span>**8** Egypt like a river riseth up, And
like floods swelling, its waters; For he saith, I will go up and cover
the land, I will destroy the city and its inhabitants.

<span id="xx.xvii-p11"></span>**9** Go up, ye horses; toss, ye chariots;
Go forth, ye the valiant; The Ethiopians and Lybians, who hold the
shield, And the Lydians, who hold and stretch the bow.

<span id="xx.xvii-p12"></span>**10** But this is the day of the Lord,
Jehovah of hosts, The day of vengeance, to avenge on his adversaries;
And devour shall the sword and be satiated, And inebriated shall it be
with their blood; For a sacrifice hath the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, In
the land of the north, by the river Euphrates.

<span id="xx.xvii-p13"></span>**11** Go up to Gilead, and take rosin,
Thou virgin, daughter of Egypt! In vain dost thou multiply medicines;
There is no healing for thee.

<span id="xx.xvii-p14"></span>**12** Heard have the nations of thy
disgrace, And by thine outcry filled is the earth; For the valiant
against the valiant has stumbled, And both have fallen together.

<span id="xx.xvii-p15"></span>**13** The word which Jehovah spake to
Jeremiah the prophet respecting the coming of Nebuchadnezzar, the king
of Babylon, to smite the land of Egypt:

<span id="xx.xvii-p16"></span>**14** Declare ye in Egypt, and publish in
Migdol, Publish in Noph, in Tahpanhes say, — Stand and prepare thyself,
For devoured hath the sword those around thee.

<span id="xx.xvii-p17"></span>**15** How scattered are thy valiants!
They stood not, for Jehovah hath driven them.

<span id="xx.xvii-p18"></span>**16** He hath multiplied; they stumbled,
Yea, fell, each on his friend: And they said, “Rise, and let us return
To our people, and to the land of our nativity, From the face of the
wasting sword.

<span id="xx.xvii-p19"></span>**17** They cried there, Pharaoh, the king
of Egypt, *Is a king* of trouble; He hath passed over the set time.

<span id="xx.xvii-p20"></span>**18** Live do I, saith the king, Jehovah
of hosts is his name; For as Tabor is in the mountains, And as Carmel is
by the sea, *so* will he come.

<span id="xx.xvii-p21"></span>**19** Thy furniture of transmigration
prepare, Thou inhabitant of Egypt; For Noph shall be a solitude, Yea, it
shall be wasted, without an inhabitant.

<span id="xx.xvii-p22"></span>**20** A beautiful heifer is Egypt;
Distress from the north cometh, it cometh.

<span id="xx.xvii-p23"></span>**21** Her mercenaries also in the midst
of her Are like the bullocks of the stall; For these also shall turn
their backs, They shall flee together, they shall not stand; For the day
of calamity is come upon them, The time of their visitation.

<span id="xx.xvii-p24"></span>**22** Her voice shall be like that of the
serpent; For with power shall they come, And with axes shall they come
against her, Like hewers of wood.

<span id="xx.xvii-p25"></span>**23** Cut down shall they thy forest,
saith Jehovah, That it may not be investigated; For they have multiplied
more than locusts, And they are without number.

<span id="xx.xvii-p26"></span>**24** Ashamed is the daughter of Egypt,
Delivered into the hand of the north people.

<span id="xx.xvii-p27"></span>**25** Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel, hath said, Behold, I will visit the multitude of No, Pharaoh
also, and Egypt, And her gods and her kings, Even Pharaoh and those who
trust in him;

<span id="xx.xvii-p28"></span>**26** And I will give them into the hand
Of those who seek their life, And into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, The
king of Babylon, \|And into the hand of his servants: But it shall
afterwards be inhabited As in days of old, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xx.xvii-p29"></span>**27** But fear not thou, my servant
Jacob, Nor be thou, Israel, broken in mind; For behold, I will save thee
from far, And thy seed from the land of their captivity: Yea, return
shall Jacob, and rest, And be secure, and none will terrify him.

<span id="xx.xvii-p30"></span>**28** Fear thou not, my servant Jacob,
Saith Jehovah, for I am with thee; For I will make an end of all the
nations To which I have driven thee; But of thee will I not make an end:
Yet I will chastise thee in moderation, And will not wholly cut thee
off.

<span id="xx.xviii"></span>

<span id="xx.xviii-p1"></span>

<span id="xx.xviii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 47

<span id="xx.xviii-p3"></span>**1** The word of Jehovah which came to
Jeremiah the prophet, concerning the Philistines, before Pharaoh smote
Gaza:

<span id="xx.xviii-p4"></span>**2** Thus saith Jehovah, — Behold, waters
ascend from the north, And they shall be an overflowing flood, And shall
overflow the land and all in it, The city and its inhabitants; And cry
aloud shall all men, And howl shall every inhabitant of the land.

<span id="xx.xviii-p5"></span>**3** For the noisy sound of the hoofs of
his steeds, For the commotion of his chariots, For the rumbling of his
wheels, Not look shall fathers to their children, On account of the
feebleness of *their* hands;

<span id="xx.xviii-p6"></span>**4** Because of the day which is come, To
destroy all the Philistines, To cut off Tyre and Sidon, All the residue
of their strength; For Jehovah lays waste the Philistines, The remnant
of the island of Caphtor.

<span id="xx.xviii-p7"></span>**5** Come is baldness on Gaza, Destroyed
is Ashkelon; The remnant of their valley! How long wilt thou rend
thyself?

<span id="xx.xviii-p8"></span>**6** Ah! sword of Jehovah! How long wilt
not thou rest? Hide thyself in thy scabbard, rest and be still.

<span id="xx.xviii-p9"></span>**7** How canst thou rest? since Jehovah
Hath commanded it against Ashkelon, And against the shore of the sea;
There hath he appointed it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc20020)
