[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc20012)  [Next](cc20014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 20: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part IV*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 42

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
42:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#001)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1**. Then all the captains of the forces,
and Johanan the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all
the people from the least even unto the greatest, came near,

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span>**1**. Et accesserunt cuncti duces copiarum,
et Joannes filius Kareah, et Jezaniah filius Ozamae, et totus populus a
parvo usque ad magnum,

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span>**2**. And said unto Jeremiah the prophet,
Let, we beseech thee, our supplication be accepted before thee, and pray
for us unto the LORD thy God, *even* for all this remnant; (for we are
left *but* a few of many, as thine eyes do behold us:)

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span>**2**. Et dixerunt ad Jeremiam prophetam,
Cadat Agedum precatio nostra coram facie tua, et ores pro nobis Jehovam
Deum tuum pro omnibus reliquiis istis, quia relicti sumus exiguum e
magno, sicuti oculi tui vident nos;

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span>**3**. That the LORD thy God may shew us the
way wherein we may walk, and the thing that we may do.

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span>**3**. Et annuntiet nobis Jehova Deus tuus
viam, per quam ambulemus, et rem quam faciamus.

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span><span id="xiv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span>I have said that John, and his associates,
and the whole people acted much more culpably by coming to the Prophet,
than if they had not done so, and had gone directly to Egypt: for they
either came dissemblingly, and thus designedly spoke what was false, or
they were extremely stupid, and hypocrisy had wholly deprived them of
their understanding. They came to the Prophet to ask counsel; nay, that
he might be to them God’s interpreter, and that thus they might know
what to do; and they promised to obey, as we shall hereafter see.
However this may have been, they sought an oracle in which it was their
duty to acquiesce, except they resolved openly to shake off the yoke and
to show themselves to be gross and profane despisers of God. They came
to the Prophet, when yet it was their fixed purpose, as we shall see, to
go to Egypt.

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span>He who asks counsel, ought first to see that
he bring no prejudice, but be free and honest: but it is, however, a
fault too common, that men deliberate and ask counsel, when they have
already settled what to do; nay, nothing is more common than this; for
those who consult do not, for the most part, wish to learn what is
right, but that others should fall in with their own inclinations. He
who has resolved on this or that point, pretends that he is in doubt,
and held in suspense; he asks what ought to be done: if the answer be
according to his wishes, he embraces what is said; but if he who is
consulted, disapproves of what he has already resolved to do, he rejects
the counsel given. Such was the dissimulation described by the Prophet,
when the leaders of the forces and the whole people came to him.

<span id="xiv.i-p12"></span>He mentions, first, the *leaders of the
forces,* and then *John the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of
Hoshiah* He adds these two last; but it was to give them honor, as when
the angel said,

<span id="xiv.i-p13"></span>“Go and tell his disciples and Peter.”
(<span id="xiv.i-p13.1"></span>[Mr
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#007)<span id="xiv.i-p13.1"></span>)

<span id="xiv.i-p14"></span>He did not put aside Peter, as though he was
inferior to all the rest; but for the sake of honor he mentions his
name, after having spoken generally of them all. So also here, the
Prophet names generally the *leaders,* but as John the son of Kareah,
and Jezaniah were the chief men, he expressly gives their names. He
adds, the whole people, *from the least to the greatest* This does not
refer to age; but what he means is, that all, of every grade, came with
one consent to Jeremiah. It was not then the conspiring of a few men,
but all from the least to the greatest had resolved to go to Egypt; and
yet they came, as though with an honest purpose, to the Prophet;
wherefore? They wished their own perverse design to be approved by God,
and thus to subject God to their own will and humor; for they did not
suffer themselves to be ruled by his Spirit, but audaciously disregarded
his word. The Prophet then shews that they were all implicated in the
same sin.

<span id="xiv.i-p15"></span><span id="xiv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p16"></span>It is added, that they *said,* as though
they were ready to obey, *Let our prayer fall before thee.* This, as we
have said, when addressed to God, is an *evidence* of humility; but it
is applied here to man; and when the Hebrews make a humble request, they
say, “Let my prayer fall before *thee,”* that is, Hear what I
suppliantly and humbly ask. *Pray,* they said, *to Jehovah thy God for
us* They called him the God of Jeremiah, not that they intended to
exempt themselves from his authority; they did not mean that they were
alienated from God; but in this way they extolled Jeremiah, and
acknowledged him to be God’s true and lawful Prophet. In short, this
saying refers to the prophetic office, as though they had said, that
Jeremiah had hitherto confirmed his vocation, so that it was clearly
evident that he had been sent from above.

<span id="xiv.i-p17"></span>We hence see why they called Jehovah the
*God* of Jeremiah, not as though they had rejected God, and as though he
was not their God in common with Jeremiah, but they allowed that the
Prophet possessed a higher honor, and that his faithfulness and
integrity were beyond controversy.

<span id="xiv.i-p18"></span>But this admission justly recoiled on their
own head; for if Jeremiah was God’s Prophet, why did they not instantly
obey him, after knowing that what he faithfully told them he had
received from God? and why did they insolently and ferociously resist
him and accuse him of falsehood? Their own admission then was not
sincere, but a fallacious flattery, as is the case with all hypocrites,
who never speak in sincerity and truth.

<span id="xiv.i-p19"></span>They afterwards added, *Pray for all this
remnant, for we are left, a few from many* This they added to produce
pity, in order that they might more easily obtain from Jeremiah what
they asked; nor was that difficult; but as they felt conscious of wrong,
they sought the favor of the Prophet by flatteries, Had they asked him
without disguise, they knew that he was of himself disposed to seek the
well being of the people; but as they were of a double mind, they set
before him their miserable state, which might; have roused the Prophet
still more to make intercession to God for them. And for this reason
they added, *as thine eyes see us* And they set before him this sad
spectacle, to create sympathy in the Prophet. And it then follows, And
*may Jehovah thy God shew us the way in which we are to walk.* They now
explained more clearly why they wished prayer to be made for them, even
that God might answer and shew what he wished them to do.

<span id="xiv.i-p20"></span><span id="xiv.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p21"></span>They came then, as it has been stated, as
though they were ready to obey; and then they professed humility,
because they did not wish to do anything rashly, but only to follow
where God called them. Had they spoken from the heart, it would have
been a rare virtue thus to-have fled in perplexities to God, and to have
allowed themselves to be ruled by his word; but we shall see that it was
all a pre-tence. We have then here set before us the hypocrisy of that
people, so that we may learn that whenever we ask what pleases God, we
should bring a pure and sincere heart, so that nothing may prevent or
hinder us immediately to embrace whatever God may command us. But their
hypocrisy is discovered to have been still baser, when the Prophet adds,

<span id="xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#004)<span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p2"></span>**4**. Then Jeremiah the prophet said unto
them, I have heard *you*; behold, I will pray unto the LORD your God
according to your words; and it shall come to pass, *that* whatsoever
thing the LORD shall answer you, I will declare *it* unto you; I will
keep nothing back from you.

<span id="xiv.ii-p3"></span>**4**. Et dixit illis Jeremias Propheta,
Audivi, ecce ego orabo Jehovam Deum vestrum secundum sermones vestros,
et erit quemcunque sermonem responderit Jehova vobis, annuntiabo vobis,
non celabo a vobis quicquam.

<span id="xiv.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ii-p5"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p6"></span>In order to prepare them to obey, he
testified that he would be a faithful messenger of God; for there is no
doubt but that the Prophet, as we shall see, regarded them with
suspicion. That he might therefore have them teachable and obedient to
the answer expected from God, he said beforehand, that he would honestly
and faithfully perform his office as a Prophet.

<span id="xiv.ii-p7"></span>*I have heard,* he says; here he shews how
ready he was to attend, and how he neglected nothing conducive to their
well being. *I have heard,* he says, *Behold, I will pray according to
your words* There is no doubt but that he thus intimated that he wished
well to them; and it might have rendered them more attentive to the
oracle to know that the Prophet was influenced by love. Nor is there a
doubt but that the Prophet testified his love towards them, that his
doctrine might afterwards have more weight with them.

<span id="xiv.ii-p8"></span>By saying, *Whatever your God will answer,*
he did not mean that the oracle would be revealed to all, for the words
could not be otherwise explained than through the Prophet, who would
openly make known to the whole people what he heard from God’s mouth.
But he says, that the answer would be given to them, because God would
give the answer which was to be communicated to all, as it is said that
God spoke to Moses, and also to all the people, for the doctrine was
intended for all. Moses did not receive the law, nor its interpretation,
in his own private character, but in order that the people might know
what was right. So Jeremiah did here; the answer he received from God he
made known as belonging in common to all the people.

<span id="xiv.ii-p9"></span>But in calling God *their God,* he did not
mean to flatter them or to praise their piety, but to exhort them to
surrender and devote themselves wholly to God, as though he had said,
that they had to do with God, who had bound them to himself when he
adopted them as his peculiar people, and then favored them with so many
blessings. Since then God had made himself known to them, they could not
reject his counsel with impunity, for there was no pretext of ignorance.
We hence see what weight there is in this, *your God;* for Jeremiah
reminded them that they could not with impunity trifle with God, for
they were not their own, but had been chosen to be God’s people, and on
this condition, to be wholly subject to his authority. Then the sum of
the whole is this, that the Prophet would faithfully convey to the Jews
the answer God would give them; and he said this that his doctrine might
have a greater authority among them. It now follows, —

<span id="xiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
42:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#005)<span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p2"></span>**5**. Then they said to Jeremiah, The LORD
be a true and faithful witness between us, if we do not even according
to all things for the which the LORD thy God shall send thee to us.

<span id="xiv.iii-p3"></span>**5**. Ipsi antem dixerunt ad Jeremiam,
Erit Jehova inter nos in testem (*vel,* testis) fidei et veritatis
(testis fidelis et verax,) nisi secundum omnem sermonem quem miserit
(*id est,* pro quo miserit) Jehova Deus tuus ad nos, sic facturi sumus;

<span id="xiv.iii-p4"></span>**6**. Whether *it be* good, or whether *it
be* evil, we will obey the voice of the LORD our God, to whom we send
thee; that it may be well with us, when we obey the voice of the LORD
our God.

<span id="xiv.iii-p5"></span>**6**. Sive bonum, sive malum, voci Jehovae
Dei nostri, pro qua nos mittimus te ad ipsum, obediemus (audiemus vocem,
*ad verbum, sed tantundem valet,* audire vocem atque obedire voci,) ut
bene sit nobis, cum obediverimus voci Dei nostri.

<span id="xiv.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iii-p7"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p8"></span>It hence appears that the people understood
for what purpose Jeremiah, before he consulted God, assured them of his
faithfulness and sincerity; for it was not without reason that they
promised to be obedient to God; but as they saw that they were suspected
as being not sincere by Jeremiah, and as he had promised to be a true
and faithful teacher, they on the other hand declared that they would be
sincere disciples, and would receive whatever God might command them.
But they soon betrayed their perfidy, for when they heard that what they
had resolved to do did not please God, they not only rejected the
counsel of God and the Prophet, but treated him insolently, and even
loaded the holy man with reproaches, as though he had told them what was
false. Their hypocrisy ought at the same time to be a lesson to us, so
that when God is pleased through a singular favor to shew us the way of
acting rightly by faithful instructors and competent teachers, we may
not be like them, but be teachable and ready to obey, and prove this not
only by the mouth but also by our deeds.

<span id="xiv.iii-p9"></span>The Prophet then says, that they spoke
thus, *Let God be a faithful and true witness between us.* Being not
content with a simple affirmation, they dared to interpose the name of
God; and thus we see how blind is hypocrisy. For if men duly weigh what
it is to profane God’s name, surely they would dread and abominate all
perjury. As then they rushed on so audaciously to swear, it is evident
that they were as it were stupefied; and there is no inebriety which so
confuses the minds of men and all their senses as hypocrisy.

<span id="xiv.iii-p10"></span>They then added, *According to whatever
word which Jehovah thy God shall send to us, so will we do,* that is,
whatever Jehovah shall command us by thee; for God is said to send to
men, when he sends a messenger in his name to bring his commands.
Jeremiah then was, as it were, a middle person to address the people in
God’s name, as though he had been sent from heaven. They therefore said,
that they would do whatever God commanded. A stronger expression
follows, *Whether good or evil, we will obey the voice of Jehovah our
God* They did not here charge God’s word with being wrong, as though it
had anything unjust in it; but they used *good* in the sense of joyful,
and *evil* as meaning what is sad or grievous, as though they had said,
that they asked for no other thing but that God should declare what
pleased him, and that they were so submissive as to refuse nothing
though contrary to the flesh. Had this declaration proceeded from the
heart, it would have been a testimony of true piety; for the minds of
the godly ought to be so framed as to obey God without making any
exception, whether he commands what is contrary to their purpose, or
leads them where they do not wish to go; for they who wish to make a
compact with God, that he should require nothing but what is agreeable
to them, shew that they know not what it is to serve God. Hence the
obedience of faith in an especial manner requires this, that man should
*renounce* his own desires, that he should not set up his own counsels
and wishes against the word of God, nor object and say, this is hard,
that is not quite agreeable. *Whether* then *it be good* or *evil,* that
is, though it may be contrary to the feelings of the flesh, we ought
still to embrace what God requires and commands: this is the rule of
true religion.

<span id="xiv.iii-p11"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p12"></span>As the Jews spoke feignedly by assuming a
character not their own, they profaned God’s name. But if we desire to
prove our fidelity to God, the only way of acting is, to regard his word
as binding, whether it be agreeable or otherwise, and never to murmur,
as the ungodly do; for when God would have a yoke laid on them, they
complain that his doctrine is too hard and burdensome. Away, then, with
all those things which can render God’s word unacceptable to us, if we
desire to give a sure proof of our fidelity. Hence they said, *Whether
it be good or evil,* what God will lay down we will obey his voice.

<span id="xiv.iii-p13"></span>They afterwards added, *For which we send
thee to him*  <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) Here they still
further cast themselves into toils. Jeremiah did not in express words
require them to make an oath; they yet did make an oath; and then in
various ways still more bound themselves over to punishment, if they
became perjurers. They now shew that it would be a two-fold crime,
should they disobey God; how? Had the Prophet been sent to them, they
might have made excuses; though vain, they might yet have something to
allege; but when they of their own accord asked God, when they offered
of themselves to do this, and promised to be obedient in all things, it
is evident that unless afterwards they acted according to their pledged
faith, they must have been more inexcusable, because they tempted God:
for who induced them to come to the Prophet? We hence see that God
extorted from them what doubled their crime. But the more hypocrites
attempt by disguises to conceal their impiety, the faster they bind
themselves, and the more they kindle God’s wrath against themselves.

<span id="xiv.iii-p15"></span>They then added, *That it may be well with
us when we obey the voice of Jehovah* By this circumstance also they
aggravated their crime. For if the Prophet had promised them a
prosperous issue, they might not have believed; in that case they would
have indeed sinned; but their wicked-ness would have been more tolerable
than when they themselves had spoken, as though they were the organs of
the Holy Spirit; they said themselves, It *shall be well with us;* it
will be our chief happiness to follow the voice of God and to obey him.
As, then, they thus protested to God and the Prophet, that they might
appear to be God’s faithful servants, the greater condemnation they
brought on themselves; for if they believed that nothing would turn out
happily, except according to God’s command, how was it that they did not
submit to God? why did they despise what was afterwards said by the
Prophet? But as we have already said, as they deceived themselves by
dealing falsely with God and profaning his holy name, let us learn and
know that we can in no other way expect a happy issue in all that we do,
but by obeying the voice of God; for whatever men may attempt of
themselves, it will be accursed before God. This, then, is our only sure
hope, that when we attempt nothing but what is according to God’s word,
there will be a good and happy issue, though many things may happen
otherwise than we hope or think.

<span id="xiv.iv"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xiv.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are here
tossed to and fro, being uncertain and doubtful, except we are ruled by
thy word, and are blind in thick darkness, — O grant, that while thou
shinest on us by thy Law and by thy Gospel, we may be illuminated as to
our minds by thy Holy Spirit, so that we may wholly surrender ourselves
to thee, and never deviate from the right way which thou hast made known
to us, but so pursue our course through life, that at length we may come
to that blessed life, which has been prepared for us in heaven by Jesus
Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xiv.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.v"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-Seventh

<span id="xiv.vi"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
42:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#007)<span id="xiv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p2"></span>**7**. And it came to pass after ten days,
that the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah.

<span id="xiv.vi-p3"></span>**7**. Et fuit a fine decem dierum datus est
sermo Jehovae ad Jeremiam.

<span id="xiv.vi-p4"></span>**8**. Then called he Johanan the son of
Kareah, and all the captains of the forces which *were* with him, and
all the people from the least even to the greatest,

<span id="xiv.vi-p5"></span>**8**. Et vocavit Joannem filium Kareah et
omnes duces copiarum, qui cum eo erant, et totum populum a parvo usque
ad magnum,

<span id="xiv.vi-p6"></span>**9**. And said unto them, Thus saith the
LORD, the God of Israel, unto whom ye sent me to present your
supplication before him;

<span id="xiv.vi-p7"></span>**9**. Et dixit illis, Sic dicit Jehova,
Deus Israel, ad quem misistis me (*ad verbum,* ad quem misistis me ad
ipsum,) ut prosternerem preca-tionem vestram coram facie ejus, —

<span id="xiv.vi-p8"></span>**10.** If ye will still abide in this land,
then will I build you, and not pull *you* down, and I will plant you,
and not pluck *you* up: for I repent me of the evil that I have done
unto you.

<span id="xiv.vi-p9"></span>**10**. Si habitando habitaveritis in terra
hac, tunc, aedificabo vos, et non diruam, et plantabo vos et non
evellam; quia poenitet me mali quod intuli vobis (*vel,* satiatus sum
malo.)

<span id="xiv.vi-p10"></span> 

<span id="xiv.vi-p11"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p12"></span>Here Jeremiah declares what answer he
received from God; and he gave it in his name to the leaders of the
forces and to the whole people. The answer was, that they were to
continue in the land; for this would be for their good. We shall
hereafter see, that they had falsely asked counsel of God, whom they had
resolved not to obey, as it has been already stated. But the Prophet
shews again more clearly how perversely they acted after God had
commanded them to remain quiet, and especially not to proceed to Egypt.

<span id="xiv.vi-p13"></span>Now he says, that at the *tenth day* God
answered him. He might have done so immediately, but he deferred, that
the prophecy might have more weight. Had the Prophet been asked any
question respecting the common rule of life, as a faithful expounder of
the Law, he might have explained to them what their duty was; but as he
had been asked on a special subject, he could not have immediately
answered them. And God, as I have said, kept them for a time in
suspense; not only that the Prophet’s answer might be made without
ostentation, but also that. the people might embrace as coming from God
what the Prophet would say; for his doctrine could not have been
doubted, for he did not instantly bring forth what had arisen in his own
head, but prayerfully waited to know what pleased God, and at length
announced his commands. We now then perceive the cause of delay, why God
did not immediately convey to his servant the answer required.

<span id="xiv.vi-p14"></span>Let us at the same time learn from this
passage, that if God does not immediately extricate us from all
perplexity and doubt, we ought patiently to wait, according to the
direction of Paul, who, when speaking of doctrine, admonished the
faithful to remain contented until what they knew not should be revealed
to them. (<span id="xiv.vi-p14.1"></span>[Php
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015)<span id="xiv.vi-p14.1"></span>.)
Much more should we do so, when we ask counsel as to any particular
thing. When God does not immediately make known to us what we ask, we
ought, as I have already said, to wait with calm and resigned minds for
the time and the season when it shall be made known to us.

<span id="xiv.vi-p15"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p16"></span>Jeremiah says, that he *called John and the
other leaders of the forces and all the people, from the least to the
greatest* This is expressed that we may know that it happened, not
through the fault of one or two, that this prophecy was disregarded, but
that all the people were united together. The people *themselves,* then,
could not have pretended that they were free from blame; for we see that
they were all implicated. The leaders are particularly mentioned, and on
the other hand the people, so that the leaders could not object and say
that they were forced by a popular tumult, nor could the people throw
the blame on the leaders. The Prophet then shews that they all rebelled
against God, and that there was no exception.

<span id="xiv.vi-p17"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p18"></span>He then says that he faithfully related to
them what God had commanded, *Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, to
whom you sent me* By this circumstance he shews that they were more
bound to obey; for if God had sent his Prophet to them,’ they ought to
have obeyed his voice; but when they of their own accord *came to* him
and prayed for a favor, and wished God’s will to be made known to them,
they became doubly culpable when they refused the answer given them in
God’s name. And he adds, *That I might prostrate,* or make to fall,
*your prayer before God* We have stated what is meant by this mode of
speaking; but there is a difference to be noticed, for he had been
requested sup-pliantly to ask God; and he says here that he had not only
prayed, but had presented the prayer of the whole people, because he
acted for the public; and then he was a middle person between God and
the people. On this account he says, that he had been *seat* to present
the prayer of the people to God, for he asked nothing for himself, but
acted for them all, and asked God to answer the people.

<span id="xiv.vi-p19"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p20"></span>He now adds, *If remaining ye will remain
in this land, I will build you up and plant you, I will not pull you
down nor root you up* Here the Prophet testifies that the counsel he
gave them in God’s name would be for their good; and what is good or
useful is deemed by men, when they theorize, as they say, to be of great
value. The simple authority of God ought, indeed, to be sufficient; and
had God only commanded them in one word to remain, they ought to have
acquiesced. But God here accommodated himself to their infirmity, and
was pleased, in a manner, to let himself down in order to promote their
well being, and did not require obedience according to his authority and
sovereign power, as he might have justly done. We hence see how kindly
God dealt with this people, as he did not demand what he might, but gave
his counsel, and testified that it would be good and useful to them.

<span id="xiv.vi-p21"></span>Now when orators adduce what is useful in
order to persuade, they have recourse to conjectures, they state human
reasons; but the Prophet here promised in God’s name, that that if they
remained it would be for their good. God’s promise, then, is brought
forward here instead of conjectures and reasons. Therefore the obstinacy
of the people was without excuse, when they rejected the authority of
God; and then despised his counsel, and also disbelieved his promise.
Then to the contempt of God was added unbelief: and we know that no
greater reproach can be offered to God than when men do not believe him.

<span id="xiv.vi-p22"></span>The metaphors here used occur often in
Scripture. God is said to *build up* men when he confirms them in a
settled state; and in the same sense he is said to *plant* them. This we
have already seen, and it is especially evident from <span
id="xiv.vi-p22.1"></span>[Ps 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#002)<span
id="xiv.vi-p22.1"></span>, where God is said to have “planted” in the
land of Canaan the people he had brought out of Egypt. He then promised
that the condition of the people would be secure, and safe, and
perpetual, if only they did not change their place. When he adds, I will
*not pull down nor pluck up,* he: follows what is done commonly in
Hebrew. Neither the Latins nor the Greeks speak in this manner; but
negatives of this kind in Hebrew are confirmations, as though the
Prophet had said, “God will so plant you that your root will remain.
There will then be no danger of being plucked up when you have been
planted by God’s hand; nor will he suffer you to be subverted or pulled
down when he has built you up by his own hand.” What then they ought to
have especially sought, God freely promised them, even to be safe and
secure in the land; for this especially was what the Prophet meant.

<span id="xiv.vi-p23"></span>It afterwards follows, *For I repent of the
evil which I have brought on you.* The verb <span
id="xiv.vi-p23.1"></span>נחם, *nuchem,* sometimes means to repent, and
often to comfort; but the former sense comports better with this
passage, that God repented of the evil. If, however, we prefer this
rendering, “For I have received comfort,” then the meaning would be, “I
am satisfied with the punishment with which I have visited your sins;”
for they to whom satisfaction is given are said to receive comfort. As
then God was content with the punishment he had inflicted on the Jews,
the words may be rendered thus, “For I have received satisfaction from
the evil,” or, “I am satisfied with the evil,” etc. The other meaning,
however, is more generally taken, that God repented of the evil.  <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) But this mode of speaking is, indeed,
somewhat harsh, yet it contains nothing contrary to the truth; for we
know that God often transfers to himself what peculiarly belongs to man.
Then repentance in God is nothing else than that having been pacified,
he does not pursue men to an extremity, so as to demand the punishment
which they justly deserve. Thus, then, God *repented of the evil* which
he had brought on the people, after having sufficiently chastised their
sins, according to what we read in Isaiah, when God says, that he had
exacted double for their sins. (<span id="xiv.vi-p24.1"></span>[Isa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)<span id="xiv.vi-p24.1"></span>.)
He called the punishment he had inflicted double, not that it exceeded a
just measure, but he spoke according to his paternal feeling, that he
had treated his people in a harder way than he wished, as a father, who
is even displeased with himself when he has been very severe towards his
children.

<span id="xiv.vi-p25"></span>We now, then, perceive what is meant by the
reason here given, that the Jews were not to fear if they dwelt in the
land, because God had sufficiently chastised them, and that he was so
pacified that he would not further pursue them with severity. Jeremiah
at the same time reminds us, that whatever evils happen to us, they
ought to be ascribed to God’s judgment, and not to adverse fortune. *We*
hence see that by these words the people were exhorted to repent; for as
*they* were bidden to entertain good hope, because their safety was in
God’s hand, so also the Prophet shews that as to the time past *they*
had suffered nothing by chance, but that they had been punished because
they had provoked God’s wrath. It follows, —

<span id="xiv.vii"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
42:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#011)<span
id="xiv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p2"></span>**11.** Be not afraid of the king of
Babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be not afraid of him, saith the LORD:
for *I am* with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand.

<span id="xiv.vii-p3"></span>**11.** Ne timearis a facie regis
Babylonis, quem vos timetis a facie ejus (*hoc est,* a cujus facie vos
timetis) ne timeatis ab ipso, dicit Jehova; quia vobiscum ego sum ad
servandum vos, et ad eripiendum vos e manu ejus;

<span id="xiv.vii-p4"></span>**12.** And I will shew mercies unto you,
that he may have mercy upon you, and cause you to return to your own
land.

<span id="xiv.vii-p5"></span>**12.** Et dabo vobis misericordias, et
miserabitur vestri et habitare faciet in terra vestra.

<span id="xiv.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiv.vii-p7"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p8"></span>The Prophet obviates the doubt which might
have grieved or agitated the minds of the people. They ought, indeed, to
have recumbed on God’s promise alone; but it was difficult to be without
doubts in a state of things so uncertain and confused; for the king of
Babylon, as it has been stated, was grievously offended when the
governor of the land was slain. The king had received wrong from the
people, and the heat of war since the late victory had not cooled. They
then justly feared, being conscious of the evil that had been done; and
then they had to do with a proud and cruel enemy. God therefore removed
from them this doubt; and thus he confirmed the paternal care which he
had shewn towards them by kindly freeing them from every fear, and
taking away every ground of terror.

<span id="xiv.vii-p9"></span>Though Nebuchadnezzar had been offended,
and might avenge the wrong done to him, yet God promised to prevent
this, and declared that he would not suffer him to do any evil to the
Jews. “Ye fear,” he says, “Nebuchadnezzar, but cease to do so; let this
fear be dismissed, for he will not hurt you.” And the reason is added,
*Because I am with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand*
Here he bade the Jews to entertain good hope, because, while relying on
his protection they would be safe: for there is no more any reason for
doubting, when God declares that he will stand on our side. For if he is
ours, we may be confident, as David was, when he said,

<span id="xiv.vii-p10"></span>“I will not fear what man may do to me;
for thou, God,”  
he says, “art with me;”

<span id="xiv.vii-p11"></span>and also,

<span id="xiv.vii-p12"></span>“I will not fear though hosts surrounded
me oft every side.”  
(<span id="xiv.vii-p12.2"></span>[Ps
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span id="xiv.vii-p12.2"></span>;
<span id="xiv.vii-p12.3"></span>[Ps
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#003)<span id="xiv.vii-p12.3"></span>)

<span id="xiv.vii-p13"></span>We ought then to feel wholly assured, that
the help of God is above that of all creatures. Thus were the whole
world to rise up against us, we might as from a secure and safe place
look down with indifference on all attempts, forces, and preparations.
This is then the sum of what is here said; and it is according to what
Christ says,

<span id="xiv.vii-p14"></span>“My Father, who has given you to *me,* is
greater than all.”  
(<span id="xiv.vii-p14.2"></span>[Joh
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029)<span id="xiv.vii-p14.2"></span>)

<span id="xiv.vii-p15"></span>Had there then been a grain of faith in
the Jews, they would have laid hold on this promise; and then had they
tenaciously held it, as though it were a plank in a shipwreck, it would
have led them safe to the harbor. It ought then to be sufficient to
shake off all cares, to drive away all fears, and to put to flight every
diffidence, when God promises to stand on our side. *I am,* he says,
*with you to save you,* and he adds, to *deliver you* He expresses the
way and manner of saving them; for they might still have objected and
said, “What will be this salvation? for Nebuchadnezzar is like a furious
lion; how then can we be saved, since we cannot think otherwise than
that he will be enraged against us?” To this God answers, by pointing
out the manner, for he would *deliver* them from his hand.

<span id="xiv.vii-p16"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p17"></span>He confirms the same thing in other words,
*I will shew mercies to you* Some explain this as meaning, that God
would be merciful towards them; and I allow that this is the first
reason why they ought to have entertained hope; but I doubt not but that
the Prophet refers here to Nebuchadnezzar, as though he had said, “I
will turn the heart of the king of Babylon to mercy, so that he will
deal mercifully with you.” For God is said to shew mercies, when he
forgives, and when he reconciles those who have sinned to himself; but
he is said also to shew mercies, when he inclines the hearts of men to
mercy. For this reason Jacob says,

<span id="xiv.vii-p18"></span>“God will shew you mercies before the
man.”  
(<span id="xiv.vii-p18.2"></span>[Ge
43:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#014)<span id="xiv.vii-p18.2"></span>)

<span id="xiv.vii-p19"></span>But I abstain from other proofs on a point
which ought to be well known.

<span id="xiv.vii-p20"></span>The sum of what is said then is, that
Nebuchadnezzar would be humane and merciful towards the Jews, because it
was in God’s power to change his heart. For we know that God turns as he
pleases the hearts of men; and he often changes wolves into sheep. The
meaning then is, that though Nebuchadnezzar boiled with hatred towards
the people, and was prepared wholly to destroy the remnant, there yet
would be a remedy in God’s hand, for he could soften his hardness,
pacify his wrath, and from a savage wild beast make him a father,
merciful, as it were, towards his children.

<span id="xiv.vii-p21"></span>Now this passage teaches us, that the
hearts and purposes of men are governed by a power from above, so that
enemies, even the worst, while they rage against us, are moved not only
by their own feelings, but also by the hidden working of God, and
according to his counsel, as he would have them thus to try our faith.
For if God moderates those who boil with anger and wrath, and renders
them placable to us; so also he lets loose the reins to those who rage
against us, and not only so, but he also stirs them up, when his purpose
is to punish us for our sins, according to the doctrine taught us
everywhere in Scripture. So in <span id="xiv.vii-p21.1"></span>[Psalm
106](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#000)<span id="xiv.vii-p21.1"></span>,
it is said that God turned the hearts of the heathens to hate his
people. But here, on the other hand, God promises, that Nebuchadnezzar
would be kind and humane, so as to spare the Jews, because he would
control his heart, and shew them mercy by inclining the king to forgive
the people.

<span id="xiv.vii-p22"></span>This then ought to be carefully noticed;
for when we see ourselves surrounded on every side by the ungodly whom
Satan drives to madness, so that they seek no other thing than to tread
us under their feet, especially when they have the power to destroy us,
except we feel fully assured, that their hearts, feelings, and all their
thoughts are in God’s hands, we must necessarily be wholly disheartened.
Hence to mitigate all our fears, it avails us much to hear that men’s
hearts are turned and ruled according to the will of God. It now
follows, —

<span id="xiv.viii"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
42:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#013)<span
id="xiv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p2"></span>**13.** But if ye say, We will not dwell
in this land, neither obey the voice of the LORD your God,

<span id="xiv.viii-p3"></span>**13.** Quod si dixeritis vos, Non
habitabimus in terra hac, non obediendo voci Jehovae Dei vestri;

<span id="xiv.viii-p4"></span>**14.** Saying, No; but we will go into
the land of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the
trumpet, nor have hunger of bread; and there will we dwell:

<span id="xiv.viii-p5"></span>**14.** Dicendo, Non, quia (*vel,* sed) in
terram Aegypti ibimus (*nam* יכ *potest adversative capi,*) ubi non
videbimus proelium, et vocem tubae non audiemus, et ad panem non
esuriemus, et habitabimus illic:

<span id="xiv.viii-p6"></span>**15.** And now therefore hear the word of
the LORD, ye remnant of Judah; Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel; If ye wholly set your faces to enter into Egypt, and go to
sojourn there;

<span id="xiv.viii-p7"></span>**15.** Nunc propterea audite sermonem
Jehovae, residuum Jehudah, quia sic dicit Jehova exercituum, Deus
Israel, Si vos ponendo posueritis facies vestras ad ingrediendum
Aegyptum (ut ingrediamini in Aegyptum,) et ingressi fueritis illic ad
peregrinandum;

<span id="xiv.viii-p8"></span>**16.** Then it shall come to pass, *that*
the sword, which ye feared, shall overtake you there in the land of
Egypt; and the famine, whereof ye were afraid, shall follow close after
you there in Egypt; and there ye shall die.

<span id="xiv.viii-p9"></span>**16.** Erit (accidet) ut gladius quem vos
timetis ab eo (hoc est, a quo metuitis) illic apprehendat vos (vel,
occurrat vobis illic, nempe) in terra Aegypti, et fames a qua
extimescitis (hoc est, propter quam estis anxii, (vel, quam
expaveseitis, *nam* גאד *utrunque significat*) illic apprehendet vos
(*vel,* adhaerebit vobis, *sed ad verbum,* apprehendet post vos, *vel,*
persequetur vos, *nempe*) in terra Aegypti, et illic moriemini.

<span id="xiv.viii-p10"></span>**17.** So shall it be with all the men
that set their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there; they shall die
by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: and none of them
shall remain or escape from the evil that I will bring upon them.

<span id="xiv.viii-p11"></span>**17.** Et erunt omnes viri qui posuerint
facies suas ut veniant in Aegyptum ad peregrinandum illuc morientur
gladio, fame et peste, et non erit illis superstes aut evasor (id est,
qui evadat) a facie mali quod ego adduco super eos.

<span id="xiv.viii-p12"></span> 

<span id="xiv.viii-p13"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p14"></span>God having promised, that the counsel he
gave to the Jews would be good and safe, now, on the other hand,
threatens them, that if they disobeyed, everything they would attempt
would end miserably. They had not expressly asked whether it would be
for their good to go into Egypt, or whether it would be pleasing to God;
but God, who penetrates into all hidden purposes, anticipated them, and
declared that their going would be unhappy, if they fled into Egypt. We
hence see how the Prophet, or rather God himself, who spoke by his
servant, tried by all means to keep them in the way of duty.

<span id="xiv.viii-p15"></span>He then says, *If ye say, We shall not
dwell in this land,* it shall be ill with you, he says: but before he
denounced punishment, he shewed that they deserved to be destroyed, if
they went to Egypt; for had the thing been in itself lawful, yet to
attempt such a thing against the express will of God was, as we know, an
impious and a diabolical presumption and rashness. God had forbidden
them specifically in his Law ever to set their hearts on Egypt, (<span
id="xiv.viii-p15.1"></span>[De
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016)<span
id="xiv.viii-p15.1"></span>;) and he had often confirmed the same thing
by his Prophets, (<span id="xiv.viii-p15.2"></span>[Isa
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#002)<span id="xiv.viii-p15.2"></span>;
<span id="xiv.viii-p15.3"></span>[Isa
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001)<span
id="xiv.viii-p15.3"></span>;) and now again he seals the former
prophecies, as he expressly forbids them to go to Egypt. The Prophet
then sets this crime before their eyes: “If ye flee into Egypt, what is
it that compels you? even because ye will not obey God.” There is then
great weight in these words, *Nor obey the voice of Jehovah your God*;
as though he had said, that they could not think of Egypt, except they
designedly, as it were, rejected the authority of God, and resisted his
counsel.

<span id="xiv.viii-p16"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p17"></span>He adds, *Saying, No; for we will go into
the land of Egypt, where we shall not see war,* etc. here the Prophet
discovers the very fountain of rebellion, namely, that they paid no
regard to God’s favor. They were indeed exposed to many dangers in their
own land, which produced fear and trembling, and its desolation also
might have filled them with horror and weariness; but as God had
declared that their safety would be cared for by him, how great and how
base an ingratitude it was to deem as nothing that aid which he had
freely promised! The Prophet then, in condemning their disobedience,
shews at the same time the cause of it, even that unbelief led them away
from rendering obedience to God. *If*, then, *ye say,* No, — this word
was a proof of their obstinacy; but he adds, *We shall go* into Egypt,
*where we shall not see war, where we shall not hear the sound of the
trumpet,* as though, indeed, the promise of God were false or void. But
the Prophet here discovers their hidden impiety, that they did not
recumb on God’s promise. They promised then to themselves a peaceable
life in Egypt. Was it in their power to effect this? and God, what could
he do? he had *declared* that they would be safe and secure in the land
of Canaan. It was to charge God with falsehood, to hope for rest in
Egypt, and to imagine nothing but disturbances in the land where God
bade them to remain in quietness.

<span id="xiv.viii-p18"></span>We now then see why he says, *We shall go
into Egypt, where we shall not see war, nor hear the sound of the
trumpet, nor hunger for bread* They promised to themselves an abundance
of all blessings, for the land of Egypt was fruitful. But could not God
afflict them with want? The Egyptians, we know, had also been sometimes
visited with famine. We hence see why God so much condemned the design
of the people as to their going into Egypt; for they entertained vain
hopes, and at the same time charged God indirectly with falsehood.

<span id="xiv.viii-p19"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p20"></span>He adds, *Hear the word of Jehovah, ye
remnant of Judah* Jeremiah, by thus addressing them, no doubt endeavored
to lead them to obedience. We indeed know that men in prosperity are in
a manner inebriated, so that they are not easily induced to obey sound
counsels. For whence comes it that kings and princes of the world
indulge themselves so much, and allow such license to their lusts? even
because the splendor of their fortune inebriates them. So also private
men, when all things succeed according to their wishes, they lodge in
their own dregs; hence it is that they are difficult to be ruled. The
Prophet, on the other hand, shews that there is no reason for them to be
proud. *Ye are,* he says, a small number, and God has wonderfully saved
you. *Hear,* then, *ye remnant of Judah* In short, they are reminded of
their humble and miserable condition, that they might be more teachable.
But this also was done without any fruit, as we shall hereafter see.

<span id="xiv.viii-p21"></span>*This saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel* Of these words we have spoken elsewhere. God is often called the
God of hosts on account of his power: so by this term God sets forth his
own greatness. Afterwards when he is said to be the *God of Israel,* we
know that the benefit of adoption was thus brought to the recollection
of the people; for God had them especially as his people, and bound them
as it were to himself. This ought then to have been a most holy bond of
faithfulness and obedience. It was not, then, by way of honor that the
Prophet thus spoke, but in order to reprove the Israelites for their
hardness and ingratitude towards God. If, he adds, *ye set your faces to
go into Egypt, and ye enter in there to sojourn, it shall be that the
sword which ye fear shall meet you, etc*. Here is their punishment
described, and there is nothing obscure in the words. God shows that
they were greatly deceived, if they thought that they would be
prosperous in Egypt; for no prosperity can be hoped except through the
favor and blessing of God; and God pronounced a curse on all their
perverse counsels when he saw that they would not be restrained by his
word. If, then, we attempt anything contrary to the prohibition of God,
it must necessarily end unsuccessfully; and why? because the cause of
all prosperity is the favor of *God,* and so his curse always renders
all issues sad and unhappy: and however prosperous at first may be what
we undertake against God’s will, yet the end will be wretched and
miserable, according to what the Prophet teaches here.

<span id="xiv.ix"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xiv.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast not
once only shown to us the way and the end to which we ought to proceed,
but art pleased daily to stretch forth thy hand to us, and dost by thy
constant exhortations invite and stimulate us to go onward, — O grant,
that we may attend to thy voice, and so renounce all the corrupt desires
and lusts of our flesh, that nothing may hinder us wholly to submit to
thee, and so to follow whithersoever thou mayest call us, that we may at
length come to that blessed rest, which thou hast prepared for us in
heaven through Christ our Lord — Amen.

<span id="xiv.ix-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.x"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-Eighth

<span id="xiv.xi"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
42:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#018)<span id="xiv.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p2"></span>**18.** For thus saith the LORD of hosts,
the God of Israel; As mine anger and my fury hath been poured forth upon
the inhabitants of Jerusalem; so shall my fury be poured forth upon you,
when ye shall enter into Egypt: and ye shall be an execration, and an
astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach; and ye shall see this place
no more.

<span id="xiv.xi-p3"></span>**18.** Quoniam sic dicit Jehova exercituum,
Deus Israel, Sicuti fusa est iracundia mea et excandescentia mea super
habitatores Jerusalem, sic fundetur excandescentia mea super vos cum
veneritis in Aegyptum; et eritis in execrationem et in stuporem et in
maledictum et in probrum; et non videbitis amplius locum hunc.

<span id="xiv.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xi-p5"></span><span id="xiv.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p6"></span>The Prophet confirms what he had already
said, by an example of God’s vengeance, which had lately been shewn as
to the Jews; for though the destruction of the city and the Temple had
been often predicted to them, they yet had become torpid as to God’s
threatenings. God, however, after having delayed for a long time, at
length executed what he had threatened. They had titan seen that
dreadful example, which ought to have filled them, and also their
posterity, with fear. Then the Prophet, as he saw that they were so
tardy and stupid that they thoughtlessly derided God’s threat-enings,
reminded them of what they had lately seen. “Ye know,” he says, “how
God’s fury had been poured forth on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, such
also will be poured forth on those who will flee into *Egypt.”*

<span id="xiv.xi-p7"></span>Now Jeremiah was able to speak with
authority, as he had been the herald of that vengeance now mentioned. If
any other had declared in God’s name what had happened, they might have
objected and said, that they had indeed been justly punished by God, but
that it did not hence follow flint what he said was true; but as the
Prophet had for forty years often and constantly denounced on them what
at length they had really and by experience found to have been predicted
to them from above, he was able to repeat a similar judgment of God with
the highest authority, as he now does.

<span id="xiv.xi-p8"></span>*Thus saith Jehovah,* he says, *as my fury
was poured forth, etc*. The similitude is taken either from water or
from metals: hence some give this rendering, “As my fury flowed down;”
but the verb used by Jeremiah means properly to pour forth. It may,
however, as I have said, be applied to water, which spreads when poured
out, or to metals, which being liquid spread here and there. He then
means, that all who should go to Egypt would be wretched and miserable;
for wheresoever they might try to withdraw themselves, the vengeance of
God would yet find them though exiles, for it would spread like a deluge
over all the inhabitants, so that they would in vain seek hiding-places.
We now see the design of the Prophet. The meaning is, that as the Jews
had by their calamity known him to have been a true and faithful servant
of God in foretelling the destruction of the city and Temple, so would
they find now, except they repented, that the message by which he
threatened a second destruction, had come also from God. *­Poured
forth,* he says, *shall be mine indignation on you when ye come into
Egypt*

<span id="xiv.xi-p9"></span>He afterwards adds a passage from the Law,
which often occurs in the Prophets, that they would be an *execration,*
an *astonishment, a curse,* and a *reproach* The word <span
id="xiv.xi-p9.1"></span>אלה*, ale,* which we have rendered “execration,”
means properly an oath; but as imprecation is often added, when we wish
to be believed, it is also understood as an execration. He then says
that they would be an *execration,* that is, a formula of execration, as
we have elsewhere explained. Whosoever then had a wish to express a
curse, they would, as the Prophet says, use this form as a common
proverb, *“May* God curse thee as he did the Jews,” — “May I perish as
the Jews perished.” In short, he intimates that the punishment would be
so horrible that men would turn it to a common proverb, he adds, *And an
astonishment,* that is, that God’s vengeance would be so dreadful, that
all would be filled with amazement. He further adds, *And a curse and a
reproach* The sum of what is said is, that God would inflict on the Jews
not a common punishment, but such as would be remembered among all the
heathens, in order that it might appear that their wickedness in
obstinately rejecting the prophetic word was not light.

<span id="xiv.xi-p10"></span>He lastly adds that they should *never see*
their own land; for it was not the design of the Jews to dwell
perpetually in Egypt; for they pretended that they remained firm and
constant in their dependence on God’s promise, and boasted that they had
a hope of a return, because God had fixed seventy years for their exile.
As they then thus foolishly gloried, that they hoped in God for the
promised favor, he says that they were shut out as to any hope of a
return; for though God would restore the other captives dispersed
throughout the East, yet the Egyptian guests were doomed to die in their
exile. This then was to cut off from them every hope, in order that they
might know that they were wholly rejected, and would have a place no
more among- God’s people, however they might wish to be deemed the
first. It follows, —

<span id="xiv.xii"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
42:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#019)<span
id="xiv.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p2"></span>**19.** The LORD hath said concerning you,
O ye remnant of Judah; Go ye not into Egypt: know certainly that I have
admonished you this day.

<span id="xiv.xii-p3"></span>**19.** Loquutus est Jehova contra vos,
reliquiae Jehudah, Ne eatis in Aegyptum; sciendo sciatis quod
contestatus fuerim vos hodie:

<span id="xiv.xii-p4"></span>**20.** For ye dissembled in your hearts,
when ye sent me unto the LORD your God, saying, Pray for us unto the
LORD our God; and according unto all that the LORD our God shall say, so
declare unto us, and we will do *it.*

<span id="xiv.xii-p5"></span>**20.** Quoniam fefellistis animus vestras
(*aut,* fallaces fuistis in animabus vestris) quando misistis me ad
Jehovam Deum vestrum, dicendo, Ora pro nobis Jehovam Deum nostrum; et
secundum omnia quae locutus Jehova Deus noster fuerit, sic annuntia
nobis et faciemus.

<span id="xiv.xii-p6"></span>**21** And *now* I have this day declared
*it* to you; but ye have not obeyed the voice of the LORD your God, nor
any *thing* for the which he hath sent me unto you.

<span id="xiv.xii-p7"></span>**21.** Ego autem annuntiavi vobis hodie,
et non audivistis vocem Jehovae Dei vestri, et secundum omnia propter
quae misit me ad vos.

<span id="xiv.xii-p8"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xii-p9"></span><span id="xiv.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p10"></span>Here the Prophet explains more fully their
sin; for their punishment might have appeared extreme, had not their
impiety been more clearly unfolded. He then says that this punishment
ought not to be regarded as too rigid, because God had not once only
protested against the Jews and admonished them in a solemn manner and
before witnesses; but they to the last not, only despised his counsel
and warnings, but proudly rejected them. And he adds, that they *dealt
falsely and perfidiously* with God, because they pretended that they
would be obedient as soon as the will of God was known; but they shewed
that in reality they had no such purpose; for their own vanity and
deceit took full possession of them when the Prophet answered them in
God’s name; nor had they a desire to obey God.

<span id="xiv.xii-p11"></span>Let us now consider the words: *Jehovah
hath spoken against you, the remnant of Judah* He again calls them a
*remnant,* in order that they might remember that they had no reason any
more to be proud. We know how the Jews while in prosperity disregarded
the Prophets; for they were inebriated with their good fortune. But God
had dissipated this pride, with which they were previously filled. The
Prophet had also set before them the favor through which they had been
liberated, that they might learn hereafter to submit to God and his
word. For this reason then he called them a remnant, even to render them
more attentive and teachable. But it was done without any benefit; for
though their affairs were nearly hopeless, and they were reduced almost
to nothing, yet they had not laid aside their high spirits. They were
then still swollen with false confidence. But this warning, however,
availed to render them more inexcusable.

<span id="xiv.xii-p12"></span>*If ye enter into Egypt,* he says,
*knowing know ye,* or, *knowing ye shall know.* The verb is in the
future tense, though it may be taken as an imperative. But the future
tense is the most suitable, *knowing ye shall know,* that is, the event
itself will teach you, but too late, as the foolish are never wise till
after the evil has taken place. *Knowing ye shall know that I have
protested against you this day.* God says that he had left nothing
undone to bring the Jews to a right mind; for a protest is usually made
in a solemn manner, witnesses being called in, so that no one can plead
that. he has gone astray through ignorance. To take away then every
ground of excuse, witnesses were wont to be called. Hence God speaks
according to the common practice and in a forensic sense, and says that
he had *protested* against the Jews, lest they should by chance offend
through want of knowledge. It then follows, that they knowingly
perished, as though they had sought their own destruction.

<span id="xiv.xii-p13"></span><span id="xiv.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p14"></span>He now adds another circumstance, that
they had sent him under the pretense of rare piety, as though they were
in every way ready to render obedience to God. But he first says that
they had *deceived* themselves, or had been deceived. The verb <span
id="xiv.xii-p14.1"></span>תעה, *toe,* from which the *Hithpael* comes,
means to err or go astray. But interpreters do not agree; for some give
this explanation, that they deceived the Prophet in their hearts, that
is, that they craftily retained their perverse design of going to Egypt,
and at the same time professed that they were ready to obey. But as the
Prophet’s name is not mentioned here, this explanation seems unnatural.
I therefore prefer the other explanation, that they deceived themselves;
and <span id="xiv.xii-p14.2"></span>ב, *beth,* is here redundant, as in
many places: *Ye deceived,* then, *your own souls, when ye sent me,* he
says, *to Jehovah* The Prophet intimates that when they sought to act
craftily they were deceived; for God is wont to discover the astute, and
when they devise this or that, they only weave snares and toils for
themselves; and we see that craftiness ever brings the ungodly to ruin.
The Prophet, according to this sense, derides that perverse affectation
of astuteness, when the ungodly seek to deceive God; and he says that
they deceived themselves, as we see also daily. Then he says that they
themselves had been the authors of the evil, for they had brought
themselves to ruin by their astute and crafty counsel, when they *sent*
him to Jehovah. The <span id="xiv.xii-p14.3"></span>כי*, ki,* is to be
taken here as an adverb of time, *When ye sent me to Jehovah your God,
saying, Pray for us.*  <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128)

<span id="xiv.xii-p19"></span>He reproves them not only for perfidy, but
also for sacrilege, because they wickedly profaned the name of God. For
it. was not to be endured that they should pretend a regard for
religion, and testify that they would be obedient to God, and should at
the same time cherish in their hearts that perverse intention which
afterwards they discovered. And hence he not only relates that he had
been sent, but that he had also been solicited to *intercede* for them.
It was then a twofold sacrilege, for they had asked what would please
God, and afterwards disregarded the prophecy, — and then they offered a
prayer, and when God gave them an answer by his servant., they counted
it as nothing! We now perceive why Jeremiah so expressly mentioned these
two things.

<span id="xiv.xii-p20"></span>*Pray for us to our God, and according to
all which Jehovah our God shall say, relate thou to us*: the people
*seemed* to act with wonderful sincerity; they exhorted the Prophet to
dissemble nothing, to add nothing and to diminish nothing’. What better
can be wished than that men should lay aside all ambiguity and all
evasions, and not wish God’s words to be corrupted? And this the Jews
expressed in high terms, *Whatever Jehovah our God shall answer, declare
thou to us* Here they seemed to have more zeal than Jeremiah himself;
for they enjoined a law, that he should add nothing and diminish
nothing, but that he should be a faithful interpreter of God’s will.
They seemed then to be half-angels. They afterwards testified that they
would *do whatever* God should *command* them.

<span id="xiv.xii-p21"></span><span id="xiv.xii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p22"></span>He at length adds, *And I have this day
declared it to you* Here he sets forth his own fidelity, not for the
sake of boasting, but that their impiety might be reproved, who at
length despised the oracle of God, which they had boasted that they
would obey. *Ye have not hearkened,* he says, *to the voice of Jehovah
your God, and according to all the things on account of which he hath
sent me to you.* The Prophet again confirms the truth, that it was their
own fault that the Jews did not follow what was right, and also what was
for their good, for he had faithfully delivered to them what God had
commanded. He now adds, —

<span id="xiv.xiii"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
42:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#022)<span id="xiv.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p2"></span>**22.** Now therefore know certainly that
ye shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, in the
place whither ye desire to go *and* to sojourn.

<span id="xiv.xiii-p3"></span>**22.** Et nunc sciendo scitote (*hic*
<span id="xiv.xiii-p3.1"></span>תדעו *imperative sumendum est sine
controversia*) quod gladio et fame et peste moriemini in loco ad quem
appetitis ire, ad peregrinandum illic.

<span id="xiv.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xiii-p5"></span><span id="xiv.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet at length concludes his
discourse, after having mentioned the reasons why God would deal so
severely with them, even because their perfidy, impiety, ingratitude,
and obstinate contempt were unsufferable. After having then shewn that
they had no reason to expostulate as though God were extremely rigid, he
at length declares what end awaited them, even that they should *die by
the sword, famine, or pestilence,* that is, that there would be no hope
of safety to them, because if they escaped from the sword, they should
be beset with famine, and if they evaded the famine, they should be
destroyed by pestilence. It is a common mode of speaking with the
Prophets, as it is well known, that when they intimate that the ungodly
in vain hope for impunity, they represent God as having at his command
all kinds of punishment.

<span id="xiv.xiii-p7"></span>*Ye shall* then, he says, *die in that
place which ye seek for your sojourn, he* again shews the object of the
people, for they did not intend to dwell perpetually in Egypt, but only
for a time, until there was liberty to return to their own country. In
short, they wished to be restored, as it were, against God’s will; and
yet they ceased not falsely to put forward the name of God, as
hypocrites, who mock God, always do. Now follows, —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc20013.htm#fr_126) <span
id="xiv.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p14"></span> Our version is, “to whom we send thee,”
and correctly too: literally it is, “whom we send thee to him,” an idiom
common in Hebrew and also in *Welsh, “*<span
id="xiv.iii-p14.1"></span>*yr* hwn y danfonwn di atto.” The *Vulg.* is,
“to whom we send thee;” and so in the *Syriac.* and *Targum.,* but the
*Septuagint* tried to imitate the Hebrew, and there is no sense given. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc20013.htm#fr_127) <span
id="xiv.vi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p24"></span> The phrase often occurs, and has ever this
meaning; and it is the meaning here, no doubt, though the *Sept.* and
the *Vulg.* adopt the other sense. The versions often give different
senses to the same phrases, which render them unsafe guides. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc20013.htm#fr_128) <span
id="xiv.xii-p14.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p15"></span> All the versions and the *Targum* differ
as to the *construction* of these two verses, the 19th and the 20th, and
modern authors too. I offer the following rendering, —

<span id="xiv.xii-p16"></span>**19.** The word of Jehovah to you, the
remnant of Judah, *is this,* Enter not into Egypt; knowing, know (or,
surely know,) that I make this pro-

<span id="xiv.xii-p17"></span>**20.** test to you this day. Verily, ye
do go greatly astray against your own selves; for ye sent me to Jehovah
your God, etc., etc.

<span id="xiv.xii-p18"></span>The first clause is according to the
*Vulg.* The express message was, not to enter into Egypt. What they were
to know and remember was the protest he made to them. Then in verse
20th, he charges them with inconsistency, that they went astray from
their own professions, and afterwards he specifies what they had
promised. There is, according to this view, a consistency in the whole
passage. The word *soul* is often taken for the person: “against your
own selves,” is literally “against your own souls.” The meaning of the
phrase is, that they belied themselves, as it is evident from what
follows. The past tense in Hebrew may often be rendered by the present,
as it refers to time up to the present and including the present. The
future also in Hebrew may be rendered by the present, because it refers
often to what is now and continues to *be.* — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 43](cc20014)
