[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc20002)  [Next](cc20004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 20: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part IV*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 32

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001)<span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>**1**. The word that came to Jeremiah from the
LORD in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which *was* the
eighteenth year of Nebuehadrezzar.

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span>**1**. Sermo qui datus fait Jeremiae a Jehova
anno decimo Zedechiae regis Jehudah; hic annus est decimus octavus
Nabuchadnezer:

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span>**2**. For then the king of Babylon’s army
besieged Jerusalem: and Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the court of
the prison, which *was* in the king of Judah’s house.

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span>**2**. Et tunc exercitus regis Babylonii
obsidebat Jerosolymam, et Jeremias propheta erat indusus in atrio
custodiae qum est in palatio regis Jehudah;

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span>**3**. For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him
up, saying, Wherefore dost thou prophesy, and say, Thus saith the LORD,
Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and
he shall take it;

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span>**3**. Quia incluserat ipsum Zedechias rex
Jehudab, dicendo, Quare tu prophetizas dicendo, sic dicit Jehova, Ecce
ego trado urbem hanc in manum regis Babylonii, et capiet eam.

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span><span id="iv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span>The Prophet here declares, that though he was
shut up in prison, the Word of God was not bound, and that he himself
was not less loose and free in his confinement than if he rambled
through the whole city and visited all the lanes and the streets. He
then did not desist from his office as a Prophet, though he was cast
into prison. And thus we see that the course of heavenly truth cannot be
impeded, how much soever the world may rage against all its ministers,
and bind them in order to make them mute: and then also we see here that
the constancy of the Prophet was invincible, because he was not cast
down with fear, though he was a captive and not beyond the reach of
danger; for we find that even then he proceeded in the discharge of his
office.

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span><span id="iv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span>He points out then the circumstances of that
time, and not without reason, when he says, that he was then *shut up in
prison,* and also mentions the year, even the tenth of Zedekiah and the
eighteenth of king Nebuchadnezar.  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58)
It was about the end of the ninth year that the army of Nebuchadnezar
came up to Jerusalem; the city was besieged for two months in that year.
The tenth year followed, in which this vision was given to the Prophet.
The siege continued for a year and a half; but there was some
interruption; for the Egyptians came to its aid. Thus for a short time,
while the Chaldeans went to meet them, it had some liberty. But the
Egyptians, as we shall hereafter see, were forced to retire in disgrace,
and afterwards suffered punishment for their audacity and rashness. It
was then about the middle of the siege that God, as we shall see,
foretold to the Prophet the future return of the people. But though God
shewed a regard for the miserable exiles, he yet at the same time
confirmed what he had previously said of his future vengeance; for the
people could not be restored before they had been driven into exile. It
was indeed a dreadful instance of hardness and obduracy, that having
been so often scourged they received no benefit. They had experienced
the heavy judgment of God under Jehoiakim, and also under Jeconiah; but
the memory of these calamities had soon vanished, and they lived as
securely as though they had never heard a word from the mouth of
Jeremiah: and he was not the only one who had threatened them, but there
were before him Isaiah and others, and at the same time with him was
Ezekiel, who had been exiled into Chaldea. Then from the number of years
we conclude how great must have been the obstinacy of the people.

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span>At the same time we must observe how
seasonable was this prophecy for alleviating the minds of the godly, as
they were not far from extreme calamity; for it was in the eleventh year
of Zedekiah and in the fourth month that the city was taken and
demolished, the people driven into exile, and the Temple burnt. Then
there were not more than six or seven months, perhaps, to the time of
their utter ruin; there is indeed no mention made here of the month in
which the Prophet received the vision, but the tenth year is only
mentioned. Now, the city was taken at the beginning of the eleventh
year, as we have stated. Hence then comes more fully to light the
extreme perverseness of the people; for while the enemy surrounded the
city, they held Jeremiah captive. He had already foretold many years
past what experience then taught them to be true. For forty years he had
not ceased to cry out and to strive by warning, exhorting, and
threatening them to lead them to repentance. As then nothing new
happened to them, and as they found by the evils which came on them that
Jeremiah had been a true and faithful servant of God, what was their
object in shutting him up in prison? was not this to carry on war with
God? for what had they to do with Jeremiah? He had not evidently acted a
private part, nor had he only dreamt of what he had so often foretold
them. Then they did not fight with a mortal man, but like the giants
they dared to raise up their horns against God himself.

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span>For the same reason also, he calls himself a
*Prophet* This indeed he often did, but there is no doubt but that the
indignity offered to him is pointed out, that even at the time when the
Chaldeans surrounded the city with their army, Jeremiah the *Prophet*
was shut up in the court of the prison. He might have only said, that
Jeremiah was shut up, but for honor’s sake he assumed the title of a
Prophet, that hence might appear more evidently the baseness of the
people’s contumacy, that though they perceived that God was angry with
them, they yet ceased not from their presumption; for they then held the
Prophet in prison as though they were fighting with God himself. We know
that fools, according to the old proverb, being chastised, become wise.
If then the Jews had a particle or a spark of wisdom, they might have
been so subdued by evils and calamities as to cast aside their
haughtiness and obstinacy. But we see that they were untameable, and
through a mad fury persisted in their wickedness; for though besieged by
their enemies, they yet attempted to hold God as it were captive in the
person of his servant.

<span id="iv.i-p16"></span>As to the *court* of the prison, I doubt not
but it was a milder sort of imprisonment, for we shall hereafter see
that the Prophet prayed that he might not be thence thrown into the dark
prison where he had been. He sought it as no common favor to remain in
some prison; and he was as yet exposed to the mockeries of all. However
this may have been, we see that the people had then become nothing
better, though they had already been chastised and scourged by God.

<span id="iv.i-p17"></span>We ought at the same timeto bear in mind what
I have already said, that though the ungodly sought in all ways wholly
to extinguish the word of God, they yet did not attain what they wished;
for God broke through all hinderances, and continued the course of his
word notwithstanding all their attempts. And this ought to be carefully
noticed, for we see at this day all sorts of contrivances made by the
wicked to impede the course of celestial truth. Let then this history be
remembered, that though Jeremiah was a captive, yet his word was free
and his tongue at liberty, as Paul also boasts, that though he was bound
with chains, yet God’s word was not bound. (<span
id="iv.i-p17.1"></span>[2Ti 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i-p17.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.i-p18"></span><span id="iv.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p19"></span>Then the reason is added why he was shut up
in prison, — he had dared to prophesy against the city and the king
himself. It was no wonder that the king’s mind was exasperated when
Jeremiah boldly said that he would come into the hands of his enemies,
for he had not only spoken of the ruin of the city, but also of the fall
of the king; he had said that he would be brought before king
Nebuchadnezar, and be led to Babylon, and be there until God visited
him. We know how delicate are the ears of kings; it was then no wonder
Zedekiah became incensed against Jeremiah; but yet he ought to have been
softened and humbled when he found that this oracle had come from God.
That he then still kept Jeremiah a prisoner, proves his madness and
stupidity, for he had no regard for God. I shall proceed with the
subject to-morrow.

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we cease not
daily to provoke thy wrath against us, we may be warned by thy word and
repent, and so humble ourselves before thee that we may anticipate the
rigor of thy judgment, and that being also chastised by thy hand, we may
not become hardened, but be submissive to thee and teachable, and so
profit under thy discipline, that being at length wholly devoted to
thee, we may have no other object than to glorify thy holy name, until
we shall become partakers of that glory which thine only-begotten Son
has obtained for us. — Amen.

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-Sixth

<span id="iv.iii-p2"></span>We began yesterday to speak of the
presumption, and also of the madness of King Zedekiah in keeping the
Prophet in prison, while he was yet besieged by his enemies, as it had
been foretold. He saw that Jeremiah had spoken as from the mouth of God,
for the accomplishment of the prophecy proved that he had brought
forward nothing rashly, but what had been committed to him from above;
and yet he did not throw aside his own perverseness. The words
themselves shew sufficiently that he was wholly blinded, for he said,
*Wherefore dost thou prophesy to us, The Chaldeans will come and take
this city?* It was not indeed the design of this foolish and insane king
to close the mouth of the Prophet, and, at the same time, to confess
that he had a command from God; but thus it is commonly with the wicked,
they assail as it were blindly the servants of God, without any judgment
or discrimination. Were any one to ask them, whether they mean openly
and professedly to resist God as their judge, they would deny it; but
yet they cannot bear to be warned and reproved. Here then, as in a
mirror, we see how madly all the wicked resist God, and try as much as
they can to extinguish his Spirit. In short, they may, indeed, concede
some authority to God, provided they be allowed to live without having
anything said against their lusts by his prophets. There is yet no doubt
but that the king was especially exasperated by the following words of
the Prophet, —

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p2"></span>**4**. And Zedekiah king of Judah shall not
escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans, but shall surely be delivered
into the hand of the king of Babylon, and shall speak with him mouth to
mouth, and his eyes shall behold his eyes;

<span id="iv.iv-p3"></span>**4**. Et Zedechia rex Jehudah not effugiet e
manu Chaldeorum, quia tradendo tradam in manum regis Babel, et loquetur
os ejus cum ore illius, et oculi ejus octrios ejus videbunt.

<span id="iv.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p6"></span>When, therefore, the king saw that he would
not be exempt from the common judgment, he was especially displeased
with Jeremiah; for kings seek to be exempt from all laws, and when they
allow the people to be reproved, they yet wish themselves to be deemed
sacred. As then Jeremiah classed the king Zedekiah with all the common
people, it was a thing not to be endured by a proud king. Hence his
indignation was such, that he shut up Jeremiah in prison; and he became
implacable, even when God’s hand pressed hard on him. It afterwards
follows, —

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#005)<span id="iv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p2"></span>**5**. And he shall lead Zedekiah to Babylon,
and there shall he be until I visit him, saith the LORD: though ye fight
with the Chaldeans, ye shall not prosper.

<span id="iv.v-p3"></span>**5**. Et Babylonem abducet Zedechiam, et
illic erit usque dum visitavero ipsum, dicit Jehova; quando proeliati
fueritis adversus Chaldeos, no, prospere vobis cedet?

<span id="iv.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v-p5"></span><span id="iv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p6"></span>He follows the same subject, *Lead,* he says,
*will King Nebuchadnezar Zedekiah captive; and* he will remain in exile
until I shall *visit him.* Some understand this time of visiting of his
death, for it is certain that he died in Babylon; and as his condition
was not improved like that of Jeconiah who was taken from the filth of a
prison to the table of the king, this exposition at the first view seems
probable, that is, that he was worn down to death by poverty and
disgrace. It, however, seems that some alleviation was promised, if
indeed a certain kind of death may be deemed a favor; for he was not
slain with the sword; and though he was not restored to his own country,
there is yet nothing improper in this way of speaking, that he would be
in exile until he was visited, for nothing particular could be hence
concluded; and we shall hereafter see that when dead he was buried
honorably and with mourning. It is then no wonder that God points out
here a time of favor, though Zedekiah was never restored to his own
Country, and we know that his eyes were plucked out by King
Nebuchadnezar, after having been tried and condemned. But this favor of
God, however, is not here without reason mentioned, for Nebuchadnezar at
length treated him more kindly, at least as far as his burial was
concerned: *Lead him,* then he says, *shall Nebuchadnezar into Babylon,
and he shall be there until I shall visit him;* that is, he shall remain
an exile in a filthy prison, and there he shall pine away and be
destitute of all help; he shall be then as one of the lowest, and shall,
in short, drag on life ignominiously until the time of my visitation.

<span id="iv.v-p7"></span>He lastly adds, *When ye fight against the
Chaldeans, ye shall not succeed* Here the Prophet meets those foolish
notions which still filled the minds of the Jews, so that they did not
submit to God nor humble themselves under his mighty hand; for there was
yet a large number of men, and the city had strong fortifications. As
then they saw that they were furnished with men and forces, they were
still confident; and then they became hardened on account of the length
of the time they had sustained the siege. When enemies make the first
attack, fear fills the minds of all; but when the event disappoints
them, then they who before trembled gather courage. So it was with the
Jews; for when the city was first encompassed by the Chaldean army, the
miserable inhabitants no doubt were greatly terrified; but when they saw
their enemies stopped, and effecting nothing by their attacks, they then
hardened their hearts more and more. For we must notice what I said
yesterday, that they had been besieged probably six or eight months when
this vision was given to Jeremiah. Hence it was that their confidence
was greater. But the Prophet repels this folly by saying,

<span id="iv.v-p8"></span>“Ye fight against the Chaldeans, but the issue
will be unsuccessful; for God will lay you prostrate before your
enemies, for with him ye carry on war.”

<span id="iv.v-p9"></span>The sum of this introduction is, that Jeremiah
was then shut up in prison, and that the king continued in his
contumacy, though God’s hand pressed hard on him; and then the cause of
this is set forth, even because he boldly threatened the king and the
city, and deelard that God’s vengeance was nigh them, so that the king
would be led into exile and the city taken and plundered by their
enemies. It now follows, —

<span id="iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:6-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#006)<span id="iv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p2"></span>**6**. And Jeremiah said, The word of the
LORD came unto me, saying,

<span id="iv.vi-p3"></span>**6**. Et dixit Jeremias, Fuit sermo Jehovae
ad me dicendo,

<span id="iv.vi-p4"></span>**7**. Behold, Hanameel the son of Shallum,
thine uncle, shall come unto thee, saying, Buy thee my field that *is*
in Anathoth: for the right of redemption *is* thine to buy *it*

<span id="iv.vi-p5"></span>**7**. Ecce Chanameel filius Sellum patrui
tui yenit ad to (aut, venturus est ad to) qui dicet, Eme tibi agrum meum
qui est in Anathoth; quia tibi jus affinitatis (vertunt, jus
redemptionis, sed redemptio illa refertur ad affinitatem, vel
cognationem, jus ignitur cognationis) ad emendum.

<span id="iv.vi-p6"></span>**8**. So Hanameel mine uncle’s son came to
me in the court of the prison according to the word of the LORD, and
said unto me, Buy my field, I pray thee, that *is* in Anathoth, which
*is* in the country of Benjamin: for the right of inheritance *is*
thine, and the redemption *is* thine; buy *it* for thyself. Then I knew
that this *was* the word of the LORD.

<span id="iv.vi-p7"></span>**8**. Et venit ad me Chanameel filius patrui
mei, sicut loquutus fuerat Jehova, ad atrium custodiae, et dixit mihi,
Eme agedum agrum meum qui est in Anathoth, quod oppidum est in terra
Benjamin, quia tibi jus haereditatis (vel, possessionis; <span
id="iv.vi-p7.1"></span>ירש significat proprie haereditario jure
possidere) et tibi redemptio; eme tibi: tunc cognovi quod hic esset
sermo Jehovae.

<span id="iv.vi-p8"></span>**9**. And I bought the field of Hanameel, my
uncle’s son, that *was* in Anathoth, and weighed him the money, *even*
seventeen shekels of silver.

<span id="iv.vi-p9"></span>**9**. Et emi agrum ab ChanameeI filio patrui
mei qui erat in Anathoth, et appendi ei pecuniam, septem siclos et decem
nunmxos argentcos.

<span id="iv.vi-p10"></span>**10**. And I subscribed the evidence, and
sealed *it*, and took witnesses, and weighed *him* the money in the
balances.

<span id="iv.vi-p11"></span>**10**. Et scripsi in libro et obsignavi, et
contestatus sum testes, et appendi pecuniam in statem (vel, in lancibus;
est in auribus, sed metaphorice trutinam in duali numero vocant aures)

<span id="iv.vi-p12"></span>**11**. So I took the evidence of the
purchase, *both* that which was sealed *according* to the law and
custom, and that which was open:

<span id="iv.vi-p13"></span>**11**. Et sumpsi librum emptionis
obsignatum ex praescripto et ritu (vel, more, vel, statuto) et apertum.

<span id="iv.vi-p14"></span>**12**. And I gave the evidence of the
purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, in the
sight of Hanameel, mine uncle’s *son*, and in the presence of the
witnesses that subscribed the book of the purchase, before all the Jews
that sat in the court of the prison.

<span id="iv.vi-p15"></span>**12**. EL dedi librum emptionis Baruch
filio Neriae filii Maassiae coram oculis Chanameel patruelis mei, et
coram oculis testium qui scripti erant in libro emptionis, coram oculis
omnium Judaeorum qui sedebant in atrio custodiae;

<span id="iv.vi-p16"></span>**13**. And I charged Baruch before them,
saying,

<span id="iv.vi-p17"></span>**13**. Et praecepi Baruch coram oculis
ipsorum, dicendo,

<span id="iv.vi-p18"></span>**14**. Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the
God of Israel, Take these evidences, this evidence of the purchase, both
which is sealed, and this evidence which is open; and put them in an
earthen vessel, that they may continue many days.

<span id="iv.vi-p19"></span>**14**. Sic dicit Jehova exercituum, Deus
Israel, Sume Flbros istos, librum emptionis hunc et obsignatum et librum
apertum (hoc est, tam obsignatum quam apertum hunt librum) et pone cos
in vase testacco, ut perstent ad multos dies, (nunc sequitur applicatio
visionis:)

<span id="iv.vi-p20"></span>**15**. For thus saith the LORD of hosts,
the God of Israel; Houses and fields and vineyards shall be possessed
again in this land.

<span id="iv.vi-p21"></span>**15**. Quia sic elicit Jehova exercituum,
Deus Israel, Adhuc ement domos et agros et vineas in terra hac.

<span id="iv.vi-p22"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi-p23"></span><span id="iv.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p24"></span>The whole of this passage ought to be read
together, for the Prophet at large explains how and by what symbol this
prophecy had been confirmed. Now the purpose of the whole is to shew
that after a long time the Jews would return to their own country, for
God would restore them, and their captivity would have an end. God’s
design, then, was to give them a hope of deliverance, but yet they were
admonished to wait patiently for the end of their exile.

<span id="iv.vi-p25"></span>Let us now come to the external symbol. The
Prophet was commanded to buy a field of his uncle’s son. Now this
appeared strange, for the enemies had taken possession of that part of
the country, and none of the Jews could then venture to go out to their
own fields. As then they were deprived of the very sight of their own
fields, the Prophet must have appeared to have been beside himself when
he bought a field in the possession of enemies. But in this way God
intended to shew, that after the Jews had for a time been deprived of
the possession of the land, they would again return to it, so that every
one would recover his own right, and thus everything would become
completely their own, that is, after God had shewed them mercy.

<span id="iv.vi-p26"></span><span id="iv.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p27"></span>But in the first place, let us see whether
this was, as they say, a naked vision, or a real transaction. Some think
that it was exhibited to Jeremiah by the prophetic Spirit; but it may be
easily gathered from the context that the field was actually bought. It
is first said, that the *word came to Jeremiah;* but shortly after it is
added, that after his uncle’s son came, Jeremiah was informed that the
whole business was directed by God. God then foretold the Prophet what
was to be, *Behold, Hanameel the son of Shallum, thine uncle, shall come
to thee,* and shall offer to sell his field to thee. This is what God
said to the Prophet; and thus far we may say, that Jeremiah was informed
of what was to be either by a dream or a vision; but when he afterwards
adds, that Hanameel himself came, and that Jeremiah testifies that he
now knew that it was from the Lord, there is no doubt but that it is a
real narrative. God then inducedHanameel to come to Jeremiah and to
offer him the field on sale, and to ask him to buy it, because he was
the next heir, and therefore had the right of redemption. We then
perceive that it was a communication from above, but then the reality
was connected with it, for Hanameel came and sold the field before
witnesses; and all this was necessary, not so much on account of
Jeremiah as of the whole people, and especially of the faithful, for
whom this prophecy was particularly designed; for God did not intend
this to be a common treasure, but laid it up for his chosen people, as
we may gather from the conclusion.

<span id="iv.vi-p28"></span>Before Hanameel then came, the Prophet was
instructed that nothing was done unadvisedly, but that God had arranged
and ordered the whole. He was then commanded to buy the field, and as it
were to cast away his money; for who would not have said that it was the
same thing as to throw it away? And then we are to notice a circumstance
as to the time; for the Prophet was then in danger of his life, to what
purpose then was the field to him? We have also said that he could not
have a free access to it, had he not been shut up in prison; for he
could not have ventured to go out of the city. It was then a most
strange and ridiculous purchase according to the judgment of the flesh;
for Jeremiah squandered away his money, and the possession of the field
was only imaginary. But yet as God would have him to buy it, he spared
not his money, but purchased the field from his uncle’s son.

<span id="iv.vi-p29"></span><span id="iv.vi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p30"></span>He then says, that *Hanameel his uncle’s son
came,* as Jehovah had spoken, that he *came into the court of the
prison,* and that he spoke to him as God had foretold. As to the end of
the verse, it may seem strange that the Prophet says, that he now *knew*
that the word came from God: for if he before doubted, where would be
the certainty as to the prophetic spirit? He had already received a
vision; he ought to have embraced what he knew had been foretold to him
from above, even without any hesitation: but it appears that he was in
suspense and perplexity. It then seems an evidence of unbelief, that he
did not put a full and all entire trust in God’s testimony, and was not
fully persuaded as to the heavenly oracle, until he saw the whole thing
really accomplished. But it is right to distinguish between the
knowledge received from the revelation of the Spirit and experimental
knowledge, as they say. The Prophet therefore did not then for the first
time learn that God had spoken, but as he was confirmed in the certainty
of his faith, and in the thing itself, there is no inconsistency; for
nothing is taken away from the credit and authority of God’s word, when
the reality and experience confirm us; and thus God often has a regard
to the weakness of his people. Jeremiah then relied on God’s oracle, and
was fully persuaded that he was directed from above to buy the field;
but afterwards, when Hanameel came to him, the event was as it were the
sealing of the vision: then the truth of God was more and more confirmed
in the heart of the Prophet. This, as I have said, was experimental
knowledge, which detracts nothing from the credibility of the word, but
is rather a help and a comfort to human infirmity. In this sense it was
that he said, that he now *knew* it; and thus he intended also to make
others to believe the prophecy. For when the faithful compare a vision
with its accomplishment, this consent and harmony, so to speak, avails
not a little to confirm their faith, that as when in one part they hear
that God had spoken, and when in another they see that what the Prophet
had been taught was really fulfilled.  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59)

<span id="iv.vi-p32"></span><span id="iv.vi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p33"></span>He afterwards adds, that he *bought the
field of Hanameel his uncle’s son, which was in Anathoth,* in *the land
of Benjamin* There is nothing superfluous in these words, for though the
Prophet speaks of places well known, yet he had a regard to the time of
the purchase, for the land of Benjamin was then in the power of enemies:
the Jews had been reduced to such straits that they were not safe at
Jerusalem. Anathoth was a village, as it was well known, exposed to the
ravages of enemies, and was seized on as a prey at their first coming.
And he adds, *in the land of Benjamin,* for it was nigh the borders of
Judah, but it had been forsaken by its inhabitants, and all had fled to
Jerusalem. As then the land of Benjamin had no inhabitant, it was by no
means reasonable for the Prophet to pay even the smallest sum for a
field there.

<span id="iv.vi-p34"></span><span id="iv.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p35"></span>It may now be asked, how could Hanameel, who
was of the Levitical order, sell a field, for we know that fields did
not belong to the Levites, and that they had tithes for their
inheritance. (<span id="iv.vi-p35.1"></span>[Nu
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#021)<span id="iv.vi-p35.1"></span>)
But this is to be taken for a suburban field, for they had the suburbs,
and each had a meadow: they neither ploughed nor reaped, nor was it
indeed lawful for them, according to the law, to labor in agriculture,
but they fed cattle and sheep: and this is proved by the smallness of
the sum given; for what was the field sold for? for seven shekels and
ten pieces of silver.  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) We hence see
that it was not a large field, but only a meadow like a garden; for the
price would have been larger, had it been some acres of land. Then the
difficulty here is easily removed, for Hanameel sold to Jeremiah a small
meadow, as every Levite had in the suburbs a meadow to feed his sheep or
his cattle; at the same time none of them had large herds, but each had
a cow or two. This, then, is what we are to understand by the field.

<span id="iv.vi-p37"></span><span id="iv.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p38"></span>The Prophet adds, that he *wrote a book,*
that is, the writing of the purchase; for <span
id="iv.vi-p38.1"></span>ספר *sepher,* means in Hebrew, not only a
volume, but what we call a document, and the Latins tablets, *(tabulas)*
Then he says that the writing of the purchase was made, and then it was
*sealed,* not as we do by appending a seal to it, but it was closed up,
as the custom then was. He also adds, according to *the law and custom;*
and at last he says that another writing was made which remained *open;*
and it is thought that the open writing means what we call *a copy;* and
so the sealed writing was deposited in a chest, and the open copy could
be referred to at any time.  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) Though
the Prophet alludes to a common custom, yet I doubt not but that he
wrote this prophecy on rolls, one sealed and the other open, in order
that those who were then living might receive some benefit from his
doctrine, and also that the authentic copy, or the original itself,
might remain for posterity, as we shall hereafter see. And doubtless God
not only intended to strengthen the hope of the faithful after the
completed time of exile, as this prophecy would he dormant for seventy
years; but he designed also that it should be then of use, so as to be a
support to them in their sufferings. There was also another benefit to
be derived from this prophecy, even that the Jews while in exile might
begin to entertain hope, and remembering this vision, might feel assured
that God would be their Deliverer, according to what he had promised.

<span id="iv.vi-p41"></span>This then was the reason why two writings of
the purchase were made, the sealed and the open.  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) The open had a present benefit, as it
would make the faithful to go more willingly into exile, and calmly to
submit to the chastisement allotted to them by God; and for this reason
the Prophecy was to be open to all. It was also sealed, in order that
after the lapse of seventy years it might animate the godly, and inspire
them with the hope of their promised deliverance. This, therefore, is
the reason, as I think, why the Prophet relates that he made a writing
and sealed it, and then that he made another writing which remained
open.

<span id="iv.vi-p48"></span><span id="iv.vi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p49"></span>He afterwards adds, that he gave both to his
scribe *Baruch, the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, in the presence
of Hanameel, and in the presence of the witnesses who had subscribed the
writings, and in the presence of all who stood there,* that is, in the
court of the prison. Hence we may again plainly conclude, that he is
narrating a real history, and not a vision exhibited to him: the seller,
Hanameel, was present together with witnesses and other Jews; and he
says that he gave up the writing with certain orders, for otherwise it
would have been merely the delivering up of a book. If he had only
deposited it with Baruch, the people would have learnt nothing; but the
orders are added, *I charged* Baruch, *saying,* etc. We hence may also
conclude, that this oracle was given to the Prophet, not only that it
might continue for posterity, even after the time of exile was
completed, but that it might also be then published and made known to
all the Jews. He then says, *Thus saith Jehovah* He had not yet shewn
the design of the prophecy; but when he said that the affair was carried
on by the command of God, he rendered them all attentive. *Take,* he
says, *these writings, and put them* in an *earthen* or a potter’s
*vessel* It seems strange that he did not bid him to put them in another
kind of vessel, for that vessel might become decayed, and so the
writings might have perished. But we know that even the most precious
treasures are deposited in earthen vessels. It is then no wonder that
God commanded the prophecy to be put in an earthen vessel. Were any one
disposed to understand something more refined, it might be said, that
the promise, which apparently was not very firm, was an earthen vessel;
for what is more frail than a voice which is dissipated into air? The
Jews were driven into exile; they had heard from the mouth of Jeremiah,
that the prefixed period was seventy years: but they might, in the
meantime have despaired, since only the sound of the voice had reached
their ears. However this may be, since the oracle, which was a pledge of
deliverance, had been laid up in an earthen vessel, it remained safe and
undecayed, because the treasure had been deposited there by God’s
command.

<span id="iv.vi-p50"></span><span id="iv.vi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p51"></span>He says, *That they may continue for many
days* By these words he intimates that the prophecy would not only be
profitable to the Jews, who were to be driven soon after into captivity,
but also to their posterity, who were not yet born, and that they might
know that this prophecy would stand valid after their death, for we
ought not to measure the faithfulness of God by the extent of our life.
This, then, was the reason why this clause was added: the prophecy was
to be preserved in earthen vessels, that it might remain safe and secure
for many days, that is, until God delivered his people.

<span id="iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iv.vii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we have at
this day the evidence of eternal salvation sealed in earthen vessels,
and thou invitest us to the hope of that blessed inheritance by the
voice of men, — O grant, that we may not judge of the permanence of thy
faithfulness by the appearance of those whom thou hast made our
ministers, but relying on thy perpetuity, may we never doubt but that
that life will be kept safe for us, which now every moment seems to
vanish away, until at last we shall come to the full fruition of it in
Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-Seventh

<span id="iv.viii-p2"></span>Though we sufficiently perceive the meaning
of the preceding prophecy, it may, however, be proper to touch briefly
on the last part, which is the application of the vision, *Houses, and
fields, and vineyards shall yet be bought in this land* God’s design
then was, that his servant should lay out his money without any regard
to his own interest, in order that he might, by this expense, cherish
the hope of the faithful to the time of restoration. What is here said
was deemed incredible, for no one thought that such a change would
happen, as that a permission would be given to the Jews to return to
their own country; for the power of the Chaldean monarchy was deemed
invincible, and it was necessary for it to be wholly overthrown, in
order that God’s people might be set free. For this reason then the
vision was given, even that the Jews might know that their calamity
would not be perpetual, for God had resolved to restore the people and
the land. But by the word *field,* all possessions were designated, for
he names not only fields, but also *houses* and *vineyards.* It now
follows —

<span id="iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p1"></span><span id="iv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#016)<span id="iv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p2"></span>**16**. Now when I had delivered the evidence
of the purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah, I prayed unto the LORD,
saying,

<span id="iv.ix-p3"></span>**16**. Et prcatus sum Jehovam postquam dedi
librum emptionis Baruch filio Neriae, dicendo,

<span id="iv.ix-p4"></span>**17**. Ah Lord GOD! behold, thou hast made
the heaven and the earth by thy great power and stretched-out arm, *and*
there is nothing too hard for thee:

<span id="iv.ix-p5"></span>**17**. Heu Domine Jehova! Ecce tu fecisti
coelos et terram in potentia tua magna et brachio tuo extento; non est
ulla res abscondita a to, *(vel,* mirabilis)

<span id="iv.ix-p6"></span>**18**. Thou shewest lovingkindness unto
thousands, and recompensest the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom
of their children after them: The Great, the Mighty God, the LORD of
hosts, *is* his name,

<span id="iv.ix-p7"></span>**18**. Faciens *(vel,* tu facis) clementiam
erga mille et rependis iniquitatem patrum in sinum filiorum eorum post
ipsos; Deus fortis, potens, Jehova exercituum nomen ejus, *(et quoe
sequuntur)*

<span id="iv.ix-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix-p9"></span><span id="iv.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p10"></span>Though the Prophet was discharging his own
office, yet he confesses that he was himself perplexed at the vision. It
hence appears that God’s counsel was not always made known in everything
to the Prophets, but as far as it was expedient. However, the Prophets
were not seized with ecstasies like heathen soothsayers, who pretended
they were carried away beyond all their senses. There was not then this
fanaticism in the Prophets, so that they spoke like sounding brass, or
like the ass of Balaam; but the Lord discovered to them what they
taught. They were then disciples, so that they delivered faithfully to
the people, as if it were from hand to hand, what was committed to them.
But the knowledge with which they were endued was not inconsistent with
ignorance as to some things; as when the Prophet said, *Houses, and
fields, and vineyards shall yet be bought,* he knew that God promised
the restitution of the land and of the people, nor was the vision itself
an obscure enigma; but yet the reason was hid from him, and hence the
perplexity of which he now speaks; for being astonished at so wonderful
a thing, he had recourse to prayer, and confessed that his mind was
perplexed. The wonder then of the Prophet proceeded from his ignorance;
but that ignorance was not incompatible with prophetic knowledge. For as
far as it was necessary, and the office of a teacher required, he no
doubt understood the counsel of God; but such was the height or the
depth of this mystery, that he was constrained to confess that it was a
work of God which surpassed all his thoughts.

<span id="iv.ix-p11"></span>We now then perceive how these two things
are consistent, — the prophetic knowledge with which Jeremiah was
endued, and the ignorance which compelled him to make this exclamation.
He knew with certainty what had been shewn to him in the vision, but
what was the design and how the work could be done by God, seemed
incomprehensible, and hence his astonishment. He therefore says that he
prayed: and by this we are taught, that whenever thoughts creep into our
minds, which toss us here and there, we ought to flee to prayer. For
many increase their anxieties by fomenting them, while they turn
themselves to all quarters, and indulge their own thoughts, and weary
themselves without any benefit. Whenever, therefore, any anxiety
stealthily lays hold on our minds, let us know that the remedy ought to
be in due time applied, that is, to pray to God; so that he may relieve
us, and not suffer us to sink into the deep, as it usually happens to
all who are curious, and give loose reins to their own imaginations.

<span id="iv.ix-p12"></span>We now see that the Prophet was greatly
astonished, and yet in such a way as not to look for more than what was
profitable; but he immediately prayed, that God would make him to
understand what grieved his mind. His prayer follows, which, however,
does not immediately discover the mind of the Prophet, for he does not
shew the purpose of his prayer until he comes to the 25th verse (<span
id="iv.ix-p12.1"></span>[Jer
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#025)<span id="iv.ix-p12.1"></span>).
But he seems here to refer to many things unconnected with his subject.
His design must be ascertained from the conclusion of his prayer, “O
Lord,” he says, “why hast thou bidden me to buy the field which is now
in the hand of enemies? the Chaldeans possess it; and thou hast bidden
me to throw away my money.” This was substantially his prayer.

<span id="iv.ix-p13"></span>But Jeremiah seems to wander and take long
circuits when he says, “Thou hast made the heavens and the earth by thy
great power and stretched-out arm; nothing is wonderful to thee; thou
shewest mercy to thousand generations; thou repayest the iniquity of
fathers to their children; thy name is Jehovah of hosts; thou art great
in council and excellent in work; thine eyes are open,” etc. These
things seem not to belong in any degree to the present subject. But the
Prophet’s object, no doubt, was to restrain himself, as it were, by
putting on a bridle, so that he might acquiesce in the counsel of God,
though it was hid and incomprehensible to him: for if he had immediately
rushed into prayer, he might, at the first burst of his feelings, have
contended with God; for such is the disposition and character of man,
when he suddenly addresses God, that he boils over beyond all
moderation. The Prophet then, who well understood that there is no such
moderation in men as to judge rightly and calmly of God’s works, set up
against himself these fences, and placed, as it were, barriers around
him, that he might not take more liberty than what was right. Let. us
then know that these high terms in which the Prophet spoke were designed
for this end, — that he might produce moderation and humility in
himself, so that he might check all those roving thoughts by which men
are wont to divert themselves. Let us come now to the words:

<span id="iv.ix-p14"></span><span id="iv.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p15"></span>*Ah, Lord Jehovah!* he says; *behold, thou
hast made heaven and earth.* Were any one not to attend to the
circumstances of the passage, he might think that the Prophet is here
rambling, and does not connect his sentences, so that his prayer seems
incoherent. But as I have already said, that as the Prophet knew that
men take too much liberty when they speak of God’s works, he bridled
himself in due time, before he came to his subject. He then made this
sort of introduction, “O Lord, it does not behove me to contend with
thee, nor is it right in me to require thee to give me a reason for thy
doings, for thou hast *made heaven and earth by thy great power and
extended arm.”* There is here then an implied contrast between God and
mortal man; “For who am I to dare to summon thee to a contest! for thy
power is justly to be dreaded by us; when we raise up our eyes to
heaven, when we look on the earth, there is nothing which ought not to
fill us with admiration of thy power, for its immensity appears above
and below.” We hence see that the Prophet extols in high terms the power
of God, in order that he might keep himself in a meek and humble state
of mind, and not dare to clamor against God, nor presumptuously rush
forward to pronounce a judgment on his works. *Behold,* he says; he sets
before his eyes the wonderful workmanship of the world, in which the
immeasurable power of God shines forth most conspicuously.

<span id="iv.ix-p16"></span>He then adds, *Nor is there any thing hid
from thee* This clause admits of two meanings; for <span
id="iv.ix-p16.1"></span>פלא, *pala,* means wonderful, and also hidden.
Now the greater part of interpreters give this explanation, — that
nothing is hid from God, because all things are before his eyes, for his
knowledge penetrates to the deepest depths. It may then be a
commendation of God’s knowledge, as an eulogy on his power has
previously been given; and this meaning is not unsuitable.

<span id="iv.ix-p17"></span>I do not, however, reject the other meaning,
given by *Jerome,* that there is nothing difficult to God, or wonderful,
because all things are subject to his will. Thus the Prophet might say,
continuing the same thought, that the power of God, which shines forth
to our view in the heavens and in the earth, may at the same time be
observed in the permanent government of the world; for he who has
created the heavens and the earth can do all things, so that nothing is
wonderful to him, that is, nothing is difficult for his power as soon as
he has decreed this or that. The main object of the Prophet is, however,
still the same.  <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63)

<span id="iv.ix-p19"></span><span id="iv.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p20"></span>He now adds, *Thou shewest mercy to
thousands, and repayest the iniquity of the fathers to the bosom of
their children* Here the Prophet acknowledges God’s judgments to be
right, though the reason for them escapes human minds. Both these things
were necessary, that is, that Jeremiah should set before himself the
awful power of God, and that he should also regard God’s judgments as
right, though men often think otherwise. For God has hidden reasons for
his judgments; and so it happens, that various thoughts disturb us, and
every one is disposed to set himself up against God. Hence the Prophet,
after having spoken of the immeasurable power of God, now declares also
that he is a just judge of the world; and he again restrains himself by
another bridle, lest he should pronounce a judgment on God’s works
according to his own perceptions.

<span id="iv.ix-p21"></span>*Thou,* he says, *shewest mercy to
thousands* This is taken from the Law of Moses, (<span
id="iv.ix-p21.1"></span>[Ex 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ix-p21.1"></span>) for the Prophets often borrowed their chief
sentences from Moses, of whom they were the interpreters. Since God then
under the Law declared that he is merciful to thousand generations,
though it appears unnaccountable to us, yet nothing remains for us to
do, but to learn reverently to receive what we cannot comprehend. The
Prophet then here confesses that the method which God adopts as to his
mercy is hid from the human mind. But the latter clause seems, however,
less reasonable, — that God should *repay the iniquity of fathers to
their children* Shortly before we saw that this was set forth as an
impious blasphemy, (<span id="iv.ix-p21.2"></span>[Jer
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#029)<span id="iv.ix-p21.2"></span>)
when they said that their fathers had eaten sour grapes, and that their
children’s teeth were set on edge; for it is always true that the soul
that sinneth, it shall die. (<span id="iv.ix-p21.3"></span>[Ezek.
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#002),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020)<span id="iv.ix-p21.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.ix-p21.4"></span>[De
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#016)<span id="iv.ix-p21.4"></span>)
But if God repays the iniquity of fathers to their children, he punishes
the innocent, and transfers to children what he ought to have rendered
to their fathers. But the Prophet, regarding it a wicked thing to
contradict what God had spoken by Moses, adores here this mystery, and
thus brings himself to humility and meekness, so that he might not break
forth into extremes when speaking of the hidden works of God.

<span id="iv.ix-p22"></span>We must at the same time briefly observe,
that the innocent are not punished when God includes children with their
fathers, and casts the iniquity of fathers into the bosom of their
children, for he does not refer to the innocent and the righteous, but
to the wicked. Some, when they saw that this truth militated against the
common feelings of mankind, have laid hold of an evasion, that is, that
God by a temporal punishment renders to children what their fathers had
deserved. But God speaks without exception, that he repays to the bosom
of children the reward due to their fathers. But how ought this to be
understood? It is a part of this punishment, that God withholds from
them his Spirit. When, therefore, his purpose is to punish the vices of
fathers in their posterity, he withholds from their posterity the light
and grace of his Spirit. It cannot then be but that they will ever
accumulate evils on evils, and thus they are entangled in the guilt of
their fathers. God then proceeds by degrees in the work of punishing
sins; for when it is his purpose to forgive the son the punishment which
he together with his father has deserved, he draws him to himself by his
Spirit, so that he is freed from punishment; but if his purpose is to
execute vengeance on sons and grandsons, he withholds from them, as I
have already said, the gift of the Spirit, so that they do nothing but
provoke his wrath more and more, and thus they become involved in the
same guilt with their fathers; hence fathers and children receive in
common the same punishment.

<span id="iv.ix-p23"></span>This indeed seems not at the first view to
be just and right; but let us remember that God’s judgments are hid from
us, and for this reason, — that we may cultivate meekness and humility
and learn to be soberly wise, and so confess God to be a just judge as
to know that our minds cannot penetrate into this deep abyss. But still
the solution given seems plain enough, that is, that God never punishes
the innocent. For when he visits the sins of fathers on their children,
a part of that punishment is, as I have already stated, that he
withholds from the children the light of his Spirit; being blind, they
ever run headlong to their own ruin, and thus by the continual
commission of new sins they provoke God’s vengeance against themselves.
When therefore God renders to them the reward due to their fathers, he
punishes them at the same time for what they themselves have deserved;
nor have they any reason to complain, because they have been guilty in
common with their fathers: there is, therefore, nothing strange that
they share with them in their punishment. But it, however, depends on
the hidden mercy of God, that. he favors some with pardon, and thus
delivers them from ruin, while he forsakes others; and as they are
wicked, they deserve all the punishment he inflicts on them: *Thou,*
then, *repayest into the bosom of their sons after them,* that is, after
their death.

<span id="iv.ix-p24"></span>He afterwards exclaims, *God, strong and
mighty! Jehovah of hosts is his name* He again declares the greatness of
God’s power, that he might restrain himself, and not rashly undertake
any new inquiry, as the ease is with curious men, who indulge themselves
in speculations, and thus summon God as it were to an account, as though
there could be appointed a tribunal before which he might be found
guilty. As then the insolence and arrogance of human nature are so
great, the Prophet here sets barriers around himself, so that he might
keep within the bounds of humility and soberness.

<span id="iv.ix-p25"></span>He afterwards changes the person, which is a
proof of vehemence and ardor; for it is, as we have seen, a prayer. He
does not now address God directly, but says, *Jehovah of hosts is his
name,* speaking in the third person.  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) Had he continued in the same strain, he
would have said, “Thou art God, strong and mighty,” etc., but he says,
“Jehovah of hosts is his name.” We then see that the Prophet as it were
turns aside; and this change of person, as I have stated, proceeded from
the vehemence and ardor of his mind. And it often happens to the
faithful, that they break off their direct address when they pray, while
they contemplate God’s works, as displaying, now his power, then his
goodness, or his wisdom. The faithful then do not always pray in a
continued strain; but as feeling guides them, they now address God, then
they turn aside and blend apostrophes. It follows, —

<span id="iv.x"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p1"></span><span id="iv.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#019)<span id="iv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p2"></span>**19**. Great in counsel, and mighty in work:
(for thine eyes *are* open upon all the ways of the sons of men: to give
every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his
doings:)

<span id="iv.x-p3"></span>**19**. Magnus consilio, excellens opere;
cujus oculi (quandoquidem oculi) tui aperti sunt super vias filiorum
hominum ad reddendum cuique secundum vias ejus, et secundum fructum
operum ejus.

<span id="iv.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.x-p5"></span><span id="iv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p6"></span>He goes on with the same subject, for he
expresses his wonder and admiration as to God’s judgments. he first
declares that God is *great in counsel and great in work* By counsel, he
understands the wisdom of God, which not only surpasses all our
thoughts, but also absorbs them. And then he mentions the execution of
his counsel, which affords evidences of that wisdom which appears to us.
By the works of God we learn how great and how unequalled is his wisdom:
for that in itself cannot be comprehended, nay, men could not have the
least knowledge of it, except it were rendered conspicuous by works. The
works of God then through their excellency are evidences of his
immeasurable wisdom. For this reason and in this sense the Prophet calls
God *great in counsel and great in work*

<span id="iv.x-p7"></span>He adds, that his *eyes are open on all the
ways of men* By these words he intimates that he is the judge of the
whole world, and that whatever men may consult, speak, or do, must come
to a reckoning. The meaning is, that the providence of God so extends to
all parts of the world, that the works of men cannot possibly be hid
from him, and that no one can escape his hand; for after having spoken
of God’s eyes, he adds, *that he may render to every one according to
his ways and according to the fruit of his doings*

<span id="iv.x-p8"></span>The Prophet then does not speak here of any
idle speculation such as ungodly men entertain; for they confess that
all things are seen by God, but imagine that he is satisfied with having
only this bare knowledge; and thus they deprive him of the dignity and
office of a judge. But the Prophet here shews what the end of God’s
providence is, why God has his eyes open, even that he may at last
produce at his tribunal all the sayings and doings of men, yea, their
thoughts also. We are further taught by these words that our life cannot
be rightly formed, unless we bear in mind the presence of God, so as to
know that his eyes are on us, and that there is nothing hid from him:
for whence is there so much liberty in sinning, except that men grow
wanton like fugitives? as when a rebellious son withdraws himself from
the eyes of his father, he can then abandon himself wholly to sin, for
he is freed from all fear and shame. So our thoughtlessness is like a
flight, for we think that we are far removed from God. This then, as I
have said, ought always to be remembered, that the eyes of God are open
on all our ways, and for this end, — that he may render to every one
according to his ways, and that every one may gather the fruit of his
own doings.

<span id="iv.x-p9"></span>Though, then, God for a time may connive at
what we do, and may not manifestly shew that he is the judge of men,
there is no reason that indifference should creep over us, as though we
could escape from his hand; but let us know that all our doings and
sayings are now noticed by him, that he may hereafter shew that he is
not an idle observer, as some ungodly men dream, but that he is an
eye-witness of all things, that he may at last appear as our judge.

<span id="iv.x-p10"></span>This passage is turned by Papists for the
support of merits by works; but it is a frivolous attempt; for when
Scripture declares that it shall be rendered to every one according to
his works, it does not exclude the gratuitous mercy of God; and when God
renders a reward to the faithful, it depends on gratuitous pardon,
because he forgives them whatever would otherwise vitiate their good
works: and to speak more exactly, God does not render to the faithful
according to their works, except as he gratuitously pardons them and
forgives whatever they have done amiss. Reward then depends on the free
mercy of God only. As to the wicked, it is no wonder that a just reward
is said to be rendered to them;for we know that they are worthy of
eternal perdition, and that God is a righteous judge when he punishes
their sins. It follows, —

<span id="iv.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#020)<span id="iv.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p2"></span>**20**. Which hast set signs and wonders in
the land of Egypt, *even* unto this day, and in Israel, and among
*other* men; and hast made thee a name, as at this day.

<span id="iv.xi-p3"></span>**20**. Qui edisti signa et portenta in terra
Egypti usque ad diem hunc, et in Israel et in hominibus; et fecisti
*(hoc est,* comparasti) tibi nomen secundum diem hunc.

<span id="iv.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xi-p5"></span><span id="iv.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p6"></span>The Prophet here especially commemorates the
singular kindness of God, by which he had testified his paternal favor
towards his Church. He then says, that *signs* and *wonders* had been
done by him in *the land of Egypt,* that: is, for the sake of his
people. For why were so many miracles done, except to prove the care he
had for his chosen people, and thus to confirm his covenant? We hence
see that God’s favor towards the children of Abraham is here set forth,
that is, when he refers to the signs and wonders

<span id="iv.xi-p7"></span>which had been done in the land of Egypt. And
he adds, *and in Israel* He extols not only God’s power in miracles, but
especially the mercy with which he favored his chosen people. He says
also, *to this day* Not that God performed miracles in every age, but he
means that they were worthy of being perpetually remembered, and
throughout all ages. Then this refers to the remembrance and celebration
of God’s power, when the Prophet says, *to this day* God, indeed,
performed miracles at a certain time, but he performed them that they
might be remembered in all ages, and that posterity might acknowledge
how wonderfully God had dwelt with their fathers.  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)

<span id="iv.xi-p11"></span>As then the power which he manifested in
Egypt was worthy of being remembered, miracles are said to have been
done *to this day;* and they are said to have been done *in Israel,*
because it was God’s purpose to prove the certainty of his faithfulness
when he redeemed his people as he had promised.

<span id="iv.xi-p12"></span>He afterwards adds, *and among men* The
Prophet goes on still further. After he had spoken of the redemption of
the people, he intimates that wherever he turned himself, he observed
and admired the evidences of God’s power, as though he had said, “O
Lord, thou hast indeed given peculiar testimonies as to thy wonderful
power and goodness; the redemption of thy people was a singular work,
and ought to be commemorated through all ages; but wherever we turn
ourselves, there is no corner in the whole world where some miracles do
not appear, which ought to lead us to celebrate thy praises.” We hence
see that the Prophet proceeds from what is particular to what is
general: after having considered God’s power and goodness in the
redemption of his people, he extended his thoughts to all parts of the
world, and contemplated God’s miracles everywhere. And this is what
often occurs in Scripture; after having been reminded of some particular
instance of divine power or grace, we are carried away so that we make a
transition to what is general. And he adds, *and thou hast made thee,*
or acquired to thyself, *a name according to this day;* that is, thou
hast made thy name to be perpetual, as its glory still at this day
shines forth before our eyes. Then the Prophet means that God had so
wonderfully manifested his power, that the knowledge of it would be
perpetual, and could never be buried by the ingratitude of men.

<span id="iv.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.xii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iv.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as our whole
wisdom is this, to submit ourselves to thee, to admire, and receive, and
reverently to adore thy judgments, — O grant, that we may not indulge
the perverse thoughts of our flesh, but so learn to check and restrain
ourselves as ever to render to thee the praise due to thy wisdom, and
justice, and power, and thus walk in sobriety of mind while we sojourn
in this world, until we shall at length contemplate thy glory thee to
face, being made partakers of it in Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iv.xii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-Eighth

<span id="iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p1"></span><span id="iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#021)<span id="iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p2"></span>**21**. And hast brought forth thy people
Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs, and with wonders, and with a
strong hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with great terror;

<span id="iv.xiv-p3"></span>**21**. Et eduxisti populum tuum Israel a
terra Egypti in signis et portentis, et in manu robusta, et in brachio
extento, et in terrore magno;

<span id="iv.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iv.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p6"></span>Jeremiah comes now nearer to the point in
hand; for, after having spoken of the unequalled power of God, he now
extols his righteous judgment in inflicting punishment on an ungodly and
wicked people. For this end he refers to the favor of redemption, and he
then adds that the *land* had been given to Israel which had been
promised to their fathers. He afterwards states that this favor had been
conferred on the ungrateful, for they immediately shook off the yoke and
despised God their redeemer, together with his Law.

<span id="iv.xiv-p7"></span>He then says, that the people had been
*brought up from the land of Egypt with signs and wonders* This is an
amplification, for God had in an unusual manner made it sufficiently
evident that without his favor the people could not have been delivered
from Egypt. For had it not been for the manifest display of God’s power
in miracles and wonders, the Israelites might have appropriated to
themselves the favor of God, or to some worldly instrumentality; but
God’s favor appeared so resplendent in signs and wonders, that the
liberation of the people could not have been ascribed either to fortune,
or to the efforts of men, or to any other means. And for the same
purpose he mentions *the strong hand and the extended arm.* He intimates
by these words, that the people had been so delivered, that the hand of
God, yea, his extended arm, openly appeared, that is, his power, as we
have explained elsewhere, was manifested far and wide.

<span id="iv.xiv-p8"></span>He refers at last to *great terror:* such
was the haughtiness of their enemies, that they would have never
suffered the people to depart, had they not been filled with great
terror. As then the Egyptians had been by terror subdued, Jeremiah
amplifies by this circumstance the favor of redemption, as though he had
said, that God’s favor was not obscure, because the Israelites might
have known by these extraordinary evidences that they were delivered by
a divine power. For so great was the power, the valor, and cruelty of
their enemies, that no hope of a free departure could have been
entertained, had not God put forth his hand from heaven. It afterwards
follows, —

<span id="iv.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p1"></span><span id="iv.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#022)<span id="iv.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p2"></span>**22**. And hast given them this land, which
thou didst swear to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk
and honey;

<span id="iv.xv-p3"></span>**22**. Et dedisti illis terram hanc quam
juraveras patribus eorum ad dandum ipsis *(hoc est,* to daturum ipsis)
terram fluentem lacte et melle;

<span id="iv.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xv-p5"></span><span id="iv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p6"></span>Here the fruitfulness of the land is
commended, so that the ingratitude of the people for their redemption
might appear less excusable. God had already bound them, as it were,
more than enough to himself, but when the wealth and fruitfulness of the
land were added, the bounty of God was doubled, which, by a stronger and
more sacred chain, bound the people to obedience. But when they buried,
as it were, both their benefits, their impiety was extreme, and so much
baser was their ingratitude. We hence see why the Prophet said that the
*land* was given to the people.

<span id="iv.xv-p7"></span>He at the same time mentions the reason, even
because it had been promised to their fathers. It is not, however, right
to suppose that the fathers had any merits, as Jerome says, who
ignorantly perverts this passage; for he says, that nothing was due to
the people on the ground of merit; but that the fathers were yet worthy
on account of their great virtues. But we know that God’s covenant was
from the beginning gratuitous. The Prophet then means here, that the
land was not given as a reward rendered to the people for their works,
but that it was given them because it had been gratuitously promised.
And he mentions the *oath,* because God, regarding the infirmity of
Abraham and the fathers, confirmed by an oath his own promise. But as I
have spoken elsewhere more at large on this subject, I touch on it but
slightly now. However, whenever there is mention made of an oath, let us
know that reproof is indirectly given to the inconstancy of men, who
always vacillate, and can never recumb on God’s promise, except they are
helped by this confirmation.

<span id="iv.xv-p8"></span>However this may be, the Prophet here reminds
us that God confirmed the pledge which he had given to the fathers when
the people entered into the land, because they could not have obtained
it by their valor, or by any other means. In short, Jeremiah calls the
attention of the people to God’s gratuitous covenant, that they might
understand that they became possessors of the land by no other right
than this, — that God of his own free will had promised to Abraham and
his seed that he would give them that land. He speaks, as I have just
said, of the fruitfulness of the land, because it was God’s design to
allure the people in every way, that they might continue in his service.
And when the people, thus bountifully dealt with, did not acknowledge
God’s favor, their extreme and base stupidity was fully proved. What the
Prophet then means is, that the land was most fruitful, in which the
people had all abundance, and that yet they despised God the giver of so
much bounty, according to what immediately follows —

<span id="iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p1"></span><span id="iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#023)<span id="iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p2"></span>**23**. And they came in, and possessed it;
but they obeyed not thy voice, neither walked in thy law; they have done
nothing of all that thou commandest them to do: therefore thou hast
caused all this evil to come upon them:

<span id="iv.xvi-p3"></span>**23**. Et ingressi sunt, et haereditate
adepti sunt cam; et non audierunt vocem tuam *(ad verbum,* in voce tua)
et in lege tua non ambulaverunt *(hoc est,* secundum legera tuam)
quaecunque illis praecepisti ut facerent, non fecerunt; ideo occurrere
fecisti illis malum hoc.

<span id="iv.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iv.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p6"></span>The Prophet in this verse confesses that.
God’s vengeance was just, when the people were cast out of the land and
driven into exile, because they, after having entered into the land, did
not obey the voice of God. The very sight of the land ought to have made
the people obedient to God; for they could not have eaten a crumb of
bread, without being always reminded whence their food came, even
because God had expelled the Gentiles from that land. When, therefore,
they were filled with all kinds of good things, and at the same time
despised God, no excuse could have been pretended; for if they made
ignorance their pretense, the very land itself was before their eyes,
which recalled them to the fear of God. This, then, is the reason why
the Prophet joins those two things together, that the Israelites
*entered into the land,* and that they *disobeyed the voice of God*

<span id="iv.xvi-p7"></span>Now, by this clause he intimates that they
had not fallen through ignorance, because God had sufficiently made
known his will. God had indeed spoken, but it was to the deaf. The
Prophet then here shews that there was no other cause for the sin of the
people, but that they obstinately refused to attend to the voice of God.

<span id="iv.xvi-p8"></span>Then he adds for the same purpose, that they
had *not walked in his Law* The Law is often compared to a way; for
except God prescribes to us what his will is, and regulates all the
actions of our life according to a certain rule, we should be
perpetually going astray. God’s Law, then, is justly said to be like a
way, according to what Moses also speaks,

<span id="iv.xvi-p9"></span>“This is the way, walk ye in it.”  
(<span id="iv.xvi-p9.2"></span>[De
5:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#033)<span id="iv.xvi-p9.2"></span>;
see also <span id="iv.xvi-p9.3"></span>[Isa
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#021)<span id="iv.xvi-p9.3"></span>)

<span id="iv.xvi-p10"></span>Then Jeremiah, after having shewn that the
people had been taught, mentions this, — that the way had been made
known to them, so that they went astray knowingly and wilfully; for they
could not have turned aside either to the right hand or to the left
without being called back by the doctrine of the Law.

<span id="iv.xvi-p11"></span>He says, in the third place, *What thou
hast commanded them to do they did not* He explains here the same thing
more clearly and without any figurative expression, even that they had
been unwilling to obey God, while yet they sufficiently understood what
was right; for the Law suffered them not to go astray, and God had
included in it everything necessary to be known. The Prophet then shews
that they had not turned aside except through perverseness, because they
knew what God required. As a certain Lacedaemonian said, that the
Athenians knew what was right, but were unwilling to do it; so the
Prophet in this place distinguishes the open impiety and contempt of the
people from ignorance and inadvertence, and does not mean that the
people did not satisfy *all* the precepts of the Law.

<span id="iv.xvi-p12"></span>And this passage also *Jerome* explains
very absurdly; for he says that the Israelites did not stand to their
promises, because they had said that they would do whatever God
commanded. But the Prophet here does not condemn them as to one thing
only, as though he had said that there had been some defect, but he says
that they had been wholly disobedient, for they had not despised only
one precept of the Law, but had as it were designedly cast aside the
whole Law, and obeyed none of God’s commandments. Then this negative
sets forth the defection of the people as to the whole law, and as to
every precept of it.

<span id="iv.xvi-p13"></span>And this passage is worthy of special
notice, because the Prophet advisedly repeats the same thing, — that the
people *had not walked in the Law,* — that they *had not obeyed the
voice of God,* — *that they had done nothing of what had been
commanded;*  <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) for a heavier
condemnation and vengeance await those who have been faithfully taught
what pleases God and what is right, and yet follow their own will, and
are carried away by the passions and lusts of the flesh. In a word,
Jeremiah points out the highest pitch of impiety, that is, when people
clearly and familiarly know what the will of God is, and yet disregard
it and shake off the yoke, and thus shew manifestly a contempt for the
whole Law.

<span id="iv.xvi-p15"></span>It follows, *Therefore thou hast made to
come on them all this evil* The Prophet here testifies that whatever had
happened to the people, was not by chance, but that a reward was
rendered to their sins. Men in some measure acknowledge God’s judgments,
but this acknowledgment presently vanishes. Wisely then does the Prophet
here shew that God’s vengeance is evident in adversities, and that the
people thus received the reward which they had deserved. It now follows,
—

<span id="iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#024)<span
id="iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p2"></span>**24**. Behold the mounts, they are come
unto the city to take it; and the city is given into the hand of the
Chaldeans, that fight against it, because of the sword, and of the
famine, and of the pestilence: and what thou hast spoken is come to
pass; and, behold, thou seest *it*

<span id="iv.xvii-p3"></span>**24**. Ecce aggeres (vel, catapultae, vel,
arietes) venerunt ad urbem ad capiendum eam; et urbs tradita est in
manum Chaldaeorum oppugnantium eam, propter gladium, famem et pestem; et
quod tu loquutus es (quicquid loquutus es) evenit; et ecce tu vides.

<span id="iv.xvii-p4"></span>**25**. And thou hast said unto me, O Lord
GOD, Buy thee the field for money, and take witnesses; for the city is
given into the hand of the Chaldeans.

<span id="iv.xvii-p5"></span>**25**. Et tu dixisti mihi, domine Jehova,
eme tibi agrum pecunia et testare testes; cum tamen urbs tradita sit in
manum Chaldaeorum.

<span id="iv.xvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.xvii-p7"></span><span id="iv.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p8"></span>Here then at length the Prophet discovers
his own perplexity. We have already stated the reason why he made so
long an introduction before he came to the main thing: it was necessary
for him to put on as it were a bridle; for except we restrain our
thoughts, we shall become petulant against God, and there will be no
moderation. The Prophet then, that he might not peevishly expostulate
with God, set before himself his immeasurable power, and then he added
that nothing happens except through his righteous vengeance. He now
however asks, how it was, that he was bidden to buy the field when the
city and the whole country were delivered up into their enemies. He then
mentions here this inconsistency, and confesses that his mind was
embarrassed, for he could not discover why God had bidden him to buy the
field, and yet had determined to drive the people into exile and to
scatter them into remote lands. But we have said that the Prophet was
fully persuaded of God’s truth; and hence it was that he was so willing
and ready to obey; for he made no delay in buying the field; and he
afterwards laid up with Baruch the writings of the purchase. But after
having performed all this, he brought a complaint against God; and as
the thing appeared unreasonable, he desired this knot to be untied.

<span id="iv.xvii-p9"></span>He then says, *Behold the mounts,* or, the
warlike engines, for the word may mean either. The word <span
id="iv.xvii-p9.1"></span>סללות *sallut,* often means mounts; but as
mention is made here of a siege, the Prophet seems to refer, as we have
said in the sixth chapter, to warlike engines or battering rams. And
there were engines to beat down walls; great stones or a number of
stones were also cast. I am therefore inclined to the opinion of those
who consider that they were either engines to shoot stones and darts, or
battering rams. *Behold,* then, he says, there are moved to the city
*battering rams to take it, and the city is delivered up to the
Chaldeans* It was, it seems, the tenth year of Zedekiah, and at the
beginning of the eleventh month the city was taken. But the Prophet is
the best interpreter of his own words, and what he means may be easily
gathered from the context, for he says that the city was taken by *the
sword, by famine, and by pestilence;* as though he had said, that though
the enemies had not as yet entered into the city, yet it was all over
with it, that there was no hope remaining, because it was not only
assailed by arms and a powerful force, but it had also enemies within,
which pressed hard on it, even *famine* and the *pestilence* As then a
great number had already been consumed by pestilence and famine, the
Prophet says, that though, the enemies should cease to assail it, and
make no forcible entrance into it, yet it was all over with it, because
the pestilence and famine had so prevailed, that there was no hope of
deliverance. By these words he intimates an extremity of despair; and
hence also arose the thought which tormented the mind of the Prophet,
that it appeared wholly unreasonable that God should bid him to buy the
field when the city had been already delivered up into the power of
enemies.

<span id="iv.xvii-p10"></span>He adds, *and what thou hast spoken is
come to pass; and, behold, thou seest it* He confirms what he had just
said, even that the destruction of the city did not otherwise happen
than through God’s judgment. And he confirms it, because whatever then
happened, had already been testified during the time of the Prophet
himself. And it hence appeared, that the city was not distressed through
chance, because God had foretold nothing by his servants but what he had
decreed and resolved to do. Then the ruin of Jerusalem was the work of
God, of which he had foretold by his servants. For these two things
ought to be joined together — the mouth of God and the hand of God. Nor
is it lawful to imagine such a thing as some fanatics do, that God sees
from heaven whatever is done on earth, and yet continues in an idle
state. But he decrees what is right, and then when it is necessary, he
testifies it by his servants the Prophets. However, the mouth of God
ought not to be separated from his hand. The Prophet then shews that the
destruction of the city was the righteous judgment of God, because the
Prophets had previously spoken of it.

<span id="iv.xvii-p11"></span>The words, *thou seest it,* refer to the
preceding sentence, or to that which immediately follows, even because
it seemed inconsistent or unreasonable that the Prophet should buy the
field as God commanded, and yet that God knew that the land was
possessed by enemies, and that the people were to be driven into exile.
Since then God had resolved to cast out the people from the land, how
was it that he had bidden his servant to buy the field? Had all this
been unknown to God, the inconsistency would not have been so evident
But when God perfectly knew that what he had so often proclaimed as to
the exile by his Prophets could not be changed, what could be his
purpose in bidding the field to be bought and the purchase to be
confirmed by witnesses, when yet the city was delivered up to enemies?
Jeremiah, after having mentioned the substance of his prayer, now adds
the answer he received from God, in which is seen the fruit of his
prayer, even that he had been taught what had regard to the deliverance
and return of the people, in order that the faithful might entertain
hope, and also that they, relying on the promise, might cheerfully bear
their exile until the prefixed time came. The words are these, —

<span id="iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.xviii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#026)<span
id="iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xviii-p2"></span>**26**. Then came the word of the LORD
unto Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="iv.xviii-p3"></span>**26**. Et fuit sermo Jehovae ad Jeremiah,
dicendo,

<span id="iv.xviii-p4"></span>**27**. Behold, I *am* the LORD, the God
of all flesh: is there any thing too hard for me?

<span id="iv.xviii-p5"></span>**27**. Ecce ego Jehova Deus universae
carnis, An a me abscondita erit ulla res *(vel,* An mihi difficilis erit
ulla res)?

<span id="iv.xviii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.xviii-p7"></span><span id="iv.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xviii-p8"></span>We have already said that the verb <span
id="iv.xviii-p8.1"></span>פלא *pela,* admits of two meanings; it means
to be hid and to be wonderful, and hence by a metaphor it means what is
difficult and impossible. Many take it to mean here, that nothing
escapes the observation of God. But as I have said in the last lecture,
I am more inclined to refer it to God’s power, even that all things are
in the hand and at the pleasure of God, so that there is no difficulty
in his way. For whence comes to men so much anxiety, except that they
are stopped by obstacles? but God can surmount all obstacles without any
labor. That our minds then may not be perplexed, rightly is set before
us the power of God.

<span id="iv.xviii-p9"></span>And this meaning is most suitable to this
passage: for Jeremiah, when that which seemed inconsistent occurred to
him, was constrained to cast his anxiety as it were into the bosom of
God. Then God, in order to relieve him, says that nothing is difficult
to him, because he is the God of all flesh. Though by the words *all
flesh,* the Scripture often means all kinds of animals, yet oftener the
human race only. I do not, however, refinedly explain this passage, as
though God did set the Gentiles in opposition to the Jews, and thus
denied that he would be any longer the God of Abraham’s children,
because he had repudiated them on account of their sins; but he says
that he is in an especial manner the king of the whole earth, and rules
over the whole human race. As God then, he says, is *the God of all
flesh, can anything be impssible to him?*

<span id="iv.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p1"></span><span id="iv.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#028)<span id="iv.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p2"></span>**28**. Therefore thus saith the LORD;
Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into
the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he shall take it:

<span id="iv.xix-p3"></span>**28**. Propterea sic dicit Jehova, Ecce ego
trade urbem hanc in manum Chaldaeorum et in manum Nebuchadnezer regis
Babylonis, et capiet eam;

<span id="iv.xix-p4"></span>**29**. And the Chaldeans, that fight
against this city, shall come and set fire on this city, and burn it
with the houses, upon whose roofs they have offered incense unto Baal,
and poured out drink offerings unto other gods, to provoke me to anger.

<span id="iv.xix-p5"></span>**29**. Et ingredientur Chaldaei, qui
oppugnant urbem hanc, et succendent urbem hanc igne, et exurent eam, et
domus in quibus suffitum fecerunt super tecta ipsarum Baal, et libamen
libarunt diis alienis ad me provocandum.

<span id="iv.xix-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.xix-p7"></span><span id="iv.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p8"></span>The import of the answer is, that though God
would bring to an end the seventy years of exile, yet there was no
reason for hypocrites to gather encouragement, for this promise did not
belong to them. God then speaks here, in the first place, of his
vengeance, in order to fill the despisers of his Law with dread, and to
intimate that they were excluded from the favor of redemption, he
afterwards adds, that he would at length be merciful to the exiles; but
this favor is confined to the elect and faithful alone.

<span id="iv.xix-p9"></span>The two parts of the answer ought then to be
noticed, for God seems here to set in opposition one to another two
contrary things. But as I have said, in the former clause, he has in
view the hypocrites, who applied to themselves, without faith and
repentance, what the Prophet had testified of restoration. God then sets
forth here his extreme severity, and then he mitigates that rigor; but
he then turns his discourse to the elect, because they alone were
capable of receiving his favor.

<span id="iv.xix-p10"></span>Let us now come to the words, *I will
deliver this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand of
King Nebuchadnezar, and he will take it* this purpose was, that what
Jeremiah himself had predicted by his command, should remain
unalterable, that the city could not be delivered. For it might have
disturbed the mind of the Prophet were the Jews shortly after to be
delivered, and were the siege of the city to be raised: he might, in
that case, have been exposed to ridicule, together with his prophecies,
and rashness might have been objected to him, because he had dared to
announce in God’s name what we before noticed. For this reason and
purpose God declares that nothing could be changed, for the Chaldeans
were to take the city; and thus he bids the Prophet to retain a quiet
mind, and not to disturb himself, as though it was his intention to
expose his prophecies to ridicule; for God’s sacred name would thus have
been subjected to many reproaches. Had Jeremiah been proved guilty of
falsehood, what would have been the consequence, but that the Jews would
have insolently triumphed over God? God then declares again that the
city was given over to destruction.

<span id="iv.xix-p11"></span><span id="iv.xix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xix-p12"></span>And therefore he adds, *enter in shall the
Chaldeans who assail the city;* for he does not say that they would
come, but he confirms in other words what he had said; *Break* then
*into the* city shall the Chaldeans, though it was closed up and
fortified; *and shall set on fire this city* It was not without purpose
that he mentioned the word city so often; for as it was the sanctuary of
God, and the royal seat, the Jews thought that it was impregnable, and
that the sun could be sooner cast down from heaven than that; enemies
could take possession of it: in order then to subvert this false
confidence, God often mentioned the word city. He at last adds, that the
Chaldeans would *burn* it, as though he had said, that whatever Jeremiah
had predicted would certainly be fulfilled, not only respecting the
attack on the city, but also its destruction, so that not a stone would
be left on a stone, but that there would be a dreadful desolation until
the time of its restoration. The rest to-morrow.

<span id="iv.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.xx-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iv.xx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou shewest
that thou so rulest over the whole world as to exercise a peculiar care
over us whom thou hast been pleased to gather into the bosom of thy
Church, — O grant, that we may be so restrained by thy awful power
within the bounds of our duty, as that we may yet be always fully
persuaded that thou art our God and Father, and thus submit ourselves
willingly to thy word, and not only taste of thy goodness, which is laid
up for thy children, but also feed on it, so that we may at length come
into thy blessed kingdom above, where there will be full satisfaction
and fruition, through Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-Ninth

<span id="iv.xxi-p2"></span>I did not, in the last lecture, fully
explain the passage in which the Prophet announced the burning of the
city. After having spoken of the city, he mentions the *houses on* which
they had *offered incense* to their idols, and *poured out libations* He
then expresses the cause why so heavy a vengeance from God awaited that
holy city, even because its houses had been polluted by superstitions.
And he says, that incense had been made to idols on their tops or roofs;
for the roofs, as it appears from many parts of Scripture, were places,
as it were, to walk in; and we know that idolaters ever sought high
places, as they imagined that they were thus nearer to God. Then the
design is to shew, that the punishment of which the Prophet had spoken,
was not too severe, because all the houses had been contaminated by many
sacrilegious acts.

<span id="iv.xxi-p3"></span>He first mentions *Baal,* and then *foreign
gods* Baal, we know, is sometimes taken specifically, and sometimes
includes all sorts of idols, and yet the Prophets often used the plural
number, and called them Baalim, that is, patrons; whom the Jews thought
that they were first to propitiate, in order that they might in the same
manner pacify God. For superstition is never satisfied with the one only
true God, but seeks many gods, as we shall hereafter see in the 35th
verse (<span id="iv.xxi-p3.1"></span>[Jer
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#035)<span id="iv.xxi-p3.1"></span>),
where Molech is mentioned, being added to Baal. And the Prophet says
here, that they had poured *libations to foreign gods* We hence see that
Baal includes idols of every sort.

<span id="iv.xxi-p4"></span>He adds, *that they might provoke me* By
these words God intimates, that no ignorance could have been pretended
by the Jews, for they had been more than sufficiently taught from the
Law how God was to be worshipped; and a rule had been also prescribed to
them to worship God alone: but they worshipped many gods, and according
to their own fictitious superstitions. Justly, then, does God here
complain that they had, as it were, purposely provoked him, for
ignorance could not have been made a pretext, since the doctrine of the
Law was sufficient to guide them. It now follows —

<span id="iv.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#030)<span id="iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p2"></span>**30**. For the children of Israel and the
children of Judah have only done evil before me from their youth: for
the children of Israel have only provoked me to anger with the work of
their hands, saith the LORD.

<span id="iv.xxii-p3"></span>**30**. Quia fuerunt filii Israel et filii
Jehudah tantummodo parrantes malum in oculis meis a pueritia sua; quia
Israel tantummodo fuerunt provocantes me in opere manum suarum, dicit
Jehova.

<span id="iv.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxii-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p6"></span>He amplifies the sin of the people, that
they never departed from their vices. And he mentions the ten tribes,
and also the tribe of Judah. The ten tribes, we know, had departed from
the pure worship of God, when as yet true religion continued at
Jerusalem. By mentioning then the *children of Judah,* he no doubt
aggravated their guilt, intimating that they had fallen together with
the Israelites, while yet they had for a time been preserved. The
Israelites had become degenerated, afterwards the whole seed of Abraham
became implicated in the same defection, so that they forsook the true
worship of God. But afterwards he mentions only the children of Israel,
but he includes also the tribe of Judah. For it ought to be observed,
that when Scripture connects Israel with Judah, Israel then means the
ten tribes, and that for the sake of honor or reproach the house of
Judah is referred to separately; from the kingdom of Israel; but that
when Israel is alone mentioned, it includes generally all the children
of Abraham without exception. So it is in this place, when he says that
the children of Israel and the children of Judah had done nothing but
provoked God. Afterwards he mentions only Israel, and includes the
twelve tribes.

<span id="iv.xxii-p7"></span>But he says that the children of Israel and
of Judah had *only provoked him from their youth* The particle <span
id="iv.xxii-p7.1"></span>אך *ak,* is sometimes taken as an affinnative,
and sometimes as an adversative, but, or nevertheless; and this latter
sense would be suitable, were the context to allow it. I am inclined to
agree with those who render it “only;” and the Prophet seems to have
removed all ambiguity, for he not only says, that they had done, but
that they *had been doing evil,* which is a mode of speaking that
intimates a continued action; they *had* then *been doing evil,* that
is, they never ceased. And he confirms this declaration by saying <span
id="iv.xxii-p7.2"></span>אך, *ak, only,* that is, their purpose had been
nothing else, or all their study has been no other than to provoke me
without end and measure.  <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) We hence
see that every ground of complaint is taken away from the Jews, because
God, by long forbearance, had deferred his vengeance, for he might have
punished them many ages before. As then they had never ceased to provoke
God, the rigor shewn to them could not have appeared too much, for he
had, in his goodness, invited them to repentance, but with no effect.

<span id="iv.xxii-p9"></span>*And from their youth* here is not to be
understood of individuals, but is to be extended to the whole people;
and so *youth* is to be taken for the time of their redemption, as we
shall hereafter see. For the Church was in a manner then born, and in
the desert, when they had been recently brought to the light, for God
had delivered them from the darkness of death. In their very childhood
they began to provoke God; from that time they had always been perverse
in their wickedness.

<span id="iv.xxii-p10"></span>The meaning then is, that the people of
Israel had been of such a perverse disposition that it became necessary
at length to punish them severely, for they ceased not to add evils to
evils. And the particle <span id="iv.xxii-p10.1"></span>אך *ak,* shews
their aggravated guilt, because they applied their whole minds to
provoke God, and had been ingenious in devising superstitions, by which
they polluted the worship of God: *They have* then, he says, *been only
doing evil*

<span id="iv.xxii-p11"></span>And he adds, *with the work of their
hands* This explanation is added, because the Israelites might have
raised a clamor, and asked what that evil was. God had indeed shewn
sufficiently that it availed them nothing to seek evasions, for he had
made himself their judge when he said, *before my eyes;* for by these
words the Prophets intimate that a right judgment cannot be formed of
men’s works by themselves, for willing or unwilling, they must stand or
fall according to the judgment of God. Whenever then God declares that
men have sinned before his eyes, he means that it is in vain for them to
seek subterfuges, by alleging their good intentions, as they are wont
commonly to say, because with him is the authority to judge. But this
truth he confirms, when he says, that they had provoked him by *the work
of their hands*  <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) By the work of
their hands the Prophet means the superstitions will tell the people had
invented for themselves. And we must ever bear in mind the contrast
between God’s commands and the works of our hands, for whatever we
obtrude on God besides his Law is the work of our hands; but obedience
is better than sacrifice. Then God here expressly condemns all the
inventions of men, as though he had said, that however men may delight
in their own superstitions, they are yet impious and detestable, for it
is not lawful to devise anything. For God having given us his Law, has
left nothing for us to do, except to follow what he has commanded; and
when we turn aside and add something of our own, we do nothing but what
is sacrilegious. It now follows —

<span id="iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#031)<span id="iv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiii-p2"></span>**31**. For this city hath been to me *as*
a provocation of mine anger and of my fury from the day that they built
it even unto this day; that I should remove it from before my face,

<span id="iv.xxiii-p3"></span>**31**. Quia ad tram meam et
excandescentiam meam fuit mihi urbs ista ex quo die aedificarunt eam ad
diem hunc usque, ad tollendum ipsam e conspectu meo;

<span id="iv.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiii-p6"></span>He confirms what we have just said, even
that God, however, severely he might punish the Jews, would not yet
exceed due limits in his judgment, because their iniquity had reached
the highest pitch. It was a dreadful judgment when the city was wholly
demolished by fire, and the Temple destroyed. Hence the atrocity of the
punishment might have driven many to complain that God was too severe.
Here he checks all such complaints, and says, that the *city* had been
*built* as it were for this end, even to provoke him, as we say in
French, *Elle a este faite pour me depiter, pour me facher.* Some read,
“Reduced to me has been the city;” but they pervert and obscure the
meaning. It might more properly be rendered, “The city has been destined
to me for my wrath and indignation.” But the meaning which I have given
is simpler. Thus the words <span id="iv.xxiii-p6.1"></span>אפי, *aphi,*
and <span id="iv.xxiii-p6.2"></span>חמתי *chemeti,* are to be taken
passively, even that the city Jerusalem had been in a manner devoted to
this madness, so that it ceased not to inflame more and more against
itself the vengeance of God. In a word, he repeats in other words what
he had before said, even that the children of Israel did nothing else
than provoke God by their misdeeds.

<span id="iv.xxiii-p7"></span>There is then nothing new said here, but
as it was a thing difficult to be believed, the Prophet dwells on it,
and says, that the city Jerusalem *had been for the wrath and
indignation of God, from the time in which it had been founded* And we
may gather from the end of the verse that this is the true meaning, for
he says, *Even to this day, that I should remove it from my sight;* as
though he had said, that the Jews had made no end of sinning, so that it
was now quite the time to punish a people so wicked, whose impiety was
un-healable. And he points out their persistency when he says, *even to
this day*  <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) For the people had not
only begun to sin in the wilderness, but they pursued in a regular
course, so to speak, their impiety, so that at no age, in no year, in no
day, did they cease from their vices. Here then is pointed out their
constant habit of sinning. It follows —

<span id="iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#032)<span id="iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p2"></span>**32**. Because of all the evil of the
children of Israel and of the children of Judah, which they have done to
provoke me to anger, they, their kings, their princes, their priests,
and their prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p3"></span>**32**. Super omne malum *(vel,* propter
omne malum) filiorum Israel et filiorum Jehudah, quod patrarunt ad
provocandum me, ipsi, reges eorum, proceres eorum, sacerdotes eorum et
prophetae eorum, et viri Jehudah et incolae Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiv-p6"></span>This verse is connected with the last: God
had complained, that the city had been so perverse in its character,
that it seemed to have been founded and built for the purpose of seeking
its own ruin by its sins. He confirms that declaration by adding, On
*account of all the wickedness of the children of Israel, and of the
children of Judah. By all the wickedness* or evil, he means what he
before said, that they had been doing only evil, for they had offended
not only in one thing, but had abandoned themselves to impiety, so that
there was nothing pure or honest among them; for they had given
themselves up to impiety, so that they omitted nothing that was
calculated to provoke God. A universal blot is extended to every part of
life, as though he had said, that they were imbued with so much
wickedness, that no sound part remained in them. It is possible for
man’s body to labor under one or two diseases, while there may be
soundness in some of the members; but the Prophet means here, that the
Israelites had become so corrupt, as it is said in <span
id="iv.xxiv-p6.1"></span>[Ps 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)<span
id="iv.xxiv-p6.1"></span>, that nothing remained whole among them.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p7"></span>Now God condemns here all ranks of men: in
the first place he says, that the *kings* had sinned; for they not only
themselves had forsaken the true worship of God, but had become the
cause of defection or apostasy to others. To kings he adds *princes,* or
counsellors, and then *priests* and *prophets.* And, doubtless, the
kings with their counsellors ought to have been one eye, the priests and
the prophets the other; for the two eyes in a true and legitimate
government are the judges and the pastors of the Church. But the Prophet
says, that the kings and their counsellors had been ungodly, and then
that the priests and the prophets had been implicated in similar crimes.
And it was indeed something monstrous to see such blindness and madness
in those priests whom God had, by a hereditary right, set over the
Church as the interpreters of the Law, according to what is said,

<span id="iv.xxiv-p8"></span>“The priest’s lips should keep knowledge,
and they should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of
the Lord of hosts.” (<span id="iv.xxiv-p8.1"></span>[Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="iv.xxiv-p8.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.xxiv-p9"></span>And when the priests failed in their
office, either through ignorance or sloth, God raised up prophets in
their place, and his purpose was to prevent by such a help the ruin of
his Church. But Jeremiah says, that the prophets had become like the
priests.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p10"></span>This passage deserves to be carefully
noticed; for we see how delighted many are when the Church is disturbed
by discords; for they think that they are thus excused, when they cast
aside every care and every concern for religion; and many indulge in
this kind of indifference. But if the faithful had been so careless at
that time, must not religion have a thousand times vanished away, having
been wholly extinguished and obliterated from their hearts? Let us then
learn, that though false prophets may rise and obscure pure doctrine by
their fallacies, and though the sacrificers should become apostates, and
raise up, as it were, a banner to demolish the whole Church — yet let us
learn to be firm; for our faith ought not to be shaken, though the whole
world were in confusion, nay, though Satan mingled heaven and earth
together. In short, it is the real trial of our faith, when we firmly
abide in God’s truth at the time when Satan attempts above all things to
throw everything into confusion. For Jeremiah does not speak here of the
Egyptians or the Assyrians, but of the chosen people, the children of
Abraham, the sacred heritage of God; and yet he says that the priests
and prophets had become leaders to the people in their sinful courses,
so that they cast aside the true worship of God, perverted the Law, and
in short, departed from religion.

<span id="iv.xxiv-p11"></span>He afterwards adds, *and the men of Judah
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem* He speaks not of the Israelites, who
had long ago become polluted, and had abandoned themselves to ungodly
superstitions, for they had become, as it were, aliens to the people of
God; but he names only the Jews, who remained alive, that God’s Church
might continue in the world. He proceeds by degrees, for he mentions the
inhabitants of Jerusalem in the last place. It was indeed less to be
endured that those, who had the Temple before them, who were constantly
reminded of God’s true worship, should be apostates, than if they dwelt
in villages; for those who lived in the country, and were wont to come
to the Temple three times a year, had apparently some excuse. But as the
citizens of Jerusalem enjoyed so many religious means, as the Law of God
continually sounded in their ears, as the sacrifices were as trumpets by
whose blast they were summoned to serve and fear God, it was, as we have
said, a great aggravation to their guilt. Hence the Prophet, for the
sake of a greater reproach, joins them to the *men of Judah* It follows
—

<span id="iv.xxv"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#033)<span id="iv.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p2"></span>**33**. And they have turned unto me the
back, and not the face: though I taught them, rising up early and
teaching *them,* yet they have not hearkened to receive instruction.

<span id="iv.xxv-p3"></span>**33**. Et verterunt mihi cervicem et non
faciem; et docendo eos, et mane surgendo et docendo, et non audierunt
(et ipsi non audientes, *ad verbum, sed,* non audierunt) ut reciperent
correctionum *(vel,* disciplinam)

<span id="iv.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxv-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet expresses more clearly the
perverseness of the people, as though he had said, that they had
deliberately rejected every instruction, and had shewn no regard for
God; for he who turns his back on us, does this knowingly and wilfully,
and indeed not without contempt. When any one addresses me, and I look
another way, is it not a manifest sign of contempt or disdain? and he
who speaks, does he not see that he is disregarded? Thus God then
complains that the Jews had not fallen away through ignorance, but as it
were through a premeditated obstinacy: *they* then *turned to me,* he
says, *the neck,*  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) when yet they
ought to have been attentive to hear the doctrine of the Law. For God
shews to us his face whenever he is pleased to prescribe what ought to
be done, or to shew the way of salvation. When he looks on us, how
detestable must be our pride, if we look not also on him in return?
This, then, is the first thing, that the Jews had knowingly and wilfully
despised God and his Law.

<span id="iv.xxv-p8"></span>Then he amplifies their guilt by saying,
*And I taught them, I rose up early and taught them, and they hearkened
not*  <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) If the Law had been only once
promulgated, the Jews might have objected and said, that they were for
the most part illiterate; but no color of pretense remained for them,
since the Prophets were continually interpreting the Law, as God had
also promised by Moses,

<span id="iv.xxv-p12"></span>“A Prophet will I raise up for thee from
the midst of thy brethren.” (<span id="iv.xxv-p12.1"></span>[De
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018)<span id="iv.xxv-p12.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.xxv-p13"></span>For he intimates that this benefit would be
perpetual in the Church, so that there would never be wanting Prophets
to shew the right way to the people. For he sets Prophets in opposition
to soothsayers, diviners, foretellers, and all other ministers of Satan,
as though he had said, that there was no reason for the people to seek
the fallacies of Satan, since the Prophets were sufficient. Lest the
Jews then should complain that they were hardly dealt with, God here
shews that he had taught them, for he ascribes to himself what he had
done by his Prophets: and doubtless Prophets and teachers are nothing
else but the instruments of the Holy Spirit; for no one is fit to teach,
but when he is guided by the Spirit of God. Justly then does God claim
for himself these offices, so that all the praise for the building up of
his Church is due to him, though he employs the labors of men. In this
sense it is, that he says, that he had taught them.

<span id="iv.xxv-p14"></span>Then he adds, that he *rose up early,* that
is, that he had been sedulous. As a master of a family, who is
solicitous for his own, early inquires how they are, and looks around
the whole house; so also God represents himself here, speaking of his
care in teaching the Israelites, as though he had said, that not only
his Law was set before their eyes, by which they might learn what was
right, but that Prophets were also given who ceased not to admonish and
exhort them.

<span id="iv.xxv-p15"></span>Now this manner of speaking ought to be
particularly observed, as we hence learn how base their ingratitude is
who reject the teaching of the Prophets; for they not only disregarded
men, but God himself, as Christ also declares,

<span id="iv.xxv-p16"></span>“He who hears you, hears me; and he who
rejects you, rejects me.” (<span id="iv.xxv-p16.1"></span>[Lu
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016)<span id="iv.xxv-p16.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.xxv-p17"></span>This form of speaking, then, commends the
truth of the doctrine taught by the Prophets; for God comes forth and
shews that he speaks by his servants. And on the other hand, we learn
what an incomparable blessing it is to have faithful and true teachers;
for God, through them and their labors, with certainty declares that he
cares for our salvation, as though he watched over us, as though he rose
up early, as though he visited us; and the preaching of the Gospel is
not without reason called the visitation of God. There is, then, no
reason for us to seek anything better, when God is present with us by
his word; for we have a sure testimony of his presence whenever true and
faithful teachers rise up.

<span id="iv.xxv-p18"></span>He adds, *to receive correction* He
intimates by the word <span id="iv.xxv-p18.1"></span>מוסר *musar,* that
the Jews had not sinned through ignorance, but that they had been
intractable, for they refused to be corrected. The word is, indeed,
taken sometimes for doctrine, but it means here correction, even when
any one, who generally holds a right course, deviates from the right
way, but being warned, repents. We hence see what the Prophet means,
even that the Jews had not only closed their eyes against the clear
light which shone forth in the Law, but that they had been wholly
refractory, so that they could not be subdued when God called them to
repentance, that when he sought to heal their diseases, they showed such
stubbornness that they cast aside all correction and discipline.  <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) We hence learn that the time of vengeance
had come, because God had tried all means to promote their welfare, and
had lost, as the common saying is, both pains and cost. It follows, —

<span id="iv.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#034)<span id="iv.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvi-p2"></span>**34**. But they set their abominations in
the house, which is called by my name, to defile it.

<span id="iv.xxvi-p3"></span>**34**. Et posueruut abominationes suas in
domo super quam invocatum est nomen meum, ad poiluendum ipsam.

<span id="iv.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvi-p6"></span>There was here, as it were, an extreme
wickedness, for the Jews had profaned the Temple itself. It was a
grievous offense, when every one had, as we have seen, private services
at home, where they burned incense on the roofs, and poured libations to
foreign gods; but when impiety had gone so far, that even the Temple
itself was polluted with idols, what hope was there of repentance?

<span id="iv.xxvi-p7"></span>He says that they had *set their
abominations* in the Temple. It is called, indeed, a *house* after the
manner of the Hebrews, but it is afterwards distinguished from private
buildings, when he says, *on which my name is called*  <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) and then, *that they might defile it* God
here shews that the Temple had been dedicated to him; it was then a
sacrilegious profanation when they offered their sacrifices to idols.
They were, indeed, already apostates; but such a sacrilege was not so
notorious in their private superstitions as in the Temple; for this was
to deprive God of his own honor. Though it was not right in them to
abandon themselves to all kind of wickedness when they came forth from
the Temple; yet the Temple itself ought to have continued, as it were,
safe and free from every defilement. For this reason, therefore, he says
that it was called by his *name,* and then that the Temple itself had
been *defiled,* so that they did not spare his sacred name. The rest I
shall defer till to-morrow.

<span id="iv.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iv.xxvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou
stretchest forth thy hand to us daily, and invitest us also by continual
exhortations to repentance, — O grant, that we may not be so ungrateful
as by our obstinacy to reject such and so great a benefit; but that, if
at any time we should happen to turn from the right way, we may
immediately tuae to thee and become obedient to thy will, and that thus
the medicine which thou hast provided for us may avail for our
salvation, until, being at length purified from all vices, we shall
enjoy that blessed and immortal glory which thou hast prepared for us in
heaven, through thine only-begotten Son, our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iv.xxvii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxviii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Thirtieth

<span id="iv.xxix"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#035)<span id="iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p2"></span>**35**. And they built the high places of
Baal, which *are* in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their
sons and their daughters to pass through *the fire* unto Molech; which I
commanded them not, neither came it into my mind, that they should do
this abomination, to cause Judah to sin.

<span id="iv.xxix-p3"></span>**35**. Et adificarunt excelsa ipsi Baal,
qui erat in valle filii Hinnom *(vel,* quae erant) ad trajiciendum
filios suos et filias suas ipsi Moloch <span
id="iv.xxix-p3.1"></span>למלך *idolo)* quod non mandavi ipsis, et non
ascendit in cor meum, ad faciendum abominationem hanc, ut peccaret
Jehudah *(vel,* ut peccare facerent Jehudah)

<span id="iv.xxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxix-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p6"></span>After having complained of the profanation
of his own Temple, God now says that the Jews had sinned through another
superstition, even because the valley of the son of Hinnom had become to
them a temple instead of the true one. God had forbidden in the Law
sacrifices to be offered except where he appointed,

<span id="iv.xxix-p7"></span>“Thou shalt not do so to thy God, but thou
shalt come to the place where he has put the memorial of his name.”  
(<span id="iv.xxix-p7.2"></span>[Deut.
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005)<span id="iv.xxix-p7.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.xxix-p8"></span>As God then had expressly testified that
sacrifices are not acceptable to him except in one Temple, and on one
altar, he shews here that the lawful worship had been corrupted by the
Jews, even because they caused their sons and their daughters to pass
through the fire in honor to Molech. And yet in a former passage he
calls him Baal. Hence it appears, as we said yesterday, that the word
Baal includes all kinds of idols. For the Jews, no doubt, while they
worshipped their Baalim, ever wished to ascribe to the one true God the
chief sovereignty, but, at the same time, they devised patrons for
themselves, and hence was the multitude of their gods. But Molech was a
particular deity, as we learn from other parts of Scripture.

<span id="iv.xxix-p9"></span>We now, then, perceive the Prophet’s
meaning, — that the Jews had not been satisfied with one kind of
idolatry, but built high places or altars for themselves; for so do some
explain <span id="iv.xxix-p9.1"></span>במות, *bemut:* <span
id="iv.xxix-p9.2"></span>במה *beme,* means a high place, and is
everywhere taken for the groves, as they were called, that is, tall
trees. But as mention is tiere made of a valley, some think that the
word high-places is not suitable here; therefore they render the word
*“altars.”*  <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) As to the main point,
God no doubt condenms the Jews here, because they had dared to set up a
foreign mode of worship in the valley of Hinnom, when the Law expressly
forbade it. The relative <span id="iv.xxix-p10.3"></span>אשר *asher,* as
I have said, may be applied to the altars as well as to Baal. But it
seems to me a more suitable meaning, if we say that Baal himself, that
is, the idol, was in the talley of Hinnom. Of the passing through the
fire, I have spoken elsewhere — it was a kind of lustration. There is no
doubt, however, but that some exceeded the moderation commonly observed,
who wished to excel others in the fervor of their zeal; for they
actually burned their sons and their daughters, which was a deed the
most savage. But they yet thought that it was a service acceptable to
God. Others performed their superstition in a milder manner, as they
deemed it enough that their children should pass through the fire as a
symbol of purification, as also the heathens were wont to purify
themselves.  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75)

<span id="iv.xxix-p12"></span>But the Prophet speaks of *sons* and of
*daughters,* in order to shew that so great was the intemperate zeal of
the Jews, that they not only prostituted themselves before their idols,
but also contaminated their offspring with these defilements.

<span id="iv.xxix-p13"></span>He at last says, that he had *commanded*
no such thing, and that it never *came to his mind* We have said
elsewhere, that whenever this manner of speaking occurs, God cuts off
every handle from objectors, because the superstitious ever have
something to allege as a pretense when they are summoned to an account.
We know that the Papists, by pretending good intentions, confidently
glory against God; and they think that this one pretense is sufficient
to defend them against all reproofs; and they think also that the
servants of God and the Prophets are too morose and scrupulous when such
an excuse does not satisfy them. But God, that he might not tediously
contend with the superstitious, assumes this principle, — that whatever
they attempt beyond the Law is spurious, and that, therefore, the
inventions of men cannot be defended by any disguise or pretense. Let us
then know that true religion is always founded on obedience to God’s
will; and hence everything devised by men, when there is no command of
God, is not only frivolous, but also abominable, according to what was
said yesterday respecting the work of the hands; and so here the command
of God is set in opposition to all the inventions of men. But as such
declarations often occur, I now touch but slightly on this passage.

<span id="iv.xxix-p14"></span>This doctrine, however, ought to be
especially noticed, that is, that there is no need of a long refutation
when we undertake to expose fictitious modes of worship, which men
devise for themselves according to their own notions, because, after all
that they can say, God in one word gives this answer, that whatever he
has not commanded in his Law, is vain and mischievous. He then says,
that he had not *commanded* this, and that it had never entered into his
mind.

<span id="iv.xxix-p15"></span>God in the last clause transfers to
himself what applies only to men; for it cannot be said with strict
propriety of God, that this or that had not come to his mind. But here
he rebukes the presumption of men, who dare to introduce this or that,
and think that an acceptable worship of God which they themselves have
presumptuously devised; for they *seek* thus to exalt their own wisdom
above that of God himself. And we even find at this day that the
Papists, when we shew that nothing has proceeded from the mouth of God
of all the mass of observances in which they make religion to consist,
do always allege that they do not without reason observe what has been
commanded by the fathers, as though some things had come into the minds
of men which had escaped God himself! We then see that God in this place
exposes to ridicule the madness of those, who, relying on their own
inventive wits, devise for themselves various kinds of worship; for they
seek, as we have said, to be wiser than God himself. We now, then,
perceive the force of the expression, when God says that it never came
to his mind, because men boast that it had not been contrived without
reason, and glory in their own acuteness, as though they were able to
appoint a better thing than God himself.

<span id="iv.xxix-p16"></span>He afterwards says, *That they should do
this abomination* God now goes farther, and calls whatever he had not
commanded an abomination. And this clause confirms what I have before
said, that there is no need of long arguments when the question is
respecting the inventions of men, for nothing can be approved of in the
worship of God but what he has himself commanded. Whatever therefore has
proceeded from the notions of men, is not only frivolous and useless,
but it is also an abomination; for God so represents it in this place.
It is therefore not enough at this day to repudiate and to treat with
disdain the fictitious modes of worship in which the Papists so much
glory; but if we would prove that we have a true zeal for religion, we
must abominate all these fictitious things; for God has once for all
declared them to be abominable.

<span id="iv.xxix-p17"></span>He adds, *that Judah might sin,* or, that
they might make Judah to sin: either is admissible, and there is a
twofold reading.  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) However this may
be, he declares that those who build not on the Law, do nothing but sin,
though they may think that they render to God the best service, even
because they ought to have begun with this principle, — to do nothing
but according to what the Law prescribes. It follows, —

<span id="iv.xxx"></span>

<span id="iv.xxx-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#036)<span id="iv.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxx-p2"></span>**36**. And now therefore thus saith the
LORD, the God of Israel, concerning this city, whereof ye say, It shall
be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, and by
the famine, and by the pestilence;

<span id="iv.xxx-p3"></span>**36**. Et nunc propterea sic dicit Jehova,
Deus Israel, ad urbem hanc *(vel,* de urbe hac) de qua vos dicitis,
Tradita est in manum regis Babylonii in gladio et fame et peste;

<span id="iv.xxx-p4"></span>**37**. Behold, I will gather them out of
all countries, whither I have driven them in mine anger, and in my fury,
and in great wrath; and I will bring them again unto this place, and I
will cause them to dwell safely:

<span id="iv.xxx-p5"></span>**37**. Ecce ego congrego cos ex omnibus
terris, ad quas expulero eos in ira mea, et excandescentia mea, et
indignatione magna; et reducam eos ad locum hunc, et habitare faciam
secure.

<span id="iv.xxx-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxx-p7"></span><span id="iv.xxx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxx-p8"></span>God has hitherto been shewing that the Jews
were worthy of that extreme punishment with which he had already visited
the kingdom of Israel, and that they could not complain of extreme
severity, though they were to rot in exile after the ruin of the city
and the Temple, for they had polluted the land which ought to have been
sacred to God, and had everywhere spread abroad their abominations, so
that even the Temple was not free from their filth and defilements, and
they had not thus offended for a short time, but, as we have seen, they
had despised all warnings; and though God had been solicitous for their
safety, they had yet proudly rejected and even extinguished his favor.
As then they were of a disposition so wicked, and their impiety had
become altogether incurable through so much hardness, God shews that he
would render to them the reward due to their works, by wholly rejecting
them. But now he adds the promise of favor, in order to shew that he
would in such a manner be the avenger of wickedness, as ever to have a
regard for the gratuitous covenant which he had made with Abraham.

<span id="iv.xxx-p9"></span>We have already said often, that whenever
God mitigates the bitterness of punishment with some hope of mercy, he
has a peculiar respect to his chosen people. The word then is not
indiscriminately addressed to all, when God declares that he will be at
length merciful and propitious, for he encourages his chosen people
alone, as I have said, to entertain hope. As then there were some godly
seed remaining among the people, God intended to relieve them, so that
they might not wholly despond.

<span id="iv.xxx-p10"></span>We now see the Prophet’s object; and this
truth ought to be carefully observed; for we shall be mistaken as to the
doctrine taught by the Prophets, except we know, that after having
threatened the wicked and the despisers of God, they then turn their
discourse to the elect, to encourage them to bear patiently and with
calm minds the punishment laid on them, as Jeremiah did in his own case
when he exhorted the faithful to lay their mouth in the dust, and then
patiently to wait for God, though he would for a time hide his face from
Jacob, that is, from his Church. Jeremiah then, after having shewn that
the Jews could not be too severely treated, because they had been wholly
intractable, now adds,-

<span id="iv.xxx-p11"></span>*And now therefore, thus saith Jehovah, the
God of Israel, concerning this city,* or, to this city. The preposition
<span id="iv.xxx-p11.1"></span>אל *al,* signifies both, but it is more
suitable to take it here in the sense of “concerning:” *of which,* it is
added, *ye say that it has been delivered into the hand of the king of
Babylon*  <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) This does not seem to be
consistent with facts, for the Jews themselves had not announced this
sentence respecting Jerusalem, but on the contrary they sturdily rose up
against the Prophets, and made a clamor whenever the ruin of the city
was announced. What then is meant when God upbraids them with speaking
in this manner? To this I answer, that this had indeed proceeded from
the Spirit of God, and also that the Prophets had been the testifiers
and heralds of this punishment; but when the Jews saw that they could
not escape, they then had such a dreadful apprehension of God’s
judgment, that they became wholly stunned with fear; and thus it always
happens to the despisers of God, for except he presses hard on them,
they scorn all his threatenings; or they think that fables are told
them, when God announces that he will execute on them his vengeance. But
when they come to extremities, they are filled with amazement, and
without any hope confess only that God is angry with them; hence their
despair. The Prophet then does not without reason upbraid them with this
— that they said that the city was delivered up to the Chaldean king,
even while he was not only assailing it with a strong army, but was also
assisted by the sword, the famine, and the pestilence as his associates.
For before the siege pressed hard on them, they esteemed as nothing,
according to what we have seen, all that Jeremiah declared to them; for
he lost all his labor for nearly forty years, though the prophecy
concerning the ruin of the city, exile, the rejection of the people, and
the abolition of all holy things, was proclaimed daily. But now when
they saw that the affair was serious, and that they could not escape
God’s vengeance, they went to another extreme, and said, that God was
false in his promises, that his covenant was void and useless, that they
had in vain worshipped him, that he had deceived them and had given them
false hopes, when he promised that he would dwell in the midst of them.
It is, then, in this sense that they said, that the *city was delivered
up into the hand of the king of Babylon;* it was the same as though they
had said, that the hope of return had been cut off. For they wholly cast
away the favor held forth by God, and said that all that Jeremiah had
promised was vain, because terrors had laid such hold on their minds and
feelings, that they could not entertain any hope of God’s mercy.

<span id="iv.xxx-p13"></span>I have said that the case with all the
reprobate is, that they deride God while he spares and bears with them;
but when they find that he is a judge, then they do not look to his
mercy, but he prostrate in despair as though they were lifeless.

<span id="iv.xxx-p14"></span><span id="iv.xxx-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxx-p15"></span>We now understand what the design of the
Prophet was, when he spoke of the Jews as saying, that the *city was
delivered up* to the Chaldeans and the Babylonians, even because the
promised deliverance could afford them no comfort, inasmuch as they
fully believed that their salvation was hopeless. *Ye* then *say,* he
says, *that the city has been delivered up; but I,* he adds, *will
gather them from all the lands to which I shall drive them in my wrath
and hot displeasure and great indignation*  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78)

<span id="iv.xxx-p17"></span>Here God promises that the exile would only
be temporary, because he would at length gather, as it is said in <span
id="iv.xxx-p17.1"></span>[Ps
147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002)<span id="iv.xxx-p17.1"></span>,
the dispersed of Israel. No name is here expressed, but a pronoun; there
is however no ambiguity, for it is sufficiently evident that he speaks
of the Jews when he says, *I will gather them* As they had been
scattered here and there, the gathering of them might have appeared
incredible; for had they been only driven from their own country, and a
place of exile had been granted them where they might have lived
together, they might have hoped some time to return: but the scattering
took away every hope, for they had been driven into different countries,
and far distant from each other. In order then to obviate this
difficulty, God expressly says that he would restore them *from all the
lands into which he had driven them* And the Prophet no doubt alludes to
a passage in <span id="iv.xxx-p17.2"></span>[De
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#004)<span id="iv.xxx-p17.2"></span>,

<span id="iv.xxx-p18"></span>“Though they be scattered to the four
quarters of the world,  
I will thence gather them.”

<span id="iv.xxx-p19"></span>As then God had through Moses promised,
that though they were banished into the farthest parts of the world, yet
their restoration would not be difficult to him; so the Prophet applies
this declaration of Moses to his own prophecy, even that God would
gather from the whole of the East those who had been scattered.

<span id="iv.xxx-p20"></span>He adds, *in my wrath, hot displeasure, and
great indignation*  <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) God does not
here speak of his wrath, but in order that the Jews might perceive that
they deserved so great a punishment: for we know that as God is the
judge of the world, nothing unjust can belong to him. When therefore
God’s wrath is said to be great, we may with certainty conclude that the
vices of men are great; for he is never angry with us, except when he is
offended by the greatness of our sins. We hence perceive the reason why
the Prophet mentions here the *wrath, the hot displeasure and great
indignation* of God, even that the faithful might feel assured that God
would be propitious to them, though they were worthy of eternal ruin. In
short, Jeremiah shews that there would be a place for God’s mercy,
though the Jews had merited destruction a hundred times through their
obstinacy.

<span id="iv.xxx-p22"></span>And he adds that his favor would be
continued, *And I will cause them to dwell safely* After having promised
to them a return, he promises now a tranquil condition: for it would
have been better for the Jews to remain always in exile and in foreign
lands, than to return to their own country and to live there in misery.
This was the reason why the Prophet expressly added, that there would be
a quiet habitation for them.

<span id="iv.xxx-p23"></span>But we know that this was not fulfilled
when the Jews returned to their own country; for they were greatly
harassed by their neighbors, and the building of the Temple was at first
hindered, and they endured many troubles from all quarters, and at
length they were oppressed with tyranny by the Syrian kings, and reduced
to such extremities, that exile would not only have been more tolerable,
but even pleasanter and more desirable, in comparison with the many
miseries with which they were oppressed. But, as it has been said
elsewhere, whenever the Prophets prophesied of the return of the people,
they extended what they taught to the whole kingdom of Christ. For
liberation from exile was no more than the beginning of God’s favor: God
began the work of true and real redemption when he restored his people
to their own country; but he gave them but a slight taste of his mercy.
This prophecy, then, with those which are like it, ought to be extended
to the kingdom of Christ. He afterwards adds, —

<span id="iv.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#038)<span id="iv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p2"></span>**38**. And they shall be my people, and I
will be their God:

<span id="iv.xxxi-p3"></span>**38**. Et erunt mihi in populum, et ego
ero ipsis in Deum.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxxi-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxi-p6"></span>This promise held the first place in the
restoration of the Church; for had the Jews been filled to satiety with
wealth and plenty, and all variety of blessings, their condition would
still have been by no means superior, had they not been the people of
God; for men have no happiness, if they live only on the good things of
this earthly and frail life, or on its pleasures and delights. Most
truly it is said in the Psalms,

<span id="iv.xxxi-p7"></span>“Happy is the people whose God is Jehovah.”
*  
*(<span id="iv.xxxi-p7.2"></span>[Ps
144:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#015)<span id="iv.xxxi-p7.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.xxxi-p8"></span>For though God commands his own blessings,
and designs them as testimonies of his paternal favor towards the godly,
yet he will not have them to live as it were on these; but he raises up
their minds by means, as it were, of these steps to the spring-head of
true felicity, the very fountain itself, so that they may know that they
are under his protection, and that he will ever be a Father to them.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p9"></span>We hence see that the Prophet, when he
spoke of the restoration of the people, propounded to them the chief and
the most desirable thing, even to know that God was reconciled to them,
and that they were become thus his people.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p10"></span>We hence learn, that though God in his
kindness bore with the infirmities of his ancient people, and so
mentioned the fruitfulness of the land and other things, yet the end of
all the promises was spiritual; nor would have this promise been true,
were it explained only of God’s temporal blessings. For we must bear in
mind that saying of the Prophet,

<span id="iv.xxxi-p11"></span>“Thou art our God, we shall not die.”*  
*(<span id="iv.xxxi-p11.2"></span>[Hab
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012)<span id="iv.xxxi-p11.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.xxxi-p12"></span>And doubtless the Prophet in the Psalm
which we have just quoted, meant to distinguish the Church of God from
all heathen nations, and meant also to distinguish the felicity of the
Church from all the pleasures, honors, and those advantages, by which
men persuade themselves they can be made happy, provided they obtain
them. Since then the Prophet there marks the difference between the
felicity of the Church and all the fleeting and empty things wished for
by those who look no higher than to this world and the present life, it
follows, that whenever these words are mentioned, “I will be your God,”
the hope of an eternal and a celestial life is set before us.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p13"></span>There is another thing to be noticed, —
that whatever we seek as to the things of this world can yield us no
real good, except God be reconciled to us. When therefore we have all
things in abundance, when nothing is wanting as to every kind of
pleasure, when we are favored with great wealth, when peace and security
are granted to us, yet all this, as I have said, will prove ruinous to
us, except God owns us as his children, and becomes a Father to us.
Therefore when we seek to become happy, we must direct our minds to the
principal thing, even to be reconciled to God, so that we may be able
with confidence to call him our Father, to hope for salvation from him,
and ever to flee to his mercy. Ungodly men desire this and that, as
their own cupidity leads them: the avaricious wishes for a large
quantity of money, wide farms, and great revenues; the ambitious seeks
to subdue the whole world; the man of pleasure wishes for everything
that may satisfy his lusts, and even he who seems to be moderate, yet
desires what is suitable to his disposition; and thus God is neglected,
and also his grace. Let us then know that the wishes of men are wholly
unreasonable, when they anxiously seek anything in this world except
what flows from this fountain, even from the gratuitous favor of God,
and when they do not prefer this singular privilege to all blessings,
even that God may be reconciled to them.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p14"></span>We now apprehend the meaning of the words,
when God declares that the Jews, after their return to their own
country, would become his people, and that he would be their God.

<span id="iv.xxxi-p15"></span>Let us at the same time observe, that
though God possesses the sovereignty of the whole world, he is not yet
properly called the God of any, but of his chosen people; for as he
gathers the Church for himself as a peculiar treasure, as he speaks
everywhere, so this privilege cannot exist without a mutual
relationship, that is, exept men know that God is their God, and are
also fully persuaded that they are counted by him as his peculiar
people. Now follows an explanation of this verse, which, on account of
its brevity, might seem somewhat obscure.

<span id="iv.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#039)<span id="iv.xxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxii-p2"></span>**39**. And I will give them one heart,
and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and
of their children after them:

<span id="iv.xxxii-p3"></span>**39**. Et dabo illis cor unum et viam
unam, nt timeant me cunctis diebus, ut bene sit illis et filius eorum
post ipsos.

<span id="iv.xxxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxxii-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxii-p6"></span>He more clearly explains the last verse;
for he mentions the effects of the favor referred to. God indeed
includes everything in one word, when he declares that he will be our
God, for he thus adopts us as his children. Hence comes the certainty as
to our heavenly inheritance, and also as to his mercy, which is better
than life. There is then nothing that can be desired beyond this
benefit, that is, when God offers himself to us, and deigns to receive
and embrace us as his people.

<span id="iv.xxxii-p7"></span>But as I have already said, we do not
fully comprehend the benefit of this doctrine; for, first, we are very
tardy and dull, we perceive not what God means by this expression, and
then we know how much our nature is prone to diffidence, so far is the
distance between us and God. Hence this doctrine has need of
explanation. Therefore the Prophet, after having pointed out the cause
and the beginning of all blessings, now mentions the effects, which more
fully confirm what he had said. Hence he says, *I willgive to them one
heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever:* for God does not
otherwise own us as his people, nor can he be our Father, except he
regenumtes us by his Spirit; for it is of regeneration that the Prophet
here speaks. But I must defer the rest until to-morrow.

<span id="iv.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iv.xxxiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since our
earthly life is appointed as a life of warfare, and we must necessarily
be exposed to continual disquietude as long as we sojourn here, — O
grant, that we may always look forward to that blessed rest, to which
thou invitest us, and in the meantime remain quiet in dependence on thy
protection, and courageously fight to the end, not doubting but that
through thy favor all things shall turn out for good, until we shall at
length enjoy that eternal and glorious inheritance, which is laid up for
us in heaven, through Christ our Lord. — Amen

<span id="iv.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Thirty-First

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain the words of
Jeremiah, in which are promised to the people *a new heart and a new
way* Now, as God promises these, it is certain that they are in his
power, and not in the power of man. We hence learn that it is not in man
to form his heart for God’s service; for it would have been a
superfluous, nay, an absurd promise, had God said, that he would give us
a heart which was already ours, or which any one might confer on
himself. The promises, then, are sure evidences of God’s favor, not only
as to the end and effect, but also in order that we may know that God
ascribes to himself the praise of all these things which he promises to
us. And it is with this argument that *Augustine* often fights against
the Palagians, and rightly, because it would be a mere mockery, as I
have said, had God promised anything, which depended not on his favor,
but on the will and power of man.

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p3"></span>When he now speaks of *one heart,* he
refers to union and consent, but of such a kind that they all obey God.
Men often unite together for evil, and the children of God are often
compelled to separate themselves from the ungodly; and hence are those
discords which now prevail in the world, the blame of which is cast on
us. But as it is necessary for us to separate from the Papists if we
wish to follow God, it is better a hundred times to separate from them
than to be united together, and thus to form an ungodly and wicked union
against God. Agreement or union is, indeed, singularly a good thing,
because there is nothing better or more desirable than peace. But we
must ever bear in mind, that in order that men may happily unite
together, obedience to God’s word must be the beginning. The bond, then,
of lawful concord among us is this — that we obey God from first to
last; for accursed is every union where there is no regard to God and to
his word.

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p4"></span>We must also observe, that when God
promises one heart, he adds *one way;* and this is to be understood of
outward works. And Paul seems to have borrowed from this place when he
says that God gives us to *will* and to *do* according to his good
pleasure. (<span id="iv.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>[Php
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span id="iv.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>)
He mentions “to will” first, and the Prophet names the *heart,* and the
heart, we know, is the seat of all the affections. By *one heart,* then,
the Prophet means united affections; and then by *way* he means what
Paul expresses by “to do;” for it is not enough “to will,” except “to
do” be added to it; while yet the external work is of itself of no
value, except it be preceded by the will and a genuine feeling.

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p5"></span>We now, then, understand what the Prophet
means: first, he shows how God would become a God to Israel, even
because he would give them *one heart* and *one way.* We hence learn, as
I have said, that to change the heart, to put off or cast aside corrupt
affections, is not in the power of man, because it is a benefit that
proceeds from God. But it would not be sufficient for us to be formed
for obedience, except God added another favor, even to lead the will
itself into action. With regard to concord or union, we have said, that
the principle of a right and lawful agreement is, to have regard to God,
to depend on his word, and, with one consent, to obey what he commands.

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p6"></span>According to this meaning, he afterwards
adds, *That they may fear me* Hence, also, it appears that the fear of
God is not otherwise produced than by the regeneration of the Spirit.
For were men naturally inclined to fear God, it would not have been
ascribed to God and to his grace; and God claims nothing for himself
except what is his own. It then follows that the beginning of the fear
of God is the regeneration of the Spirit. But we ought to notice the
words when he says, that he would *give them one heart* and *one way,*
that they *might fear* him; for he does not say, “That they may be able
to fear me,” or, “That there may be a free option, and yet a flexible
will;” but he mentions, so to speak, the actual fear of God, as the
result of forming anew the hearts of men.  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) This, I have said, ought to be carefully
observed, because the Papists confess with us that we are wholly weak as
to what is good, and that all our faculties are so corrupt, that the
will cannot move itself, nor can any effect follow, without the constant
co-operation of the grace of the Holy Spirit; but, at the same time,
they imagine that the Holy Spirit does only one half of the work in us;
and hence the grace of the Spirit is called by them aid and cooperation.
We hence see how far we and the Papists agree; for they are ashamed to
deny, that man’s nature is so corrupted by original sin as not always to
need the grace of the Holy Spirit. But when God claims entirely for
himself whatever good there is in us, the Papists concede to him only
the half, and imagine a two-fold grace of God, a grace going before and
a grace following. What do the Papists mean, or what do they understand
by this grace going before? Even that God inspires us with good and
pious feelings, so that if we wish we may be free to follow what is
right; for, as I have said, the Papists confess that we are under the
tyranny of the devil, and slaves to him, and that there is no right will
in men, *except* through the prevenient *(proeunte)* grace of the Holy
Spirit. But as I have already said, they talk vainly of the grace of the
Spirit, and say that it is an influence by which God enables us to
follow that which is right, if we have a will to do so. Thus, then, the
grace of God, according to them, leaves men in suspense, so that they
are free either to receive or to reject the grace of God. Afterwards,
they join the subsequent grace, which, in their view, is a reward; for
if I assent to God, that is, if I suffer myself to be ruled by his
Spirit, and embrace the grace offered to me, God will then reward me
with another grace to confirm me in my right purpose. And thus they
confess that perseverance is in part the gift. of God; but they always
imagine it a co-operating grace. And then, as perseverance, according to
them, is God’s subsequent grace, and is, as it were, a handmaid, it
ceases to be grace, for it is rather the reward of merit. But what does
the Prophet say? *I will give them one heart and one way, that they may
fear me*

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p8"></span>We hence see that the grace of God is of
itself efficacious; and then he does not say that he would give them a
power to turn either way, but that he would give them *one heart,* as
the same thing is afterwards more clearly expressed. We see then that
the one heart or will is the work of the Holy Spirit, and the mere favor
of God. This ought in the flrst place to be borne in mind. We further
see that this grace works effectually in men; it not only gives them a
free option, but the actual work, as they commonly say, follows, *that
they may fear me,* and it is added, *all* their *days.* Here God
promises also perseverance as the singular gift of the Holy Spirit; for
it would not be sufficient that our hearts should be formed for his
service, were he not to sustain us in it; for such is our levity and
weakness; that we might every moment fall away from his grace. There is,
then, need of grace to preserve us. It hence appears, that not only the
beginning of good works proceeds from his Spirit, but also that he
enables us to go on to the end; for otherwise there would be no
perseverance in a right course.

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p9"></span>He adds, *That it may be well with them,
and with their children after them* By these words he intimates, that
the Israelites themselves had been the authors of all their evils,
because they had not feared God; for they could not have been happy
without continuing in obedience to him. And the Prophet confirms what we
said yesterday, that external prosperity is in itself evanescent;
therefore we ought to seek first the grace of God. But when is it that
God is propitious to us? Even when we know him as our Father, and obey
his commandments; that is, when we render ourselves submissive to him as
it becomes children. It now follows, —

<span id="iv.xxxv"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#040)<span id="iv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p2"></span>**40**. And I will make an everlasting
covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them
good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart
from me.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p3"></span>**40**. Et percutiam *(vel,* insculpam,
feriam) cum ipsis foedus perpetuum, nempe qued non discedam ab ipsis
*(ad verbum,* de post ipsis) ut benefaciam! psis, et timorem mei ponam
in cordibus ipsorum, ut non discedant a me.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxxv-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p6"></span>He pursues the same subject; but the
repetition is intended emphatically to recommend the grace of God, for
we know how men ever strive to withhold the praise due to his grace, and
that on account of their pride. God, then, on the other hand, celebrates
in high terms his grace, lest men should malignantly obscure it.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p7"></span>He first says, *I will strike with them a
perpetual covenant* We must notice the contrast between the covenant of
the Law, and the covenant of which the Prophet now speaks. He called it
in the thirty-first chapter a new covenant, and gave the reason for it,
because their fathers had soon fallen away after the Law was proclaimed,
and because its doctrine was that of the letter, and deadly, and also
fatal. But he now calls it a *perpetual covenant* That the covenant of
the Law was not valid, this was accidental to it; for the Law would
remain in force, were we only to keep it; but through men’s fault it
happened that the covenant of the Law became void and immediately
vanished. When, therefore, God promises anything, there is a manifest
difference; but what is it? God intimates that his doctrine is set
before men with no effect, for it only sounds in their ears, it does not
penetrate into their hearts. There is, then, need of the grace of the
Holy Spirit; for except God speaks within and touches our hearts, the
sound will be to no purpose, only beating the air. We now, then, see why
the covenant is called perpetual which God now promises.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p8"></span>We must, at the same time, bear in mind
that this covenant peculiarly belongs to the kingdom of Christ. For
though it was a part of God’s grace, which was manifested in delivering
his people from captivity, yet the continued stream of his grace ought
to be extended to the coming of Christ. The Prophet then, no doubt,
brings Christ before us, together with the new covenant; for without him
there is not the least hope that God would make another covenant, as it
appears evident from the whole Law and the teaching of the Prophets.
Then Christ is here opposed to Moses, and the Gospel to the Law. It
hence follows, that the Law was a temporary covenant, for it had no
stability, as it was that of the letter; but that the Gospel is a
perpetual covenant, for it is inscribed on the heart. And for the same
reason it is also called a new covenant, for the Law must have become
obsolete, since the perpetuity of which the Prophet speaks has come in
its place.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p9"></span>Now follows an explanation, *Because I will
not depart,* etc. The <span id="iv.xxxv-p9.1"></span>אשר *asher,* here
is not a relative, but rather an explanatory or exegetic particle. It
then briefly designates the form or nature of the covenant, even that
God would never *depart from behind them* God is sometimes said to go
before his faithful people, when he shows to them the right way. He is
said also to rule them from behind, as when Isaiah says,

<span id="iv.xxxv-p10"></span>“They shall hear a voice behind them,
saying,  
‘This is the way, walk ye in it.’” (<span id="iv.xxxv-p10.2"></span>[Isa
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#021)<span id="iv.xxxv-p10.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.xxxv-p11"></span>God no doubt testifies here, that he would
be always an Instructor and Teacher to his people. And he says, that he
will speak from behind, as schoolmasters follow the pupils committed to
their care, even that they may observe and watch all their gestures,
walking, words, and everything else. So God compares himself to those
teachers to whom children are committed to be taught and trained; and he
says that he speaks from behind. We may then explain what is here said
in this sense, “I will not depart from after thee:” but we may also take
a simpler view that God would *not depart from them,* even because he
would show them perpetual favor and kindness, according to what is
immediately added, *that I may do them good* In a word, God shows that
he would be an eternal Father to his people, who would never forsake nor
cast them away.  <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81)

<span id="iv.xxxv-p14"></span>But the manner or method is also
expressed, that he would *put his fear in their hearts, that they might
never depart* from him. This is the same doctrine with what we have
already seen; it is now repeated, but in other words; and thus God, as I
said, more fully illustrates his favor, he says then that he would *put*
his *fear* in the *hearts* of men. We now see how that puerile fiction
is refuted, with which the Papists are inebriated, when they say that
God’s grace co-operates, because the Spirit helps the infirmity of men,
as though they themselves brought something of their own and were
co-operators. But the Prophet here testifies that the fear of God is the
work and gift of the Holy Spirit. He does not say I will give them power
to fear me, but I *will put my fear in their hearts* We then see that he
again shews that the Spirit works effectually in us, so as to form anew
our affections, and does not leave us capable of turning or suspended.
The same thing is said by Ezekiel,

<span id="iv.xxxv-p15"></span>“And I will cause them to fear me.” (<span
id="iv.xxxv-p15.1"></span>[Eze
36:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#027)<span id="iv.xxxv-p15.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.xxxv-p16"></span>Thus the same doctrine is confirmed there,
for it is said, that God would make Israel to fear him, not that they
might be able to fear him.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p17"></span>He adds again, *That they may not depart
from me* We see that clearly refuted are those foolish notions about
neutral grace, which offers only power to men, which they may afterwards
receive if they please; for the Prophet says, “that they may not depart
from me.” Thus he again shews that perseverance, no less than the
commencement of acting rightly, is the gift of God and the work of the
Holy Spirit: and as I have already said, were God only to form our
hearts once, that we might be disposed to act rightly, the devil might,
at any moment, entice us, by his wiles, from the right way, or, as he
employs sudden and violent attacks, he might drive us up and down as he
pleases. To rule us then for one hour would avail us nothing, except God
preserved us through the whole course of our life, and led us on to the
end. It hence then follows, that the whole course of our life is
directed by the Spirit of God, so that the end no less than the
beginning of good works ought to be ascribed to his grace. Whatever
merit then men claim for themselves, they take away from God, and thus
they become sacrilegious.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p18"></span>A question may, however, be here raised:
we see that the faithful often stumble, not ten times during life, but
every day: how then is this, that where God’s Spirit works, his efficacy
is such that men never turn aside from the right way? Were any to
answer, that the faithful indeed stumble, but do not wholly fail, and
that God here refers to that defection which shakes off every fear of
God, it would not be a full solution. For we see that even the elect
themselves are sometimes like apostates, for the fear of God and piety
are, as it were, choked in them. Piety is not indeed extinguished, but
not even a spark of the Spirit appears in them. But we must notice, that
inflexible perseverance is given to the faithful, so that when they
fall, they soon repent. Hence interruptions are no hinderances that God
should not guide them from the starting-post to the goal, until they
complete their whole course. And thus true is what Augustine says, that
the Spirit so works in us, that we invariably have a good will. For he
compares our state with that of Adam, such as he was in his first
creation. We know that Adam was then without any stain, for he was
formed in the image of God: he was then upright and free from every
vice. We are as yet imperfect; though God has regenerated us by his
Spirit, there abide in us still some remnants of the flesh, and we do
not run with so much alacrity as it behoves us; nay, we are constrained
to exclaim with Paul, that we are “wretched,” and to confess that we do
not the good which we would, but the evil which is hateful to us. (<span
id="iv.xxxv-p18.1"></span>[Ro
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#015)<span id="iv.xxxv-p18.1"></span>)
Then the condition of Adam seems to have been better than ours. To this
Augustine replies, — that God deals better with us now than he did with
Adam, our first parent; for though he created him just and innocent, and
without any stain, yet he gave him a nature liable to a change; and
hence Adam, having a free-will, immediately fell. To what end then did
free-will serve? even that man immediately fell and brought us into the
same ruin with himself. This is the praise of free-will! even that man,
possessed of it, cast himself down into the lowest abyss, whence he
could never of himself have risen. But now, with respect to us, though
we halt, and also turn out of the right way, and our depraved lusts
entice us to evil, and our corruption hinders us from running as we
desire to do, yet our condition is far better, because God endues us
amidst all our conflicts with the power of his own Spirit, so that we
are never overcome or overwhelmed. This indefectible constancy,
*(indeclinabilis constantia)* as Augustine calls it, is then far
superior to the excellency and honor which Adam at first possessed. This
may be clearly gathered from the words of the Prophet when he says, that
God would *put his fear in the hearts* of his people, so that they may
*never depart* from him.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p19"></span>It may be again asked, why is there no
mention made of gratuitous justification? for the covenant of God cannot
be valid, except he reconciles us to himself, for regeneration is not
sufficient for the obtaining of God’s favor, as in part only we will
rightly and act rightly. To this we answer, that there is no doubt but
that God includes faith in the word *fear;* hence remission of sins, by
which men return into favor with God, is not excluded when regeneration
is spoken of. This passage may at the same time be explained in this
way, that the Prophet states a part for the whole. Doubtless the new
covenant, as we have before seen, consists of two parts, even that God,
in adopting us as his children, forgives us, and pardons all our
infirmities, and then governs us by his Spirit: but here he speaks only
of the last. So the sentence may be viewed as including a part for the
whole. Still the Scripture, as it has been said, when it speaks of God’s
fear, often includes faith, for God, as the Psalmist says, cannot be
feared, except we taste of his goodness,

<span id="iv.xxxv-p20"></span>“With thee is propitiation, that thou
mayest be feared.”  
(<span id="iv.xxxv-p20.2"></span>[Ps
130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004)<span id="iv.xxxv-p20.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.xxxv-p21"></span>For there would be no reverential fear of
God, except it were preceded by a knowledge of his paternal favor.

<span id="iv.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#041)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p2"></span>**41**. Yea, I will rejoice over them to
do them good, and I will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole
heart and with my whole soul.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p3"></span>**41**. Et laetabor super ipsos
beneficiendo ipsis, et plantabo eos in terra hac, in veritate (id est,
fideliter) in toto corde meo, et in tota anima men.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p6"></span>When God says that he would take pleasure
in doing good to his people, he adopts the language of man, for fathers
rejoice when they can do good to their children. God then, as the
paternal love with which he regards his people could not have been
otherwise expressed, made use of this similitude. Further, the contrast
also ought to be noticed, even that God had rejoiced when he punished
his people for their wickedness. For God delights in judgment as well as
in mercy. God then for a time rejoiced when he punished the peopie; for
as his judgment is right, he delights in it. But now he says that he
would manifest his paternal affection, so as to take pleasure in doing
them good.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p7"></span>He adds, *I will plant them in this land*
He had indeed planted them, when, by Joshua, the possession of the land
was given them, according to what is said in the 80th Psalm, where a
similar expression is used, even that God had brought his vine out of
Egypt, and planted it in the promised inheritance. (<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p7.1"></span>[Ps
80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008)<span id="iv.xxxvi-p7.1"></span>)
But afterwards the people were plucked up by the roots. Hence the first
possession of the land to the time of the exile was not, strictly
speaking, a plantation, for the people did not then strike firm roots.
God then promises here something new and unusual, when he speaks of a
plantation. Nor is there a doubt but the perpetuity, of which mention
has been made, is intended; for this plantation of the people depends on
the covenant, and the covenant is not temporary as before the exile, but
perpetual in its duration.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p8"></span>We now then understand what the Prophet
means when he compares to a plantation the restoration of the people
after their return from exile. We know, indeed, that the people from
that time had not been banished, and that the Temple had ever stood,
though the faithful had been pressed down with many troubles; but this
was only a type of a plantation. We must therefore necessarily pass on
to Christ, in order to have a complete fulfillment of this promise. The
beginning, as we have said, and I am often compelled to repeat this, is
to be taken from this return; but Christ is not to be excluded from that
liberation which was like the morning star, before the sun of
righteousness itself appeared in its own splendor. When Christians
explain this passage and the like, they leave out the liberation of the
people from Babylonish exile, as though these prophecies did not belong
at all to that time; in this they are mistaken. And the Jews, who reject
Christ, stop in that earthly deliverance. But the Prophets, as I have
said, begin with the return of the people, but they set Christ also in
the middle, that the faithful might know that that return was but a
slight taste of the full grace, which was alone to be expected from
Christ; for it was then, indeed, that God really planted his people.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p9"></span>Further, when the Jews were afterwards
expelled from the land of Canaan, it was owing to their ingratitude; and
it was a total abdication. In the meantime, however, God planted there
his own vine until Jerusalem was extended and had its limits in the
farthest parts of the earth: and we are said to be grafted in Christ and
planted, when God adopts us into his Church; and hence that saying of
Christ,

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p10"></span>“Every tree which my Father hath not
planted shall be rooted up.” (<span id="iv.xxxvi-p10.1"></span>[Mt
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#013)<span
id="iv.xxxvi-p10.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p11"></span>Let us then know that the Church was
planted in Judea, for it remained to the time of Christ. And as Christ
has pulled down the wall of partition, so that there is now no
difference between Jews and Gentiles, God plants us now in the holy
land, when he grafts us into the body of Christ.

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p12"></span>He says, *in truth,* that is, faithfully,
so as never to pull them up again. And he adds, *with my whole heart and
with my whole soul* The words are indeed singular, for God transfers to
himself the affections and feelings of men; but it is necessary that he
should in a manner transform himself, that he may be understood by us;
for unless he prattled, where would be found so much understanding as
would reach the immense altitude of his wisdom? As then the mysteries
with which he favors us are incomprehensible, it is necessary that he
should accommodate himself to our limited capacities. By the *whole
heart,* then, and the *whole soul,* he means that faithfulness and
constancy which will ever endure until the faithful shall obtain eternal
life. Integrity in man is called the whole heart, because there may be a
double heart. It cannot, it is true, be for this reason applied to God
or to his nature. But as I have already said, he says by a similitude
that he would do this with the whole heart, because he will do it so
perfectly that there will be nothing wanting to render salvation
complete, and the same thing is also meant by *truth;* though some
philosophize more refinedly as to this word, for by truth they
understand the firmness or veracity of the promises,  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) But we know that according to the usage
of the Hebrew language, that truth means often what is solid and
perpetual. He means then that the plantation would be so firm and solid,
that there would be no danger that the people would ever be removed
elsewhere, even because there would be a living root, as we have
explained: the Church was fixed in Judea until the coming of Christ, who
brought in the real accomplishment of this plantation; for when we are
grafted into him, we already in a manner possess eternal life and are
become the citizens of heaven.

<span id="iv.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we are by
nature wholly addicted to evil and bring nothing from the womb but
depravity, — O grant, that being regenerated by thy Spirit we may strive
to please and obey thee; and as our frailty is such that we may at any
moment fall away, simply thou us with firmness and constancy, that we
may never faint in the middle of our course, but so constantly obey
thee, that we may at length enjoy that blessed rest, which is prepared
for us, after we shall have passed through our earthly warfare, in
Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iv.xxxvii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Thirty-Second

<span id="iv.xxxix"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p1"></span><span id="iv.xxxix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#042)<span id="iv.xxxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p2"></span>**42**. For thus saith the LORD; Like as I
have brought all this great evil upon this people, so will I bring upon
them all the good that I have promised them.

<span id="iv.xxxix-p3"></span>**42**. Quia sic dicit Jehova, Quemadmodum
venire feci super populum hunc omne malum hoc grande, sic ego reducam
super eos bonum quod ego pronuntio super eos.

<span id="iv.xxxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.xxxix-p5"></span><span id="iv.xxxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxix-p6"></span>God shews here again to his Prophet that
exile would be temporary as to the remnant; for we know that the greater
part of the people had been wholly rejected; but it pleased the Lord,
that his Church should survive, though very small in number. Then this
promise is not to be extended indiscriminately to all the twelve tribes,
but refers especially to the elect, as the event sufficiently proved,
and Paul also is a most faithful interpreter of this truth. And this
ought to be carefully borne in mind, because hypocrites always steal for
themselves whatever God promises to his faithful people, while yet they
falsely pretend his name. Let us then understand the design of God, even
that his purpose was to support with strong confidence his chosen, lest
despair should close up the avenue to prayer. Since, then, a portion of
the people remained, that the Church might not wholly be cut off, this
promise was fulfilled; and as we can never embrace the promise of mercy,
except repentance and acknowledgment of sin precede, the two things are
here referred to by the Prophet.

<span id="iv.xxxix-p7"></span>He says that God had *made to come,* or
had brought, a dreadful calamity; and it then follows, that he would
*bring* on them *all the good* that he had promised. By these words God
intimates that what he had before promised would not be difficult for
him to accomplish, because he could heal the wound which he had
inflicted. Had the Chaldeans, as it had been said elsewhere, taken the
city according to their own will, the remedy might have been difficult;
but as God had employed the Chaldeans, and as they had fought, as it
were, under his banner, it was an easy thing for him to restore the
city, and to recall from exile those whom his righteous vengeance had
banished.

<span id="iv.xxxix-p8"></span>We must notice especially what is said, *I
will render to them all the good* which I have spoken concerning them.
For God shews on what support the faithful were to rely in hoping for
their liberation; he bids them to depend on his own mouth; for whatever
men may promise is evanescent and without fruit. If, then, we would have
our hope to be firmly fixed, so that it may not disappoint us, let us
learn to rely on God’s promises, so that no one of us may presumptuously
dream of this or that, as we thus often deceive ourselves; but let us
acquiesce in the word of God. But when the evidence of God’s grace fails
us, we may have recourse to many confidences, but it will be without
profit. We now perceive why the Prophet expressly added this particular
respecting God’s word. It follows, —

<span id="iv.xl"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p1"></span><span id="iv.xl-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
32:43-44](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#043)<span id="iv.xl-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p2"></span>**43**. And fields shall be bought in this
land, whereof ye say, *It is* desolate without man or beast; it is given
into the hand of the Chaldeans.

<span id="iv.xl-p3"></span>**43**. Et acquiretur ager in terra hac de
qua vos dicitis, Deserta est ab homine et jumento, tradita est in manum
Chaldaeorum.

<span id="iv.xl-p4"></span>**44**. Men shall buy fields for money, and
subscribe evidences, and seal *them,* and take witnesses in the land of
Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah,
and in the cities of the mountains, and in the cities of the valley, and
in the cities of the south: for I will cause their captivity to return,
saith the LORD.

<span id="iv.xl-p5"></span>**44**. Agros pecunia ement, scribendo in
libro, et obsignando, et obtestando testes in terra Benjamin, et per
circuitus Jerusalem, et in urbibus Jehudah, et in urbibus montanis, et
in urbibus campestribus, *(quanquam alii volunt esse proprium nomen, sed
hoc non convenit)* et in urbibus austri, *(id est,* quae respiciunt
versus austrum) quia reduco captivitatem eorum, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.xl-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.xl-p7"></span><span id="iv.xl-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p8"></span>He confirms the prediction respecting the
return of the people, and makes application of the vision which had been
presented to the Prophet; for he had been commanded, as we have seen, to
buy a field in the land of Benjamin. God now then annects that sign to
the prophecy; for the use of signs is to secure faith to doctrine, which
yet deserves of itself to be believed, and is fully authentic, and of
itself worthy of belief; it is however conceded to our infirmity, that
signs are given us, in order that the promises may be more fixed and
ratified in our hearts.

<span id="iv.xl-p9"></span>This order God now follows, and says, *Yet
bought shall a field be in this land* The verb, <span
id="iv.xl-p9.1"></span>קנה *kone,* means to acquire or to buy and to
possess; but as in the next verse he says, *Buy shall they with money a
field,* the meaning ought not to be changed. *Bought then shall be a
field* (the singular for the plural) *in this land, of which ye say,*
 <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) *Deserted it is by man and beast*
The chief men did not say this, as we have elsewhere shewn; nay, when
Jeremiah declared this to them, he was in treated and cruelly dealt with
by them; for it was a thing difficult to be believed that the land,
which was as it were the sacred habitation of God, should be laid waste
by the Chaldeans. God had indeed called it his rest, and it had been
given as a heritage to the children of Abraham. The Jews, then, did not
originate this saying; nay, it was God himself. But this question has
been solved elsewhere; they did not indeed speak of the desolation of
the land in the same sense or manner as God did; for when the Prophets
threatened them with the desolation of the land, they always added the
hope of deliverance and of a return; but they, when that calamity
happened to them, cast aside every hope, and gave themselves up wholly
to despair. And it is a usual thing with the ungodly to ridicule all
God’s threatenings as long as he spares them or defers their punishment;
but when God makes it known that he speaks in earnest, then they are
swallowed up with despair, and conclude that nothing remains for them.

<span id="iv.xl-p13"></span>This, then, is what Jeremiah upbraids his
own nation with, that is, that they cast off from themselves every hope,
while yet God had fixed for them the term of seventy years. While God
then was stretching forth his hand to them, they chose rather thus to
sink in the abyss of despair, so that nothing could alleviate their
minds. This ingratitude the Prophet justly condemns; for they considered
their land as devoted to perpetual ruin, when yet its restoration had
been promised to them; as though he had said, “The mercy of God and his
faithfulness will surpass all your wickedness; but ye, as far as you
can, extinguish his promises, abolish his grace, and give no place to
his promises: nevertheless he will complete what he has promised; for
though the land is falsely deemed by you to be given up for ever to
destruction, yet the Lord will cause it to be inhabited by its own
legitimate heirs, even the children of Abraham.” This is the reason why
he intimates that the Jews had regarded the land as given up to
perpetual desolation.

<span id="iv.xl-p14"></span><span id="iv.xl-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p15"></span>To shew more fully what is said in the
preceding verse, he adds, *Fields with money shall be bought, and by
writing* (the verbs are in the infinitive mood) they *shall write on
tablets and sign by witnesses* even *if the land of Benjamin*  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) Then the Prophet mentions all the
boundaries by which Jerusalem was surrounded. We know that a part of the
city was in the lot of Benjamin, and even one gate was so called: *in
the land of Benjamin,* he says, and also *through the circuits of
Jerusalem, even in the cities of Judah,* those on the *mountains,* as
well as those *in the valley, and in the cities* which he to *the
south,* even Egypt, for the southern country was towards Egypt. The
reason is added, *Because God* would *restore* their *captivity,* that,
is, restore the captives that they might again rossess the land. Now
follows, —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc20003.htm#fr_58) <span
id="iv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span> The 2d, 3d, 4th, and 5th verses (<span
id="iv.i-p13.1"></span>[Jer
32:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001)<span id="iv.i-p13.1"></span>)
ought to be put as parenthetical, as they only relate the circumstances
connected with Jeremiah when he received the vision which he proceeds to
relate in the 6th verse. Instead of “For then” in the 2d verse, “And
then” would be more proper; and “Where” would be better than “For” at
the beginning of the 3d verse, “Where Zedekiah had shut him up,” etc. It
is “In which” in the *Sept.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc20003.htm#fr_59) <span
id="iv.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p31"></span> *Gataker* and *Venema* give another view of
this clause. The Lord, as we find from verse 7 (<span
id="iv.vi-p31.1"></span>[Jer 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#007)<span
id="iv.vi-p31.1"></span>), did not tell him to *buy* the field, but only
informed him of the coming and offer of Hanameel. When Hanameel came, he
knew that it was God’s will that he should buy the field, and he
instantly acted accordingly. He knew from the very circumstances that it
was God’s message, sent to him to buy the field. — Ed.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc20003.htm#fr_60) <span
id="iv.vi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p36"></span> We may render the words literally thus,
“And I weighed for him the money, seven shekels and ten, the money.” The
word is “silver,” but it is often taken for money. The seventeen
shekels, according to *Lowth,* were about two pounds of our money. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc20003.htm#fr_61) <span
id="iv.vi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p39"></span> There were no doubt two rolls or writings,
as it appears clear from <span id="iv.vi-p39.1"></span>[Jer
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#014)<span id="iv.vi-p39.1"></span>,
where the two are distinctly mentioned, “Take these rolls, this roll of
the purchase, even the sealed, and this open roll,” etc. The word <span
id="iv.vi-p39.2"></span>ספר ought to be rendered throughout either a
roll, or a book, or writing, when preceded by an article, and not
“evidence,” as in our version.

<span id="iv.vi-p40"></span>There seems to be an incongruity in verse
the 10th (<span id="iv.vi-p40.1"></span>[Jer
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#010)<span id="iv.vi-p40.1"></span>),
as rendered by most; the roll is represented as “sealed,” before the
“witnesses” are mentioned, and before the money was weighed. The
rendering, I conceive, ought to be as follows, “So I wrote in a roll;
and I sealed it, when I had made witnesses to witness *it,* and weighed
the money in balances.” The <span id="iv.vi-p40.2"></span>ו may often be
rendered “when,” and also “so,” as it is done in the next verse in our
version, though there “and” would be more suitable. The “witnesses” are
expressly said in ver. 12 (<span id="iv.vi-p40.3"></span>[Jer
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#012)<span id="iv.vi-p40.3"></span>)
to have subscribed, or written in, the book or roll of purchase, which
was sealed. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc20003.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iv.vi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p42"></span> The 11th verse (<span
id="iv.vi-p42.1"></span>[Jer
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#011)<span id="iv.vi-p42.1"></span>),
where the two rolls are first mentioned, is difficult to be rendered. I
offer the following literal version of the 11th, 12th, 13th and 14th, —

<span id="iv.vi-p43"></span>**11.** And I took the writing of the
purchase, — it the sealed, the commandment and the conditions, — and it
the open; and I gave the writing of the purchase to Baruch the son of
Neriah,

<span id="iv.vi-p44"></span>**12.** The son of Maaseiah, in the sight of
Hanameel my uncle’s son, and in the sight of the witnesses who wrote in
the roll of the purchase, and in sight of all the Jews who

<span id="iv.vi-p45"></span>**13.** sat in the court of the prison; and
I commanded Baruch in their sight,

<span id="iv.vi-p46"></span>**14.** saying, “Thus saith Jehovah of
hosts, the God of Israel, ‘Take these rolls, — this roll of the
purchase, even it the sealed, and this open roll; and put them in au
earthen vessel, that they may continue many days.’”

<span id="iv.vi-p47"></span>The two rolls are called “the writing of the
purchase” in ver. 11, but distinguished, one being “sealed,” and the
other “open,” or unsealed. The sealed contained “the commandment,” that
is, to purchase, and “the conditions,” literally “ordinances;” which
*Blayney* renders, “the assignment and the limitations,” and the
*Vulg.,* “the stipulations and ratifications.” But <span
id="iv.vi-p47.1"></span>מצוה never means anything but a precept or a
commandment, and <span id="iv.vi-p47.2"></span>חקים are things defined,
settled, or appointed, and may be rendered “stipulations.” Thus the
contents of the sealed roll are specified, but those of the open roll
are not expressly mentioned. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc20003.htm#fr_63) <span
id="iv.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p18"></span> The *Targ.* and the versions, except the
*Vulg.,* give the first sense; but the latter is no doubt the true
meaning, as the word never means properly to be hidden. The phrase here
literally is, “Not harder (or more marvellous) than thou shall anything
be,” that is, not harder than what thou canst do. Exactly the same
phrase occurs in <span id="iv.ix-p18.1"></span>[Ge
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#014)<span id="iv.ix-p18.1"></span>.
The word, in a similar clause, in <span id="iv.ix-p18.2"></span>[De
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011)<span id="iv.ix-p18.2"></span>,
is rendered “hidden;” but the clause literally is, “It is not harder
than thou,” that is, than what thou canst attain, or do, as the context
proves, see <span id="iv.ix-p18.3"></span>[Jer
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#014)<span id="iv.ix-p18.3"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc20003.htm#fr_64) <span
id="iv.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p26"></span> The change of person seems to begin at the
18th verse (<span id="iv.ix-p26.1"></span>[Jer
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#018)<span id="iv.ix-p26.1"></span>),
and includes the first clause in the 19th, —

<span id="iv.ix-p27"></span>**18.** He who sheweth mercy to thousands,
And who returns the iniquity of fathers To the bosom of their children
after them, *Is* God, the great, the powerful; Jehovah is his name, —

<span id="iv.ix-p28"></span>**19.** Great in counsel and mighty in his
doings: Who — thine eyes are open On the ways of the sons of men, To
give to each according to his ways, And according to the fruit of his
doings;

<span id="iv.ix-p29"></span>**20.** Who, etc., etc.

<span id="iv.ix-p30"></span>“God, the great,” etc., is connected with
shewing mercy and requiting iniquity. His greatness is in counsel or
wisdom, and his power or might is manifested in his doings. The <span
id="iv.ix-p30.1"></span>ה after doings is the Chaldee for <span
id="iv.ix-p30.2"></span>ו Then his omniscience is referred to, as
necessary for carrying to effect his purposes and directing his doings.
Here he returns to the second person, and the “who” is idiomatic, and
the *Welsh* is exactly the same, <span id="iv.ix-p30.3"></span>*Yr hwn y
mae dy lygaid,* etc.; and the “Who” is continued in the <span
id="iv.ix-p30.4"></span>[Jer
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#020)<span id="iv.ix-p30.4"></span>.
In saying that each is to have “according to his ways,” he intimates
what *Calvin* says, that the children like the fathers are guilty. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc20003.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iv.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi-p8"></span> This is commonly the meaning given to this
verse. It may be rendered as follows, —

<span id="iv.xi-p9"></span>**20.** Who hast set signs and wonders in the
land of Egypt, *To before signs and wonders* to this day Both to Israel
and to mankind; And hast made to thyself a name, Such as it is at this
day.

<span id="iv.xi-p10"></span>They were “signs” or evidences of God’s
power, and in their character “wonders,” that is, supernatural. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc20003.htm#fr_66) <span
id="iv.xvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p14"></span> There is this difference between these
three things: the “voice” was that of God by his prophets, — the “law”
was the ten commandments, — and “all which” had been “commanded” were
the statutes and ordinances, the civil and ceremonial appointments. To
“hearken to his voice,” rather than to obey it, is what is meant: so far
from obeying it, they would not hear the Prophets. This had been
throughout their sin. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc20003.htm#fr_67) <span
id="iv.xxii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p8"></span> The particle <span
id="iv.xxii-p8.1"></span>אך means also truly, verily, surely. It is
rendered “only,” by the *Sept.,* — “continually,” by the *Vulg.,* —
“verily,” by the *Targ.,* — and is omitted by the *Syr;* Its most proper
meaning is, “nevertheless,” but is often rendered “surely” in our
version: and it might be rendered here, surely or doubtless. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc20003.htm#fr_68) <span
id="iv.xxii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxii-p12"></span> It appears evident, that the last clause
of this is explanatory of the first, as *Calvin* shews. “The evil,” for
the article precedes it, was “the work of their hands,” that is,
idolatry:

<span id="iv.xxii-p13"></span>For the children of Israel and the
children of Judah have doubtless been doing the evil before mine eyes
from their youth; for the children of Israel have doubtless been
provoking me with the work of their hands, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iv.xxii-p14"></span>The connection in this way appears more
obvious. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc20003.htm#fr_69) <span
id="iv.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxiii-p8"></span> It has been found difficult to render
this verse literally, though the general meaning is evident, and is
given in our version, which is more paraphrastic than usual. If we take
<span id="iv.xxiii-p8.1"></span>על for <span
id="iv.xxiii-p8.2"></span>עלה, in its Chaldee sense, as in <span
id="iv.xxiii-p8.3"></span>[Dan. 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#006)<span id="iv.xxiii-p8.3"></span>, we
shall find the version easy, —

<span id="iv.xxiii-p9"></span>**31.** For the occasion of my wrath, and
the occasion of my indignation, has this city been to me from the day
that they have built it even

<span id="iv.xxiii-p10"></span>**32.** to this day; so that I shall
remove it from my sight on account of all the wickedness of the children
of Israel, etc. etc.

<span id="iv.xxiii-p11"></span>So the latter part of <span
id="iv.xxiii-p11.1"></span>[Jer
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#031)<span id="iv.xxiii-p11.1"></span>
ought to be connected with the following verse. The verb for “remove” is
in the infinitive mood preceded by <span id="iv.xxiii-p11.2"></span>ל.
It is an elliptical phrase, as is sometimes the case, where a
resolution, obligation, or duty is intended. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc20003.htm#fr_70) <span
id="iv.xxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p7"></span> So the original is; but we say the back.
The same words are found in <span id="iv.xxv-p7.1"></span>[Jer
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027)<span id="iv.xxv-p7.1"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc20003.htm#fr_71) <span
id="iv.xxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p9"></span> The words for teaching, and early rising,
are participles, dependent on “me,” in the previous clause, and by
making a little change in the order of the words, the sense would be
more evident, —

<span id="iv.xxv-p10"></span>And they turned the neck and not the face
to me, while teaching them, early-rising and teaching; yet they
hearkened not to receive instruction.

<span id="iv.xxv-p11"></span>They turned their back, while God was
teaching them! — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc20003.htm#fr_72) <span
id="iv.xxv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p19"></span> It is true that the word means correction
as well as instruction; but as “teaching” is what was previously
mentioned, our version, which gives the latter word, seems to present
the true meaning here. It is so rendered by *Blayney.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc20003.htm#fr_73) <span
id="iv.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxvi-p8"></span> The *Vulg.* and the *Targ.* very
incorrectly render the words, “In which my name is called.” The *Sept.*
and the *Syr.* are the same as our version. It was, no doubt, a house of
prayer; but what is here meant is, that it was called God’s house. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc20003.htm#fr_74) <span
id="iv.xxix-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p10"></span> In <span id="iv.xxix-p10.1"></span>[Jer
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031)<span id="iv.xxix-p10.1"></span>,
we have “the high places,” or elevations, “of Tophet.” *Blayney* thinks
that they were artificial mounts thrown up for the purpose of performing
some of their superstitious rites. Trees were, no doubt, planted on some
of the high places; but there might be mounts without trees. That these
high places were in a valley, favor the idea that they were artificial
mounts without trees. And it indeed appears from this verse and from
<span id="iv.xxix-p10.2"></span>[Jer
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031)<span id="iv.xxix-p10.2"></span>,
that the image of Molech was set on the artificial mounts, for it is
said that they *built* or erected these high places for this purpose, —
that they might *burn* their children to Molech. And, probably, there
were several mounts in this valley, in order to accommodate a large
number of people. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc20003.htm#fr_75) <span
id="iv.xxix-p10.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p11"></span> There is no ground for this supposition
as to the practice in Tophet; for, in other parts of Scripture, what
they did is specifically mentioned. In this very book it is said, that
they *burnt* their children *in the fire,* <span
id="iv.xxix-p11.1"></span>[Jer
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031)<span id="iv.xxix-p11.1"></span>,
and that they *burnt* them as *burnt-offerings* to Baal, <span
id="iv.xxix-p11.2"></span>[Jer
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#005)<span id="iv.xxix-p11.2"></span>.
See also <span id="iv.xxix-p11.3"></span>[De
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#031)<span id="iv.xxix-p11.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.xxix-p11.4"></span>[Eze
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#037)<span id="iv.xxix-p11.4"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc20003.htm#fr_76) <span
id="iv.xxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxix-p18"></span> The *Keri,* <span
id="iv.xxix-p18.1"></span>החטיא “to cause to sin,” is no doubt the true
reading, even the <span id="iv.xxix-p18.2"></span>את before Judah is a
proof of it, and it is the meaning given by the versions and the *Targ.*
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc20003.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iv.xxx-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxx-p12"></span> “Ye *are* saying,” is the original, which
betokens a habit at that time; they were continually saying this during
the siege. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc20003.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iv.xxx-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxx-p16"></span> This promise clearly shews what *Calvin*
says as to their meaning in saying “The city has been delivered up,”
etc. that is, irretrievably. No, says God, I will restore it. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc20003.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iv.xxx-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxx-p21"></span> There is a gradation in the words, —
wrath, hot wrath, foaming wrath. Extreme displeasure betokens, as
*Calvin* intimates, extreme wickedness, and inflicts extreme punishment.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc20003.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iv.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxiv-p7"></span> “One heart” and “one way,” seem to refer
to the previous divisions between Israel and Judah. They were before
divided in thoughts respecting God and in the way of worshipping him.
This division would no longer exist. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc20003.htm#fr_81) <span
id="iv.xxxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxv-p12"></span> The <span id="iv.xxxv-p12.1"></span>אשר
may be rendered *that,* or *because. It* would be a perpetual covenant,
because he would “not turn from *being* after them to do them good,” or,
as the *Syr.* is, “from following them to do them good.” The *Vulg.*
omits <span id="iv.xxxv-p12.2"></span>אשר and so does the *Targ.;* the
*Syr.* gives it the meaning of *that,* but it is rendered *which,* by
the *Sept.,* “which (that is covenant) I will not turn away from behind
them,” that is, as it seems, from those behind them, *i.e.,* posterity.
And this is the meaning which *Blayney* has adopted, “which I will not
withdraw from their posterity, to be a benefactor to them;” which last
words he evidently connects with the first clause. What favors this
rendering is, that “children” are mentioned in the previous verse.

<span id="iv.xxxv-p13"></span>Still, owing to the last clause, the
*Syriac* version seems to be the most suitable. There are here two
remarkable promises, — that God would not turn away from them, — and
that he would put in his fear, so as to keep them from turning away from
him. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc20003.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxvi-p13"></span> The word <span
id="iv.xxxvi-p13.1"></span>אמת most commonly means *reality* in
opposition to dissimulation or pretense, or what is only apparent;
*truth* in opposition to falsehood, and *stability* in opposition to
what is evanescent and temporary. The planting was to be a *real*
planting, and not one in disguise or appearance. The following words
explain the meaning, “with all my heart and with all my soul,” that is,
with sincerity and earnestness, or, with the full purpose of mind and
with the full assent of the will and affections. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc20003.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iv.xl-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p10"></span> This is not the literal rendering of the
Hebrew, but the following, —

<span id="iv.xl-p11"></span>Which, ye say, *is* desolate, without man or
beast, Given into the hand of the Chaldeans.

<span id="iv.xl-p12"></span>Had “which” been governed by “say,” there
would have been a pronoun after it with a preposition prefixed. The
*Sept.,* the *Syr.,* and *Arab.* have retained the right construction,
though the *Vulg.* has not. “Without,” *i.e.,* with not, or not with, is
literally the Hebrew, <span id="iv.xl-p12.1"></span>מאין — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc20003.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iv.xl-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xl-p16"></span> The infinitives in Hebrew are often as in
*Welsh,* verbal nouns. The rendering may be made as follows, —

<span id="iv.xl-p17"></span>Fields with money shall they buy; And *there
shall be* writing in a book, And sealing, and the witnessing of
witnesses, In the land of Benjamin, etc. etc.

<span id="iv.xl-p18"></span>Our version is the *Syr.* and nearly the
*Targ.* — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 33](cc20004)
