[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc20011)  [Next](cc20013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 20: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part IV*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 41

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
41:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Now it came to pass in the seventh
month, *that* Ishmael the son of Nethaniah the son of Elishama, of the
seed royal, and the princes of the king, even ten men with him, came
unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and there they did eat bread
together in Mizpah.

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Et accidit mense septimo, ut venerit
(et venit) Ismael filius Nathaniae filii Elisamae, e semine regio, et
proceres regis et decem viri cum eo ad Godoliam filium Achikam in
Mispath, et comederunt illic panem simul in Mispath.

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span>**2**. Then arose Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah, and the ten men that were with him, and smote Gedaliah the
son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan with the sword, and slew him, whom the
king of Babylon had made governor over the land.

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Et surrexit Ismael filius Nathaniae,
et decem viri qui cum eo erant, et percussit Godoliam filium Achikam
tilii Saphan gladio; et occidit eum quem praefecerat rex Babylonis in
terra.

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>**3**. Ishmael also slew all the Jews that
were with him, *even* with Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans that
were found there, *and* the men of war.

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span>**3**. Et Judaeos qui erant cum eo, cum
Godolia, nempe, in Mispath, et Chaldaeos qui inventi sunt illic, viros
bellicosos percussit Ismael.

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span><span id="xiii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>It was a detestable cruelty and barbarity
in Ishmael to kill Gedaliah who entertained him, and whom he found to
possess a paternal regard towards him. Heathens have ever deemed
hospitality sacred; and to violate it has been counted by them as the
greatest atrocity; and hospitable Jupiter ever possessed among them the
right of taking vengeance, if any one broke an oath given when at table.
Now Ishmael had sworn, as we have seen, that he would be faithful to
Gedaliah. He was again received by him, and was treated hospitably; and
from his table he rose up to slay the innocent man, who was his friend,
and had acted towards him, as it has been stated, the part of a father.
And hence he became not only a parricide, but also the traitor of his
own country; for he knew that it could not be but that Nebuchadnezzar
would become more and more incensed against that miserable people, whom
he had spared: but he made no account of his own fidelity, nor shewed
any regard for his own brethren, whom he knew he exposed to slaughter
and ruin.

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span>But the cause of this madness is here
indirectly intimated; the Prophet says, that he was of the *royal seed.*
The royal seed was then, indeed, in the greatest disgrace; the king’s
children had been slain; he himself had been taken away bound to Babylon
after Nebuchadnezzar had made him blind. But we see, that those who had
been once in any dignity, can hardly relinquish those high notions by
which they are inflated. So that when those of the royal seed are
reduced to extreme poverty and want, they still aim at something royal,
and never submit to the power of God. The fountain then of this madness
the Prophet points out here, as by the finger, when he says, that
Ishmael was *of the royal seed*: for he thought that it was by no means
an honor to him, that Gedaliah was set over the Jews. He, no doubt,
imagined that the kingdom was to be perpetual, since God had so often
promised, that the throne of David would stand as long as the moon
continued in the heavens. (<span id="xiii.i-p11.1"></span>[Ps
89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)<span id="xiii.i-p11.1"></span>)
But mere ambition and pride led him to commit this abominable murder:
and thus it was, that he suffered himself to be persuaded by the king of
Ammon.

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span>He then *came* together with the *princes
of the king,* even those who were in the first rank when Zedekiah
reigned. Then the Prophet adds, that they *did eat bread.* This phrase
intimates that they were received hospitably, and were admitted to the
table of Gedaliah. And this kindness and benevolence ought to have
induced Ishmael and his associates to spare their host. But it follows,
that they *rose up.* This circumstance, as to the time, enhanced their
crime; for it was at the time they were eating that Ishmael slew
Gedaliah; and thus he polluted his hands with innocent blood at the
sacred table, having paid no regard to the rights of hospitality. Now
the Prophet shews that this was fatal to the miserable remnant, who were
permitted to dwell in the land. For, first, it could not have been done
without exciting the highest indignation of the king of Babylon, for he
had set Gedaliah over the land; and it was not expressed without reason,
but emphatically, that this slaughter roused the displeasure of the king
of Babylon, because the murder of Gedaliah was a manifest contempt of
his authority. And then there was another cause of displeasure, for the
Chal-deans in Mizpah, who had been given as protectors, were killed. For
the Prophet tells us, that they were *men of war,* that no one might
think that Chaldeans were sent there to occupy the place of the Jews, as
it is sometimes the case when colonists or some such men settle in a
land: they were military men, who had been chosen as a guard and
protection to Gedaliah. Thus then was the wrath of the king of Babylon
provoked to. vent his rage on the remnant to whom he had shewed mercy.
It now follows, —

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
41:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#004)<span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>**4**. And it came to pass the second day
after he had slain Gedaliah, and no man knew *it,*

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span>**4**. Et factum est die postero ex quo
occiderat Godoliam, ut nemo sciret,

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span>**5**. That there came certain from
Shechem, from Shiloh, and from Samaria, *even* fourscore men, having
their beards shaven, and their clothes rent, and having cut themselves,
with offerings and incense in their hand, to bring *them* to the house
of the LORD.

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span>**5**. Et venerunt viri ex Sichem, e Silo
et Samaria octoginta rasi barba (*vel,* rasa barba,) et laceris
vestibus, et scissi (*vel,* laniati) in cute sua; oblatio autem et thus
in manibus ipsorum, ut offerrent in domo Jehovae.

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span>The Prophet skews here, that after Ishmael
had polluted his hands, he made no end of his barbarity. And thus wicked
men become hardened; for even if they dread at first to murder innocent
men, when once they begin the work, they rush on to the commission of
numberless murders. This is what the Prophet now tells us had happened;
for after Gedaliah was killed, he says, that *eighty men came from
Shechem, from Shiloh, and from Samaria,* who brought incense and
offering, to present them in the Temple, and that these were led by
treachery to Mizpah, there killed and cast into a pit, as we shall
hereafter see.

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span>It is not known by what cause Ishmael was
induced to commit this cruel and barbarous act, for there was no war
declared, nor could he have pretended any excuse for thus slaying
unhappy men, who apprehended no such thing. They were of the seed of
Abraham, they were worshippers of God, and then they had committed no
offense, and plotted nothing against him. Why then he was seized with
such rage is uncertain, except that wicked men, as we have said, never
set any bounds to their crimes; for God gives theta the spirit of
giddiness, so that they are carried away by blind madness. It is,
indeed, probable, that they were killed, because Ishmael thought that
they carne to Gedaliah, that they might live under his protection, and
that he could not have gained anything by the murder of one man, except
he obtained authority over the whole land. It was then suspicion alone,
and that indeed slight, which led him to such a cruelty. And the
atrocity of the deed was enhanced by what the Prophet says, that they
came to offer to God *incense and offering,* <span
id="xiii.ii-p9.1"></span>מנחה*, meneche*: and he says also, that they
had their *beards shaven,* and their *garments torn* Such an appearance
ought to have roused pity even in the most inveterate enemies; for we
know, that there is an innate feeling which leads us to pity
*wretchedness* and tears, and every mournful appearance. The fury then
of Ishmael, even if he had before determined to do some grievous thing
to these men, ought to have been allayed by their very sight, so as not
to be even angry with them. According then to every view of the case, we
see that he must have been divested of every sense of equity, and that
he was more cruel than any wild beast.

<span id="xiii.ii-p10"></span>But it may be asked, How did these men
come for the purpose mentioned, since the report respecting the
destruction of the Temple must have spread everywhere? for they are not
said to have come from Persia, or from countries beyond the sea; but
that they came from places not afar off. They who answer that the report
of the Temple being destroyed had not reached them, only seek to escape,
but the answer is not credible, and it is only an evasion. The Temple
was burnt in the fifth month; could that calamity be unknown in Judea?
And then we know that Shiloh was not far from Jerusalem, nor was Samaria
very distant. Since then the distance of these places cannot account for
their ignorance, it seems not to me probable, that these came, because
they thought that the Temple was still standing, nor did they bring
victims, but only incense and oblation. I then think that they came, not
to offer the ordinary sacrifice, but only that they might testify their
piety in that place where they had before offered their sacrifices. This
conjecture has nothing inconsistent in it; nor is there a doubt, but
that before they left their homes, they had put on their mean and torn
garments. These were signs, as we have elsewhere seen, of sorrow and
mourning among the Orientals.

<span id="xiii.ii-p11"></span>But here another question is raised, for
the Prophet says, that they were *torn* or cut; and this has been deemed
as referring to the skin or body: but this was forbidden by the Law.
Some answer that they forgot the Law in their extreme grief, so that
they undesignedly tore or lacerated their bodies. But the prohibition of
the Law seems to me to have had something special in it, even that God
designed by it to distinguish his people from heathens. And we may
gather from sacred history, that some artifice was practiced by
idolaters, when they cut their bodies; for it is said, that the priests
of Baal cut their bodies according to their usual manner or practice.
God then, wishing to keep his people from every corruption, forbade them
to imitate the rites of the heathens. And then there is no doubt but
that God designed to correct excess in grief and mourning. I therefore
do not think that anything contrary to the Law was done by these men,
when they came to the ruins of the Temple with torn garments and
lacerated skin, for there was in them nothing affected, for so
lamentable a calamity drew forth such grief, that they spared neither
themselves nor their garments.

<span id="xiii.ii-p12"></span>Jeremiah says, in the first of these
verses, that the death of Gedaliah was concealed, so that *no one knew
it;* yet such a deed could have been hardly buried; for many of the Jews
were killed together with Gedaliah, and also the guarding soldiers, whom
Nebuchadnezzar had given to Gedaliah. But the Prophet means that it was
hid, because the report had not yet gone forth. He then speaks
comparatively, when he says that it was known to none. We have already
stated the purpose for which the eighty men came from Samaria and other
places; it was not that they might offer sacrifices, as when the Temple
was standing, but only lament the destruction of the Temple and of the
city; and that as they had brought from home the greatest sorrow, they
might, on their return, humble themselves, after having seen so grievous
a punishment inflicted on the people for their sins.

<span id="xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xiii.iii-p2"></span>Grant, omnipotent God, that since our life
is exposed to innumerable dangers, and thou settest before our eyes what
happened to the best and choicest of thy servants, — O grant, that we
may flee to thee, and resign ourselves wholly to thy will, that we may
know that thou art the guardian of our life, so that not a hair of our
head can fall without thy hidden permission, and that we may also learn
to ask of thee the spirit of wisdom and discretion, so that thou thyself
mayest guide our steps, as it is not in us to defend our life from those
many intrigues by which we are on every side surrounded, the whole world
being opposed to us, so that we may proceed in the course of our
pilgrimage under thy care and protection, until we shall be removed into
that blessed rest, which is laid up for us in heaven by Christ our Lord.
— Amen.

<span id="xiii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.iv"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-Fifth

<span id="xiii.v"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p1"></span><span id="xiii.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
41:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#006)<span id="xiii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p2"></span>**6**. And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went
forth from Mizpah to meet them, weeping all along as he went: and it
came to pass, as he met them, he said unto them, Come to Gedaliah the
son of Ahikam.

<span id="xiii.v-p3"></span>**6**. Et egressus est Ismael filius
Nathaniae obviam ipsis e Mispath, ambnlans ambulando et fiens; et factum
est cum occurrisset illis, tune dixit illis, Venite ad Godoliam filium
Achikam.

<span id="xiii.v-p4"></span>**7**. And it was *so,* when they came into
the midst of the city, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew them, *and
cast them* into the midst of the pit, he, and the men that *were* with
him.

<span id="xiii.v-p5"></span>**7**. Et factum est cum venissent in medium
urbis, tunc jugulavit (*vel,* mactavit) eos Ismael filius Natha-niae ad
medium fossae, ipse et viri qui erant cum eo.

<span id="xiii.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiii.v-p7"></span><span id="xiii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p8"></span>Here Jeremiah relates another circumstance
in the nefarious conduct of Ishmael, that by flatteries he enticed
simple men, who feared no evil, and while pretending kindness, slew
them. The slaughter was in itself very detestable, but added to it was
the most abominable deceit, for he pretended to weep with them, and
offered an act of kindness, to bring them to Gedaliah, and then he
traitorously killed them! We hence see that it was an act of extreme
wickedness. In saying that he *wept,* it was no doubt a sign of feigned
piety,  <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) He saw these good men in
torn garments and in tears on account of the Temple being destroyed, he
therefore pretended that he had the same feeling. This was falsely to
pretend a regard for God, and his tears were those of the crocodile; for
he shed tears as though he lamented the ruin of the Temple and of the
city. He thus gained the confidence of the unwary men, and then after
having led them into the middle of the city, he slew them. The place
also is mentioned, *nigh to the middle of the pit,* for so I render it,
rather than *in the middle,* for it is not credible that he killed them
in the pit itself; but when led to the pit they were killed and were
cast into it, as we shall see.  <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121)
He then slew them at the outside of the pit, and immediately cast them
in.

<span id="xiii.v-p14"></span>It may, however be asked, Whether he could
with so few attack with success so many men? for it seems strange, that
as they were eighty men they did not resist; they might at least have
frightened their enemies. But we must, in the first place, recollect
that they were, as we have seen, unarmed; for they had brought only a
sacred offering with incense; but the others were armed and well trained
for war; they had also been reduced to a state of hopeless despair, so
that they had doubtless contracted great ferocity, as those who are
continually in danger accustom themselves to acts of cruelty. Ishmael,
then, and his companions were armed, but the others were without any
arms, and were also simple men and in no degree accustomed to war. Hence
it was that they were killed like sheep, while Ishmael and his
associates were like wolves, altogether ferocious. It now follows, —

<span id="xiii.vi"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#008)<span id="xiii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p2"></span>**8**. But ten men were found among them
that said unto Ishmael, Slay us not: for we have treasures in the field,
of wheat, and of barley, and of oil, and of honey. So he forbare, and
slew them not among their brethren.

<span id="xiii.vi-p3"></span>**8**. Decem autem homines inventi sunt in
ipsis qui dixerunt (et dixerunt, *copula resolvi debet hoc modo;*
dixerunt *ergo*) ad Ismael, Ne interficias nos, quia sunt nobis opes
reconditae in agro, triticum et hordeum (*sunt pluralis numeri, sed
durum esset Latine dicere,* tritica et hordea) et oleum et mel: et
cessavit (*vel,* destitit,) et non occidit eos in medio fratrum suorum.

<span id="xiii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.vi-p5"></span><span id="xiii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p6"></span>We here see that the barbarity of Ishmael
was connected with avarice, he was indeed inflamed with ferocious
madness when he slew simple and innocent men; but when the hope of gain
was presented to him, he spared some of them. Thus then we see that he
was a lion, a wolf, or a bear in savageness, but that he was also a
hungry man, for as soon as he smelt the odor of prey, he spared ten out
of the eighty, who, it is probable, thus redeemed their life and
returned home. So in one man we see there were many monsters; for if he
hated all those who favored Gedaliah, why did he suffer these to escape?
even because avarice and rapacity prevailed in him.

<span id="xiii.vi-p7"></span>It is then added, that he *slew them not in
the midst of their brethren,* that is, when they were exposed to death
and were mixed with the others, so that their condition seems to have
been the same. The Prophet says, that they were spared, even because
Ishmael sought nothing else but gain. And it is probable that in a state
of things so disturbed he was not furnished with provisions and other
things. As, then, want urged him, so he became moderate, lest his
cruelty should cause a loss to him.

<span id="xiii.vi-p8"></span>Here also is set before us the inscrutable
purpose of God, that he suffered unhappy men to have been thus slain by
robbers. They had left. their houses to lament the burning of the
Temple. As then the ardor of their piety led them to Jerusalem, how
unworthy it was that they should become a prey to the barbarity of
Ishmael and his associates? But as we said yesterday, God has hidden
ways by which he provides for the salvation of his people. He took away
Gedaliah; his end indeed was sad, having been slain by Ishmael whom he
had hospitably entertained. Thus God did not suffer him to be tossed
about in the midst of great troubles. For John, the son of Kareah, who
yet was a most faithful man, would have become soon troublesome to the
holy man; for he became soon after the head and ringleader of an impious
faction, and ferociously opposed Jeremiah. Had then Gedaliah lived, he
would have been assailed on every side by his own people. It was then
God’s purpose to free him at once from all these miserable troubles. The
same thing also happened to the seventy who were slain; for the Lord
removed them to their rest, that they might; not be exposed to the
grievous evils and calamities which afterwards soon followed; for none
could have been in a more miserable state than the remnant whom
Nebuchadnezzar had spared. We have then reason in this instance to
admire the secret purpose of God, when we see that these unhappy men
were killed, who yet had gone to Jerusalem for the sake of testifying
their piety. It was, in short, better for them to have been removed than
to have been under the necessity of suffering again many miseries. It
now follows, —

<span id="xiii.vii"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#009)<span id="xiii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p2"></span>**9**. Now the pit wherein Ishmael had
cast all the dead bodies of the men, whom he had slain because of
Gedaliah, *was* it which Asa the king had made for fear of Baasha king
of Israel: *and* Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled it with *them that
were* slain.

<span id="xiii.vii-p3"></span>**9**. Fovea autem in quam projecit Ismael
illuc (sed abundat  <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) ) omnia
cadavera hominum, quos percussit in plaga Godeliae (vel, propter
Godoliam, ut alii vertunt) ipsa est quam fecerat rex Aza propter Baaza
regem Israel; hanc replevit Ismael filius Nathaniae interfectis.

<span id="xiii.vii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiii.vii-p6"></span><span id="xiii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p7"></span>The Prophet tells us by the way that the
trench was made by King Asa, when he fortified the city against the
attack of Baasha, as it is related in the sixteenth chapter of Second
Chronicles. For Baasha, having collected an army, made an attack on the
land of Judah and began to build the city, that he might thus keep the
Jews as it were besieged, and make thence daily incursions, and where he
might safely take his forces together with the spoils. Asa then hired
the king of Syria, and induced him to break the treaty which the two
kings of Syria and Israel had made with one another. Thus Baasha was
forced to leave the work unfinished, and thence Asa is said to have
carried away the gathered stones, that thereby the trench might be
formed. There is indeed no mention of the trench; but we may conclude
that it was then formed, in order that it might interpose between the
enemy and the city. But it may seem strange that the trench was in the
midst of the city, except perhaps that Asa built a fortress within the
town, that if he was overcome by his enemy, he might take refuge there
with his men of war, as we know that citadels are often built in the
middle of cities as fortresses, as places of refuge. Asa then built this
trench, that should the king of Israel take the city, he might not
penetrate farther, but be kept back by the interposing trench. But only
in things uncertain are conjectures to be allowed.

<span id="xiii.vii-p8"></span>But the Prophet increases the indignity of
the deed, when he says, that the *trench was filled with the slain* It
was formed for a very different end and purpose, even that the king of
Judah, when reduced to the greatest straits, might have the trench as a
defense against the violence of his enemies, so that he might protect
his kingdom and his subjects. But now the slain were cast into the
trench, not the Syrians nor the Israelites, but Jews themselves and
God’s pious worshipers. What then had been made for the public benefit
of the people, was made by Ishmael a place for the slaughter of good
men. And hence, as it has been said, the atrocity of the deed was more
enhanced. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="xiii.viii"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#010)<span id="xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p2"></span>**10**. Then Ishmael carried away captive
all the residue of the people that *were* in Mizpah, *even* the king’s
daughters, and all the people that remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan
the captain of the guard had committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam:
and Ishmael the son of Nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed
to go over to the Ammonites.

<span id="xiii.viii-p3"></span>**10.** Et captivum cepit Ismael quod
residuum erat populi, quod erat in Mispath, nempe filias regis, et totum
populum qui relictus fuerat in Mispath quem commiserat Nabuzardan
princeps interfectorum Godoliae filio Achikam (vel, cui residuo populi
praefecerat Godoliam, eodem sensu, filium Achikam:) accepit ergo Ismael
filius Nathaniae, et profectus est ut transiret ad filios Ammon.

<span id="xiii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.viii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p6"></span>It is not known whether Ishmael had this
design at the beginning, or whether, when he saw that he had no power to
stand his ground, he took the captives with him, that he might dwell
with the king of Ammon. It is, however, probable that this was done
according to a previous resolution, and that before he slew Gedaliah, it
was determined that the remnant should be drawn away to that country.
Perhaps the king of Ammon wished to send some of his own people to dwell
in Judea; thus he hoped to become the ruler of Judea, and also hoped to
pacify the king of Babylon by becoming his tributary. It was, however, a
great thing to possess a land so fertile. However this may have been,
there is no doubt but that the king of Ammon hoped for something great
after the death of Gedaliah. And it is probable that for this reason the
people were drawn away, to whom an habitation in Judea had been
permitted.

<span id="xiii.viii-p7"></span>The Prophet now tells us, that Ishmael
*took* the remnant of the people *captives.* And it appears that in a
short time he had a greater force than at the beginning; for he could
not with a few men collect the people, for the number of those who had
been left, as we have seen, was not inconsiderable: and they were
dispersed through many towns; and Ishmael could not have prevailed on
them by his command alone to remove to the land of Ammon. But after he
had killed Gedaliah, his barbarity frightened them all, and no doubt
many joined him; for an impious faction ever finds many followers when
any hope is offered them. All then who were miserable among the people
followed him as their leader; and thus he was able to lead away the
whole people as captives.

<span id="xiii.viii-p8"></span>But here again a question arises, that
is, respecting the *daughters of the king;* for the poor and the
obscure, who were of the lowest class, had alone been left; and the
royal seed, as we have seen, had been carried away. But it is probable
that some of the king’s daughters had escaped when the city was
besieged; for Ishmael himself was of the royal seed, but he had escaped
before the city was taken. Nebuchadnezzar then could not have had him as
a captive. The same was the case with the daughters of the king, whom
Zedekiah might have sent to some secure places. And Ge-daliah afterwards
brought them together when he saw that it could be done without danger
or hazard of exciting suspicion: he had indeed obtained this power, as
we have before seen, from Nebuzaradan. Though then Gedaliah ruled over
the poor and those of no repute, yet the daughters of the king, who had
been removed to quieter places, afterwards dwelt with him; and so
Ishmael, and John the son of Kareah, and other leaders of the army, came
to him: the reason was the same.

<span id="xiii.viii-p9"></span>But it is again repeated, *and all the
people that remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan had committed to
Gedaliah,* or, over whom he appointed Gedaliah, as we have before seen.
But the repetition was not made without reason; for Jeremiah expressed
again what was worthy of special notice, that the fury and violence of
Ishmael were so great that he did not see that the mind of
Nebuchadnezzar would be so exasperated as to become implacable; but his
madness was so furious that he had no regard for himself nor for others.

<span id="xiii.viii-p10"></span>He then says that he *took away captive
the* people, and *went that he might pass over to the children of Ammon*
Thus their condition was much worse than if they had been driven into
exile; for the Ammonites were in no degree more kind than the Chaldeans;
nay, they were exposed there, as we shall hereafter see, to greater
reproaches; it would indeed have been better for them and more
tolerable, had they been at once killed, than to have been thus removed
to an exile the most miserable.

<span id="xiii.viii-p11"></span>It hence appears that Ishmael was wholly
devoid of all humane feelings, having been thus capable of the impiety
of betraying the children of Abraham. For where there is ambition, it
often happens that a lust for empire impels men to deeds of great
enormity; but to draw away unhappy people to the Ammonites was certainly
an act more than monstrous.

<span id="xiii.viii-p12"></span>As to the people, we shall hereafter see
that they deserved all their reproaches and miseries; and this calamity
did not happen to them except through the righteous providence of God.
For though they were freed, as we shall see, by the son of Kareah, yet
they soon went into Egypt, notwithstanding the remonstrances of the
Prophet, and his severe denunciations in case they removed there. Though
then the base and monstrous cruelty of Ishmael is here set before us,
let us yet know that the Jews deserved to be driven away into exile, and
to be subjected to all kinds of miseries.

<span id="xiii.viii-p13"></span>Oh, miserable sentence! when it is said,
that there were slain seventy men *in the hand of Gedaliah*  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) Some render “hand,” as I have noticed,
“on account of Gedaliah;*”* and others, “in the place of *Gedaliah.”*
But as this explanation seems forced, we may take hand for stroke or
wound; and this seems the most suitable meaning, as hand is often so
taken in Scripture. They were then slain in the wound of Gedaliah, that
is, they were slain in like manner with him, as it were in addition to
the wound he *received. Let* us now proceed, —

<span id="xiii.ix"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
41:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#011)<span
id="xiii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p2"></span>**11.** But when Johanan the son of Kareah,
and all the captains of the forces that *were* with him, heard of all
the evil that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had done,

<span id="xiii.ix-p3"></span>**11.** Et audivit Joannes filius Kareah et
omnes duces copiarum, qui cum eo erant, omne malum quod perpetraverat
Ismael filius Nathaniae;

<span id="xiii.ix-p4"></span>**12.** Then they took all the men, and
went to fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him by the
great waters that *are* in Gibeon.

<span id="xiii.ix-p5"></span>**12.** Et sumpserunt omnes homines, et
profecti sunt ad proeliandum cum Ismael filio Nathaniae, et invenerunt
(*vel,* assecuti sunt) ipsum ad aquas magnas (*alii vetrunt,* multas,
*sed non placet*) quae sunt in Guibeon.

<span id="xiii.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ix-p7"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p8"></span>Here the Prophet informs us, that Ishmael
did not attain his wishes; for he had resolved to sell; as it were, the
people to the king of Ammon, but he was intercepted in his course. But
he says first, that *John the son of Kareah* had *heard* the report, and
that he, together with other leaders, went to meet him in order to
intercept him in his journey. He says also that *he collected all the
men,* even those who had been dispersed. All then they could have got,
they enlisted, and went to fight with Ishmael. And the Prophet adds,
that they *found him at the great waters* And I think they were so
called because they were either a lake or a pool. I doubt not, then, but
that it was a common name. Some say that the waters were then abundant,
because there had been constant rains. But this conjecture is not
probable. The simpler meaning is, that these waters were thus called,
because in that part the abundance of water was not great in comparison
with the lake.  <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) Ishmael then was
found there. It is now added by the Prophet, that the captives rejoiced
when they saw John, and immediately came over to his side. he therefore
says, —

<span id="xiii.x"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p1"></span><span id="xiii.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
41:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#013)<span id="xiii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p2"></span>**13.** Now it came to pass, *that* when all
the people which *were* with Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and
all the captains of the forces that *were* with him, then they were
glad.

<span id="xiii.x-p3"></span>**13.** Et accidit cum vidisset populus, qui
erat cum Ismael, Joannem filium Kareah, et omnes duces copiarum, qui
erant cum eo, tunc laetati sunt.

<span id="xiii.x-p4"></span>**14.** So all the people that Ishmael had
carried away captive from Mizpah cast about and returned, and went unto
Johanan the son of Kareah.

<span id="xiii.x-p5"></span>**14.** Et conversus est totus populus quem
abduxerat Ismael e Mispath, et reversi sunt et profecti sunt cum Joanne
filio Kareah.

<span id="xiii.x-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiii.x-p7"></span><span id="xiii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p8"></span>The people readily passed over to John and
his army, because John, and other leaders of the forces, came to them
sufficiently armed, and they were, as we have before seen, men trained
up for war. And Ishmael could not have been equal to them, when the
people went over to John and his associates. Thus we see that the
impious man failed in his base purpose, for he thought to render himself
very acceptable to the king of Ammon by bringing so many captives to
dwell in his land, that he might take possession of Judea. He had then
formed many plans for himself, but God frustrated them. But it was God’s
will that he should remain alive; for he fled, as it appears from what
follows, —

<span id="xiii.xi"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p1"></span><span id="xiii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
41:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#015)<span id="xiii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p2"></span>**15**. But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah
escaped from Johanan with eight men, and went to the Ammonites.

<span id="xiii.xi-p3"></span>**15**. Et Ismael (Ismael autem) filius
Nathaniae servatus est (vel, evasit) cum octo hominibus a facie Joannis,
et pro-fectus eat ad filios Ammon.

<span id="xiii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xi-p5"></span><span id="xiii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p6"></span>He indeed met with bad success; he fled
before his enemy, when the whole people forsook him, when he lost his
soldiers; and he could not come without the greatest disgrace before the
king of Ammon. It seems, however, very strange that he was allowed to
flee away; for how was it that God did not execute those well-known
sentences, —

<span id="xiii.xi-p7"></span>“He who smites with the sword shall perish
by the sword;” “Whosoever sheds man’s blood, his blood shall be shed?”
(<span id="xiii.xi-p7.1"></span>[Mt
26:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#052)<span id="xiii.xi-p7.1"></span>;
<span id="xiii.xi-p7.2"></span>[Re
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010)<span id="xiii.xi-p7.2"></span>;
<span id="xiii.xi-p7.3"></span>[Ge
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006)<span id="xiii.xi-p7.3"></span>)

<span id="xiii.xi-p8"></span>Ishmael had not only killed a man, but the
governor of the people, and that governor by whose protection and favor
a remnant had been preserved as a seed; and he had also killed all whom
he had found with him; and lastly, he had killed seventy men, with whom
he had no strife, no war, no quarrel. As, then, Ishmael had so polluted
himself with innocent blood, and with so many murders of good men, how
was it that he was suffered to escape?

<span id="xiii.xi-p9"></span>As we have before said, God does not now
observe an equal, or the same course in his judgments; for he often
extends the life of the most wicked, that they may be exhibited, as it
were, as a spectacle; nor does the truth of the words, “Whosoever sheds
man’s blood, his blood shall be shed,” become evanescent; but God has
various ways by which he renders a just reward to murderers and
assassins. And we ought to notice what is said in the book of Psalms,

<span id="xiii.xi-p10"></span>“Slay them not, lest my people should
forget.”  
(<span id="xiii.xi-p10.2"></span>[Ps
59:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#011)<span id="xiii.xi-p10.2"></span>)

<span id="xiii.xi-p11"></span>The Psalmist there asks God not to destroy
immediately the wicked; for an oblivion of a remarkable punishment might
easily creep in, if God executed it suddenly and instantly. But when God
impresses a mark of his curse on the impious and the wicked, and
prolongs their life, it is the same as though he placed them in a
theater to be looked on leisurely and for a long time. Conspicuous,
then, are the marks of God on the impious, when God pursues them slowly
and by degrees, and summons them, in a manner, day by day before his
tribunal. There is, therefore, no doubt but that God thus executed
vengeance on the barbarity of Ishmael.

<span id="xiii.xi-p12"></span>For how was it that he killed Gedaliah?
even because he was of the royal seed, and foolish pride still filled
his heart, though God by his powerful hand had broken down whatever
dignity that once belonged to the royal seed, *sea, he* had completely
torn it to pieces; and yet this man *cherished* his own ferocity. Hence
God executed on him a two-fold punishment, by depriving him of his
company; for he went to the king of Ammon, whom he had no doubt
flattered with great promises, and from whom he also *expected* no
common rewards, — he went there a fugitive with his eight companions,
and also filled with confusion, and he saw no hope of a return. Thus,
then, it happened that he was despised and reprobated; and this was, no
doubt, more bitter to him than if he had suffered ten deaths.

<span id="xiii.xi-p13"></span>Let us then learn not to form our judgment
according to the present appearance of things; but let us patiently wait
while God makes openly known to us the various ways he adopts in
punishing the wicked; nay, this ought *especially* to serve as a
confirmation to our faith, when we see the godly cruelly slain, and the
wicked remaining in security; for it hence follows that we are to look
for another judgment of God, which does not yet appear. For if God
rendered to each his just reward, then the Sadducees would have some
ground to boast that there is not another life; but when things are thus
in a state of confusion in the world, we know that God’s judgment is
suspended and deferred to another time. Then this variety or confusion,
if you please, confirms our minds in the hope of the last judgment, and
of a blessed resurrection. I cannot now proceed further.

<span id="xiii.xii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xiii.xii-p2"></span>Grant, omnipotent God, that as this world
is filled with the filth of the wicked, and as we are on every side
surrounded with enemies, — O grant, that we may learn to flee under thy
protection, and so hide ourselves under the shadow of thy wings, that we
may look nowhere else for safety but from thy defense; and that we may
also know that as to everything that happens to us, our life and our
death are so ordered by thy wonderful providence, that all events help
forward our salvation, so that we may go onward, not only through many
calamities, but, if need be, through the midst of slaughters, until we
shall come to that blessed rest, which thine only-begotten Son has
obtained for us by his own blood. — Amen.

<span id="xiii.xii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-Sixth

<span id="xiii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xiii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
41:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#016)<span
id="xiii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p2"></span>**16** Then took Johanan the son of
Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that *were* with him, all the
remnant of the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after *that* he had slain Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam, *even* mighty men of war, and the women, and the children, and
the eunuchs, whom he had brought again from Gibeon:

<span id="xiii.xiv-p3"></span>**16.** Et sumpsit Joannes filius Kareah
et cuncti principes (duces) copiarum qui erant cum eo omnes reliquias
populi, quas reduxerant ab Ismaele filio Nathaniae e Mispath, postquam
percusserat Godoliam filium Achikam, viros fortes, viros belli (*hoc
est,* bellicosos,) et mulieres et pueritiam et eunuchos quos reduxerat a
Guibeon:

<span id="xiii.xiv-p4"></span>**17.** And they departed, and dwelt in
the habitation of Chimham, which is by Bethlehem, to go to enter into
Egypt,

<span id="xiii.xiv-p5"></span>**17.** Et profecti sunt et sederunt
(*vel,* substiterunt) in Geruth-Chimcham, quae est prope Bethlehem, ut
proficiscerentur ad ingrediendum in Aegyptum,

<span id="xiii.xiv-p6"></span>**18.** Because of the Chaldeans: for they
were afraid of them, because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon and made governor
in the land.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p7"></span>**18.** Propter Chaldaeos, quia timebant
ab ipsis (*ad verbum,* a facie ipsorum,) quia percusserat Ismael filius
Nathaniae Godoliam filium Achikam, quem praefecerat rex Babylonis in
terra.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p8"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xiv-p9"></span><span id="xiii.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p10"></span>The Prophet now shews, that though some
kind of virtue appeared in John the son of Kareah, he was not yet of a
right mind. He was an energetic and a *discreet* man, but he discovered
his unbelief, when he led the remnant of the people into Egypt, while
the Prophet was forbidding such a thing. He already knew that this was
not lawful, but his obstinacy was two-fold more, when the Prophet
repudiated his project, as we shall see. This passage then teaches us,
that though the leaders of the forces, who had put Ishmael to flight,
and avenged his perfidy, were men of courage, and shewed regard for the
public good, they were destitute of faith: there was thus wanting in
them the chief thing, that is piety and the fear of God.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p11"></span>Then the Prophet says, that *John* and
the rest *took the remnant of the people whom they had recovered from
Ishmael, from Mizpah,* not that they were recovered from that place, but
that Ishmael had brought the unhappy people captives from Mizpah, as we
have seen; but they had all been recovered at Gibeon, according to what
is said at the end of the verse. But he says that they were *valiant
men,* <span id="xiii.xiv-p11.1"></span>גברים*, geberim,* (he so calls
them on account of their courage, for an explanation follows,) and men
*of war,* <span id="xiii.xiv-p11.2"></span>המלחמה אנשי*, anushi
emelecheme.* He then calls them *valiant* or brave, and afterwards he
explains what that virtue was, even because they were warlike men. He
says further, that there were *women* mixed with them, and *children,*
and *eunuchs,* who once lived in the king’s court; and as we have before
seen, there were among them the king’s daughters. Gedaliah then had
collected together a considerable number of men, not only from the lower
orders, but also from the higher class, whose wealth and rank were not
common while the kingdom was standing.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p12"></span><span id="xiii.xiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p13"></span>But the Prophet immediately adds what the
purpose was which they had all formed. They dwelt, he says, *in Geruth;*
some render it, *“in* the peregrination;*”* but it seems to me to be a
proper name, and I agree with those who so render it.  <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) But it is called the *Geruth of
Chimham,* of whom mention is made in <span id="xiii.xiv-p14.1"></span>[2
Sam. 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#031),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#037)<span id="xiii.xiv-p14.1"></span>.
he was the son of Barzillai, who entertained David when a fugitive from
his kingdom, and entertained him bountifully. When David wished to
remunerate his kindness, the good man made his age as an excuse, and
said, that he was old, so that he could not enjoy the things of this
life; but he presented his son to David, and it is probable that this
place was given to the son as a reward. It was hence called
Geruth-Chimham, the name of its possessor being attached to it. And he
says that it was *nigh Bethlehem.* It is also probable, that when David
wished to remunerate his host, he chose a place nigh his own city, where
he was born.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p15"></span>It is added, *to go,* etc. Then the
Prophet shews that this was not a settled habitation, but that they
intended to go into *Egypt* They knew that this was forbidden by the Law
of God, and the Prophets had often pronounced a curse on such a design.
Notwithstanding God’s prohibition, they prepared themselves for the
journey. Fear was the cause; but how much so ever they might have justly
feared, they ought yet to have considered what God permitted: for if a
sick man takes poison instead of medicine, he must suffer the punishment
that necessarily follows his own presumption and madness; so they who
seek to provide for themselves contrary to God’s will, gain only their
own destruction. This was done, as the Prophet tells us, by the remnant
of the people.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p16"></span><span id="xiii.xiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p17"></span>He then says, that they were there for a
time, but that they looked forward to Egypt, on *account,* he says, *of
the Chaldeans,* because they feared them, and for this reason, *because
Ishmael had killed Gedaliah, whom Nebuchadnezzar had set over the land*
This fear was not without reason; but they might have sent persons to
the king of Babylon, and have thrown the blame on the right person, and
cleared themselves; and the matter might have been settled. They might
then have easily obtained pardon from King Nebuchadnezzar; but as no
fear of God prevailed in them, they did not consider what was lawful,
and were by a blind impulse led into Egypt. Thus fear was no alleviation
to their crime, for there was another remedy at hand, which God would
have blessed. But when they disregarded God’s word, and followed what
their own feelings dictated to them, they contrived in a very bad way
for themselves. But far worse is what follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc20012.htm#fr_120) <span
id="xiii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p9"></span> The words may be thus literally rendered, —

<span id="xiii.v-p10"></span>And Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, went out
from Mizpah to meet them, walking, walking and weeping, etc.

<span id="xiii.v-p11"></span>He went on foot, and wept as he went out.

<span id="xiii.v-p12"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc20012.htm#fr_121) <span
id="xiii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p13"></span> “At the pit,” is the *Sept.; “About* the
middle of the pool,” is the *Vulg.* and the *Targum.* It was evidently a
ditch or a trench made for the defense of the city. See <span
id="xiii.v-p13.1"></span>[Jer
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#009)<span id="xiii.v-p13.1"></span> —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc20012.htm#fr_122) <span
id="xiii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p4"></span> It is not redundant, for it is the idiom
of the language: and so it is in *Welsh,* though the present version is
not correct, which ought to be as follows, — “<span
id="xiii.vii-p4.1"></span>A’r clawdd (not <span
id="xiii.vii-p4.2"></span>pydew) <span id="xiii.vii-p4.3"></span>yr hwn
y bwriodd Ishmael iddo,” etc. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc20012.htm#fr_123) <span
id="xiii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p14"></span> This is in the ninth verse. The words
are omitted in the *Sept.; “on* account of Gedaliah,” is the *Vulg.* and
the *Targum.;* which is the same with our version. *“Along* with
Gedaliah,” is *Blayney’s.* The word “hand,’ often means power,
authority, dominion. (<span id="xiii.viii-p14.1"></span>[Ge
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#002)<span id="xiii.viii-p14.1"></span>;
<span id="xiii.viii-p14.2"></span>[Jud
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#035)<span
id="xiii.viii-p14.2"></span>) Then the rendering would be, “on account
of the power of Gedaliah;” and this would give the passage the most
emphatic meaning: Ishmael smote them because he envied the power given
to Gedaliah, which these men, by coming to Mizpah, acknowledged and
supported. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc20012.htm#fr_124) <span
id="xiii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p9"></span> There was a pool in Gibeon, mentioned in
<span id="xiii.ix-p9.1"></span>[2Sa
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#013)<span id="xiii.ix-p9.1"></span>;
and it must have been large, otherwise it would not have been called
“great *waters.”* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc20012.htm#fr_125) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p14"></span> It is given as a proper name in the
*Sept.;* the idea of peregrination is given in the *Vulgate* and
*Targum.* If it be a common noun, its proper meaning is not
peregrination, but habitation or dwelling, or rather dwellings, it being
in the plural number. *Blayney* takes it as a proper name. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 42](cc20013)
