[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc20010)  [Next](cc20012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 20: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part IV*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 40

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
40:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** The word that came to Jeremiah from
the LORD, after that Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go
from Ramah, when he had taken him being bound in chains among all that
were carried away captive of Jerusalem and Judah, which were carried
away captive unto Babylon.

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Sermo qui fuit ad Jeremiam a Jehova,
postquam dimisit eum Nabuzardan, princeps interfectorum, e Ramah, quum
sustulisset ipsum: et ipse vinctus erat cathenis (vel, manicis,) in
medio captivitatis (hoc est, multitudinis captivae) Jerusalem et
Jehudah, qui transferebantur Babylonem.

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>**2**. And the captain of the guard took
Jeremiah, and said unto him, The LORD thy God hath pronounced this evil
upon this place.

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Et sumpsit princeps interfectorum
Jeremiam, et dixit ad eum, Jehova Deus tuus loquutus est malum hoc super
locum hunc;

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span>**3**. Now the LORD hath brought *it*, and
done according as he hath said: because ye have sinned against the LORD,
and have not obeyed his voice, therefore this thing is come upon you.

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>**3**. Et adduxit et fecit Jehova sicut
loquutus fuerat, quia peccastis Jehovae, et non audiistis vocem ejus; et
fuit vobis res haec (hoc est, accidit vobis haec res.)

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>**4**. And now, behold, I loose thee this day
from the chains which *were* upon thine hand. If it seem good unto thee
to come with me into Babylon, come; and I will look well unto thee: but
if it seem ill unto thee to come with me into Babylon, forbear: behold,
all the land *is* before thee: whither it seemeth good and convenient
for thee to go, thither go.

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span>**4**. Et tu ecce (hoc est, quantum ad te,)
ego ecce solvi te hodie a manicis (vel, cathenis, sed potius, a manicis,
quoniam addit) quae erant super manus tuas (ideo perperam alii, vertunt,
compedes, quia non ligantur compedibus;) si bonum in oculis tuis
fecerit, ut venias (hoc est, si tibi placuerit venire) Babylonem,
venias; ego autem ponam oculum meum super te; si autem malum in oculis
tuis fuerit, ut venias Babylonem, desine (cessa, veI, supersedeas:) ecce
tota regio coram facie tua est, ad bonum et rectum in oculis tuis, ad
proficiscendum (hoc est, quod fuerit bonum et rectum in oculis tuis,) ut
illic eas, eas.

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span><span id="xii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span>Here Jeremiah pursues more at large what he
had briefly touched upon before; for the Hebrews were wont, in a few
words, to state the substance of the whole, and then to explain more
diffusely what, they had briefly said. Jeremiah had before told us that
some of the Babylonian generals had been sent to release him from
prison; and he added that he had been committed to the care of Gedaliah,
who had been set over the poor of the land. He now tells us, that he, as
yet bound with chains, had been brought forth to Ramah in that miserable
condition. These things appear inconsistent, but, as I have said, we
must bear in mind, that there is an omission in that summary, which we
have noticed. For, in the first instance, Jeremiah only said, that he
had been freed from his chains; but he now states the manner more
distinctly, and, as it were, the different parts of the transaction.
Then this order ought to be especially noticed.

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>Moreover, this chapter so begins, that he
seems throughout the chapter to have forgotten the introduction. He
says, that a *word came* to him; he afterwards declares historically,
how he had been brought to Ramah, and then that he had been released
there, and also that Gedaliah was set over the remainder of the people:
in short, there is not in this long’ passage any mention made of any
prophecy; but there is inserted a whole historical narrative before the
Prophet expresses what God had committed to him, after the city was
taken, and after he had been restored to his former liberty. When,
therefore, he says here, that a *word came* to him, we must wait until
he has completed what we find in this chapter; for he will then return
to this prophecy.

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span>Let us now consider the words. *After
Nebuzaradan,* he says, *dismissed him from Ramah, etc*.; into which
place he had been brought by the guards, when he was as yet bound with
chains. There is then no doubt but that the leaders of the army had
ordered Jeremiah to be brought there, after he was taken out of the
court of the prison, and that he was brought there in the presence of
all the people; for it is probable also that all the Jews, who were to
be led into exile, were brought there too, and that they were there
mustered, that none might escape, for they would have slipped off here
and there, had they not been delivered to guards. When, therefore, all
the captives were there, Nebuzaradan ordered Jeremiah to be brought
forth, not for the sake of degrading him, for, as we have seen, the king
had been solicitous about his life; and no doubt this coutier wished to
gratify his king in every way: but it was, on the contrary, for the
purpose of an indirect reproof to all the people, as though he would
honor the servant of God, who had so faithfully warned them, and for so
long a time, even above forty years, and would set before them their
wickedness, and also their ingratitude, for having so cruelly treated
God’s servant.

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>This then was the reason why Nebuzaradan
wished Jeremiah to come bound with chains, and to be released in the
presence of all the people; it was that the Jews might at length be
ashamed of their pride and impiety against God, and of their ingratitude
towards the holy Prophet. Nebu-zaradan then did not treat Jeremiah
reproachfully; but he brought him forth in chains, that he might
publicly expose the wickedness of the whole nation.

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>He says, that an *option* was given him by
Nebuzaradan; so that if he wished, he might remain in his own country,
and choose the best place for himself, and the situation which was most
agreeable to him; but if he chose rather to go to Babylon, there he
might go. This, certainly, was a liberal offer. The Prophet was not only
freed from prison and loosed from His chains; but liberty was so given
him, that he alone was free, while the whole nation was reduced to
bondage. For they who remained had no liberty to go elsewhere. But
Nebuzaradan gave here a free option to Jere-mime, so that he was at
liberty either to live in Chaldea, or to remain in any place he wished,
or in any part of the earth.

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span><span id="xii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span>But before he says this, he administers
reproof to the people, and says, *Jehovah thy God hath spoken evil on
this city; and he hath brought it, and made it to come.* Here
Nebuzar-adan undertook the prophetic *office,* and spoke in high terms
of God’s righteous vengeance on the people. There is no doubt but that
God had raised up such a teacher to the Jews; for they had for forty
years and more obstinately rejected celestial truth. God had not ceased
kindly to invite them to repentance, and to promise them pardon and
salvation, provided they repented. As then God had not ceased for so
long a time, and continually to address them according to his paternal
goodness, and at the same time had spoken to the deaf, they deserved to
hear such a preacher as Nebuzaradan, who now contumeliously upbraided
them, that they had brought this evil on themselves, because they had
been disobedient and rebellious against God, as they had not obeyed his
word.

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span>There is here a remarkable example set
before us, so that we may learn, that when God addresses us by his
servants, we ought immediately to render obedience to him; let us learn
to fear when he threatens us, and learn to entertain hope when he offers
his favor to us. For if we reject the Prophets when they are sent to us,
other teachers will arise, who will deride us, and though they may be
themselves ungodly, they will yet upbraid us with our impiety. This then
is the doctrine we ought to gather from this passage, in which we see
that Nebuzaradan, as though gifted with the prophetic spirit, severely
rebuked the people. He, indeed, addressed Jeremiah, and seems to have
included him with the people, when he said, *Thy God hath spoken* —
*because ye have sinned and have been rebellious.* But Nebuzaradan, no
doubt, thus highly commended the faithfulness of Jeremiah, because he
had been true and faithful in his vocation and office, he then did not
make him as one of the people, nor did he mean that he had sinned with
others, or had been rebellious against God. But, in the first, place, he
addressed Jeremiah, *Thy God,* he said; and this was expressed by way of
honor, even that God was the God of Jeremiah; for though the people
boasted that they were holy, yet Nebuzaradan here indirectly condemned
their foolish boastings, since he inti-mated that Jeremiah alone was
worthy of being deemed one of God’s servants, as though he had said,
that the Jews were unworthy of the honor of glorying in God’s name, or
of professing it: *Thy God* then *hath spoken* The rest tomorrow.

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
promised that we shall be to thee as the apple of the eye, — O grant,
that we may ever flee under the shadow of thy mercy, and that this alone
may be our tranquillity in times of confusion and misery: and may we, at
the same time, recumb in confidence on thy help, that we may, in
sincerity, perform what thou commandest us, and that which is our duty
to do, so that we may, by experience, find, that all they who obey thy
voice are really sustained by thine hand, and that those are never
disappointed who look for the certain reward of their obedience from
thee; and may we carry on the warfare so perseveringly in this life,
that we may know that there is a reward laid up for us in heaven, when
Christ thine only-begotten Son shall appear. — Amen.

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-Third

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>WE began yesterday to explain the words of
Nebuzaradan which he spoke before all the Jews. We have said that though
he directed his words to Jeremiah, yet what he said referred to the
whole people; for he spoke in praise of Jeremiah, and subscribed to his
prophecies: he hence concluded that the people deserved their extreme
punishment. He says that God *had spoken,* not that he had faith in the
words of Jeremiah, but as far as he saw, that they were serviceable to
his purpose. He-gladly laid hold on what he approved, as ungodly men do,
who embrace what is useful for them in God’s Law and the Prophets,
though they do not regard them with much reverence; and yet they pretend
a great concern for religion. Such was the case with Nebu-zaradan; when
he had got the victory over the Jews, he boasted that he was the
minister of God; *Jehovah,* he says, *has spoken,* as though he had
said, that the Jews suffered such punishment as they deserved, because
God had long before declared that he would punish them.

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span>And then he adds, that God had *done* as he
had *spoken,* because they had *sinned* and *hearkened not* to his
*voice* He was nothing better; but as I have already said, he boldly
reproved others. And this is a common thing with hypocrites and all
despisers of God; they are judges in another’s cause, but look not, as
one has said, on the other side of the wallet. Thus all are keen and
ready enough to condemn others; and of this we have an example here in
Nebuzaradan, for, as though he was the lawful judge of the people, he
declared that the destruction of the city and Temple had not happened by
chance, but that it was a just punishment inflicted by God on the
wicked, because they had obstinately rejected the prophetic doctrine,
and had been intractable and disobedient.

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span>Nor is there indeed a doubt, as we hinted
yesterday, but that God, in order to expose the Jews to greater shame,
raised up for them this prophet; for when Jeremiah addressed them, and
that for their safety, while yet there was time to repent, they had
perversely rejected that favor of God. They then deserved to be
addressed with no benefit by a foreign teacher, who exulted over them,
as this unbelieving heathen did in the present instance.

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span>As to the option given to Jeremiah, we said
yesterday that it was openly made in the presence of the Jews, in order
that Nebuzaradan might wound them the more. But at the same time it was
God’s purpose to make the perseverance of his servant an example, as we
shall hereafter see. Let us now proceed, —

<span id="xii.iv"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#005)<span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p2"></span>**5**. Now while he was not yet gone back,
*he said,* Go back also to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of
Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon hath made governor over the cities of
Judah, and dwell with him among the people: or go wheresoever it seemeth
convenient unto thee to go. So the captain of the guard gave him
victuals and a reward, and let him go.

<span id="xii.iv-p3"></span>**5**. Adhuc autem non reversus erat (*hoc
per parenthesin legendum est*) et revertere ad Godoliam filium Achikam
filii Saphan, quem praefecit rex Babylonis urbibus Jehudah, et habita
cum eo in medio populi, vel ad quemcunque locum qui visus erit in oculis
tuis ad proficiscendum illuc proficiscere; et dedit illi princeps
interfectorum cibum et munus (*est enallage numeri,* munera) et demisit
eum.

<span id="xii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.iv-p5"></span><span id="xii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p6"></span>Jeremiah goes on with the same discourse,
that Nebuzar-adan dealt bountifully with him, and permitted him to go
wherever he wished. We hence conclude that Nebuchadnezzar was fully
convinced of the honesty and uprightness of Jeremiah. For he knew how he
was regarded among his own people, and that he might rouse great
disturbances, except he was upright and quiet. As, then, Nebuchadnezzar
had no doubt respecting’ the character of Jeremiah, he wished to grant
him free liberty to choose his own habitation in any city he pleased, or
to remove wherever it seemed good to him. Invitation was given him to go
to Babylon, and a promise of favor was added; but it was further
permitted to him to remain in his own country.

<span id="xii.iv-p7"></span>I have said that this was done according to
the divine purpose, that the Prophet might give a proof of his religion.
For if he had gone to Chaldea, it might have been that the confidence of
many would have failed them, and that faith in the promises would have
vanished: for they might have thought it a sign of hopeless despair, had
the Prophet gone there. That he might not then disturb weak minds, he
thought it his duty to remain in his own country. And hence God inclined
the mind of Nebuchadnezzar and the minds of his leaders to grant liberty
to the holy Prophet to remain in Judea, as though for the purpose of
raising a standard for the captives, and of accomplishing their return
after seventy years. We shall, however, see presently that he was led
away elsewhere; but that in no degree frustrated his prophecies, because
violent men led him away as a captive, and he at length died in Egypt.
But he did not willingly remove from Judea, though he found there
nothing but grief and sorrow; for he did not gratify himself, nor could
he indulge in any pleasures, in the abundance of meat and drink, but he
was ever lamenting the overthrow of his own nation, and especially the
destruction of the Temple. As, then, he preferred Judea to all other
countries, and submitted to be a constant spectator of so many miseries,
he gave a remarkable proof of his faith and patience, and thus
strengthened the faith of the miserable exiles, so that they might know
that God would be yet merciful and propitious to his people.

<span id="xii.iv-p8"></span>He goes on with the words of Nebuzaradan,
but he introduces this clause, *He was not yet gone back,* that is,
because he was not yet gone back. Then Nebuzaradan said, *“Return to
Gedaliah,* that is, if thou preferrest to live here rather than to
follow me, then go to Gedaliah.” Here Nebuzaradan shews how he would
have Jeremiah to live in safety in that land, which was as yet like a
den of robbers, even that he should be with Gedaliab. And we see how
solicitous Nebuzaradan was to preserve the life of the Prophet, for he
wished that Gedaliah should be his guardian, as he had briefly said
before; but he now sets the matter more fully and more at large before
him, *Return,* he says, *to Gedaliah, whom the king of Babylon hath set
over the cities of Judah, and dwell with him* he intimates that Jeremiah
would be without danger if he dwelt with Gedaliah, because he had been
set over Judah by the king of Babylon. Repeated at the same time is what
we have before observed, that it was in the Prophet’s power, either to
go to Gedaliah or to go anywhere else; *Whatever place,* he says, *it
seems right in thine eyes to go to, go there* He did not then assign to
him any certain place, but gave him leave to go anywhere; so that the
Prophet was to choose for himself an habitation either in Judea or out
of Judea.

<span id="xii.iv-p9"></span>It follows, that he *gave him food;* for so
I render the <span id="xii.iv-p9.1"></span>ארחה*, areche,* though some,
*“a* present;” but it means food, as we shall hereafter see in the
fifty-first chapter, where Jeremiah speaks of daily bread. The second
word, <span id="xii.iv-p9.2"></span>משאה, *meshae,* I regard as meaning
a gift or a present. Then Nebuzaradan bestowed on God’s servant food and
other gifts. As to food, the Prophet might have well *accepted* it, for
after the city was taken we know that he must have been in want of
*everything.* Even before, he lived very scantily and miserably, having
only a piece of bread daily. And now, when Nebuzaradan supplied him with
food, there was no reason why the holy man should not in such want
receive what was given him. But as to the *presents,* Jeremiah may seem
to have forgotten himself; for it was a disgrace to him to receive from
an enemy of God’s people, a present or gifts for his doctrine; for
whence proceeded this benevolence and bounty to the Prophet, except that
Nebuzaradan knew that his prophecy referred to the destruction of his
own nation? It seems, then, that for this reason he wished to reward the
holy man; he ought then to have refused these presents. But it is
probable that he was not enriched by a large sum of money, or by costly
things; Nebuzaradan only gave him some token of benevolence; and the
Prophet might without suspicion have received the present, not as a
reward for his doctrine, but rather as a confirmation of it offered by
God, because the Jews had been enemies to him as long as he had been
faithfully spending his labors among them; for when he bitterly reproved
them, he had no other object but to secure their safety. But as he had
been so inhumanely treated by the Jews, God intended that more humanity
should be shown to him by a heathen and barbarous nation than by the
children of Abraham, who boasted that they were the holy people of God.
It was, then, for this reason that Jeremiah received gifts from the hand
of Nebuzaradan. It follows, —

<span id="xii.v"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p1"></span><span id="xii.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#006)<span id="xii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p2"></span>**6**. Then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah the
son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and dwelt with him among the people that were
left in the land.

<span id="xii.v-p3"></span>**6**. Et venit Jeremias ad Godoliam filium
Achikam in Mispath; et habitavit cum eo in medio populi, qui residui
erant in terra.

<span id="xii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.v-p5"></span><span id="xii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p6"></span>Here is shown to us the firmness of the
Prophet, that he hesitated not to reject, what Nebuzaradan kindly
offered to him, and yet he might have committed a great offense in
making light, as it were, of Chaldea. It was, as we know, a very
pleasant country, and very fertile; and tyrants cannot bear their bounty
to be despised; for when they are pleased to honor any one, however
little may be what they offer, if he refuses, they regard it as a
dishonor done to them. The Prophet, then, might have been overcome by
modesty and fear, so as to remove to Chaldea. That he dared simply to
refuse the offer, and to ask that he might dwell in his own country, was
a proof and evidence that he had more concern for religion, and more
care for God’s Church, than for all the favors of men, and all that he
might have hoped from the wealth of Babylon and Chaldea.

<span id="xii.v-p7"></span>We hence see that the Prophet in receiving
presents, accepted of nothing but what he knew would be for the benefit
of God’s Church. At the same time he made light of the offense he might
have given, when he chose to remain in his own country; for as we have
said, it was as though he erected a standard to invite the Jews to
return, and thus to prove the truth of his prophecy respecting their
exile being temporary, the end of which was to be hoped for after
seventy years. For this reason he says, that he went to Gedaliah, and
dwelt in the midst of the people, even Of those who remained in the
land. It follows, —

<span id="xii.vi"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
40:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#007)<span id="xii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p2"></span>**7**. Now, when all the captains of the
forces which *were* in the fields, *even* they and their men, heard that
the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the
land, and had committed unto him men, and women, and children, and of
the poor of the land, of them that were not carried away captive to
Babylon;

<span id="xii.vi-p3"></span>**7**. Et audierunt omnes principes
exercituum qui erant in agro, ipsi et viri eorum, quod praefecisset rex
Babylonis Godoliam filium Achikam in terra; et quod commiserat ei viros
et mulieres et parvulum (*hoc est,* parvulos, *sed fere in singulari
numero hoc nomen legitur tam singulari quam plurali·significatione,*) et
ex paupertate terrae ex his qui non fuerant translati Babylonem;

<span id="xii.vi-p4"></span>**8**. Then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah,
even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of
Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the
Netophathite, and Jezaniah the son of a Maachathite, they and their men.

<span id="xii.vi-p5"></span>**8**. Et venerunt ad Godoliam in Mispath
Ishmael filius Nathaniae et Jochanan (Joannes) et Jonathan filii Chareah
et Seraiah filius Thanekumeth et filii Ophi, qui erat Nethophites, et
Jazanias filius Maachati, ipsi et viri eorum.

<span id="xii.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.vi-p7"></span><span id="xii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p8"></span>Mention has been before made of Gedaliah. We
have seen that the Prophet was once rescued from death through his
kindness, for he interposed for him when almost all with one consent
doomed the holy Prophet to death.  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) And God bestowed on him no common
honor, that while he was seeking nothing, Nebuchadnezzar should set him
as governor over the land. He did not, indeed, enjoy power for any
length of time; but it was yet God’s will to extend his hand to the
pious man, so that he might have, at least for a time, some evidence of
his favor. He was at length, as we shall see, killed by treachery.

<span id="xii.vi-p10"></span>The Prophet now tells us, that the leaders
of the forces, before scattered together with their troops, were now
come to him. When the Prophet says that they were *in the field,* I do
not think as some, that they were those who fled when the city was
taken. But probably they were those who were forced to flee from the
cities at the first entrance of the Chaldean army. Nor does it seem
probable that they escaped, when all the companions of the king were
overtaken and caught in the plain of Jericho, as we have already seen. I
then think that they were those who had been scattered here and there,
having deserted the cities committed to them at the first approach of
their enemies. As then they had been wanderers from their own country
and exiles, they now returned to Gedaliah. By saying that the *leaders
of the forces had heard,* he does not mean that they had now an army,
but that they had been set over cities and towns in Judea together with
their troops.

<span id="xii.vi-p11"></span><span id="xii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p12"></span> *They* then and *their men, came to
Gedaliah,* when they *heard* that the king of Babylon had set Gedaliah,
the son of Ahikam, over Judea, and that men, women, and children were
committed to his power or keeping. And then he adds, *from the poverty
of the land,* that is, from the dregs of the people, even *from those
who had not been removed to Babylon*: they *came,* even *Ishmael,* etc.;
who, as we shall hereafter see, became a traitor. He was, as the Prophet
says, of the royal family. His spirits were still very high, and
influenced by envy, he killed Gedaliah, though he had been kindly
received by him. He had, at the same time, *received* a reward for his
*treachery* from the king of Amon. But all these things we shall see in
what follows.

<span id="xii.vi-p13"></span>He names here the fugitive chiefs, the
first of whom was Ishmael, and among them were the sons of Kareah; who
had pledged their faith to Gedaliah; but he was too credulous, and, at
the same time, closed his ears to wise counsels and warnings. The
Prophet proceeds to tell us how Geda-liah dealt with his own nation, —

<span id="xii.vii"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p1"></span><span id="xii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
40:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#009)<span id="xii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p2"></span>**9**. And Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the
son of Shaphan sware unto them and to their men, saying, Fear not to
serve the Chaldeans: dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon,
and it shall be well with you.

<span id="xii.vii-p3"></span>**9**. Et juravit illis Godolias filius
Achikam et viris eorum, dicendo, Ne metuatis a serviendo (*hoc est,* ne
metuatis servire, *ne impediat vos* timor quo minus serviatis
Chaldaeis;) sed subjicite vos et servite regi Babylonis; et bene erit
vobis.

<span id="xii.vii-p4"></span>**10.** As for me, behold, I will dwell at
Mizpah to serve the Chaldeans, which will come unto us: but ye, gather
ye wine, and summer-fruits, and oil, and put *them* in your vessels, and
dwell in your cities that ye have taken.

<span id="xii.vii-p5"></span>**10.** Et ego, ecce ego manebo in Mispath,
ut stem coram facie Chaldaeorum (*hoc est,* ut occurram Chaldaeis) qui
venient ad nos; et vos colligite vinum et fructus aestivos (<span
id="xii.vii-p5.1"></span>קיף significat *oestatem, sed transfertur
metaphorice ad oestivos* fructus,) et oleum; et reponite in vasis
vestris, et habitate in urbibus quas apprehenderitis.

<span id="xii.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.vii-p7"></span><span id="xii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p8"></span>Here, as I have hinted, is explained the
great humanity of Gedaliah, and also his pious solicitude for his own
nation, in order that the perfidy and cruelty of the son of Nethaniah
might appear the more detestable, who slew a man so well deserving in
his conduct to him and to others, having been led to do so by reward.

<span id="xii.vii-p9"></span>The Prophet says that he *swore* to them;
nor was it strange to interpose an oath in a state of things so
disturbed. Hardly could Ishmael and the rest have any confidence, since
the Chaldeans had been so extremely hostile to them; they must, indeed,
have been in the greatest trepidation. There was, therefore, need of a
remedy, even that Gedaliah should assure them of his integrity. This was
the reason why he made an oath; for had it been in times of
tranquillity, an oath would not have been necessary. But as their life
hung, as it were, on a thread, and they saw many dangers on every side,
there was need of a confirmation; nor did Gedaliah receive them without
some danger; for it was not pleasing to the Chaldeans that such men
should continue in the land. For we have seen that the princes had been
on this account killed, and then all the chief men among the people had
been removed to Chaldea, lest any of them should attempt some new
commotions. It was, therefore, the object of Nebuchadnezzar to keep the
country quiet; and this was the best way to prevent any disturbance.
Gedaliah then, no doubt, saw that this would not be very agreeable to
the Chaldeans, and yet his humanity prevailed, and his concern for his
own nation, that he not only hospitably received them, but also promised
them by an oath, that there would be safety for them. He therefore
exhorted them to be confident, and also to serve the Chaldeans. It was,
indeed, especially expected of them, that they should surrender up
themselves, as their case was hopeless. Then Gedaliah promised that the
Chaldeans would be content with a voluntary submission; and he promised
them also, that there would be a safe dwelling for them in the land.

<span id="xii.vii-p10"></span><span id="xii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p11"></span>And he ordered them to *gather* wine, and
corn, and fruit, and to store them up, as there would be no danger from
war. He also ordered them to dwell in the *cities* which they had taken,
or to which they had been driven. The verb here is ambiguous; but I
prefer its most literal meaning, *which ye have taken.* They could not,
indeed, have taken a city by force and arms, as they had only a few men,
and could never have been equal to their enemies. Then the forcible
taking of cities is not what is meant; but Gedaliah’s meaning was, that
they might safely remain wherever they were, or that they might dwell in
any city they came to. But it was a great ‘thing when he said to them,
that he would *stand* for them; for he thus laid down his own life, as
though he had said that he would be a surety that nothing grievous
should happen to them. And hence it is more clearly seen that he did not
regard himself, but that he used the power given him for the public
good; for if he had ambition, he would have been, doubtless, more
careful to ingratiate himself with the king of Babylon, and he would
have resolved to deal no less cruelly with a people so hard and
refractory, than their enemies. But when he extended his wings as the
hen, to gather under them the residue of his own nation, it appears
quite evident that he had no care for his own private safety, but that
whatever power had been given him by King Nebuchadnezzar, he employed it
wholly for the public good.

<span id="xii.vii-p12"></span>Then these words ought to be especially
noticed, And *I, behold, I will dwell in Mizpah, that I may stand,*
etc., that is, that I may meet the Chaldeans *who may come to us,* that
is, lest they should come upon you for some hostile purpose. It
afterwards follows —

<span id="xii.viii"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p1"></span><span id="xii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
40:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#011)<span
id="xii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p2"></span>**11.** Likewise when all the Jews that
*were* in Moab, and among the Ammonites, and in Edom, and that *were* in
all the countries, heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant of
Judah, and that he had set over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son
of Shaphan;

<span id="xii.viii-p3"></span>**11**. Atque etiam omnes Judaei qui erant
in Moab (hoc est, apud Moabitas) et apud filios Ammon, et apud ldumaeos
(et in Edom,) et quicunque erant in omnibus terris (hoc est, qui
dispersi erant per varios regiones,) audierunt quod dimisisset rex
Babylonis reliquias (residuum aliquod) Jehudah, et quod praefecisset
illis Godoliam filium Achikam filii Saphan;

<span id="xii.viii-p4"></span>**12.** Even all the Jews returned out of
all places whither they were driven, and came to the land of Judah, to
Gedaliah, unto Mizpah, and gathered wine and summer-fruits very much.

<span id="xii.viii-p5"></span>**12.** Et venerunt omnes Judaei (venerunt
ergo omnes Judaei) ex cunctis locis ad quae expulsi fuerunt et venerunt
(reversi sunt) in terrain Jehudah ad Godoliam in Mispath; et collegerunt
vinum et fructus aestivos multos valde (*hoc est,* in magna copia.)

<span id="xii.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.viii-p7"></span><span id="xii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p8"></span>The Prophet shews here, that except
intestine wickedness had arisen, the condition of the people would have
been endurable until the time of exile had elapsed. God had pre-fixed,
as it has been before stated, seventy years. Nebuchadnezzar had already
so withdrawn the flower of the people, that still some inhabitants
remained, that the land might not be wholly naked and forsaken. For
besides the poor who had been left, he has already told us, that some
chief men came with their troops. He now adds that *all the Jews,* who
had fled to neighboring nations, came to Geda-liah; some had taken
refuge among the Ammonites, and some among the Moabites; these came and
*dwelt* in the land. Then God did thus moderate the rigor of his
vengeance, so that some remnants continued in Judea until the
restoration of the whole people. But the perverseness of those who had
before despised his favor, is on the other hand most clearly shewn. God
no doubt designed to make manifest their extreme wickedness; for they
not only despised the kindness of King Nebuchadnezzar, but rushed
headlong to their own ruin; for their fury and madness led them on to
kill their own leader, and thus all things were thrown into confusion,
as this might have provoked the indignation of the conqueror to
obliterate the very name of the people by slaying the captives as well
as those who had been left in the land. To point out this was the object
of the Prophet in this part of the chapter.

<span id="xii.viii-p9"></span><span id="xii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p10"></span>He says that *all the Jews;* he puts in
the particle <span id="xii.viii-p10.1"></span>גם, *gam,* for the sake of
emphasis, *and even all the Jews,* who had fled either to the Moabites
or to the children of Ammon, or to the Idumeans, or to other parts in
other countries. There is no doubt but they made up a considerable
number. Then the whole land must have had many inhabitants; and though
it was not populous, yet the desolation that might have been feared, was
not extreme. We hence conclude, that there was no over-statement made,
when Gedaliah promised security to the leaders of the forces and their
companions. As he then made an oath that they would all be safe, he did
not deceive them, for he really proved his faithfulness, because these
miserable exiles, who returned into Judea, dwelt in safety, and God also
gave them a rich abundance of fruits, so that they lived comfortably in
their own country. Before the city was taken these were wanderers, and
no doubt they must have suffered great poverty and want. But now the
Lord gave them relief, and supplied them with plenty.

<span id="xii.viii-p11"></span>But we hence know more fully how great
must have been the impiety and wickedness of Ishmael and his companions,
who not only had the liberty to dwell comfortably in their own country
under the care and protection of Gedaliah, but who also enjoyed
abundance of blessings. For as the most miserable of them gathered great
abundance of fruits, they might have had a large portion of all good
things. Hence then the more and the more detestable appeared their
ingratitude. And it further appears how extreme and incurable was their
perverseness, that they were not moved and affected, when they saw
Jerusalem destroyed, the temple burnt, and the horrible slaughter which
had taken place; and especially when they knew what Nebuzaradan had
preached respecting God’s vengeance, and had performed the office of a
prophet in reproving them. That they thus so obstinately rejected the
blessings of God and resisted what he did for them, was an evident proof
that they were monstrously stupid; and this is what the Prophet intended
to shew, as we shall hereafter see. But I must make an end here.

<span id="xii.ix"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xii.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are not
sufficiently attentive in considering thy judgments, we may learn to
become wise by the examples of others, and so to reflect on what thou
teachest us by thy servants the Prophets, that we may apply it to our
own use, and thus render ourselves teachable and obedient to thee, and
that especially when thou chastisest us with thy scourges, we may not
resist thy power, but so submit to thee, that we may at length be raised
up and comforted by thy mercy and be restored to a complete salvation,
through Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xii.ix-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.x"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-Fourth

<span id="xii.xi"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p1"></span><span id="xii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
40:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#013)<span id="xii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p2"></span>**13.** Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah,
and all the captains of the forces that *were* in the fields, came to
Gedaliah to Mizpah,

<span id="xii.xi-p3"></span>**13.** Et Johanan (Joannes) filius Chareah
et omnes duces copiarum qui fuerant in agro, venerunt ad Godoliam in
Mispath;

<span id="xii.xi-p4"></span>**14.** And said unto him, Dost thou
certainly know that Baalis the king of the Ammonites hath sent Ishmael
the son of Nethaniah to slay thee? But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam
believed them not.

<span id="xii.xi-p5"></span>**14.** Et dixerunt ei, An sciendo scis,
quod Baalis rex filiorum Ammon misit Ismael filium Nathaniae qui
percutiat to in anima? Sed non credidit illis Godolias filius Achikam.

<span id="xii.xi-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.xi-p7"></span><span id="xii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p8"></span>A sad history is here given, from which we
may conclude, that God’s wrath against the people had not been appeased
by the destruction of the city and the burning of the Temple. It was
some token of mercy, when Gedaliah was set over the remnant of the
people and the poor, who had been allowed to dwell in the land. But now
Gedaliah is slain, and a miserable scattering must have ensued. The
wrath also of the king of Babylon was kindled, because the Chaldeans,
who had been given as guards, were at the same time killed. It was then
God’s purpose to execute his judgment also on these remnants.

<span id="xii.xi-p9"></span>But the Prophet shews how it was that
Gedaliah was killed, even because Ishmael had been hired and advised by
the king of Ammon. he says, however, that he had been warned by the sons
of Kareah, of whom mention has been made, but that he had no faith in
them. And hence the Prophet begins by saying, that *John the son of
Kareah* and the other leaders *came* to him. He had, as we have seen,
received them before, and had sworn to them that he would be their
defender, so that no one would hurt them; he had undertaken to face all
danger, and offered his head as a pledge that the Chaldeans would not
attempt anything against them. They *came* then to him, because with
safety was connected public benefit, he had, then, bound them to himself
by no common benefit, and it was for their good that he should be safe
and secure, who was in favor with the king of Babylon.

<span id="xii.xi-p10"></span><span id="xii.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p11"></span> They therefore came and *said, that
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah* was suborned by the king of Ammon It may
have been that the king of Ammon had hoped to be the king of Judea, or
to have all that land as his own after the departure of the Chaldean
army. But as his expectation was disappointed, he began to attempt
another tiling, to render the land desolate by creating disturbances.
Such then seems to have been the reason why he induced Ishmael to
undertake the impious and abominable act of killing Gedaliah.

<span id="xii.xi-p12"></span>As to Gedaliah having no faith in their
words, a question may be here raised, How was it that God suffered this
holy man, endued with such rare virtues, to be basely killed by a
traitor and an assassin? In the first place, we must hold it as true,
that God’s judgments are just, though they correspond not with our
notions. It seems indeed, at the first glance, very unaccountable, that
Gedaliah should have been slain, who *yet* had emerged, as it were, from
death, and had obtained favor with the Chaldeans; but it was God’s
pur*pose* to take him to himself, and at the same time to execute his
vengeance to the utmost on the people; for we shall see that those who
had been left were wholly unworthy of God’s favor; and we shall also
see, that as mad wild beasts they ran headlong to death, and never
ceased to provoke God’s wrath against them.

<span id="xii.xi-p13"></span>Let us then learn from this passage, that
when God calls his servants from this world, he regards their salvation,
so that death is for their good. For Gedaliah might have seen, that had
he lived longer, things more bitter than hundred deaths would have
happened to him. It was then God’s will to take him in time, before he
was overwhelmed with sorrows. For it was no small cause of grief to see
the people obstinately struggling against the goodness of God, until
their final ruin came. This obstinacy then might have been the cause of
incredible sorrow to the holy man: hence the Lord removed him in due
time. In the meantime, as I have said, he opened a way for his wrath, so
that after it became evident that the remnant that had been saved were
wholly unworthy of mercy, they were destroyed together with the rest.

<span id="xii.xi-p14"></span>But, in the second place, we see that there
was a fault mixed with virtue in Gedaliah. Love, indeed, is not
suspicious, as Paul says, and ought not easily to admit an accusation.
(<span id="xii.xi-p14.1"></span>[1Co
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005)<span id="xii.xi-p14.1"></span>.)
But he ought to have been *circumspect,* not only for his own sake, but
because his death brought with it the ruin of the whole people. He ought
then to have been more cautious. But we hence learn how difficult it is
even for the best of men, endued with peculiar virtues, so to conduct
themselves, as not to deviate on either side. It was a. praiseworthy
simplicity that Gedaliah did not suspect that Ishmael would be so
perfidious and so wicked; but as in this instance he shewed no regard
for himself nor for the public safety, he was to be blamed. But, as I
have said, it was God’s purpose to remove him to his rest, for had he
lived, he would have been a hundred times overwhelmed with troubles.
Ungodly men may blast the memory of the holy man, because he had been so
stupid: but as I have already said, that as he must have deviated either
on this or that side, it was better that Ishmael should not be accused
until he was found guilty. Gedaliah’s only mistake was, that he
disregarded the treachery of which he had been warned. It now follows —

<span id="xii.xii"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p1"></span><span id="xii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
40:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#015)<span
id="xii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p2"></span>**15.** Then Johanan the son of Kareah
spake to Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, saying, Let me go, I pray thee,
and I will slay Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and no man shall know
*it*: wherefore should he slay thee, that all the Jews which are
gathered unto thee should be scattered, and the remnant in Judah perish?

<span id="xii.xii-p3"></span>**15.** Et Joannes filius Kareah dixit ad
Godoliam in secreto in Mispath, dicendo, lbo nunc (*vel,* agedum eam) et
percutiam Ismael filium Nathaniae ita ut nemo sciat: quare percutiet to
in anima,  <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) et dissipabuntur
totus Jehudah, qui congregati sunt ad te (*hoc est,* dissipabuntur qui
congregati sunt ad te ex toto Jehudah,) et peribit residuum Jehudah?

<span id="xii.xii-p5"></span>**16** But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said
unto Johanan the son of Kareah, Thou shalt not do this thing: for thou
speakest falsely of Ishmael.

<span id="xii.xii-p6"></span>**16.** Et dixit Godolias filius Achikam
Joanni filio Kareah, Ne feceris hanc rem, quia merdacium tu loqueris
contra Ismael.

<span id="xii.xii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xii.xii-p8"></span><span id="xii.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p9"></span>We here see that the holy man was blinded,
so that he not only disregarded the counsel given to him, but also
rejected the help offered to him. It is again a thing worthy of praise,
that he was unwilling that Ishmael should be rashly killed, the cause
being not known; but he ought to have carefully inquired, and the thing
being found out, he might have defended himself, and put to death a
wicked man and a public pest. He was armed with the sword; and he might
have justly punished Ishmael, if he had only been attentive to the
matter, that is, if he had taken the trouble to ascertain the fact. As
then he had been endued with authority, for Nebuchadnezzar had set him
over the land, he was to be blamed in this, that he abstained from
taking’ vengeance, (for he was not a private man,)but he did not believe
that there was so great a treachery in Ishmael, whom he thought to be an
honest and upright man, and friendly to him. Nevertheless, there is a
medium between simplicity on the one hand, and cruelty on the other. Had
he immediately become incensed against Ishmael, it would have been
blamable cruelty; for we ought not to be carried away headlong to
condemn innocent men; for if we indiscriminately receive all sorts of
calumnies, no man can remain innocent. But as I have said, Gedaliah
might have so acted as not to wrong Ishmael by believing every idle
report, and yet he might have taken care of himself. He might have done
this, had he inquired, and having known the case, determined
accordingly; but he willfully closed his eyes, and thus committed a
great mistake.

<span id="xii.xii-p10"></span>But we hence see, that when in other
things he was not without judgment and foresight, he was in this
instance, as it were, destitute of a sound mind; for it was God’s
purpose to open a way for his judgment, so that he might destroy the
remnant of the people. And at the same time we see how difficult it is
not to do wrong, when we desire to be just, tolerant, and unsuspicious.
We are, in short, taught, how difficult a thing it is, and how rare is
the virtue to exercise moderation. Ishmael might have been immediately
convicted of perfidy and wickedness; this was what Gedaliah was
unwilling to do; and why? because he was unwilling to suspect anything
wrong in a man whom he thought to be sincere and faithful. Well, but at
the same time he did wrong to John, the son of Kareah, and to the other
leaders of the forces. They came to him, not one man or two men, but the
chiefs who had been set over the soldiers by King Zedekiah. These came
to him, so that their charge was probable. What did Gedaliah say? *Thou
speakest falsely,* he said. he reproachfully repelled John, the son of
Kareah, who yet was well disposed towards him, and wished to save him
from his danger. We hence clearly see that the best of men never so act,
but that under the color of equity and humanity they often fall into
sloth and neglect; and that when they wish to be humane towards one,
they act unkindly and reproachfully towards many. So it is ever
necessary to flee to God, that he may rule us by the spirit of
discretion. Now follows the murder of Gedaliah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc20011.htm#fr_118) <span
id="xii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p9"></span> There is here an oversight; it was his
father Ahikam that delivered the Prophet, as recorded in the
twenty-sixth chapter (<span id="xii.vi-p9.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#000)<span id="xii.vi-p9.1"></span>). —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc20011.htm#fr_119) <span
id="xii.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p4"></span> Why should he kill (or smite) thy life?*”*
so all the versions and the *Targum.* But <span
id="xii.xii-p4.1"></span>נפש means often a corpse or a dead body, <span
id="xii.xii-p4.2"></span>[Le 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001)<span
id="xii.xii-p4.2"></span>; <span id="xii.xii-p4.3"></span>[Le
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#004)<span id="xii.xii-p4.3"></span>.
Then the most obvious rendering would be, “Why should he smite thee
dead?” or, “Why should he smite thee a corpse?” *Blayney* gives the
meaning, but not a translation,” Wherefore should he take away thy
life?*”* — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 41](cc20012)
