[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf06039) 
[Next](daf06041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIFCE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 6*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1788\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXXI: Prospect Of The Ruins Of Rome In The Fifteenth Century. Part I.

Prospect Of The Ruins Of Rome In The Fifteenth Century. - Four Causes Of
Decay And Destruction. - Example Of The Coliseum. - Renovation Of The
City. - Conclusion Of The Whole Work.

In the last days of Pope Eugenius the Fourth,  <span
id="fr_1164"></span>[\*\_0072](#fn_1164) two of his servants, the
learned Poggius  <span id="fr_1165"></span>[1](#fn_1165) and a friend,
ascended the Capitoline hill; reposed themselves among the ruins of
columns and temples; and viewed from that commanding spot the wide and
various prospect of desolation.  <span id="fr_1166"></span>[2](#fn_1166)
The place and the object gave ample scope for moralizing on the
vicissitudes of fortune, which spares neither man nor the proudest of
his works, which buries empires and cities in a common grave; and it was
agreed, that in proportion to her former greatness, the fall of Rome was
the more awful and deplorable. "Her primeval state, such as she might
appear in a remote age, when Evander entertained the stranger of Troy,
 <span id="fr_1167"></span>[3](#fn_1167) has been delineated by the
fancy of Virgil. This Tarpeian rock was then a savage and solitary
thicket: in the time of the poet, it was crowned with the golden roofs
of a temple; the temple is overthrown, the gold has been pillaged, the
wheel of fortune has accomplished her revolution, and the sacred ground
is again disfigured with thorns and brambles. The hill of the Capitol,
on which we sit, was formerly the head of the Roman empire, the citadel
of the earth, the terror of kings; illustrated by the footsteps of so
many triumphs, enriched with the spoils and tributes of so many nations.
This spectacle of the world, how is it fallen! how changed! how defaced!
The path of victory is obliterated by vines, and the benches of the
senators are concealed by a dunghill. Cast your eyes on the Palatine
hill, and seek among the shapeless and enormous fragments the marble
theatre, the obelisks, the colossal statues, the porticos of Nero's
palace: survey the other hills of the city, the vacant space is
interrupted only by ruins and gardens. The forum of the Roman people,
where they assembled to enact their laws and elect their magistrates, is
now enclosed for the cultivation of pot-herbs, or thrown open for the
reception of swine and buffaloes. The public and private edifices, that
were founded for eternity, lie prostrate, naked, and broken, like the
limbs of a mighty giant; and the ruin is the more visible, from the
stupendous relics that have survived the injuries of time and fortune."
 <span id="fr_1168"></span>[4](#fn_1168)

These relics are minutely described by Poggius, one of the first who
raised his eyes from the monuments of legendary, to those of classic,
superstition.  <span id="fr_1169"></span>[5](#fn_1169) 1. Besides a
bridge, an arch, a sepulchre, and the pyramid of Cestius, he could
discern, of the age of the republic, a double row of vaults, in the
salt-office of the Capitol, which were inscribed with the name and
munificence of Catulus. 2. Eleven temples were visible in some degree,
from the perfect form of the Pantheon, to the three arches and a marble
column of the temple of Peace, which Vespasian erected after the civil
wars and the Jewish triumph. 3. Of the number, which he rashly defines,
of seven thermoe, or public baths, none were sufficiently entire to
represent the use and distribution of the several parts: but those of
Diocletian and Antoninus Caracalla still retained the titles of the
founders, and astonished the curious spectator, who, in observing their
solidity and extent, the variety of marbles, the size and multitude of
the columns, compared the labor and expense with the use and importance.
Of the baths of Constantine, of Alexander, of Domitian, or rather of
Titus, some vestige might yet be found. 4. The triumphal arches of
Titus, Severus, and Constantine, were entire, both the structure and the
inscriptions; a falling fragment was honored with the name of Trajan;
and two arches, then extant, in the Flaminian way, have been ascribed to
the baser memory of Faustina and Gallienus.  <span
id="fr_1170"></span>[\*\_0073](#fn_1170) 5. After the wonder of the
Coliseum, Poggius might have overlooked small amphitheatre of brick,
most probably for the use of the praetorian camp: the theatres of
Marcellus and Pompey were occupied in a great measure by public and
private buildings; and in the Circus, Agonalis and Maximus, little more
than the situation and the form could be investigated. 6. The columns of
Trajan and Antonine were still erect; but the Egyptian obelisks were
broken or buried. A people of gods and heroes, the workmanship of art,
was reduced to one equestrian figure of gilt brass, and to five marble
statues, of which the most conspicuous were the two horses of Phidias
and Praxiteles. 7. The two mausoleums or sepulchres of Augustus and
Hadrian could not totally be lost: but the former was only visible as a
mound of earth; and the latter, the castle of St. Angelo, had acquired
the name and appearance of a modern fortress. With the addition of some
separate and nameless columns, such were the remains of the ancient
city; for the marks of a more recent structure might be detected in the
walls, which formed a circumference of ten miles, included three hundred
and seventy-nine turrets, and opened into the country by thirteen gates.

This melancholy picture was drawn above nine hundred years after the
fall of the Western empire, and even of the Gothic kingdom of Italy. A
long period of distress and anarchy, in which empire, and arts, and
riches had migrated from the banks of the Tyber, was incapable of
restoring or adorning the city; and, as all that is human must
retrograde if it do not advance, every successive age must have hastened
the ruin of the works of antiquity. To measure the progress of decay,
and to ascertain, at each aera, the state of each edifice, would be an
endless and a useless labor; and I shall content myself with two
observations, which will introduce a short inquiry into the general
causes and effects. 1. Two hundred years before the eloquent complaint
of Poggius, an anonymous writer composed a description of Rome.  <span
id="fr_1171"></span>[6](#fn_1171) His ignorance may repeat the same
objects under strange and fabulous names. Yet this barbarous topographer
had eyes and ears; he could observe the visible remains; he could listen
to the tradition of the people; and he distinctly enumerates seven
theatres, eleven baths, twelve arches, and eighteen palaces, of which
many had disappeared before the time of Poggius. It is apparent, that
many stately monuments of antiquity survived till a late period,  <span
id="fr_1172"></span>[7](#fn_1172) and that the principles of destruction
acted with vigorous and increasing energy in the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries. 2. The same reflection must be applied to the
three last ages; and we should vainly seek the Septizonium of Severus;
 <span id="fr_1173"></span>[8](#fn_1173) which is celebrated by Petrarch
and the antiquarians of the sixteenth century. While the Roman edifices
were still entire, the first blows, however weighty and impetuous, were
resisted by the solidity of the mass and the harmony of the parts; but
the slightest touch would precipitate the fragments of arches and
columns, that already nodded to their fall.

After a diligent inquiry, I can discern four principal causes of the
ruin of Rome, which continued to operate in a period of more than a
thousand years. I. The injuries of time and nature. II. The hostile
attacks of the Barbarians and Christians. III. The use and abuse of the
materials. And, IV. The domestic quarrels of the Romans.

I. The art of man is able to construct monuments far more permanent than
the narrow span of his own existence; yet these monuments, like himself,
are perishable and frail; and in the boundless annals of time, his life
and his labors must equally be measured as a fleeting moment. Of a
simple and solid edifice, it is not easy, however, to circumscribe the
duration. As the wonders of ancient days, the pyramids  <span
id="fr_1174"></span>[9](#fn_1174) attracted the curiosity of the
ancients: a hundred generations, the leaves of autumn, have dropped
 <span id="fr_1175"></span>[10](#fn_1175) into the grave; and after the
fall of the Pharaohs and Ptolemies, the Caesars and caliphs, the same
pyramids stand erect and unshaken above the floods of the Nile. A
complex figure of various and minute parts to more accessible to injury
and decay; and the silent lapse of time is often accelerated by
hurricanes and earthquakes, by fires and inundations. The air and earth
have doubtless been shaken; and the lofty turrets of Rome have tottered
from their foundations; but the seven hills do not appear to be placed
on the great cavities of the globe; nor has the city, in any age, been
exposed to the convulsions of nature, which, in the climate of Antioch,
Lisbon, or Lima, have crumbled in a few moments the works of ages into
dust. Fire is the most powerful agent of life and death: the rapid
mischief may be kindled and propagated by the industry or negligence of
mankind; and every period of the Roman annals is marked by the
repetition of similar calamities. A memorable conflagration, the guilt
or misfortune of Nero's reign, continued, though with unequal fury,
either six or nine days.  <span id="fr_1176"></span>[11](#fn_1176)
Innumerable buildings, crowded in close and crooked streets, supplied
perpetual fuel for the flames; and when they ceased, four only of the
fourteen regions were left entire; three were totally destroyed, and
seven were deformed by the relics of smoking and lacerated edifices.
 <span id="fr_1177"></span>[12](#fn_1177) In the full meridian of
empire, the metropolis arose with fresh beauty from her ashes; yet the
memory of the old deplored their irreparable losses, the arts of Greece,
the trophies of victory, the monuments of primitive or fabulous
antiquity. In the days of distress and anarchy, every wound is mortal,
every fall irretrievable; nor can the damage be restored either by the
public care of government, or the activity of private interest. Yet two
causes may be alleged, which render the calamity of fire more
destructive to a flourishing than a decayed city. 1. The more
combustible materials of brick, timber, and metals, are first melted or
consumed; but the flames may play without injury or effect on the naked
walls, and massy arches, that have been despoiled of their ornaments. 2.
It is among the common and plebeian habitations, that a mischievous
spark is most easily blown to a conflagration; but as soon as they are
devoured, the greater edifices, which have resisted or escaped, are left
as so many islands in a state of solitude and safety. From her
situation, Rome is exposed to the danger of frequent inundations.
Without excepting the Tyber, the rivers that descend from either side of
the Apennine have a short and irregular course; a shallow stream in the
summer heats; an impetuous torrent, when it is swelled in the spring or
winter, by the fall of rain, and the melting of the snows. When the
current is repelled from the sea by adverse winds, when the ordinary bed
is inadequate to the weight of waters, they rise above the banks, and
overspread, without limits or control, the plains and cities of the
adjacent country. Soon after the triumph of the first Punic war, the
Tyber was increased by unusual rains; and the inundation, surpassing all
former measure of time and place, destroyed all the buildings that were
situated below the hills of Rome. According to the variety of ground,
the same mischief was produced by different means; and the edifices were
either swept away by the sudden impulse, or dissolved and undermined by
the long continuance, of the flood.  <span
id="fr_1178"></span>[13](#fn_1178) Under the reign of Augustus, the same
calamity was renewed: the lawless river overturned the palaces and
temples on its banks;  <span id="fr_1179"></span>[14](#fn_1179) and,
after the labors of the emperor in cleansing and widening the bed that
was encumbered with ruins,  <span id="fr_1180"></span>[15](#fn_1180) the
vigilance of his successors was exercised by similar dangers and
designs. The project of diverting into new channels the Tyber itself, or
some of the dependent streams, was long opposed by superstition and
local interests;  <span id="fr_1181"></span>[16](#fn_1181) nor did the
use compensate the toil and cost of the tardy and imperfect execution.
The servitude of rivers is the noblest and most important victory which
man has obtained over the licentiousness of nature;  <span
id="fr_1182"></span>[17](#fn_1182) and if such were the ravages of the
Tyber under a firm and active government, what could oppose, or who can
enumerate, the injuries of the city, after the fall of the Western
empire? A remedy was at length produced by the evil itself: the
accumulation of rubbish and the earth, that has been washed down from
the hills, is supposed to have elevated the plain of Rome, fourteen or
fifteen feet, perhaps, above the ancient level;  <span
id="fr_1183"></span>[18](#fn_1183) and the modern city is less
accessible to the attacks of the river.  <span
id="fr_1184"></span>[19](#fn_1184)

II\. The crowd of writers of every nation, who impute the destruction of
the Roman monuments to the Goths and the Christians, have neglected to
inquire how far they were animated by a hostile principle, and how far
they possessed the means and the leisure to satiate their enmity. In the
preceding volumes of this History, I have described the triumph of
barbarism and religion; and I can only resume, in a few words, their
real or imaginary connection with the ruin of ancient Rome. Our fancy
may create, or adopt, a pleasing romance, that the Goths and Vandals
sallied from Scandinavia, ardent to avenge the flight of Odin;  <span
id="fr_1185"></span>[20](#fn_1185) to break the chains, and to chastise
the oppressors, of mankind; that they wished to burn the records of
classic literature, and to found their national architecture on the
broken members of the Tuscan and Corinthian orders. But in simple truth,
the northern conquerors were neither sufficiently savage, nor
sufficiently refined, to entertain such aspiring ideas of destruction
and revenge. The shepherds of Scythia and Germany had been educated in
the armies of the empire, whose discipline they acquired, and whose
weakness they invaded: with the familiar use of the Latin tongue, they
had learned to reverence the name and titles of Rome; and, though
incapable of emulating, they were more inclined to admire, than to
abolish, the arts and studies of a brighter period. In the transient
possession of a rich and unresisting capital, the soldiers of Alaric and
Genseric were stimulated by the passions of a victorious army; amidst
the wanton indulgence of lust or cruelty, portable wealth was the object
of their search; nor could they derive either pride or pleasure from the
unprofitable reflection, that they had battered to the ground the works
of the consuls and Caesars. Their moments were indeed precious; the
Goths evacuated Rome on the sixth,  <span
id="fr_1186"></span>[21](#fn_1186) the Vandals on the fifteenth, day:
 <span id="fr_1187"></span>[22](#fn_1187) and, though it be far more
difficult to build than to destroy, their hasty assault would have made
a slight impression on the solid piles of antiquity. We may remember,
that both Alaric and Genseric affected to spare the buildings of the
city; that they subsisted in strength and beauty under the auspicious
government of Theodoric;  <span id="fr_1188"></span>[23](#fn_1188) and
that the momentary resentment of Totila  <span
id="fr_1189"></span>[24](#fn_1189) was disarmed by his own temper and
the advice of his friends and enemies. From these innocent Barbarians,
the reproach may be transferred to the Catholics of Rome. The statues,
altars, and houses, of the daemons, were an abomination in their eyes;
and in the absolute command of the city, they might labor with zeal and
perseverance to erase the idolatry of their ancestors. The demolition of
the temples in the East  <span id="fr_1190"></span>[25](#fn_1190)
affords to them an example of conduct, and to us an argument of belief;
and it is probable that a portion of guilt or merit may be imputed with
justice to the Roman proselytes. Yet their abhorrence was confined to
the monuments of heathen superstition; and the civil structures that
were dedicated to the business or pleasure of society might be preserved
without injury or scandal. The change of religion was accomplished, not
by a popular tumult, but by the decrees of the emperors, of the senate,
and of time. Of the Christian hierarchy, the bishops of Rome were
commonly the most prudent and least fanatic; nor can any positive charge
be opposed to the meritorious act of saving or converting the majestic
structure of the Pantheon.  <span id="fr_1191"></span>[26](#fn_1191)
 <span id="fr_1192"></span>[\*\_0074](#fn_1192)

III\. The value of any object that supplies the wants or pleasures of
mankind is compounded of its substance and its form, of the materials
and the manufacture. Its price must depend on the number of persons by
whom it may be acquired and used; on the extent of the market; and
consequently on the ease or difficulty of remote exportation, according
to the nature of the commodity, its local situation, and the temporary
circumstances of the world. The Barbarian conquerors of Rome usurped in
a moment the toil and treasure of successive ages; but, except the
luxuries of immediate consumption, they must view without desire all
that could not be removed from the city in the Gothic wagons or the
fleet of the Vandals.  <span id="fr_1193"></span>[27](#fn_1193) Gold and
silver were the first objects of their avarice; as in every country, and
in the smallest compass, they represent the most ample command of the
industry and possessions of mankind. A vase or a statue of those
precious metals might tempt the vanity of some Barbarian chief; but the
grosser multitude, regardless of the form, was tenacious only of the
substance; and the melted ingots might be readily divided and stamped
into the current coin of the empire. The less active or less fortunate
robbers were reduced to the baser plunder of brass, lead, iron, and
copper: whatever had escaped the Goths and Vandals was pillaged by the
Greek tyrants; and the emperor Constans, in his rapacious visit,
stripped the bronze tiles from the roof of the Pantheon.  <span
id="fr_1194"></span>[28](#fn_1194) The edifices of Rome might be
considered as a vast and various mine; the first labor of extracting the
materials was already performed; the metals were purified and cast; the
marbles were hewn and polished; and after foreign and domestic rapine
had been satiated, the remains of the city, could a purchaser have been
found, were still venal. The monuments of antiquity had been left naked
of their precious ornaments; but the Romans would demolish with their
own hands the arches and walls, if the hope of profit could surpass the
cost of the labor and exportation. If Charlemagne had fixed in Italy the
seat of the Western empire, his genius would have aspired to restore,
rather than to violate, the works of the Caesars; but policy confined
the French monarch to the forests of Germany; his taste could be
gratified only by destruction; and the new palace of Aix la Chapelle was
decorated with the marbles of Ravenna  <span
id="fr_1195"></span>[29](#fn_1195) and Rome.  <span
id="fr_1196"></span>[30](#fn_1196) Five hundred years after Charlemagne,
a king of Sicily, Robert, the wisest and most liberal sovereign of the
age, was supplied with the same materials by the easy navigation of the
Tyber and the sea; and Petrarch sighs an indignant complaint, that the
ancient capital of the world should adorn from her own bowels the
slothful luxury of Naples.  <span id="fr_1197"></span>[31](#fn_1197) But
these examples of plunder or purchase were rare in the darker ages; and
the Romans, alone and unenvied, might have applied to their private or
public use the remaining structures of antiquity, if in their present
form and situation they had not been useless in a great measure to the
city and its inhabitants. The walls still described the old
circumference, but the city had descended from the seven hills into the
Campus Martius; and some of the noblest monuments which had braved the
injuries of time were left in a desert, far remote from the habitations
of mankind. The palaces of the senators were no longer adapted to the
manners or fortunes of their indigent successors: the use of baths
 <span id="fr_1198"></span>[32](#fn_1198) and porticos was forgotten: in
the sixth century, the games of the theatre, amphitheatre, and circus,
had been interrupted: some temples were devoted to the prevailing
worship; but the Christian churches preferred the holy figure of the
cross; and fashion, or reason, had distributed after a peculiar model
the cells and offices of the cloister. Under the ecclesiastical reign,
the number of these pious foundations was enormously multiplied; and the
city was crowded with forty monasteries of men, twenty of women, and
sixty chapters and colleges of canons and priests,  <span
id="fr_1199"></span>[33](#fn_1199) who aggravated, instead of relieving,
the depopulation of the tenth century. But if the forms of ancient
architecture were disregarded by a people insensible of their use and
beauty, the plentiful materials were applied to every call of necessity
or superstition; till the fairest columns of the Ionic and Corinthian
orders, the richest marbles of Paros and Numidia, were degraded, perhaps
to the support of a convent or a stable. The daily havoc which is
perpetrated by the Turks in the cities of Greece and Asia may afford a
melancholy example; and in the gradual destruction of the monuments of
Rome, Sixtus the Fifth may alone be excused for employing the stones of
the Septizonium in the glorious edifice of St. Peter's.  <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[34](#fn_1200) A fragment, a ruin, howsoever mangled
or profaned, may be viewed with pleasure and regret; but the greater
part of the marble was deprived of substance, as well as of place and
proportion; it was burnt to lime for the purpose of cement.  <span
id="fr_1201"></span>[\*\_0075](#fn_1201) Since the arrival of Poggius,
the temple of Concord,  <span id="fr_1202"></span>[35](#fn_1202) and
many capital structures, had vanished from his eyes; and an epigram of
the same age expresses a just and pious fear, that the continuance of
this practice would finally annihilate all the monuments of antiquity.
 <span id="fr_1203"></span>[36](#fn_1203) The smallness of their numbers
was the sole check on the demands and depredations of the Romans. The
imagination of Petrarch might create the presence of a mighty people;
 <span id="fr_1204"></span>[37](#fn_1204) and I hesitate to believe,
that, even in the fourteenth century, they could be reduced to a
contemptible list of thirty-three thousand inhabitants. From that period
to the reign of Leo the Tenth, if they multiplied to the amount of
eighty-five thousand,  <span id="fr_1205"></span>[38](#fn_1205) the
increase of citizens was in some degree pernicious to the ancient city.

IV\. I have reserved for the last, the most potent and forcible cause of
destruction, the domestic hostilities of the Romans themselves. Under
the dominion of the Greek and French emperors, the peace of the city was
disturbed by accidental, though frequent, seditions: it is from the
decline of the latter, from the beginning of the tenth century, that we
may date the licentiousness of private war, which violated with impunity
the laws of the Code and the Gospel, without respecting the majesty of
the absent sovereign, or the presence and person of the vicar of Christ.
In a dark period of five hundred years, Rome was perpetually afflicted
by the sanguinary quarrels of the nobles and the people, the Guelphs and
Ghibelines, the Colonna and Ursini; and if much has escaped the
knowledge, and much is unworthy of the notice, of history, I have
exposed in the two preceding chapters the causes and effects of the
public disorders. At such a time, when every quarrel was decided by the
sword, and none could trust their lives or properties to the impotence
of law, the powerful citizens were armed for safety, or offence, against
the domestic enemies whom they feared or hated. Except Venice alone, the
same dangers and designs were common to all the free republics of Italy;
and the nobles usurped the prerogative of fortifying their houses, and
erecting strong towers,  <span id="fr_1206"></span>[39](#fn_1206) that
were capable of resisting a sudden attack. The cities were filled with
these hostile edifices; and the example of Lucca, which contained three
hundred towers; her law, which confined their height to the measure of
fourscore feet, may be extended with suitable latitude to the more
opulent and populous states. The first step of the senator Brancaleone
in the establishment of peace and justice, was to demolish (as we have
already seen) one hundred and forty of the towers of Rome; and, in the
last days of anarchy and discord, as late as the reign of Martin the
Fifth, forty-four still stood in one of the thirteen or fourteen regions
of the city. To this mischievous purpose the remains of antiquity were
most readily adapted: the temples and arches afforded a broad and solid
basis for the new structures of brick and stone; and we can name the
modern turrets that were raised on the triumphal monuments of Julius
Caesar, Titus, and the Antonines.  <span
id="fr_1207"></span>[40](#fn_1207) With some slight alterations, a
theatre, an amphitheatre, a mausoleum, was transformed into a strong and
spacious citadel. I need not repeat, that the mole of Adrian has assumed
the title and form of the castle of St. Angelo;  <span
id="fr_1208"></span>[41](#fn_1208) the Septizonium of Severus was
capable of standing against a royal army;  <span
id="fr_1209"></span>[42](#fn_1209) the sepulchre of Metella has sunk
under its outworks;  <span id="fr_1210"></span>[43](#fn_1210)  <span
id="fr_1211"></span>[\*\_0076](#fn_1211) the theatres of Pompey and
Marcellus were occupied by the Savelli and Ursini families;  <span
id="fr_1212"></span>[44](#fn_1212) and the rough fortress has been
gradually softened to the splendor and elegance of an Italian palace.
Even the churches were encompassed with arms and bulwarks, and the
military engines on the roof of St. Peter's were the terror of the
Vatican and the scandal of the Christian world. Whatever is fortified
will be attacked; and whatever is attacked may be destroyed. Could the
Romans have wrested from the popes the castle of St. Angelo, they had
resolved by a public decree to annihilate that monument of servitude.
Every building of defence was exposed to a siege; and in every siege the
arts and engines of destruction were laboriously employed. After the
death of Nicholas the Fourth, Rome, without a sovereign or a senate, was
abandoned six months to the fury of civil war. "The houses," says a
cardinal and poet of the times,  <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[45](#fn_1213) "were crushed by the weight and
velocity of enormous stones;  <span id="fr_1214"></span>[46](#fn_1214)
the walls were perforated by the strokes of the battering-ram; the
towers were involved in fire and smoke; and the assailants were
stimulated by rapine and revenge." The work was consummated by the
tyranny of the laws; and the factions of Italy alternately exercised a
blind and thoughtless vengeance on their adversaries, whose houses and
castles they razed to the ground.  <span
id="fr_1215"></span>[47](#fn_1215) In comparing the days of foreign,
with the ages of domestic, hostility, we must pronounce, that the latter
have been far more ruinous to the city; and our opinion is confirmed by
the evidence of Petrarch. "Behold," says the laureate, "the relics of
Rome, the image of her pristine greatness! neither time nor the
Barbarian can boast the merit of this stupendous destruction: it was
perpetrated by her own citizens, by the most illustrious of her sons;
and your ancestors (he writes to a noble Annabaldi) have done with the
battering-ram what the Punic hero could not accomplish with the sword."
 <span id="fr_1216"></span>[48](#fn_1216) The influence of the two last
principles of decay must in some degree be multiplied by each other;
since the houses and towers, which were subverted by civil war, required
by a new and perpetual supply from the monuments of antiquity.  <span
id="fr_1217"></span>[\*\*\_0076](#fn_1217)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[\*\_0072](daf06040.htm#fr_1164) It should be
Pope Martin the Fifth. See Gibbon's own note, ch. lxv, note 51 and
Hobhouse, Illustrations of Childe Harold, p. 155. - M.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[1](daf06040.htm#fr_1165) I have already
(notes 50, 51, on chap. lxv.) mentioned the age, character, and writings
of Poggius; and particularly noticed the date of this elegant moral
lecture on the varieties of fortune.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[2](daf06040.htm#fr_1166) Consedimus in ipsis
Tarpeiae arcis ruinis, pone ingens portae cujusdam, ut puto, templi,
marmoreum limen, plurimasque passim confractas columnas, unde magna ex
parte prospectus urbis patet, (p. 5.)

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[3](daf06040.htm#fr_1167) Aeneid viii. 97 -
369. This ancient picture, so artfully introduced, and so exquisitely
finished, must have been highly interesting to an inhabitant of Rome;
and our early studies allow us to sympathize in the feelings of a Roman.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[4](daf06040.htm#fr_1168) Capitolium adeo . .
. . immutatum ut vineae in senatorum subellia successerint, stercorum ac
purgamentorum receptaculum factum. Respice ad Palatinum montem . . . . .
vasta rudera . . . . caeteroscolles perlustra omnia vacua aedificiis,
ruinis vineisque oppleta conspicies, (Poggius, de Varietat. Fortunae p.
21.)

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[5](daf06040.htm#fr_1169) See Poggius, p. 8 -
22.

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[\*\_0073](daf06040.htm#fr_1170) One was in
the Via Nomentana; est alter praetevea Gallieno principi dicatus, ut
superscriptio indicat, Via Nomentana. Hobhouse, p. 154. Poggio likewise
mentions the building which Gibbon ambiguously says be "might have
overlooked." - M.

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[6](daf06040.htm#fr_1171) Liber de Mirabilibus
Romae ex Registro Nicolai Cardinalis de Amagonia in Bibliotheca St.
Isidori Armario IV., No. 69. This treatise, with some short but
pertinent notes, has been published by Montfaucon, (Diarium Italicum, p.
283 - 301,) who thus delivers his own critical opinion: Scriptor xiiimi.
circiter saeculi, ut ibidem notatur; antiquariae rei imperitus et, ut ab
illo aevo, nugis et anilibus fabellis refertus: sed, quia monumenta,
quae iis temporibus Romae supererant pro modulo recenset, non parum inde
lucis mutuabitur qu Romanis antiquitatibus indagandis operam navabit,
(p. 283.)

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[7](daf06040.htm#fr_1172) The Pere Mabillon
(Analecta, tom. iv. p. 502) has published an anonymous pilgrim of the
ixth century, who, in his visit round the churches and holy places at
Rome, touches on several buildings, especially porticos, which had
disappeared before the xiiith century.

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[8](daf06040.htm#fr_1173) On the Septizonium,
see the Memoires sur Petrarque, (tom. i. p. 325,) Donatus, (p. 338,) and
Nardini, (p. 117, 414.)

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[9](daf06040.htm#fr_1174) The age of the
pyramids is remote and unknown, since Diodorus Siculus (tom. i l. i. c.
44, p. 72) is unable to decide whether they were constructed 1000, or
3400, years before the clxxxth Olympiad. Sir John Marsham's contracted
scale of the Egyptian dynasties would fix them about 2000 years before
Christ, (Canon. Chronicus, p. 47.)

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[10](daf06040.htm#fr_1175) See the speech of
Glaucus in the Iliad, (Z. 146.) This natural but melancholy image is
peculiar to Homer.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[11](daf06040.htm#fr_1176) The learning and
criticism of M. des Vignoles (Histoire Critique de la Republique des
Lettres, tom. viii. p. 47 - 118, ix. p. 172 - 187) dates the fire of
Rome from A.D. 64, July 19, and the subsequent persecution of the
Christians from November 15 of the same year.

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[12](daf06040.htm#fr_1177) Quippe in regiones
quatuordecim Roma dividitur, quarum quatuor integrae manebant, tres solo
tenus dejectae: septem reliquis pauca testorum vestigia supererant,
lacera et semiusta. Among the old relics that were irreparably lost,
Tacitus enumerates the temple of the moon of Servius Tullius; the fane
and altar consecrated by Evander praesenti Herculi; the temple of
Jupiter Stator, a vow of Romulus; the palace of Numa; the temple of
Vesta cum Penatibus populi Romani. He then deplores the opes tot
victoriis quaesitae et Graecarum artium decora . . . . multa quae
seniores meminerant, quae reparari nequibant, (Annal. xv. 40, 41.)

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[13](daf06040.htm#fr_1178) A. U. C. 507,
repentina subversio ipsius Romae praevenit triumphum Romanorum. . . . .
diversae ignium aquarumque cladespene absumsere urbem Nam Tiberis
insolitis auctus imbribus et ultra opinionem, vel diuturnitate vel
maguitudine redundans omnia Romae aedificia in plano posita delevit.
Diversae qualitate locorum ad unam convenere perniciem: quoniam et quae
segniori inundatio tenuit madefacta dissolvit, et quae cursus torrentis
invenit impulsa dejecit, (Orosius, Hist. l. iv. c. 11, p. 244, edit.
Havercamp.) Yet we may observe, that it is the plan and study of the
Christian apologist to magnify the calamities of the Pagan world.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[14](daf06040.htm#fr_1179) Vidimus flavum
Tiberim, retortis Littore Etrusco violenter undis, Ire dejectum
monumenta Regis Templaque Vestae.

(Horat. Carm. I. 2.)

If the palace of Numa and temple of Vesta were thrown down in Horace's
time, what was consumed of those buildings by Nero's fire could hardly
deserve the epithets of vetustissima or incorrupta.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[15](daf06040.htm#fr_1180) Ad coercendas
inundationes alveum Tiberis laxavit, ac repurgavit, completum olim
ruderibus, et aedificiorum prolapsionibus coarctatum, (Suetonius in
Augusto, c. 30.)

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[16](daf06040.htm#fr_1181) Tacitus (Annal. i.
79) reports the petitions of the different towns of Italy to the senate
against the measure; and we may applaud the progress of reason. On a
similar occasion, local interests would undoubtedly be consulted: but an
English House of Commons would reject with contempt the arguments of
superstition, "that nature had assigned to the rivers their proper
course," &c.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[17](daf06040.htm#fr_1182) See the Epoques de
la Nature of the eloquent and philosophic Buffon. His picture of Guyana,
in South America, is that of a new and savage land, in which the waters
are abandoned to themselves without being regulated by human industry,
(p. 212, 561, quarto edition.)

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[18](daf06040.htm#fr_1183) In his travels in
Italy, Mr. Addison (his works, vol. ii. p. 98, Baskerville's edition)
has observed this curious and unquestionable fact.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[19](daf06040.htm#fr_1184) Yet in modern
times, the Tyber has sometimes damaged the city, and in the years 1530,
1557, 1598, the annals of Muratori record three mischievous and
memorable inundations, (tom. xiv. p. 268, 429, tom. xv. p. 99, &c.)

Note: The level of the Tyber was at one time supposed to be considerably
raised: recent investigations seem to be conclusive against this
supposition. See a brief, but satisfactory statement of the question in
Bunsen and Platner, Roms Beschreibung. vol. i. p. 29. - M.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[20](daf06040.htm#fr_1185) I take this
opportunity of declaring, that in the course of twelve years, I have
forgotten, or renounced, the flight of Odin from Azoph to Sweden, which
I never very seriously believed, (vol. i. p. 283.) The Goths are
apparently Germans: but all beyond Caesar and Tacitus is darkness or
fable, in the antiquities of Germany.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[21](daf06040.htm#fr_1186) History of the
Decline, &c., vol. iii. p. 291.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[22](daf06040.htm#fr_1187) - vol. iii. p. 464.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[23](daf06040.htm#fr_1188) - vol. iv. p. 23 -
25.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[24](daf06040.htm#fr_1189) - vol. iv. p. 258.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[25](daf06040.htm#fr_1190) - vol. iii. c.
xxviii. p. 139 - 148.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[26](daf06040.htm#fr_1191) Eodem tempore
petiit a Phocate principe templum, quod appellatur Pantheon, in quo
fecit ecclesiam Sanctae Mariae semper Virginis, et omnium martyrum; in
qua ecclesiae princeps multa bona obtulit, (Anastasius vel potius Liber
Pontificalis in Bonifacio IV., in Muratori, Script. Rerum Italicarum,
tom. iii. P. i. p. 135.) According to the anonymous writer in
Montfaucon, the Pantheon had been vowed by Agrippa to Cybele and
Neptune, and was dedicated by Boniface IV., on the calends of November,
to the Virgin, quae est mater omnium sanctorum, (p. 297, 298.)

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[\*\_0074](daf06040.htm#fr_1192) The popes,
under the dominion of the emperor and of the exarcha, according to
Feas's just observation, did not possess the power of disposing of the
buildings and monuments of the city according to their own will. Bunsen
and Platner, vol. i. p. 241. - M.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[27](daf06040.htm#fr_1193) Flaminius Vacca
(apud Montfaucon, p. 155, 156. His memoir is likewise printed, p. 21, at
the end of the Roman Antica of Nardini) and several Romans, doctrina
graves, were persuaded that the Goths buried their treasures at Rome,
and bequeathed the secret marks filiis nepotibusque. He relates some
anedotes to prove, that in his own time, these places were visited and
rifled by the Transalpine pilgrims, the heirs of the Gothic conquerors.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[28](daf06040.htm#fr_1194) Omnia quae erant in
aere ad ornatum civitatis deposuit, sed e ecclesiam B. Mariae ad
martyres quae de tegulis aereis cooperta discooperuit, (Anast. in
Vitalian. p. 141.) The base and sacrilegious Greek had not even the poor
pretence of plundering a heathen temple, the Pantheon was already a
Catholic church.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[29](daf06040.htm#fr_1195) For the spoils of
Ravenna (musiva atque marmora) see the original grant of Pope Adrian I.
to Charlemagne, (Codex Carolin. epist. lxvii. in Muratori, Script. Ital.
tom. iii. P. ii. p. 223.)

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[30](daf06040.htm#fr_1196) I shall quote the
authentic testimony of the Saxon poet, (A.D. 887 - 899,) de Rebus gestis
Caroli magni, l. v. 437 - 440, in the Historians of France, (tom. v. p.
180:)

Ad quae marmoreas praestabat Roma columnas, Quasdam praecipuas pul hra
Ravenna dedit. De tam longinqua poterit regiona vetustas Illius ornatum,
Francia, ferre tibi.

And I shall add from the Chronicle of Sigebert, (Historians of France,
tom. v. p. 378,) extruxit etiam Aquisgrani basilicam plurimae
pulchritudinis, ad cujus structuram a Roma et Ravenna columnas et
marmora devehi fecit.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[31](daf06040.htm#fr_1197) I cannot refuse to
transcribe a long passage of Petrarch (Opp. p. 536, 537) in Epistola
hortatoria ad Nicolaum Laurentium; it is so strong and full to the
point: Nec pudor aut pietas continuit quominus impii spoliata Dei
templa, occupatas arces, opes publicas, regiones urbis, atque honores
magistratuum inter se divisos; (habeant?) quam una in re, turbulenti ac
seditiosi homines et totius reliquae vitae consiliis et rationibus
discordes, inhumani foederis stupenda societate convenirent, in pontes
et moenia atque immeritos lapides desaevirent. Denique post vi vel senio
collapsa palatia, quae quondam ingentes tenuerunt viri, post diruptos
arcus triumphales, (unde majores horum forsitan corruerunt,) de ipsius
vetustatis ac propriae impietatis fragminibus vilem quaestum turpi
mercimonio captare non puduit. Itaque nunc, heu dolor! heu scelus
indignum! de vestris marmoreis columnis, de liminibus templorum, (ad
quae nuper ex orbe toto concursus devotissimus fiebat,) de imaginibus
sepulchrorum sub quibus patrum vestrorum venerabilis civis (cinis?)
erat, ut reliquas sileam, desidiosa Neapolis adornatur. Sic paullatim
ruinae ipsae deficiunt. Yet King Robert was the friend of Petrarch.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[32](daf06040.htm#fr_1198) Yet Charlemagne
washed and swam at Aix la Chapelle with a hundred of his courtiers,
(Eginhart, c. 22, p. 108, 109,) and Muratori describes, as late as the
year 814, the public baths which were built at Spoleto in Italy,
(Annali, tom. vi. p. 416.)

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[33](daf06040.htm#fr_1199) See the Annals of
Italy, A.D. 988. For this and the preceding fact, Muratori himself is
indebted to the Benedictine history of Pere Mabillon.

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[34](daf06040.htm#fr_1200) Vita di Sisto
Quinto, da Gregorio Leti, tom. iii. p. 50.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[\*\_0075](daf06040.htm#fr_1201) From the
quotations in Bunsen's Dissertation, it may be suspected that this slow
but continual process of destruction was the most fatal. - M

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[35](daf06040.htm#fr_1202) Porticus aedis
Concordiae, quam cum primum ad urbem accessi vidi fere integram opere
marmoreo admodum specioso: Romani postmodum ad calcem aedem totam et
porticus partem disjectis columnis sunt demoliti, (p. 12.) The temple of
Concord was therefore not destroyed by a sedition in the xiiith century,
as I have read in a MS. treatise del' Governo civile di Rome, lent me
formerly at Rome, and ascribed (I believe falsely) to the celebrated
Gravina. Poggius likewise affirms that the sepulchre of Caecilia Metella
was burnt for lime, (p. 19, 20.)

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[36](daf06040.htm#fr_1203) Composed by Aeneas
Sylvius, afterwards Pope Pius II., and published by Mabillon, from a Ms.
of the queen of Sweden, (Musaeum Italicum, tom. i. p. 97.)

Oblectat me, Roma, tuas spectare ruinas: Ex cujus lapsu gloria prisca
patet. Sed tuus hic populus muris defossa vetustis Calcis in obsequium
marmora dura coquit. Impia tercentum si sic gens egerit annos Nullum
hinc indicium nobilitatis erit.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[37](daf06040.htm#fr_1204) Vagabamur pariter
in illa urbe tam magna; quae, cum propter spatium vacua videretur,
populum habet immensum, (Opp p. 605 Epist. Familiares, ii. 14.)

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[38](daf06040.htm#fr_1205) These states of the
population of Rome at different periods are derived from an ingenious
treatise of the physician Lancisi, de Romani Coeli Qualitatibus, (p.
122.)

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[39](daf06040.htm#fr_1206) All the facts that
relate to the towers at Rome, and in other free cities of Italy, may be
found in the laborious and entertaining compilation of Muratori,
Antiquitates Italiae Medii Aevi, dissertat. xxvi., (tom. ii. p. 493 -
496, of the Latin, tom. . p. 446, of the Italian work.)

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[40](daf06040.htm#fr_1207) As for instance,
templum Jani nunc dicitur, turris Centii Frangipanis; et sane Jano
impositae turris lateritiae conspicua hodieque vestigia supersunt,
(Montfaucon Diarium Italicum, p. 186.) The anonymous writer (p. 285)
enumerates, arcus Titi, turris Cartularia; arcus Julii Caesaris et
Senatorum, turres de Bratis; arcus Antonini, turris de Cosectis, &c.

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[41](daf06040.htm#fr_1208) Hadriani molem . .
. . magna ex parte Romanorum injuria . . disturbavit; quod certe
funditus evertissent, si eorum manibus pervia, absumptis grandibus
saxis, reliqua moles exstisset, (Poggius de Varietate Fortunae, p. 12.)

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[42](daf06040.htm#fr_1209) Against the emperor
Henry IV., (Muratori, Annali d' Italia, tom. ix. p. 147.)

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[43](daf06040.htm#fr_1210) I must copy an
important passage of Montfaucon: Turris ingens rotunda . . . . Caeciliae
Metellae . . . . sepulchrum erat, cujus muri tam solidi, ut spatium
perquam minimum intus vacuum supersit; et Torre di Bove dicitur, a boum
capitibus muro inscriptis. Huic sequiori aevo, tempore intestinorum
bellorum, ceu urbecula adjuncta fuit, cujus moenia et turres etiamnum
visuntur; ita ut sepulchrum Metellae quasi arx oppiduli fuerit.
Ferventibus in urbe partibus, cum Ursini atque Colum nenses mutuis
cladibus perniciem inferrent civitati, in utriusve partia ditionem
cederet magni momenti erat, (p. 142.)

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[\*\_0076](daf06040.htm#fr_1211) This is
inaccurately expressed. The sepulchre is still standing See Hobhouse, p.
204. - M.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[44](daf06040.htm#fr_1212) See the testimonies
of Donatus, Nardini, and Montfaucon. In the Savelli palace, the remains
of the theatre of Marcellus are still great and conspicuous.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[45](daf06040.htm#fr_1213) James, cardinal of
St. George, ad velum aureum, in his metrical life of Pope Celestin V.,
(Muratori, Script. Ital. tom. i. P. iii. p. 621, l. i. c. l. ver. 132,
&c.)

Hoc dixisse sat est, Romam caruisee Senatu Mensibus exactis heu sex;
belloque vocatum (vocatos) In scelus, in socios fraternaque vulnera
patres; Tormentis jecisse viros immania saxa; Perfodisse domus trabibus,
fecisse ruinas Ignibus; incensas turres, obscuraque fumo Lumina vicino,
quo sit spoliata supellex.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[46](daf06040.htm#fr_1214) Muratori
(Dissertazione sopra le Antiquita Italiane, tom. i. p. 427 - 431) finds
that stone bullets of two or three hundred pounds' weight were not
uncommon; and they are sometimes computed at xii. or xviii cantari of
Genoa, each cantaro weighing 150 pounds.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[47](daf06040.htm#fr_1215) The vith law of the
Visconti prohibits this common and mischievous practice; and strictly
enjoins, that the houses of banished citizens should be preserved pro
communi utilitate, (Gualvancus de la Flamma in Muratori, Script. Rerum
Italicarum, tom. xii. p. 1041.)

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[48](daf06040.htm#fr_1216) Petrarch thus
addresses his friend, who, with shame and tears had shown him the
moenia, lacerae specimen miserable Romae, and declared his own intention
of restoring them, (Carmina Latina, l. ii. epist. Paulo Annibalensi,
xii. p. 97, 98.)

Nec te parva manet servatis fama ruinis Quanta quod integrae fuit olim
gloria Romae Reliquiae testantur adhuc; quas longior aetas Frangere non
valuit; non vis aut ira cruenti Hostis, ab egregiis franguntur civibus,
heu! heu' - Quod ille nequivit (Hannibal.) Perficit hic aries.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[\*\*\_0076](daf06040.htm#fr_1217) Bunsen has
shown that the hostile attacks of the emperor Henry the Fourth, but more
particularly that of Robert Guiscard, who burned down whole districts,
inflicted the worst damage on the ancient city Vol. i. p. 247. - M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXI: Prospect Of The Ruins Of Rome In The Fifteenth
Century. Part II.](daf06041)
