[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf06031) 
[Next](daf06033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIFCE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 6*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1788\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXIX: State Of Rome From The Twelfth Century.

### Part I.

State Of Rome From The Twelfth Century. - Temporal Dominion Of The
Popes. - Seditions Of The City. - Political Heresy Of Arnold Of Brescia.
- Restoration Of The Republic. - The Senators. - Pride Of The Romans. -
Their Wars. - They Are Deprived Of The Election And Presence Of The
Popes, Who Retire To Avignon. - The Jubilee. - Noble Families Of Rome. -
Feud Of The Colonna And Ursini.

In the first ages of the decline and fall of the Roman empire, our eye
is invariably fixed on the royal city, which had given laws to the
fairest portion of the globe. We contemplate her fortunes, at first with
admiration, at length with pity, always with attention, and when that
attention is diverted from the capital to the provinces, they are
considered as so many branches which have been successively severed from
the Imperial trunk. The foundation of a second Rome, on the shores of
the Bosphorus, has compelled the historian to follow the successors of
Constantine; and our curiosity has been tempted to visit the most remote
countries of Europe and Asia, to explore the causes and the authors of
the long decay of the Byzantine monarchy. By the conquest of Justinian,
we have been recalled to the banks of the Tyber, to the deliverance of
the ancient metropolis; but that deliverance was a change, or perhaps an
aggravation, of servitude. Rome had been already stripped of her
trophies, her gods, and her Caesars; nor was the Gothic dominion more
inglorious and oppressive than the tyranny of the Greeks. In the eighth
century of the Christian aera, a religious quarrel, the worship of
images, provoked the Romans to assert their independence: their bishop
became the temporal, as well as the spiritual, father of a free people;
and of the Western empire, which was restored by Charlemagne, the title
and image still decorate the singular constitution of modern Germany.
The name of Rome must yet command our involuntary respect: the climate
(whatsoever may be its influence) was no longer the same:  <span
id="fr_912"></span>[1](#fn_912) the purity of blood had been
contaminated through a thousand channels; but the venerable aspect of
her ruins, and the memory of past greatness, rekindled a spark of the
national character. The darkness of the middle ages exhibits some scenes
not unworthy of our notice. Nor shall I dismiss the present work till I
have reviewed the state and revolutions of the Roman City, which
acquiesced under the absolute dominion of the popes, about the same time
that Constantinople was enslaved by the Turkish arms.

In the beginning of the twelfth century,  <span
id="fr_913"></span>[2](#fn_913) the aera of the first crusade, Rome was
revered by the Latins, as the metropolis of the world, as the throne of
the pope and the emperor, who, from the eternal city, derived their
title, their honors, and the right or exercise of temporal dominion.
After so long an interruption, it may not be useless to repeat that the
successors of Charlemagne and the Othos were chosen beyond the Rhine in
a national diet; but that these princes were content with the humble
names of kings of Germany and Italy, till they had passed the Alps and
the Apennine, to seek their Imperial crown on the banks of the Tyber.
 <span id="fr_914"></span>[3](#fn_914) At some distance from the city,
their approach was saluted by a long procession of the clergy and people
with palms and crosses; and the terrific emblems of wolves and lions, of
dragons and eagles, that floated in the military banners, represented
the departed legions and cohorts of the republic. The royal path to
maintain the liberties of Rome was thrice reiterated, at the bridge, the
gate, and on the stairs of the Vatican; and the distribution of a
customary donative feebly imitated the magnificence of the first
Caesars. In the church of St. Peter, the coronation was performed by his
successor: the voice of God was confounded with that of the people; and
the public consent was declared in the acclamations of "Long life and
victory to our lord the pope! long life and victory to our lord the
emperor! long life and victory to the Roman and Teutonic armies!"  <span
id="fr_915"></span>[4](#fn_915) The names of Caesar and Augustus, the
laws of Constantine and Justinian, the example of Charlemagne and Otho,
established the supreme dominion of the emperors: their title and image
was engraved on the papal coins;  <span id="fr_916"></span>[5](#fn_916)
and their jurisdiction was marked by the sword of justice, which they
delivered to the praefect of the city. But every Roman prejudice was
awakened by the name, the language, and the manners, of a Barbarian
lord. The Caesars of Saxony or Franconia were the chiefs of a feudal
aristocracy; nor could they exercise the discipline of civil and
military power, which alone secures the obedience of a distant people,
impatient of servitude, though perhaps incapable of freedom. Once, and
once only, in his life, each emperor, with an army of Teutonic vassals,
descended from the Alps. I have described the peaceful order of his
entry and coronation; but that order was commonly disturbed by the
clamor and sedition of the Romans, who encountered their sovereign as a
foreign invader: his departure was always speedy, and often shameful;
and, in the absence of a long reign, his authority was insulted, and his
name was forgotten. The progress of independence in Germany and Italy
undermined the foundations of the Imperial sovereignty, and the triumph
of the popes was the deliverance of Rome.

Of her two sovereigns, the emperor had precariously reigned by the right
of conquest; but the authority of the pope was founded on the soft,
though more solid, basis of opinion and habit. The removal of a foreign
influence restored and endeared the shepherd to his flock. Instead of
the arbitrary or venal nomination of a German court, the vicar of Christ
was freely chosen by the college of cardinals, most of whom were either
natives or inhabitants of the city. The applause of the magistrates and
people confirmed his election, and the ecclesiastical power that was
obeyed in Sweden and Britain had been ultimately derived from the
suffrage of the Romans. The same suffrage gave a prince, as well as a
pontiff, to the capital. It was universally believed, that Constantine
had invested the popes with the temporal dominion of Rome; and the
boldest civilians, the most profane skeptics, were satisfied with
disputing the right of the emperor and the validity of his gift. The
truth of the fact, the authenticity of his donation, was deeply rooted
in the ignorance and tradition of four centuries; and the fabulous
origin was lost in the real and permanent effects. The name of Dominus
or Lord was inscribed on the coin of the bishops: their title was
acknowledged by acclamations and oaths of allegiance, and with the free,
or reluctant, consent of the German Caesars, they had long exercised a
supreme or subordinate jurisdiction over the city and patrimony of St.
Peter. The reign of the popes, which gratified the prejudices, was not
incompatible with the liberties, of Rome; and a more critical inquiry
would have revealed a still nobler source of their power; the gratitude
of a nation, whom they had rescued from the heresy and oppression of the
Greek tyrant. In an age of superstition, it should seem that the union
of the royal and sacerdotal characters would mutually fortify each
other; and that the keys of Paradise would be the surest pledge of
earthly obedience. The sanctity of the office might indeed be degraded
by the personal vices of the man. But the scandals of the tenth century
were obliterated by the austere and more dangerous virtues of Gregory
the Seventh and his successors; and in the ambitious contests which they
maintained for the rights of the church, their sufferings or their
success must equally tend to increase the popular veneration. They
sometimes wandered in poverty and exile, the victims of persecution; and
the apostolic zeal with which they offered themselves to martyrdom must
engage the favor and sympathy of every Catholic breast. And sometimes,
thundering from the Vatican, they created, judged, and deposed the kings
of the world; nor could the proudest Roman be disgraced by submitting to
a priest, whose feet were kissed, and whose stirrup was held, by the
successors of Charlemagne.  <span id="fr_917"></span>[6](#fn_917) Even
the temporal interest of the city should have protected in peace and
honor the residence of the popes; from whence a vain and lazy people
derived the greatest part of their subsistence and riches. The fixed
revenue of the popes was probably impaired; many of the old patrimonial
estates, both in Italy and the provinces, had been invaded by
sacrilegious hands; nor could the loss be compensated by the claim,
rather than the possession, of the more ample gifts of Pepin and his
descendants. But the Vatican and Capitol were nourished by the incessant
and increasing swarms of pilgrims and suppliants: the pale of
Christianity was enlarged, and the pope and cardinals were overwhelmed
by the judgment of ecclesiastical and secular causes. A new
jurisprudence had established in the Latin church the right and practice
of appeals;  <span id="fr_918"></span>[7](#fn_918) and from the North
and West the bishops and abbots were invited or summoned to solicit, to
complain, to accuse, or to justify, before the threshold of the
apostles. A rare prodigy is once recorded, that two horses, belonging to
the archbishops of Mentz and Cologne, repassed the Alps, yet laden with
gold and silver:  <span id="fr_919"></span>[8](#fn_919) but it was soon
understood, that the success, both of the pilgrims and clients, depended
much less on the justice of their cause than on the value of their
offering. The wealth and piety of these strangers were ostentatiously
displayed; and their expenses, sacred or profane, circulated in various
channels for the emolument of the Romans.

Such powerful motives should have firmly attached the voluntary and
pious obedience of the Roman people to their spiritual and temporal
father. But the operation of prejudice and interest is often disturbed
by the sallies of ungovernable passion. The Indian who fells the tree,
that he may gather the fruit,  <span id="fr_920"></span>[9](#fn_920) and
the Arab who plunders the caravans of commerce, are actuated by the same
impulse of savage nature, which overlooks the future in the present, and
relinquishes for momentary rapine the long and secure possession of the
most important blessings. And it was thus, that the shrine of St. Peter
was profaned by the thoughtless Romans; who pillaged the offerings, and
wounded the pilgrims, without computing the number and value of similar
visits, which they prevented by their inhospitable sacrilege. Even the
influence of superstition is fluctuating and precarious; and the slave,
whose reason is subdued, will often be delivered by his avarice or
pride. A credulous devotion for the fables and oracles of the priesthood
most powerfully acts on the mind of a Barbarian; yet such a mind is the
least capable of preferring imagination to sense, of sacrificing to a
distant motive, to an invisible, perhaps an ideal, object, the appetites
and interests of the present world. In the vigor of health and youth,
his practice will perpetually contradict his belief; till the pressure
of age, or sickness, or calamity, awakens his terrors, and compels him
to satisfy the double debt of piety and remorse. I have already
observed, that the modern times of religious indifference are the most
favorable to the peace and security of the clergy. Under the reign of
superstition, they had much to hope from the ignorance, and much to fear
from the violence, of mankind. The wealth, whose constant increase must
have rendered them the sole proprietors of the earth, was alternately
bestowed by the repentant father and plundered by the rapacious son:
their persons were adored or violated; and the same idol, by the hands
of the same votaries, was placed on the altar, or trampled in the dust.
In the feudal system of Europe, arms were the title of distinction and
the measure of allegiance; and amidst their tumult, the still voice of
law and reason was seldom heard or obeyed. The turbulent Romans
disdained the yoke, and insulted the impotence, of their bishop:  <span
id="fr_921"></span>[10](#fn_921) nor would his education or character
allow him to exercise, with decency or effect, the power of the sword.
The motives of his election and the frailties of his life were exposed
to their familiar observation; and proximity must diminish the reverence
which his name and his decrees impressed on a barbarous world. This
difference has not escaped the notice of our philosophic historian:
"Though the name and authority of the court of Rome were so terrible in
the remote countries of Europe, which were sunk in profound ignorance,
and were entirely unacquainted with its character and conduct, the pope
was so little revered at home, that his inveterate enemies surrounded
the gates of Rome itself, and even controlled his government in that
city; and the ambassadors, who, from a distant extremity of Europe,
carried to him the humble, or rather abject, submissions of the greatest
potentate of the age, found the utmost difficulty to make their way to
him, and to throw themselves at his feet."  <span
id="fr_922"></span>[11](#fn_922)

Since the primitive times, the wealth of the popes was exposed to envy,
their powers to opposition, and their persons to violence. But the long
hostility of the mitre and the crown increased the numbers, and inflamed
the passions, of their enemies. The deadly factions of the Guelphs and
Ghibelines, so fatal to Italy, could never be embraced with truth or
constancy by the Romans, the subjects and adversaries both of the bishop
and emperor; but their support was solicited by both parties, and they
alternately displayed in their banners the keys of St. Peter and the
German eagle. Gregory the Seventh, who may be adored or detested as the
founder of the papal monarchy, was driven from Rome, and died in exile
at Salerno. Six- and-thirty of his successors,  <span
id="fr_923"></span>[12](#fn_923) till their retreat to Avignon,
maintained an unequal contest with the Romans: their age and dignity
were often violated; and the churches, in the solemn rites of religion,
were polluted with sedition and murder. A repetition  <span
id="fr_924"></span>[13](#fn_924) of such capricious brutality, without
connection or design, would be tedious and disgusting; and I shall
content myself with some events of the twelfth century, which represent
the state of the popes and the city. On Holy Thursday, while Paschal
officiated before the altar, he was interrupted by the clamors of the
multitude, who imperiously demanded the confirmation of a favorite
magistrate. His silence exasperated their fury; his pious refusal to
mingle the affairs of earth and heaven was encountered with menaces, and
oaths, that he should be the cause and the witness of the public ruin.
During the festival of Easter, while the bishop and the clergy,
barefooted and in procession, visited the tombs of the martyrs, they
were twice assaulted, at the bridge of St. Angelo, and before the
Capitol, with volleys of stones and darts. The houses of his adherents
were levelled with the ground: Paschal escaped with difficulty and
danger; he levied an army in the patrimony of St. Peter; and his last
days were embittered by suffering and inflicting the calamities of civil
war. The scenes that followed the election of his successor Gelasius the
Second were still more scandalous to the church and city. Cencio
Frangipani,  <span id="fr_925"></span>[14](#fn_925) a potent and
factious baron, burst into the assembly furious and in arms: the
cardinals were stripped, beaten, and trampled under foot; and he seized,
without pity or respect, the vicar of Christ by the throat. Gelasius was
dragged by the hair along the ground, buffeted with blows, wounded with
spurs, and bound with an iron chain in the house of his brutal tyrant.
An insurrection of the people delivered their bishop: the rival families
opposed the violence of the Frangipani; and Cencio, who sued for pardon,
repented of the failure, rather than of the guilt, of his enterprise.
Not many days had elapsed, when the pope was again assaulted at the
altar. While his friends and enemies were engaged in a bloody contest,
he escaped in his sacerdotal garments. In this unworthy flight, which
excited the compassion of the Roman matrons, his attendants were
scattered or unhorsed; and, in the fields behind the church of St.
Peter, his successor was found alone and half dead with fear and
fatigue. Shaking the dust from his feet, the apostle withdrew from a
city in which his dignity was insulted and his person was endangered;
and the vanity of sacerdotal ambition is revealed in the involuntary
confession, that one emperor was more tolerable than twenty.  <span
id="fr_926"></span>[15](#fn_926) These examples might suffice; but I
cannot forget the sufferings of two pontiffs of the same age, the second
and third of the name of Lucius. The former, as he ascended in battle
array to assault the Capitol, was struck on the temple by a stone, and
expired in a few days. The latter was severely wounded in the person of
his servants. In a civil commotion, several of his priests had been made
prisoners; and the inhuman Romans, reserving one as a guide for his
brethren, put out their eyes, crowned them with ludicrous mitres,
mounted them on asses with their faces towards the tail, and extorted an
oath, that, in this wretched condition, they should offer themselves as
a lesson to the head of the church. Hope or fear, lassitude or remorse,
the characters of the men, and the circumstances of the times, might
sometimes obtain an interval of peace and obedience; and the pope was
restored with joyful acclamations to the Lateran or Vatican, from whence
he had been driven with threats and violence. But the root of mischief
was deep and perennial; and a momentary calm was preceded and followed
by such tempests as had almost sunk the bark of St. Peter. Rome
continually presented the aspect of war and discord: the churches and
palaces were fortified and assaulted by the factions and families; and,
after giving peace to Europe, Calistus the Second alone had resolution
and power to prohibit the use of private arms in the metropolis. Among
the nations who revered the apostolic throne, the tumults of Rome
provoked a general indignation; and in a letter to his disciple Eugenius
the Third, St. Bernard, with the sharpness of his wit and zeal, has
stigmatized the vices of the rebellious people.  <span
id="fr_927"></span>[16](#fn_927) "Who is ignorant," says the monk of
Clairvaux, "of the vanity and arrogance of the Romans? a nation nursed
in sedition, untractable, and scorning to obey, unless they are too
feeble to resist. When they promise to serve, they aspire to reign; if
they swear allegiance, they watch the opportunity of revolt; yet they
vent their discontent in loud clamors, if your doors, or your counsels,
are shut against them. Dexterous in mischief, they have never learned
the science of doing good. Odious to earth and heaven, impious to God,
seditious among themselves, jealous of their neighbors, inhuman to
strangers, they love no one, by no one are they beloved; and while they
wish to inspire fear, they live in base and continual apprehension. They
will not submit; they know not how to govern faithless to their
superiors, intolerable to their equals, ungrateful to their benefactors,
and alike impudent in their demands and their refusals. Lofty in
promise, poor in execution; adulation and calumny, perfidy and treason,
are the familiar arts of their policy." Surely this dark portrait is not
colored by the pencil of Christian charity;  <span
id="fr_928"></span>[17](#fn_928) yet the features, however harsh or
ugly, express a lively resemblance of the Roman of the twelfth century.
 <span id="fr_929"></span>[18](#fn_929)

The Jews had rejected the Christ when he appeared among them in a
plebeian character; and the Romans might plead their ignorance of his
vicar when he assumed the pomp and pride of a temporal sovereign. In the
busy age of the crusades, some sparks of curiosity and reason were
rekindled in the Western world: the heresy of Bulgaria, the Paulician
sect, was successfully transplanted into the soil of Italy and France;
the Gnostic visions were mingled with the simplicity of the gospel; and
the enemies of the clergy reconciled their passions with their
conscience, the desire of freedom with the profession of piety.  <span
id="fr_930"></span>[19](#fn_930) The trumpet of Roman liberty was first
sounded by Arnold of Brescia,  <span id="fr_931"></span>[20](#fn_931)
whose promotion in the church was confined to the lowest rank, and who
wore the monastic habit rather as a garb of poverty than as a uniform of
obedience. His adversaries could not deny the wit and eloquence which
they severely felt; they confess with reluctance the specious purity of
his morals; and his errors were recommended to the public by a mixture
of important and beneficial truths. In his theological studies, he had
been the disciple of the famous and unfortunate Abelard,  <span
id="fr_932"></span>[21](#fn_932) who was likewise involved in the
suspicion of heresy: but the lover of Eloisa was of a soft and flexible
nature; and his ecclesiastic judges were edified and disarmed by the
humility of his repentance. From this master, Arnold most probably
imbibed some metaphysical definitions of the Trinity, repugnant to the
taste of the times: his ideas of baptism and the eucharist are loosely
censured; but a political heresy was the source of his fame and
misfortunes. He presumed to quote the declaration of Christ, that his
kingdom is not of this world: he boldly maintained, that the sword and
the sceptre were intrusted to the civil magistrate; that temporal honors
and possessions were lawfully vested in secular persons; that the
abbots, the bishops, and the pope himself, must renounce either their
state or their salvation; and that after the loss of their revenues, the
voluntary tithes and oblations of the faithful would suffice, not indeed
for luxury and avarice, but for a frugal life in the exercise of
spiritual labors. During a short time, the preacher was revered as a
patriot; and the discontent, or revolt, of Brescia against her bishop,
was the first fruits of his dangerous lessons. But the favor of the
people is less permanent than the resentment of the priest; and after
the heresy of Arnold had been condemned by Innocent the Second,  <span
id="fr_933"></span>[22](#fn_933) in the general council of the Lateran,
the magistrates themselves were urged by prejudice and fear to execute
the sentence of the church. Italy could no longer afford a refuge; and
the disciple of Abelard escaped beyond the Alps, till he found a safe
and hospitable shelter in Zurich, now the first of the Swiss cantons.
From a Roman station,  <span id="fr_934"></span>[23](#fn_934) a royal
villa, a chapter of noble virgins, Zurich had gradually increased to a
free and flourishing city; where the appeals of the Milanese were
sometimes tried by the Imperial commissaries.  <span
id="fr_935"></span>[24](#fn_935) In an age less ripe for reformation,
the precursor of Zuinglius was heard with applause: a brave and simple
people imbibed, and long retained, the color of his opinions; and his
art, or merit, seduced the bishop of Constance, and even the pope's
legate, who forgot, for his sake, the interest of their master and their
order. Their tardy zeal was quickened by the fierce exhortations of St.
Bernard;  <span id="fr_936"></span>[25](#fn_936) and the enemy of the
church was driven by persecution to the desperate measures of erecting
his standard in Rome itself, in the face of the successor of St. Peter.

Part III.

While they expected the descent of the tardy angel, the doors were
broken with axes; and as the Turks encountered no resistance, their
bloodless hands were employed in selecting and securing the multitude of
their prisoners. Youth, beauty, and the appearance of wealth, attracted
their choice; and the right of property was decided among themselves by
a prior seizure, by personal strength, and by the authority of command.
In the space of an hour, the male captives were bound with cords, the
females with their veils and girdles. The senators were linked with
their slaves; the prelates, with the porters of the church; and young
men of the plebeian class, with noble maids, whose faces had been
invisible to the sun and their nearest kindred. In this common
captivity, the ranks of society were confounded; the ties of nature were
cut asunder; and the inexorable soldier was careless of the father's
groans, the tears of the mother, and the lamentations of the children.
The loudest in their wailings were the nuns, who were torn from the
altar with naked bosoms, outstretched hands, and dishevelled hair; and
we should piously believe that few could be tempted to prefer the vigils
of the harem to those of the monastery. Of these unfortunate Greeks, of
these domestic animals, whole strings were rudely driven through the
streets; and as the conquerors were eager to return for more prey, their
trembling pace was quickened with menaces and blows. At the same hour, a
similar rapine was exercised in all the churches and monasteries, in all
the palaces and habitations, of the capital; nor could any place,
however sacred or sequestered, protect the persons or the property of
the Greeks. Above sixty thousand of this devoted people were transported
from the city to the camp and fleet; exchanged or sold according to the
caprice or interest of their masters, and dispersed in remote servitude
through the provinces of the Ottoman empire. Among these we may notice
some remarkable characters. The historian Phranza, first chamberlain and
principal secretary, was involved with his family in the common lot.
After suffering four months the hardships of slavery, he recovered his
freedom: in the ensuing winter he ventured to Adrianople, and ransomed
his wife from the mir bashi, or master of the horse; but his two
children, in the flower of youth and beauty, had been seized for the use
of Mahomet himself. The daughter of Phranza died in the seraglio,
perhaps a virgin: his son, in the fifteenth year of his age, preferred
death to infamy, and was stabbed by the hand of the royal lover.  <span
id="fr_937"></span>[66](#fn_937) A deed thus inhuman cannot surely be
expiated by the taste and liberality with which he released a Grecian
matron and her two daughters, on receiving a Latin doe From ode from
Philelphus, who had chosen a wife in that noble family.  <span
id="fr_938"></span>[67](#fn_938) The pride or cruelty of Mahomet would
have been most sensibly gratified by the capture of a Roman legate; but
the dexterity of Cardinal Isidore eluded the search, and he escaped from
Galata in a plebeian habit.  <span id="fr_939"></span>[68](#fn_939) The
chain and entrance of the outward harbor was still occupied by the
Italian ships of merchandise and war. They had signalized their valor in
the siege: they embraced the moment of retreat, while the Turkish
mariners were dissipated in the pillage of the city. When they hoisted
sail, the beach was covered with a suppliant and lamentable crowd; but
the means of transportation were scanty: the Venetians and Genoese
selected their countrymen; and, notwithstanding the fairest promises of
the sultan, the inhabitants of Galata evacuated their houses, and
embarked with their most precious effects.

In the fall and the sack of great cities, an historian is condemned to
repeat the tale of uniform calamity: the same effects must be produced
by the same passions; and when those passions may be indulged without
control, small, alas! is the difference between civilized and savage
man. Amidst the vague exclamations of bigotry and hatred, the Turks are
not accused of a wanton or immoderate effusion of Christian blood: but
according to their maxims, (the maxims of antiquity,) the lives of the
vanquished were forfeited; and the legitimate reward of the conqueror
was derived from the service, the sale, or the ransom, of his captives
of both sexes.  <span id="fr_940"></span>[69](#fn_940) The wealth of
Constantinople had been granted by the sultan to his victorious troops;
and the rapine of an hour is more productive than the industry of years.
But as no regular division was attempted of the spoil, the respective
shares were not determined by merit; and the rewards of valor were
stolen away by the followers of the camp, who had declined the toil and
danger of the battle. The narrative of their depredations could not
afford either amusement or instruction: the total amount, in the last
poverty of the empire, has been valued at four millions of ducats;
 <span id="fr_941"></span>[70](#fn_941) and of this sum a small part was
the property of the Venetians, the Genoese, the Florentines, and the
merchants of Ancona. Of these foreigners, the stock was improved in
quick and perpetual circulation: but the riches of the Greeks were
displayed in the idle ostentation of palaces and wardrobes, or deeply
buried in treasures of ingots and old coin, lest it should be demanded
at their hands for the defence of their country. The profanation and
plunder of the monasteries and churches excited the most tragic
complaints. The dome of St. Sophia itself, the earthly heaven, the
second firmament, the vehicle of the cherubim, the throne of the glory
of God,  <span id="fr_942"></span>[71](#fn_942) was despoiled of the
oblation of ages; and the gold and silver, the pearls and jewels, the
vases and sacerdotal ornaments, were most wickedly converted to the
service of mankind. After the divine images had been stripped of all
that could be valuable to a profane eye, the canvas, or the wood, was
torn, or broken, or burnt, or trod under foot, or applied, in the
stables or the kitchen, to the vilest uses. The example of sacrilege was
imitated, however, from the Latin conquerors of Constantinople; and the
treatment which Christ, the Virgin, and the saints, had sustained from
the guilty Catholic, might be inflicted by the zealous Mussulman on the
monuments of idolatry. Perhaps, instead of joining the public clamor, a
philosopher will observe, that in the decline of the arts the
workmanship could not be more valuable than the work, and that a fresh
supply of visions and miracles would speedily be renewed by the craft of
the priests and the credulity of the people. He will more seriously
deplore the loss of the Byzantine libraries, which were destroyed or
scattered in the general confusion: one hundred and twenty thousand
manuscripts are said to have disappeared;  <span
id="fr_943"></span>[72](#fn_943) ten volumes might be purchased for a
single ducat; and the same ignominious price, too high perhaps for a
shelf of theology, included the whole works of Aristotle and Homer, the
noblest productions of the science and literature of ancient Greece. We
may reflect with pleasure that an inestimable portion of our classic
treasures was safely deposited in Italy; and that the mechanics of a
German town had invented an art which derides the havoc of time and
barbarism.

From the first hour  <span id="fr_944"></span>[73](#fn_944) of the
memorable twenty-ninth of May, disorder and rapine prevailed in
Constantinople, till the eighth hour of the same day; when the sultan
himself passed in triumph through the gate of St. Romanus. He was
attended by his viziers, bashaws, and guards, each of whom (says a
Byzantine historian) was robust as Hercules, dexterous as Apollo, and
equal in battle to any ten of the race of ordinary mortals. The
conqueror  <span id="fr_945"></span>[74](#fn_945) gazed with
satisfaction and wonder on the strange, though splendid, appearance of
the domes and palaces, so dissimilar from the style of Oriental
architecture. In the hippodrome, or atmeidan, his eye was attracted by
the twisted column of the three serpents; and, as a trial of his
strength, he shattered with his iron mace or battle-axe the under jaw of
one of these monsters,  <span id="fr_946"></span>[75](#fn_946) which in
the eyes of the Turks were the idols or talismans of the city.  <span
id="fr_947"></span>[\*\_0064](#fn_947) At the principal door of St.
Sophia, he alighted from his horse, and entered the dome; and such was
his jealous regard for that monument of his glory, that on observing a
zealous Mussulman in the act of breaking the marble pavement, he
admonished him with his cimeter, that, if the spoil and captives were
granted to the soldiers, the public and private buildings had been
reserved for the prince. By his command the metropolis of the Eastern
church was transformed into a mosque: the rich and portable instruments
of superstition had been removed; the crosses were thrown down; and the
walls, which were covered with images and mosaics, were washed and
purified, and restored to a state of naked simplicity. On the same day,
or on the ensuing Friday, the muezin, or crier, ascended the most lofty
turret, and proclaimed the ezan, or public invitation in the name of God
and his prophet; the imam preached; and Mahomet and Second performed the
namaz of prayer and thanksgiving on the great altar, where the Christian
mysteries had so lately been celebrated before the last of the Caesars.
 <span id="fr_948"></span>[76](#fn_948) From St. Sophia he proceeded to
the august, but desolate mansion of a hundred successors of the great
Constantine, but which in a few hours had been stripped of the pomp of
royalty. A melancholy reflection on the vicissitudes of human greatness
forced itself on his mind; and he repeated an elegant distich of Persian
poetry: "The spider has wove his web in the Imperial palace; and the owl
hath sung her watch-song on the towers of Afrasiab."  <span
id="fr_949"></span>[77](#fn_949)

Yet his mind was not satisfied, nor did the victory seem complete, till
he was informed of the fate of Constantine; whether he had escaped, or
been made prisoner, or had fallen in the battle. Two Janizaries claimed
the honor and reward of his death: the body, under a heap of slain, was
discovered by the golden eagles embroidered on his shoes; the Greeks
acknowledged, with tears, the head of their late emperor; and, after
exposing the bloody trophy,  <span id="fr_950"></span>[78](#fn_950)
Mahomet bestowed on his rival the honors of a decent funeral. After his
decease, Lucas Notaras, great duke,  <span
id="fr_951"></span>[79](#fn_951) and first minister of the empire, was
the most important prisoner. When he offered his person and his
treasures at the foot of the throne, "And why," said the indignant
sultan, "did you not employ these treasures in the defence of your
prince and country?" - "They were yours," answered the slave; "God had
reserved them for your hands." - "If he reserved them for me," replied
the despot, "how have you presumed to withhold them so long by a
fruitless and fatal resistance?" The great duke alleged the obstinacy of
the strangers, and some secret encouragement from the Turkish vizier;
and from this perilous interview he was at length dismissed with the
assurance of pardon and protection. Mahomet condescended to visit his
wife, a venerable princess oppressed with sickness and grief; and his
consolation for her misfortunes was in the most tender strain of
humanity and filial reverence. A similar clemency was extended to the
principal officers of state, of whom several were ransomed at his
expense; and during some days he declared himself the friend and father
of the vanquished people. But the scene was soon changed; and before his
departure, the hippodrome streamed with the blood of his noblest
captives. His perfidious cruelty is execrated by the Christians: they
adorn with the colors of heroic martyrdom the execution of the great
duke and his two sons; and his death is ascribed to the generous refusal
of delivering his children to the tyrant's lust.  <span
id="fr_952"></span>[\*\_0065](#fn_952) Yet a Byzantine historian has
dropped an unguarded word of conspiracy, deliverance, and Italian
succor: such treason may be glorious; but the rebel who bravely
ventures, has justly forfeited his life; nor should we blame a conqueror
for destroying the enemies whom he can no longer trust. On the
eighteenth of June the victorious sultan returned to Adrianople; and
smiled at the base and hollow embassies of the Christian princes, who
viewed their approaching ruin in the fall of the Eastern empire.

Constantinople had been left naked and desolate, without a prince or a
people. But she could not be despoiled of the incomparable situation
which marks her for the metropolis of a great empire; and the genius of
the place will ever triumph over the accidents of time and fortune.
Boursa and Adrianople, the ancient seats of the Ottomans, sunk into
provincial towns; and Mahomet the Second established his own residence,
and that of his successors, on the same commanding spot which had been
chosen by Constantine.  <span id="fr_953"></span>[80](#fn_953) The
fortifications of Galata, which might afford a shelter to the Latins,
were prudently destroyed; but the damage of the Turkish cannon was soon
repaired; and before the month of August, great quantities of lime had
been burnt for the restoration of the walls of the capital. As the
entire property of the soil and buildings, whether public or private, or
profane or sacred, was now transferred to the conqueror, he first
separated a space of eight furlongs from the point of the triangle for
the establishment of his seraglio or palace. It is here, in the bosom of
luxury, that the Grand Signor (as he has been emphatically named by the
Italians) appears to reign over Europe and Asia; but his person on the
shores of the Bosphorus may not always be secure from the insults of a
hostile navy. In the new character of a mosque, the cathedral of St.
Sophia was endowed with an ample revenue, crowned with lofty minarets,
and surrounded with groves and fountains, for the devotion and
refreshment of the Moslems. The same model was imitated in the jami, or
royal mosques; and the first of these was built, by Mahomet himself, on
the ruins of the church of the holy apostles, and the tombs of the Greek
emperors. On the third day after the conquest, the grave of Abu Ayub, or
Job, who had fallen in the first siege of the Arabs, was revealed in a
vision; and it is before the sepulchre of the martyr that the new
sultans are girded with the sword of empire.  <span
id="fr_954"></span>[81](#fn_954) Constantinople no longer appertains to
the Roman historian; nor shall I enumerate the civil and religious
edifices that were profaned or erected by its Turkish masters: the
population was speedily renewed; and before the end of September, five
thousand families of Anatolia and Romania had obeyed the royal mandate,
which enjoined them, under pain of death, to occupy their new
habitations in the capital. The throne of Mahomet was guarded by the
numbers and fidelity of his Moslem subjects: but his rational policy
aspired to collect the remnant of the Greeks; and they returned in
crowds, as soon as they were assured of their lives, their liberties,
and the free exercise of their religion. In the election and investiture
of a patriarch, the ceremonial of the Byzantine court was revived and
imitated. With a mixture of satisfaction and horror, they beheld the
sultan on his throne; who delivered into the hands of Gennadius the
crosier or pastoral staff, the symbol of his ecclesiastical office; who
conducted the patriarch to the gate of the seraglio, presented him with
a horse richly caparisoned, and directed the viziers and bashaws to lead
him to the palace which had been allotted for his residence.  <span
id="fr_955"></span>[82](#fn_955) The churches of Constantinople were
shared between the two religions: their limits were marked; and, till it
was infringed by Selim, the grandson of Mahomet, the Greeks  <span
id="fr_956"></span>[83](#fn_956) enjoyed above sixty years the benefit
of this equal partition. Encouraged by the ministers of the divan, who
wished to elude the fanaticism of the sultan, the Christian advocates
presumed to allege that this division had been an act, not of
generosity, but of justice; not a concession, but a compact; and that if
one half of the city had been taken by storm, the other moiety had
surrendered on the faith of a sacred capitulation. The original grant
had indeed been consumed by fire: but the loss was supplied by the
testimony of three aged Janizaries who remembered the transaction; and
their venal oaths are of more weight in the opinion of Cantemir, than
the positive and unanimous consent of the history of the times.  <span
id="fr_957"></span>[84](#fn_957)

The remaining fragments of the Greek kingdom in Europe and Asia I shall
abandon to the Turkish arms; but the final extinction of the two last
dynasties  <span id="fr_958"></span>[85](#fn_958) which have reigned in
Constantinople should terminate the decline and fall of the Roman empire
in the East. The despots of the Morea, Demetrius and Thomas,  <span
id="fr_959"></span>[86](#fn_959) the two surviving brothers of the name
of Palaeologus, were astonished by the death of the emperor Constantine,
and the ruin of the monarchy. Hopeless of defence, they prepared, with
the noble Greeks who adhered to their fortune, to seek a refuge in
Italy, beyond the reach of the Ottoman thunder. Their first
apprehensions were dispelled by the victorious sultan, who contented
himself with a tribute of twelve thousand ducats; and while his ambition
explored the continent and the islands, in search of prey, he indulged
the Morea in a respite of seven years. But this respite was a period of
grief, discord, and misery. The hexamilion, the rampart of the Isthmus,
so often raised and so often subverted, could not long be defended by
three hundred Italian archers: the keys of Corinth were seized by the
Turks: they returned from their summer excursions with a train of
captives and spoil; and the complaints of the injured Greeks were heard
with indifference and disdain. The Albanians, a vagrant tribe of
shepherds and robbers, filled the peninsula with rapine and murder: the
two despots implored the dangerous and humiliating aid of a neighboring
bashaw; and when he had quelled the revolt, his lessons inculcated the
rule of their future conduct. Neither the ties of blood, nor the oaths
which they repeatedly pledged in the communion and before the altar, nor
the stronger pressure of necessity, could reconcile or suspend their
domestic quarrels. They ravaged each other's patrimony with fire and
sword: the alms and succors of the West were consumed in civil
hostility; and their power was only exerted in savage and arbitrary
executions. The distress and revenge of the weaker rival invoked their
supreme lord; and, in the season of maturity and revenge, Mahomet
declared himself the friend of Demetrius, and marched into the Morea
with an irresistible force. When he had taken possession of Sparta, "You
are too weak," said the sultan, "to control this turbulent province: I
will take your daughter to my bed; and you shall pass the remainder of
your life in security and honor." Demetrius sighed and obeyed;
surrendered his daughter and his castles; followed to Adrianople his
sovereign and his son; and received for his own maintenance, and that of
his followers, a city in Thrace and the adjacent isles of Imbros,
Lemnos, and Samothrace. He was joined the next year by a companion
 <span id="fr_960"></span>[\*\_0066](#fn_960) of misfortune, the last of
the Comnenian race, who, after the taking of Constantinople by the
Latins, had founded a new empire on the coast of the Black Sea.  <span
id="fr_961"></span>[87](#fn_961) In the progress of his Anatolian
conquest, Mahomet invested with a fleet and army the capital of David,
who presumed to style himself emperor of Trebizond;  <span
id="fr_962"></span>[88](#fn_962) and the negotiation was comprised in a
short and peremptory question, "Will you secure your life and treasures
by resigning your kingdom? or had you rather forfeit your kingdom, your
treasures, and your life?" The feeble Comnenus was subdued by his own
fears,  <span id="fr_963"></span>[!\_0066](#fn_963) and the example of a
Mussulman neighbor, the prince of Sinope,  <span
id="fr_964"></span>[89](#fn_964) who, on a similar summons, had yielded
a fortified city, with four hundred cannon and ten or twelve thousand
soldiers. The capitulation of Trebizond was faithfully performed:  <span
id="fr_965"></span>[\*\*\_0066](#fn_965) and the emperor, with his
family, was transported to a castle in Romania; but on a slight
suspicion of corresponding with the Persian king, David, and the whole
Comnenian race, were sacrificed to the jealousy or avarice of the
conqueror.  <span id="fr_966"></span>[!!\_0066](#fn_966) Nor could the
name of father long protect the unfortunate Demetrius from exile and
confiscation; his abject submission moved the pity and contempt of the
sultan; his followers were transplanted to Constantinople; and his
poverty was alleviated by a pension of fifty thousand aspers, till a
monastic habit and a tardy death released Palaeologus from an earthly
master. It is not easy to pronounce whether the servitude of Demetrius,
or the exile of his brother Thomas,  <span
id="fr_967"></span>[90](#fn_967) be the most inglorious. On the conquest
of the Morea, the despot escaped to Corfu, and from thence to Italy,
with some naked adherents: his name, his sufferings, and the head of the
apostle St. Andrew, entitled him to the hospitality of the Vatican; and
his misery was prolonged by a pension of six thousand ducats from the
pope and cardinals. His two sons, Andrew and Manuel, were educated in
Italy; but the eldest, contemptible to his enemies and burdensome to his
friends, was degraded by the baseness of his life and marriage. A title
was his sole inheritance; and that inheritance he successively sold to
the kings of France and Arragon.  <span id="fr_968"></span>[91](#fn_968)
During his transient prosperity, Charles the Eighth was ambitious of
joining the empire of the East with the kingdom of Naples: in a public
festival, he assumed the appellation and the purple of Augustus: the
Greeks rejoiced and the Ottoman already trembled, at the approach of the
French chivalry.  <span id="fr_969"></span>[92](#fn_969) Manuel
Palaeologus, the second son, was tempted to revisit his native country:
his return might be grateful, and could not be dangerous, to the Porte:
he was maintained at Constantinople in safety and ease; and an honorable
train of Christians and Moslems attended him to the grave. If there be
some animals of so generous a nature that they refuse to propagate in a
domestic state, the last of the Imperial race must be ascribed to an
inferior kind: he accepted from the sultan's liberality two beautiful
females; and his surviving son was lost in the habit and religion of a
Turkish slave.

The importance of Constantinople was felt and magnified in its loss: the
pontificate of Nicholas the Fifth, however peaceful and prosperous, was
dishonored by the fall of the Eastern empire; and the grief and terror
of the Latins revived, or seemed to revive, the old enthusiasm of the
crusades. In one of the most distant countries of the West, Philip duke
of Burgundy entertained, at Lisle in Flanders, an assembly of his
nobles; and the pompous pageants of the feast were skilfully adapted to
their fancy and feelings.  <span id="fr_970"></span>[93](#fn_970) In the
midst of the banquet a gigantic Saracen entered the hall, leading a
fictitious elephant with a castle on his back: a matron in a mourning
robe, the symbol of religion, was seen to issue from the castle: she
deplored her oppression, and accused the slowness of her champions: the
principal herald of the golden fleece advanced, bearing on his fist a
live pheasant, which, according to the rites of chivalry, he presented
to the duke. At this extraordinary summons, Philip, a wise and aged
prince, engaged his person and powers in the holy war against the Turks:
his example was imitated by the barons and knights of the assembly: they
swore to God, the Virgin, the ladies and the pheasant; and their
particular vows were not less extravagant than the general sanction of
their oath. But the performance was made to depend on some future and
foreign contingency; and during twelve years, till the last hour of his
life, the duke of Burgundy might be scrupulously, and perhaps sincerely,
on the eve of his departure. Had every breast glowed with the same
ardor; had the union of the Christians corresponded with their bravery;
had every country, from Sweden  <span id="fr_971"></span>[94](#fn_971)
to Naples, supplied a just proportion of cavalry and infantry, of men
and money, it is indeed probable that Constantinople would have been
delivered, and that the Turks might have been chased beyond the
Hellespont or the Euphrates. But the secretary of the emperor, who
composed every epistle, and attended every meeting, Aeneas Sylvius,
 <span id="fr_972"></span>[95](#fn_972) a statesman and orator,
describes from his own experience the repugnant state and spirit of
Christendom. "It is a body," says he, "without a head; a republic
without laws or magistrates. The pope and the emperor may shine as lofty
titles, as splendid images; but they are unable to command, and none are
willing to obey: every state has a separate prince, and every prince has
a separate interest. What eloquence could unite so many discordant and
hostile powers under the same standard? Could they be assembled in arms,
who would dare to assume the office of general? What order could be
maintained? - what military discipline? Who would undertake to feed such
an enormous multitude? Who would understand their various languages, or
direct their stranger and incompatible manners? What mortal could
reconcile the English with the French, Genoa with Arragon the Germans
with the natives of Hungary and Bohemia? If a small number enlisted in
the holy war, they must be overthrown by the infidels; if many, by their
own weight and confusion." Yet the same Aeneas, when he was raised to
the papal throne, under the name of Pius the Second, devoted his life to
the prosecution of the Turkish war. In the council of Mantua he excited
some sparks of a false or feeble enthusiasm; but when the pontiff
appeared at Ancona, to embark in person with the troops, engagements
vanished in excuses; a precise day was adjourned to an indefinite term;
and his effective army consisted of some German pilgrims, whom he was
obliged to disband with indulgences and arms. Regardless of futurity,
his successors and the powers of Italy were involved in the schemes of
present and domestic ambition; and the distance or proximity of each
object determined in their eyes its apparent magnitude. A more enlarged
view of their interest would have taught them to maintain a defensive
and naval war against the common enemy; and the support of Scanderbeg
and his brave Albanians might have prevented the subsequent invasion of
the kingdom of Naples. The siege and sack of Otranto by the Turks
diffused a general consternation; and Pope Sixtus was preparing to fly
beyond the Alps, when the storm was instantly dispelled by the death of
Mahomet the Second, in the fifty-first year of his age.  <span
id="fr_973"></span>[96](#fn_973) His lofty genius aspired to the
conquest of Italy: he was possessed of a strong city and a capacious
harbor; and the same reign might have been decorated with the trophies
of the New and the Ancient Rome.  <span id="fr_974"></span>[97](#fn_974)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_912"></span>[1](daf06032.htm#fr_912) The abbe Dubos, who,
with less genius than his successor Montesquieu, has asserted and
magnified the influence of climate, objects to himself the degeneracy of
the Romans and Batavians. To the first of these examples he replies, 1.
That the change is less real than apparent, and that the modern Romans
prudently conceal in themselves the virtues of their ancestors. 2. That
the air, the soil, and the climate of Rome have suffered a great and
visible alteration, (Reflexions sur la Poesie et sur la Peinture, part
ii. sect. 16.)

Note: This question is discussed at considerable length in Dr. Arnold's
History of Rome, ch. xxiii. See likewise Bunsen's Dissertation on the
Aria Cattiva Roms Beschreibung, pp. 82, 108. - M.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[2](daf06032.htm#fr_913) The reader has been so
long absent from Rome, that I would advise him to recollect or review
the xlixth chapter of this History.

<span id="fn_914"></span>[3](daf06032.htm#fr_914) The coronation of the
German emperors at Rome, more especially in the xith century, is best
represented from the original monuments by Muratori (Antiquitat. Italiae
Medii Aevi, tom. i. dissertat. ii. p. 99, &c.) and Cenni, (Monument.
Domin. Pontif. tom. ii. diss. vi. p. 261,) the latter of whom I only
know from the copious extract of Schmidt, (Hist. des Allemands tom. iii.
p. 255 - 266.)

<span id="fn_915"></span>[4](daf06032.htm#fr_915) Exercitui Romano et
Teutonico! The latter was both seen and felt; but the former was no more
than magni nominis umbra.

<span id="fn_916"></span>[5](daf06032.htm#fr_916) Muratori has given the
series of the papal coins, (Antiquitat. tom. ii. diss. xxvii. p. 548 -
554.) He finds only two more early than the year 800: fifty are still
extant from Leo III. to Leo IX., with the addition of the reigning
emperor none remain of Gregory VII. or Urban II.; but in those of
Paschal II. he seems to have renounced this badge of dependence.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[6](daf06032.htm#fr_917) See Ducange, Gloss.
mediae et infimae Latinitat. tom. vi. p. 364, 365, Staffa. This homage
was paid by kings to archbishops, and by vassals to their lords,
(Schmidt, tom. iii. p. 262;) and it was the nicest policy of Rome to
confound the marks of filial and of feudal subjection

<span id="fn_918"></span>[7](daf06032.htm#fr_918) The appeals from all
the churches to the Roman pontiff are deplored by the zeal of St.
Bernard (de Consideratione, l. iii. tom. ii. p. 431 - 442, edit.
Mabillon, Venet. 1750) and the judgment of Fleury, (Discours sur l'Hist.
Ecclesiastique, iv. et vii.) But the saint, who believed in the false
decretals condemns only the abuse of these appeals; the more enlightened
historian investigates the origin, and rejects the principles, of this
new jurisprudence.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[8](daf06032.htm#fr_919) Germanici . . . .
summarii non levatis sarcinis onusti nihilominus repatriant inviti. Nova
res! quando hactenus aurum Roma refudit? Et nunc Romanorum consilio id
usurpatum non credimus, (Bernard, de Consideratione, l. iii. c. 3, p.
437.) The first words of the passage are obscure, and probably corrupt.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[9](daf06032.htm#fr_920) Quand les sauvages de
la Louisiane veulent avoir du fruit, ils coupent l'arbre au pied et
cueillent le fruit. Voila le gouvernement despotique, (Esprit des Loix,
l. v. c. 13;) and passion and ignorance are always despotic.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[10](daf06032.htm#fr_921) In a free
conversation with his countryman Adrian IV., John of Salisbury accuses
the avarice of the pope and clergy: Provinciarum diripiunt spolia, ac si
thesauros Croesi studeant reparare. Sed recte cum eis agit Altissimus,
quoniam et ipsi aliis et saepe vilissimis hominibus dati sunt in
direptionem, (de Nugis Curialium, l. vi. c. 24, p. 387.) In the next
page, he blames the rashness and infidelity of the Romans, whom their
bishops vainly strove to conciliate by gifts, instead of virtues. It is
pity that this miscellaneous writer has not given us less morality and
erudition, and more pictures of himself and the times.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[11](daf06032.htm#fr_922) Hume's History of
England, vol. i. p. 419. The same writer has given us, from
Fitz-Stephen, a singular act of cruelty perpetrated on the clergy by
Geoffrey, the father of Henry II. "When he was master of Normandy, the
chapter of Seez presumed, without his consent, to proceed to the
election of a bishop: upon which he ordered all of them, with the bishop
elect, to be castrated, and made all their testicles be brought him in a
platter." Of the pain and danger they might justly complain; yet since
they had vowed chastity he deprived them of a superfluous treasure.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[12](daf06032.htm#fr_923) From Leo IX. and
Gregory VII. an authentic and contemporary series of the lives of the
popes by the cardinal of Arragon, Pandulphus Pisanus, Bernard Guido,
&c., is inserted in the Italian Historians of Muratori, (tom. iii. P. i.
p. 277 - 685,) and has been always before my eyes.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[13](daf06032.htm#fr_924) The dates of years
int he in the contents may throughout his this chapter be understood as
tacit references to the Annals of Muratori, my ordinary and excellent
guide. He uses, and indeed quotes, with the freedom of a master, his
great collection of the Italian Historians, in xxviii. volumes; and as
that treasure is in my library, I have thought it an amusement, if not a
duty, to consult the originals.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[14](daf06032.htm#fr_925) I cannot refrain from
transcribing the high-colored words of Pandulphus Pisanus, (p. 384.) Hoc
audiens inimicus pacis atque turbator jam fatus Centius Frajapane, more
draconis immanissimi sibilans, et ab imis pectoribus trahens longa
suspiria, accinctus retro gladio sine more cucurrit, valvas ac fores
confregit. Ecclesiam furibundus introiit, inde custode remoto papam per
gulam accepit, distraxit pugnis calcibusque percussit, et tanquam brutum
animal intra limen ecclesiae acriter calcaribus cruentavit; et latro
tantum dominum per capillos et brachia, Jesu bono interim dormiente,
detraxit, ad domum usque deduxit, inibi catenavit et inclusit.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[15](daf06032.htm#fr_926) Ego coram Deo et
Ecclesia dico, si unquam possibile esset, mallem unum imperatorem quam
tot dominos, (Vit. Gelas. II. p. 398.)

<span id="fn_927"></span>[16](daf06032.htm#fr_927) Quid tam notum
seculis quam protervia et cervicositas Romanorum? Gens insueta paci,
tumultui assueta, gens immitis et intractabilis usque adhuc, subdi
nescia, nisi cum non valet resistere, (de Considerat. l. iv. c. 2, p.
441.) The saint takes breath, and then begins again: Hi, invisi terrae
et coelo, utrique injecere manus, &c., (p. 443.)

<span id="fn_928"></span>[17](daf06032.htm#fr_928) As a Roman citizen,
Petrarch takes leave to observe, that Bernard, though a saint, was a
man; that he might be provoked by resentment, and possibly repent of his
hasty passion, &c. (Memoires sur la Vie de Petrarque, tom. i. p. 330.)

<span id="fn_929"></span>[18](daf06032.htm#fr_929) Baronius, in his
index to the xiith volume of his Annals, has found a fair and easy
excuse. He makes two heads, of Romani Catholici and Schismatici: to the
former he applies all the good, to the latter all the evil, that is told
of the city.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[19](daf06032.htm#fr_930) The heresies of the
xiith century may be found in Mosheim, (Institut. Hist. Eccles. p. 419 -
427,) who entertains a favorable opinion of Arnold of Brescia. In the
vth volume I have described the sect of the Paulicians, and followed
their migration from Armenia to Thrace and Bulgaria, Italy and France.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[20](daf06032.htm#fr_931) The original pictures
of Arnold of Brescia are drawn by Otho, bishop of Frisingen, (Chron. l.
vii. c. 31, de Gestis Frederici I. l. i. c. 27, l. ii. c. 21,) and in
the iiid book of the Ligurinus, a poem of Gunthur, who flourished A.D.
1200, in the monastery of Paris near Basil, (Fabric. Bibliot. Latin.
Med. et Infimae Aetatis, tom. iii. p. 174, 175.) The long passage that
relates to Arnold is produced by Guilliman, (de Rebus Helveticis, l.
iii. c. 5, p. 108.)

Note: Compare Franke, Arnold von Brescia und seine Zeit. Zarich, 1828 -
M.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[21](daf06032.htm#fr_932) The wicked wit of
Bayle was amused in composing, with much levity and learning, the
articles of Abelard, Foulkes, Heloise, in his Dictionnaire Critique. The
dispute of Abelard and St. Bernard, of scholastic and positive divinity,
is well understood by Mosheim, (Institut. Hist. Eccles. p. 412 - 415.)

<span id="fn_933"></span>[22](daf06032.htm#fr_933) - Damnatus ab illo
Praesule, qui numeros vetitum contingere nostros Nomen ad innocua ducit
laudabile vita. We may applaud the dexterity and correctness of
Ligurinus, who turns the unpoetical name of Innocent II. into a
compliment.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[23](daf06032.htm#fr_934) A Roman inscription
of Statio Turicensis has been found at Zurich, (D'Anville, Notice de
l'ancienne Gaul, p. 642 - 644;) but it is without sufficient warrant,
that the city and canton have usurped, and even monopolized, the names
of Tigurum and Pagus Tigurinus.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[24](daf06032.htm#fr_935) Guilliman (de Rebus
Helveticis, l. iii. c. 5, p. 106) recapitulates the donation (A.D. 833)
of the emperor Lewis the Pious to his daughter the abbess Hildegardis.
Curtim nostram Turegum in ducatu Alamanniae in pago Durgaugensi, with
villages, woods, meadows, waters, slaves, churches, &c.; a noble gift.
Charles the Bald gave the jus monetae, the city was walled under Otho
I., and the line of the bishop of Frisingen,

Nobile Turegum multarum copia rerum,

is repeated with pleasure by the antiquaries of Zurich.

<span id="fn_936"></span>[25](daf06032.htm#fr_936) Bernard, Epistol.
cxcv. tom. i. p. 187 - 190. Amidst his invectives he drops a precious
acknowledgment, qui, utinam quam sanae esset doctrinae quam districtae
est vitae. He owns that Arnold would be a valuable acquisition for the
church.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[66](daf06032.htm#fr_937) See Phranza, l. iii.
c. 20, 21. His expressions are positive: Ameras sua manu jugulavit . . .
. volebat enim eo turpiter et nefarie abuti. Me miserum et infelicem!
Yet he could only learn from report the bloody or impure scenes that
were acted in the dark recesses of the seraglio.

<span id="fn_938"></span>[67](daf06032.htm#fr_938) See Tiraboschi (tom.
vi. P. i. p. 290) and Lancelot, (Mem. de l'Academie des Inscriptions,
tom. x. p. 718.) I should be curious to learn how he could praise the
public enemy, whom he so often reviles as the most corrupt and inhuman
of tyrants.

<span id="fn_939"></span>[68](daf06032.htm#fr_939) The commentaries of
Pius II. suppose that he craftily placed his cardinal's hat on the head
of a corpse which was cut off and exposed in triumph, while the legate
himself was bought and delivered as a captive of no value. The great
Belgic Chronicle adorns his escape with new adventures, which he
suppressed (says Spondanus, A.D. 1453, No. 15) in his own letters, lest
he should lose the merit and reward of suffering for Christ. Note: He
was sold as a slave in Galata, according to Von Hammer, p. 175. See the
somewhat vague and declamatory letter of Cardinal Isidore, in the
appendix to Clarke's Travels, vol. ii. p. 653. - M.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[69](daf06032.htm#fr_940) Busbequius expatiates
with pleasure and applause on the rights of war, and the use of slavery,
among the ancients and the Turks, (de Legat. Turcica, epist. iii. p.
161.)

<span id="fn_941"></span>[70](daf06032.htm#fr_941) This sum is specified
in a marginal note of Leunclavius, (Chalcondyles, l. viii. p. 211,) but
in the distribution to Venice, Genoa, Florence, and Ancona, of 50, 20,
and 15,000 ducats, I suspect that a figure has been dropped. Even with
the restitution, the foreign property would scarcely exceed one fourth.

<span id="fn_942"></span>[71](daf06032.htm#fr_942) See the enthusiastic
praises and lamentations of Phranza, (l. iii. c. 17.)

<span id="fn_943"></span>[72](daf06032.htm#fr_943) See Ducas, (c. 43,)
and an epistle, July 15th, 1453, from Laurus Quirinus to Pope Nicholas
V., (Hody de Graecis, p. 192, from a MS. in the Cotton library.)

<span id="fn_944"></span>[73](daf06032.htm#fr_944) The Julian Calendar,
which reckons the days and hours from midnight, was used at
Constantinople. But Ducas seems to understand the natural hours from
sunrise.

<span id="fn_945"></span>[74](daf06032.htm#fr_945) See the Turkish
Annals, p. 329, and the Pandects of Leunclarius, p. 448.

<span id="fn_946"></span>[75](daf06032.htm#fr_946) I have had occasion
(vol. ii. p. 100) to mention this curious relic of Grecian antiquity.

<span id="fn_947"></span>[\*\_0064](daf06032.htm#fr_947) Von Hammer
passes over this circumstance, which is treated by Dr. Clarke (Travels,
vol. ii. p. 58, 4to. edit,) as a fiction of Thevenot. Chishull states
that the monument was broken by some attendants of the Polish
ambassador. - M.

<span id="fn_948"></span>[76](daf06032.htm#fr_948) We are obliged to
Cantemir (p. 102) for the Turkish account of the conversion of St.
Sophia, so bitterly deplored by Phranza and Ducas. It is amusing enough
to observe, in what opposite lights the same object appears to a
Mussulman and a Christian eye.

<span id="fn_949"></span>[77](daf06032.htm#fr_949) This distich, which
Cantemir gives in the original, derives new beauties from the
application. It was thus that Scipio repeated, in the sack of Carthage,
the famous prophecy of Homer. The same generous feeling carried the mind
of the conqueror to the past or the future.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[78](daf06032.htm#fr_950) I cannot believe with
Ducas (see Spondanus, A.D. 1453, No. 13) that Mahomet sent round Persia,
Arabia, &c., the head of the Greek emperor: he would surely content
himself with a trophy less inhuman.

<span id="fn_951"></span>[79](daf06032.htm#fr_951) Phranza was the
personal enemy of the great duke; nor could time, or death, or his own
retreat to a monastery, extort a feeling of sympathy or forgiveness.
Ducas is inclined to praise and pity the martyr; Chalcondyles is neuter,
but we are indebted to him for the hint of the Greek conspiracy.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[\*\_0065](daf06032.htm#fr_952) Von Hammer
relates this undoubtingly, apparently on good authority, p. 559. - M.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[80](daf06032.htm#fr_953) For the restitution
of Constantinople and the Turkish foundations, see Cantemir, (p. 102 -
109,) Ducas, (c. 42,) with Thevenot, Tournefort, and the rest of our
modern travellers. From a gigantic picture of the greatness, population,
&c., of Constantinople and the Ottoman empire, (Abrege de l'Histoire
Ottomane, tom. i. p. 16 - 21,) we may learn, that in the year 1586 the
Moslems were less numerous in the capital than the Christians, or even
the Jews.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[81](daf06032.htm#fr_954) The Turbe, or
sepulchral monument of Abu Ayub, is described and engraved in the
Tableau Generale de l'Empire Ottoman, (Paris 1787, in large folio,) a
work of less use, perhaps, than magnificence, (tom. i. p. 305, 306.)

<span id="fn_955"></span>[82](daf06032.htm#fr_955) Phranza (l. iii. c.
19) relates the ceremony, which has possibly been adorned in the Greek
reports to each other, and to the Latins. The fact is confirmed by
Emanuel Malaxus, who wrote, in vulgar Greek, the History of the
Patriarchs after the taking of Constantinople, inserted in the
Turco-Graecia of Crusius, (l. v. p. 106 - 184.) But the most patient
reader will not believe that Mahomet adopted the Catholic form, "Sancta
Trinitas quae mihi donavit imperium te in patriarcham novae Romae
deligit."

<span id="fn_956"></span>[83](daf06032.htm#fr_956) From the
Turco-Graecia of Crusius, &c. Spondanus (A.D. 1453, No. 21, 1458, No.
16) describes the slavery and domestic quarrels of the Greek church. The
patriarch who succeeded Gennadius threw himself in despair into a well.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[84](daf06032.htm#fr_957) Cantemir (p. 101 -
105) insists on the unanimous consent of the Turkish historians, ancient
as well as modern, and argues, that they would not have violated the
truth to diminish their national glory, since it is esteemed more
honorable to take a city by force than by composition. But, 1. I doubt
this consent, since he quotes no particular historian, and the Turkish
Annals of Leunclavius affirm, without exception, that Mahomet took
Constantinople per vim, (p. 329.) 2 The same argument may be turned in
favor of the Greeks of the times, who would not have forgotten this
honorable and salutary treaty. Voltaire, as usual, prefers the Turks to
the Christians.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[85](daf06032.htm#fr_958) For the genealogy and
fall of the Comneni of Trebizond, see Ducange, (Fam. Byzant. p. 195;)
for the last Palaeologi, the same accurate antiquarian, (p. 244, 247,
248.) The Palaeologi of Montferrat were not extinct till the next
century; but they had forgotten their Greek origin and kindred.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[86](daf06032.htm#fr_959) In the worthless
story of the disputes and misfortunes of the two brothers, Phranza (l.
iii. c. 21 - 30) is too partial on the side of Thomas Ducas (c. 44, 45)
is too brief, and Chalcondyles (l. viii. ix. x.) too diffuse and
digressive.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[\*\_0066](daf06032.htm#fr_960) Kalo-Johannes,
the predecessor of David his brother, the last emperor of Trebizond, had
attempted to organize a confederacy against Mahomet it comprehended
Hassan Bei, sultan of Mesopotamia, the Christian princes of Georgia and
Iberia, the emir of Sinope, and the sultan of Caramania. The
negotiations were interrupted by his sudden death, A.D. 1458.
Fallmerayer, p. 257 - 260. - M.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[87](daf06032.htm#fr_961) See the loss or
conquest of Trebizond in Chalcondyles, (l. ix. p. 263 - 266,) Ducas, (c.
45,) Phranza, (l. iii. c. 27,) and Cantemir, (p. 107.)

<span id="fn_962"></span>[88](daf06032.htm#fr_962) Though Tournefort
(tom. iii. lettre xvii. p. 179) speaks of Trebizond as mal peuplee,
Peysonnel, the latest and most accurate observer, can find 100,000
inhabitants, (Commerce de la Mer Noire, tom. ii. p. 72, and for the
province, p. 53 - 90.) Its prosperity and trade are perpetually
disturbed by the factious quarrels of two odas of Janizaries, in one
which 30,000 Lazi are commonly enrolled, (Memoires de Tott, tom. iii. p.
16, 17.)

<span id="fn_963"></span>[!\_0066](daf06032.htm#fr_963) According to the
Georgian account of these transactions, (translated by M. Brosset,
additions to Le Beau, vol. xxi. p. 325,) the emperor of Trebizond humbly
entreated the sultan to have the goodness to marry one of his daughters.
- M.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[89](daf06032.htm#fr_964) Ismael Beg, prince of
Sinope or Sinople, was possessed (chiefly from his copper mines) of a
revenure of 200,000 ducats, (Chalcond. l. ix. p. 258, 259.) Peysonnel
(Commerce de la Mer Noire, tom. ii. p. 100) ascribes to the modern city
60,000 inhabitants. This account seems enormous; yet it is by trading
with people that we become acquainted with their wealth and numbers.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[\*\*\_0066](daf06032.htm#fr_965) M. Boissonade
has published, in the fifth volume of his Anecdota Graeca (p. 387, 401.)
a very interesting letter from George Amiroutzes, protovestia rius of
Trebizond, to Bessarion, describing the surrender of Trebizond, and the
fate of its chief inhabitants. - M.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[!!\_0066](daf06032.htm#fr_966) See in Von
Hammer, vol. ii. p. 60, the striking account of the mother, the empress
Helena the Cantacuzene, who, in defiance of the edict, like that of
Creon in the Greek tragedy, dug the grave for her murdered children with
her own hand, and sank into it herself. - M.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[90](daf06032.htm#fr_967) Spondanus (from
Gobelin Comment. Pii II. l. v.) relates the arrival and reception of of
the despot Thomas at Rome,. (A.D. 1461 No. NO. 3.)

<span id="fn_968"></span>[91](daf06032.htm#fr_968) By an act dated A.D.
1494, Sept. 6, and lately transmitted from the archives of the Capitol
to the royal library of Paris, the despot Andrew Palaeologus, reserving
the Morea, and stipulating some private advantages, conveys to Charles
VIII., king of France, the empires of Constantinople and Trebizond,
(Spondanus, A.D. 1495, No. 2.) M. D. Foncemagne (Mem. de l'Academie des
Inscriptions, tom. xvii. p. 539 - 578) has bestowed a dissertation on
his national title, of which he had obtained a copy from Rome.

<span id="fn_969"></span>[92](daf06032.htm#fr_969) See Philippe de
Comines, (l. vii. c. 14,) who reckons with pleasure the number of Greeks
who were prepared to rise, 60 miles of an easy navigation, eighteen
days' journey from Valona to Constantinople, &c. On this occasion the
Turkish empire was saved by the policy of Venice.

<span id="fn_970"></span>[93](daf06032.htm#fr_970) See the original
feast in Olivier de la Marche, (Memoires, P. i. c. 29, 30,) with the
abstract and observations of M. de Ste. Palaye, (Memoires sur la
Chevalerie, tom. i. P. iii. p. 182 - 185.) The peacock and the pheasant
were distinguished as royal birds.

<span id="fn_971"></span>[94](daf06032.htm#fr_971) It was found by an
actual enumeration, that Sweden, Gothland, and Finland, contained
1,800,000 fighting men, and consequently were far more populous than at
present.

<span id="fn_972"></span>[95](daf06032.htm#fr_972) In the year 1454,
Spondanus has given, from Aeneas Sylvius, a view of the state of Europe,
enriched with his own observations. That valuable annalist, and the
Italian Muratori, will continue the series of events from the year 1453
to 1481, the end of Mahomet's life, and of this chapter.

<span id="fn_973"></span>[96](daf06032.htm#fr_973) Besides the two
annalists, the reader may consult Giannone (Istoria Civile, tom. iii. p.
449 - 455) for the Turkish invasion of the kingdom of Naples. For the
reign and conquests of Mahomet II., I have occasionally used the Memorie
Istoriche de Monarchi Ottomanni di Giovanni Sagredo, (Venezia, 1677, in
4to.) In peace and war, the Turks have ever engaged the attention of the
republic of Venice. All her despatches and archives were open to a
procurator of St. Mark, and Sagredo is not contemptible either in sense
or style. Yet he too bitterly hates the infidels: he is ignorant of
their language and manners; and his narrative, which allows only 70
pages to Mahomet II., (p. 69 - 140,) becomes more copious and authentic
as he approaches the years 1640 and 1644, the term of the historic
labors of John Sagredo.

<span id="fn_974"></span>[97](daf06032.htm#fr_974) As I am now taking an
everlasting farewell of the Greek empire, I shall briefly mention the
great collection of Byzantine writers whose names and testimonies have
been successively repeated in this work. The Greeks presses of Aldus and
the Italians were confined to the classics of a better age; and the
first rude editions of Procopius, Agathias, Cedrenus, Zonaras, &c., were
published by the learned diligence of the Germans. The whole Byzantine
series (xxxvi. volumes in folio) has gradually issued (A.D. 1648, &c.)
from the royal press of the Louvre, with some collateral aid from Rome
and Leipsic; but the Venetian edition, (A.D. 1729,) though cheaper and
more copious, is not less inferior in correctness than in magnificence
to that of Paris. The merits of the French editors are various; but the
value of Anna Comnena, Cinnamus, Villehardouin, &c., is enhanced by the
historical notes of Charles de Fresne du Cange. His supplemental works,
the Greek Glossary, the Constantinopolis Christiana, the Familiae
Byzantinae, diffuse a steady light over the darkness of the Lower
Empire.

Note: The new edition of the Byzantines, projected by Niebuhr, and
continued under the patronage of the Prussian government, is the most
convenient in size, and contains some authors (Leo Diaconus, Johannes
Lydus, Corippus, the new fragment of Dexippus, Eunapius, &c., discovered
by Mai) which could not be comprised in the former collections; but the
names of such editors as Bekker, the Dindorfs, &c., raised hopes of
something more than the mere republication of the text, and the notes of
former editors. Little, I regret to say, has been added of annotation,
and in some cases, the old incorrect versions have been retained. - M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIX: State Of Rome From The Twelfth Century. Part
II.](daf06033)
