[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf06025) 
[Next](daf06027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIFCE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 6*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1788\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXVI: Union Of The Greek And Latin Churches. Part IV.

The most learned Italians of the fifteenth century have confessed and
applauded the restoration of Greek literature, after a long oblivion of
many hundred years.  <span id="fr_740"></span>[85](#fn_740) Yet in that
country, and beyond the Alps, some names are quoted; some profound
scholars, who in the darker ages were honorably distinguished by their
knowledge of the Greek tongue; and national vanity has been loud in the
praise of such rare examples of erudition. Without scrutinizing the
merit of individuals, truth must observe, that their science is without
a cause, and without an effect; that it was easy for them to satisfy
themselves and their more ignorant contemporaries; and that the idiom,
which they had so marvellously acquired was transcribed in few
manuscripts, and was not taught in any university of the West. In a
corner of Italy, it faintly existed as the popular, or at least as the
ecclesiastical dialect.  <span id="fr_741"></span>[86](#fn_741) The
first impression of the Doric and Ionic colonies has never been
completely erased: the Calabrian churches were long attached to the
throne of Constantinople: and the monks of St. Basil pursued their
studies in Mount Athos and the schools of the East. Calabria was the
native country of Barlaam, who has already appeared as a sectary and an
ambassador; and Barlaam was the first who revived, beyond the Alps, the
memory, or at least the writings, of Homer.  <span
id="fr_742"></span>[87](#fn_742) He is described, by Petrarch and
Boccace,  <span id="fr_743"></span>[88](#fn_743) as a man of diminutive
stature, though truly great in the measure of learning and genius; of a
piercing discernment, though of a slow and painful elocution. For many
ages (as they affirm) Greece had not produced his equal in the knowledge
of history, grammar, and philosophy; and his merit was celebrated in the
attestations of the princes and doctors of Constantinople. One of these
attestations is still extant; and the emperor Cantacuzene, the protector
of his adversaries, is forced to allow, that Euclid, Aristotle, and
Plato, were familiar to that profound and subtle logician.  <span
id="fr_744"></span>[89](#fn_744) In the court of Avignon, he formed an
intimate connection with Petrarch,  <span
id="fr_745"></span>[90](#fn_745) the first of the Latin scholars; and
the desire of mutual instruction was the principle of their literary
commerce. The Tuscan applied himself with eager curiosity and assiduous
diligence to the study of the Greek language; and in a laborious
struggle with the dryness and difficulty of the first rudiments, he
began to reach the sense, and to feel the spirit, of poets and
philosophers, whose minds were congenial to his own. But he was soon
deprived of the society and lessons of this useful assistant: Barlaam
relinquished his fruitless embassy; and, on his return to Greece, he
rashly provoked the swarms of fanatic monks, by attempting to substitute
the light of reason to that of their navel. After a separation of three
years, the two friends again met in the court of Naples: but the
generous pupil renounced the fairest occasion of improvement; and by his
recommendation Barlaam was finally settled in a small bishopric of his
native Calabria.  <span id="fr_746"></span>[91](#fn_746) The manifold
avocations of Petrarch, love and friendship, his various correspondence
and frequent journeys, the Roman laurel, and his elaborate compositions
in prose and verse, in Latin and Italian, diverted him from a foreign
idiom; and as he advanced in life, the attainment of the Greek language
was the object of his wishes rather than of his hopes. When he was about
fifty years of age, a Byzantine ambassador, his friend, and a master of
both tongues, presented him with a copy of Homer; and the answer of
Petrarch is at one expressive of his eloquence, gratitude, and regret.
After celebrating the generosity of the donor, and the value of a gift
more precious in his estimation than gold or rubies, he thus proceeds:
"Your present of the genuine and original text of the divine poet, the
fountain of all inventions, is worthy of yourself and of me: you have
fulfilled your promise, and satisfied my desires. Yet your liberality is
still imperfect: with Homer you should have given me yourself; a guide,
who could lead me into the fields of light, and disclose to my wondering
eyes the spacious miracles of the Iliad and Odyssey. But, alas! Homer is
dumb, or I am deaf; nor is it in my power to enjoy the beauty which I
possess. I have seated him by the side of Plato, the prince of poets
near the prince of philosophers; and I glory in the sight of my
illustrious guests. Of their immortal writings, whatever had been
translated into the Latin idiom, I had already acquired; but, if there
be no profit, there is some pleasure, in beholding these venerable
Greeks in their proper and national habit. I am delighted with the
aspect of Homer; and as often as I embrace the silent volume, I exclaim
with a sigh, Illustrious bard! with what pleasure should I listen to thy
song, if my sense of hearing were not obstructed and lost by the death
of one friend, and in the much-lamented absence of another. Nor do I yet
despair; and the example of Cato suggests some comfort and hope, since
it was in the last period of age that he attained the knowledge of the
Greek letters."  <span id="fr_747"></span>[92](#fn_747)

The prize which eluded the efforts of Petrarch, was obtained by the
fortune and industry of his friend Boccace, <span
id="fr_748"></span>[93](#fn_748) the father of the Tuscan prose. That
popular writer, who derives his reputation from the Decameron, a hundred
novels of pleasantry and love, may aspire to the more serious praise of
restoring in Italy the study of the Greek language. In the year one
thousand three hundred and sixty, a disciple of Barlaam, whose name was
Leo, or Leontius Pilatus, was detained in his way to Avignon by the
advice and hospitality of Boccace, who lodged the stranger in his house,
prevailed on the republic of Florence to allow him an annual stipend,
and devoted his leisure to the first Greek professor, who taught that
language in the Western countries of Europe. The appearance of Leo might
disgust the most eager disciple, he was clothed in the mantle of a
philosopher, or a mendicant; his countenance was hideous; his face was
overshadowed with black hair; his beard long an uncombed; his deportment
rustic; his temper gloomy and inconstant; nor could he grace his
discourse with the ornaments, or even the perspicuity, of Latin
elocution. But his mind was stored with a treasure of Greek learning:
history and fable, philosophy and grammar, were alike at his command;
and he read the poems of Homer in the schools of Florence. It was from
his explanation that Boccace composed  <span
id="fr_749"></span>[\*\_0048](#fn_749) and transcribed a literal prose
version of the Iliad and Odyssey, which satisfied the thirst of his
friend Petrarch, and which, perhaps, in the succeeding century, was
clandestinely used by Laurentius Valla, the Latin interpreter. It was
from his narratives that the same Boccace collected the materials for
his treatise on the genealogy of the heathen gods, a work, in that age,
of stupendous erudition, and which he ostentatiously sprinkled with
Greek characters and passages, to excite the wonder and applause of his
more ignorant readers.  <span id="fr_750"></span>[94](#fn_750) The first
steps of learning are slow and laborious; no more than ten votaries of
Homer could be enumerated in all Italy; and neither Rome, nor Venice,
nor Naples, could add a single name to this studious catalogue. But
their numbers would have multiplied, their progress would have been
accelerated, if the inconstant Leo, at the end of three years, had not
relinquished an honorable and beneficial station. In his passage,
Petrarch entertained him at Padua a short time: he enjoyed the scholar,
but was justly offended with the gloomy and unsocial temper of the man.
Discontented with the world and with himself, Leo depreciated his
present enjoyments, while absent persons and objects were dear to his
imagination. In Italy he was a Thessalian, in Greece a native of
Calabria: in the company of the Latins he disdained their language,
religion, and manners: no sooner was he landed at Constantinople, than
he again sighed for the wealth of Venice and the elegance of Florence.
His Italian friends were deaf to his importunity: he depended on their
curiosity and indulgence, and embarked on a second voyage; but on his
entrance into the Adriatic, the ship was assailed by a tempest, and the
unfortunate teacher, who like Ulysses had fastened himself to the mast,
was struck dead by a flash of lightning. The humane Petrarch dropped a
tear on his disaster; but he was most anxious to learn whether some copy
of Euripides or Sophocles might not be saved from the hands of the
mariners.  <span id="fr_751"></span>[95](#fn_751)

But the faint rudiments of Greek learning, which Petrarch had encouraged
and Boccace had planted, soon withered and expired. The succeeding
generation was content for a while with the improvement of Latin
eloquence; nor was it before the end of the fourteenth century that a
new and perpetual flame was rekindled in Italy.  <span
id="fr_752"></span>[96](#fn_752) Previous to his own journey the emperor
Manuel despatched his envoys and orators to implore the compassion of
the Western princes. Of these envoys, the most conspicuous, or the most
learned, was Manuel Chrysoloras,  <span id="fr_753"></span>[97](#fn_753)
of noble birth, and whose Roman ancestors are supposed to have migrated
with the great Constantine. After visiting the courts of France and
England, where he obtained some contributions and more promises, the
envoy was invited to assume the office of a professor; and Florence had
again the honor of this second invitation. By his knowledge, not only of
the Greek, but of the Latin tongue, Chrysoloras deserved the stipend,
and surpassed the expectation, of the republic. His school was
frequented by a crowd of disciples of every rank and age; and one of
these, in a general history, has described his motives and his success.
"At that time," says Leonard Aretin,  <span
id="fr_754"></span>[98](#fn_754) "I was a student of the civil law; but
my soul was inflamed with the love of letters; and I bestowed some
application on the sciences of logic and rhetoric. On the arrival of
Manuel, I hesitated whether I should desert my legal studies, or
relinquish this golden opportunity; and thus, in the ardor of youth, I
communed with my own mind - Wilt thou be wanting to thyself and thy
fortune? Wilt thou refuse to be introduced to a familiar converse with
Homer, Plato, and Demosthenes; with those poets, philosophers, and
orators, of whom such wonders are related, and who are celebrated by
every age as the great masters of human science? Of professors and
scholars in civil law, a sufficient supply will always be found in our
universities; but a teacher, and such a teacher, of the Greek language,
if he once be suffered to escape, may never afterwards be retrieved.
Convinced by these reasons, I gave myself to Chrysoloras; and so strong
was my passion, that the lessons which I had imbibed in the day were the
constant object of my nightly dreams."  <span
id="fr_755"></span>[99](#fn_755) At the same time and place, the Latin
classics were explained by John of Ravenna, the domestic pupil of
Petrarch;  <span id="fr_756"></span>[100](#fn_756) the Italians, who
illustrated their age and country, were formed in this double school;
and Florence became the fruitful seminary of Greek and Roman erudition.
 <span id="fr_757"></span>[101](#fn_757) The presence of the emperor
recalled Chrysoloras from the college to the court; but he afterwards
taught at Pavia and Rome with equal industry and applause. The remainder
of his life, about fifteen years, was divided between Italy and
Constantinople, between embassies and lessons. In the noble office of
enlightening a foreign nation, the grammarian was not unmindful of a
more sacred duty to his prince and country; and Emanuel Chrysoloras died
at Constance on a public mission from the emperor to the council.

After his example, the restoration of the Greek letters in Italy was
prosecuted by a series of emigrants, who were destitute of fortune, and
endowed with learning, or at least with language. From the terror or
oppression of the Turkish arms, the natives of Thessalonica and
Constantinople escaped to a land of freedom, curiosity, and wealth. The
synod introduced into Florence the lights of the Greek church, and the
oracles of the Platonic philosophy; and the fugitives who adhered to the
union, had the double merit of renouncing their country, not only for
the Christian, but for the catholic cause. A patriot, who sacrifices his
party and conscience to the allurements of favor, may be possessed,
however, of the private and social virtues: he no longer hears the
reproachful epithets of slave and apostate; and the consideration which
he acquires among his new associates will restore in his own eyes the
dignity of his character. The prudent conformity of Bessarion was
rewarded with the Roman purple: he fixed his residence in Italy; and the
Greek cardinal, the titular patriarch of Constantinople, was respected
as the chief and protector of his nation:  <span
id="fr_758"></span>[102](#fn_758) his abilities were exercised in the
legations of Bologna, Venice, Germany, and France; and his election to
the chair of St. Peter floated for a moment on the uncertain breath of a
conclave.  <span id="fr_759"></span>[103](#fn_759) His ecclesiastical
honors diffused a splendor and preeminence over his literary merit and
service: his palace was a school; as often as the cardinal visited the
Vatican, he was attended by a learned train of both nations;  <span
id="fr_760"></span>[104](#fn_760) of men applauded by themselves and the
public; and whose writings, now overspread with dust, were popular and
useful in their own times. I shall not attempt to enumerate the
restorers of Grecian literature in the fifteenth century; and it may be
sufficient to mention with gratitude the names of Theodore Gaza, of
George of Trebizond, of John Argyropulus, and Demetrius Chalcocondyles,
who taught their native language in the schools of Florence and Rome.
Their labors were not inferior to those of Bessarion, whose purple they
revered, and whose fortune was the secret object of their envy. But the
lives of these grammarians were humble and obscure: they had declined
the lucrative paths of the church; their dress and manners secluded them
from the commerce of the world; and since they were confined to the
merit, they might be content with the rewards, of learning. From this
character, Janus Lascaris  <span id="fr_761"></span>[105](#fn_761) will
deserve an exception. His eloquence, politeness, and Imperial descent,
recommended him to the French monarch; and in the same cities he was
alternately employed to teach and to negotiate. Duty and interest
prompted them to cultivate the study of the Latin language; and the most
successful attained the faculty of writing and speaking with fluency and
elegance in a foreign idiom. But they ever retained the inveterate
vanity of their country: their praise, or at least their esteem, was
reserved for the national writers, to whom they owed their fame and
subsistence; and they sometimes betrayed their contempt in licentious
criticism or satire on Virgil's poetry, and the oratory of Tully.  <span
id="fr_762"></span>[106](#fn_762) The superiority of these masters arose
from the familiar use of a living language; and their first disciples
were incapable of discerning how far they had degenerated from the
knowledge, and even the practice of their ancestors. A vicious
pronunciation,  <span id="fr_763"></span>[107](#fn_763) which they
introduced, was banished from the schools by the reason of the
succeeding age. Of the power of the Greek accents they were ignorant;
and those musical notes, which, from an Attic tongue, and to an Attic
ear, must have been the secret soul of harmony, were to their eyes, as
to our own, no more than minute and unmeaning marks, in prose
superfluous and troublesome in verse. The art of grammar they truly
possessed; the valuable fragments of Apollonius and Herodian were
transfused into their lessons; and their treatises of syntax and
etymology, though devoid of philosophic spirit, are still useful to the
Greek student. In the shipwreck of the Byzantine libraries, each
fugitive seized a fragment of treasure, a copy of some author, who
without his industry might have perished: the transcripts were
multiplied by an assiduous, and sometimes an elegant pen; and the text
was corrected and explained by their own comments, or those of the elder
scholiasts. The sense, though not the spirit, of the Greek classics, was
interpreted to the Latin world: the beauties of style evaporate in a
version; but the judgment of Theodore Gaza selected the more solid works
of Aristotle and Theophrastus, and their natural histories of animals
and plants opened a rich fund of genuine and experimental science.

Yet the fleeting shadows of metaphysics were pursued with more curiosity
and ardor. After a long oblivion, Plato was revived in Italy by a
venerable Greek,  <span id="fr_764"></span>[108](#fn_764) who taught in
the house of Cosmo of Medicis. While the synod of Florence was involved
in theological debate, some beneficial consequences might flow from the
study of his elegant philosophy: his style is the purest standard of the
Attic dialect, and his sublime thoughts are sometimes adapted to
familiar conversation, and sometimes adorned with the richest colors of
poetry and eloquence. The dialogues of Plato are a dramatic picture of
the life and death of a sage; and, as often as he descends from the
clouds, his moral system inculcates the love of truth, of our country,
and of mankind. The precept and example of Socrates recommended a modest
doubt and liberal inquiry; and if the Platonists, with blind devotion,
adored the visions and errors of their divine master, their enthusiasm
might correct the dry, dogmatic method of the Peripatetic school. So
equal, yet so opposite, are the merits of Plato and Aristotle, that they
may be balanced in endless controversy; but some spark of freedom may be
produced by the collision of adverse servitude. The modern Greeks were
divided between the two sects: with more fury than skill they fought
under the banner of their leaders; and the field of battle was removed
in their flight from Constantinople to Rome. But this philosophical
debate soon degenerated into an angry and personal quarrel of
grammarians; and Bessarion, though an advocate for Plato, protected the
national honor, by interposing the advice and authority of a mediator.
In the gardens of the Medici, the academical doctrine was enjoyed by the
polite and learned: but their philosophic society was quickly dissolved;
and if the writings of the Attic sage were perused in the closet, the
more powerful Stagyrite continued to reign, the oracle of the church and
school.  <span id="fr_765"></span>[109](#fn_765)

I have fairly represented the literary merits of the Greeks; yet it must
be confessed, that they were seconded and surpassed by the ardor of the
Latins. Italy was divided into many independent states; and at that time
it was the ambition of princes and republics to vie with each other in
the encouragement and reward of literature. The fame of Nicholas the
Fifth  <span id="fr_766"></span>[110](#fn_766) has not been adequate to
his merits. From a plebeian origin he raised himself by his virtue and
learning: the character of the man prevailed over the interest of the
pope; and he sharpened those weapons which were soon pointed against the
Roman church.  <span id="fr_767"></span>[111](#fn_767) He had been the
friend of the most eminent scholars of the age: he became their patron;
and such was the humility of his manners, that the change was scarcely
discernible either to them or to himself. If he pressed the acceptance
of a liberal gift, it was not as the measure of desert, but as the proof
of benevolence; and when modest merit declined his bounty, "Accept it,"
would he say, with a consciousness of his own worth: "ye will not always
have a Nicholas among you." The influence of the holy see pervaded
Christendom; and he exerted that influence in the search, not of
benefices, but of books. From the ruins of the Byzantine libraries, from
the darkest monasteries of Germany and Britain, he collected the dusty
manuscripts of the writers of antiquity; and wherever the original could
not be removed, a faithful copy was transcribed and transmitted for his
use. The Vatican, the old repository for bulls and legends, for
superstition and forgery, was daily replenished with more precious
furniture; and such was the industry of Nicholas, that in a reign of
eight years he formed a library of five thousand volumes. To his
munificence the Latin world was indebted for the versions of Xenophon,
Diodorus, Polybius, Thucydides, Herodotus, and Appian; of Strabo's
Geography, of the Iliad, of the most valuable works of Plato and
Aristotle, of Ptolemy and Theophrastus, and of the fathers of the Greek
church. The example of the Roman pontiff was preceded or imitated by a
Florentine merchant, who governed the republic without arms and without
a title. Cosmo of Medicis  <span id="fr_768"></span>[112](#fn_768) was
the father of a line of princes, whose name and age are almost
synonymous with the restoration of learning: his credit was ennobled
into fame; his riches were dedicated to the service of mankind; he
corresponded at once with Cairo and London: and a cargo of Indian spices
and Greek books was often imported in the same vessel. The genius and
education of his grandson Lorenzo rendered him not only a patron, but a
judge and candidate, in the literary race. In his pallace, distress was
entitled to relief, and merit to reward: his leisure hours were
delightfully spent in the Platonic academy; he encouraged the emulation
of Demetrius Chalcocondyles and Angelo Politian; and his active
missionary Janus Lascaris returned from the East with a treasure of two
hundred manuscripts, fourscore of which were as yet unknown in the
libraries of Europe.  <span id="fr_769"></span>[113](#fn_769) The rest
of Italy was animated by a similar spirit, and the progress of the
nation repaid the liberality of their princes. The Latins held the
exclusive property of their own literature; and these disciples of
Greece were soon capable of transmitting and improving the lessons which
they had imbibed. After a short succession of foreign teachers, the tide
of emigration subsided; but the language of Constantinople was spread
beyond the Alps and the natives of France, Germany, and England,  <span
id="fr_770"></span>[114](#fn_770) imparted to their country the sacred
fire which they had kindled in the schools of Florence and Rome.  <span
id="fr_771"></span>[115](#fn_771) In the productions of the mind, as in
those of the soil, the gifts of nature are excelled by industry and
skill: the Greek authors, forgotten on the banks of the Ilissus, have
been illustrated on those of the Elbe and the Thames: and Bessarion or
Gaza might have envied the superior science of the Barbarians; the
accuracy of Budaeus, the taste of Erasmus, the copiousness of Stephens,
the erudition of Scaliger, the discernment of Reiske, or of Bentley. On
the side of the Latins, the discovery of printing was a casual
advantage: but this useful art has been applied by Aldus, and his
innumerable successors, to perpetuate and multiply the works of
antiquity.  <span id="fr_772"></span>[116](#fn_772) A single manuscript
imported from Greece is revived in ten thousand copies; and each copy is
fairer than the original. In this form, Homer and Plato would peruse
with more satisfaction their own writings; and their scholiasts must
resign the prize to the labors of our Western editors.

Before the revival of classic literature, the Barbarians in Europe were
immersed in ignorance; and their vulgar tongues were marked with the
rudeness and poverty of their manners. The students of the more perfect
idioms of Rome and Greece were introduced to a new world of light and
science; to the society of the free and polished nations of antiquity;
and to a familiar converse with those immortal men who spoke the sublime
language of eloquence and reason. Such an intercourse must tend to
refine the taste, and to elevate the genius, of the moderns; and yet,
from the first experiments, it might appear that the study of the
ancients had given fetters, rather than wings, to the human mind.
However laudable, the spirit of imitation is of a servile cast; and the
first disciples of the Greeks and Romans were a colony of strangers in
the midst of their age and country. The minute and laborious diligence
which explored the antiquities of remote times might have improved or
adorned the present state of society, the critic and metaphysician were
the slaves of Aristotle; the poets, historians, and orators, were proud
to repeat the thoughts and words of the Augustan age: the works of
nature were observed with the eyes of Pliny and Theophrastus; and some
Pagan votaries professed a secret devotion to the gods of Homer and
Plato.  <span id="fr_773"></span>[117](#fn_773) The Italians were
oppressed by the strength and number of their ancient auxiliaries: the
century after the deaths of Petrarch and Boccace was filled with a crowd
of Latin imitators, who decently repose on our shelves; but in that aera
of learning it will not be easy to discern a real discovery of science,
a work of invention or eloquence, in the popular language of the
country.  <span id="fr_774"></span>[118](#fn_774) But as soon as it had
been deeply saturated with the celestial dew, the soil was quickened
into vegetation and life; the modern idioms were refined; the classics
of Athens and Rome inspired a pure taste and a generous emulation; and
in Italy, as afterwards in France and England, the pleasing reign of
poetry and fiction was succeeded by the light of speculative and
experimental philosophy. Genius may anticipate the season of maturity;
but in the education of a people, as in that of an individual, memory
must be exercised, before the powers of reason and fancy can be
expanded: nor may the artist hope to equal or surpass, till he has
learned to imitate, the works of his predecessors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_740"></span>[85](daf06026.htm#fr_740) Of those writers who
professedly treat of the restoration of the Greek learning in Italy, the
two principal are Hodius, Dr. Humphrey Hody, (de Graecis Illustribus,
Linguae Graecae Literarumque humaniorum Instauratoribus; Londini, 1742,
in large octavo,) and Tiraboschi, (Istoria della Letteratura Italiana,
tom. v. p. 364 - 377, tom. vii. p. 112 - 143.) The Oxford professor is a
laborious scholar, but the librarian of Modema enjoys the superiority of
a modern and national historian.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[86](daf06026.htm#fr_741) In Calabria quae olim
magna Graecia dicebatur, coloniis Graecis repleta, remansit quaedam
linguae veteris, cognitio, (Hodius, p. 2.) If it were eradicated by the
Romans, it was revived and perpetuated by the monks of St. Basil, who
possessed seven convents at Rossano alone, (Giannone, Istoria di Napoli,
tom. i. p. 520.)

<span id="fn_742"></span>[87](daf06026.htm#fr_742) Ii Barbari (says
Petrarch, the French and Germans) vix, non dicam libros sed nomen Homeri
audiverunt. Perhaps, in that respect, the xiiith century was less happy
than the age of Charlemagne.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[88](daf06026.htm#fr_743) See the character of
Barlaam, in Boccace de Genealog. Deorum, l. xv. c. 6.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[89](daf06026.htm#fr_744) Cantacuzen. l. ii. c.
36.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[90](daf06026.htm#fr_745) For the connection of
Petrarch and Barlaam, and the two interviews at Avignon in 1339, and at
Naples in 1342, see the excellent Memoires sur la Vie de Petrarque, tom.
i. p. 406 - 410, tom. ii. p. 74 - 77.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[91](daf06026.htm#fr_746) The bishopric to
which Barlaam retired, was the old Locri, in the middle ages. Scta.
Cyriaca, and by corruption Hieracium, Gerace, (Dissert. Chorographica
Italiae Medii Aevi, p. 312.) The dives opum of the Norman times soon
lapsed into poverty, since even the church was poor: yet the town still
contains 3000 inhabitants, (Swinburne, p. 340.)

<span id="fn_747"></span>[92](daf06026.htm#fr_747) I will transcribe a
passage from this epistle of Petrarch, (Famil. ix. 2;) Donasti Homerum
non in alienum sermonem Alienum sermonen violento alveo derivatum, sed
ex ipsis Graeci eloquii scatebris, et qualis divino illi profluxit
ingenio . . . . Sine tua voce Homerus tuus apud me mutus, immo vero ego
apud illum surdus sum. Gaudeo tamen vel adspectu solo, ac saepe illum
amplexus atque suspirans dico, O magne vir, &c.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[93](daf06026.htm#fr_748) For the life and
writings of Boccace, who was born in 1313, and died in 1375, Fabricius
(Bibliot. Latin. Medii Aevi, tom. i. p. 248, &c.) and Tiraboschi (tom.
v. p. 83, 439 - 451) may be consulted. The editions, versions,
imitations of his novels, are innumerable. Yet he was ashamed to
communicate that trifling, and perhaps scandalous, work to Petrarch, his
respectable friend, in whose letters and memoirs he conspicuously
appears.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[\*\_0048](daf06026.htm#fr_749) This
translation of Homer was by Pilatus, not by Boccacio. See Halleza, Hist.
of Lit. vol. i. p. 132. - M.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[94](daf06026.htm#fr_750) Boccace indulges an
honest vanity: Ostentationis causa Graeca carmina adscripsi . . . . jure
utor meo; meum est hoc decus, mea gloria scilicet inter Etruscos Graecis
uti carminibus. Nonne ego fui qui Leontium Pilatum, &c., (de Genealogia
Deorum, l. xv. c. 7, a work which, though now forgotten, has run through
thirteen or fourteen editions.)

<span id="fn_751"></span>[95](daf06026.htm#fr_751) Leontius, or Leo
Pilatus, is sufficiently made known by Hody, (p. 2 - 11,) and the abbe
de Sade, (Vie de Petrarque, tom. iii. p. 625 - 634, 670 - 673,) who has
very happily caught the lively and dramatic manner of his original.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[96](daf06026.htm#fr_752) Dr. Hody (p. 54) is
angry with Leonard Aretin, Guarinus, Paulus Jovius, &c., for affirming,
that the Greek letters were restored in Italy post septingentos annos;
as if, says he, they had flourished till the end of the viith century.
These writers most probably reckoned from the last period of the
exarchate; and the presence of the Greek magistrates and troops at
Ravenna and Rome must have preserved, in some degree, the use of their
native tongue.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[97](daf06026.htm#fr_753) See the article of
Emanuel, or Manuel Chrysoloras, in Hody (p 12 - 54) and Tiraboschi,
(tom. vii. p. 113 - 118.) The precise date of his arrival floats between
the years 1390 and 1400, and is only confined by the reign of Boniface
IX.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[98](daf06026.htm#fr_754) The name of Aretinus
has been assumed by five or six natives of Arezzo in Tuscany, of whom
the most famous and the most worthless lived in the xvith century.
Leonardus Brunus Aretinus, the disciple of Chrysoloras, was a linguist,
an orator, and an historian, the secretary of four successive popes, and
the chancellor of the republic of Florence, where he died A.D. 1444, at
the age of seventy-five, (Fabric. Bibliot. Medii Aevi, tom. i. p. 190
&c. Tiraboschi, tom. vii. p. 33 - 38)

<span id="fn_755"></span>[99](daf06026.htm#fr_755) See the passage in
Aretin. Commentario Rerum suo Tempore in Italia gestarum, apud Hodium,
p. 28 - 30.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[100](daf06026.htm#fr_756) In this domestic
discipline, Petrarch, who loved the youth, often complains of the eager
curiosity, restless temper, and proud feelings, which announce the
genius and glory of a riper age, (Memoires sur Petrarque, tom. iii. p.
700 - 709.)

<span id="fn_757"></span>[101](daf06026.htm#fr_757) Hinc Graecae
Latinaeque scholae exortae sunt, Guarino Philelpho, Leonardo Aretino,
Caroloque, ac plerisque aliis tanquam ex equo Trojano prodeuntibus,
quorum emulatione multa ingenia deinceps ad laudem excitata sunt,
(Platina in Bonifacio IX.) Another Italian writer adds the names of
Paulus Petrus Vergerius, Omnibonus Vincentius, Poggius, Franciscus
Barbarus, &c. But I question whether a rigid chronology would allow
Chrysoloras all these eminent scholars, (Hodius, p. 25 - 27, &c.)

<span id="fn_758"></span>[102](daf06026.htm#fr_758) See in Hody the
article of Bessarion, (p. 136 - 177.) Theodore Gaza, George of
Trebizond, aud the rest of the Greeks whom I have named or omitted, are
inserted in their proper chapters of his learned work. See likewise
Tiraboschi, in the 1st and 2d parts of the vith tome.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[103](daf06026.htm#fr_759) The cardinals
knocked at his door, but his conclavist refused to interrupt the studies
of Bessarion: "Nicholas," said he, "thy respect has cost thee a hat, and
me the tiara."

Note: Roscoe (Life of Lorenzo de Medici, vol. i. p. 75) considers that
Hody has refuted this "idle tale." - M.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[104](daf06026.htm#fr_760) Such as George of
Trebizond, Theodore Gaza, Argyropulus, Andronicus of Thessalonica,
Philelphus, Poggius, Blondus, Nicholas Perrot, Valla, Campanus, Platina,
&c. Viri (says Hody, with the pious zeal of a scholar) nullo aevo
perituri, p. 156.)

<span id="fn_761"></span>[105](daf06026.htm#fr_761) He was born before
the taking of Constantinople, but his honorable life was stretched far
into the xvith century, (A.D. 1535.) Leo X. and Francis I. were his
noblest patrons, under whose auspices he founded the Greek colleges of
Rome and Paris, (Hody, p. 247 - 275.) He left posterity in France; but
the counts de Vintimille, and their numerous branches, derive the name
of Lascaris from a doubtful marriage in the xiiith century with the
daughter of a Greek emperor (Ducange, Fam. Byzant. p. 224 - 230.)

<span id="fn_762"></span>[106](daf06026.htm#fr_762) Two of his epigrams
against Virgil, and three against Tully, are preserved and refuted by
Franciscus Floridus, who can find no better names than Graeculus ineptus
et impudens, (Hody, p. 274.) In our own times, an English critic has
accused the Aeneid of containing multa languida, nugatoria, spiritu et
majestate carminis heroici defecta; many such verses as he, the said
Jeremiah Markland, would have been ashamed of owning, (praefat. ad
Statii Sylvas, p. 21, 22.)

<span id="fn_763"></span>[107](daf06026.htm#fr_763) Emanuel Chrysoloras,
and his colleagues, are accused of ignorance, envy, or avarice,
(Sylloge, &c., tom. ii. p. 235.) The modern Greeks pronounce it as a V
consonant, and confound three vowels, and several diphthongs. Such was
the vulgar pronunciation which the stern Gardiner maintained by penal
statutes in the university of Cambridge: but the monosyllable
represented to an Attic ear the bleating of sheep, and a bellwether is
better evidence than a bishop or a chancellor. The treatises of those
scholars, particularly Erasmus, who asserted a more classical
pronunciation, are collected in the Sylloge of Havercamp, (2 vols. in
octavo, Lugd. Bat. 1736, 1740:) but it is difficult to paint sounds by
words: and in their reference to modern use, they can be understood only
by their respective countrymen. We may observe, that our peculiar
pronunciation of the O, th, is approved by Erasmus, (tom. ii. p. 130.)

<span id="fn_764"></span>[108](daf06026.htm#fr_764) George Gemistus
Pletho, a various and voluminous writer, the master of Bessarion, and
all the Platonists of the times. He visited Italy in his old age, and
soon returned to end his days in Peloponnesus. See the curious Diatribe
of Leo Allatius de Georgiis, in Fabricius. (Bibliot. Graec. tom. x. p.
739 - 756.)

<span id="fn_765"></span>[109](daf06026.htm#fr_765) The state of the
Platonic philosophy in Italy is illustrated by Boivin, (Mem. de l'Acad.
des Inscriptions, tom. ii. p. 715 - 729,) and Tiraboschi, (tom. vi. P.
i. p. 259 - 288.)

<span id="fn_766"></span>[110](daf06026.htm#fr_766) See the Life of
Nicholas V. by two contemporary authors, Janottus Manettus, (tom. iii.
P. ii. p. 905 - 962,) and Vespasian of Florence, (tom. xxv. p. 267 -
290,) in the collection of Muratori; and consult Tiraboschi, (tom. vi.
P. i. p. 46 - 52, 109,) and Hody in the articles of Theodore Gaza,
George of Trebizond, &c.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[111](daf06026.htm#fr_767) Lord Bolingbroke
observes, with truth and spirit, that the popes in this instance, were
worse politicians than the muftis, and that the charm which had bound
mankind for so many ages was broken by the magicians themselves,
(Letters on the Study of History, l. vi. p. 165, 166, octavo edition,
1779.)

<span id="fn_768"></span>[112](daf06026.htm#fr_768) See the literary
history of Cosmo and Lorenzo of Medicis, in Tiraboschi, (tom. vi. P. i.
l. i. c. 2,) who bestows a due measure of praise on Alphonso of Arragon,
king of Naples, the dukes of Milan, Ferrara Urbino, &c. The republic of
Venice has deserved the least from the gratitude of scholars.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[113](daf06026.htm#fr_769) Tiraboschi, (tom.
vi. P. i. p. 104,) from the preface of Janus Lascaris to the Greek
Anthology, printed at Florence, 1494. Latebant (says Aldus in his
preface to the Greek orators, apud Hodium, p. 249) in Atho Thraciae
monte. Eas Larcaris . . . . in Italiam reportavit. Miserat enim ipsum
Laurentius ille Medices in Graeciam ad inquirendos simul, et quantovis
emendos pretio bonos libros. It is remarkable enough, that the research
was facilitated by Sultan Bajazet II.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[114](daf06026.htm#fr_770) The Greek language
was introduced into the university of Oxford in the last years of the
xvth century, by Grocyn, Linacer, and Latimer, who had all studied at
Florence under Demetrius Chalcocondyles. See Dr. Knight's curious Life
of Erasmus. Although a stout academical patriot, he is forced to
acknowledge that Erasmus learned Greek at Oxford, and taught it at
Cambridge.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[115](daf06026.htm#fr_771) The jealous Italians
were desirous of keeping a monopoly of Greek learning. When Aldus was
about to publish the Greek scholiasts on Sophocles and Euripides, Cave,
(said they,) cave hoc facias, ne Barbari istis adjuti domi maneant, et
pauciores in Italiam ventitent, (Dr. Knight, in his Life of Erasmus, p.
365, from Beatus Rhemanus.)

<span id="fn_772"></span>[116](daf06026.htm#fr_772) The press of Aldus
Manutius, a Roman, was established at Venice about the year 1494: he
printed above sixty considerable works of Greek literature, almost all
for the first time; several containing different treatises and authors,
and of several authors, two, three, or four editions, (Fabric. Bibliot.
Graec. tom. xiii. p. 605, &c.) Yet his glory must not tempt us to
forget, that the first Greek book, the Grammar of Constantine Lascaris,
was printed at Milan in 1476; and that the Florence Homer of 1488
displays all the luxury of the typographical art. See the Annales
Typographical of Mattaire, and the Bibliographie Instructive of De Bure,
a knowing bookseller of Paris.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[117](daf06026.htm#fr_773) I will select three
singular examples of this classic enthusiasm. I. At the synod of
Florence, Gemistus Pletho said, in familiar conversation to George of
Trebizond, that in a short time mankind would unanimously renounce the
Gospel and the Koran, for a religion similar to that of the Gentiles,
(Leo Allatius, apud Fabricium, tom. x. p. 751.) 2. Paul II. persecuted
the Roman academy, which had been founded by Pomponius Laetus; and the
principal members were accused of heresy, impiety, and paganism,
(Tiraboschi, tom. vi. P. i. p. 81, 82.) 3. In the next century, some
scholars and poets in France celebrated the success of Jodelle's tragedy
of Cleopatra, by a festival of Bacchus, and, as it is said, by the
sacrifice of a goat, (Bayle, Dictionnaire, Jodelle. Fontenelle, tom.
iii. p. 56 - 61.) Yet the spirit of bigotry might often discern a
serious impiety in the sportive play of fancy and learning.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[118](daf06026.htm#fr_774) The survivor Boccace
died in the year 1375; and we cannot place before 1480 the composition
of the Morgante Maggiore of Pulo and the Orlando Innamorato of Boyardo,
(Tiraboschi, tom. vi. P. ii. p. 174 - 177.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVII: Schism Of The Greeks And Latins. Part
I.](daf06027)
