[Sacred-Texts](../index)  [Esoteric](../eso/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rbacon2)  [Next](turba2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Turba Philosophorum (part 1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Turba Philosophorum.

The Epistle of Arisleus, prefixed to the Words of the Sages, concerning
the Purport of this Book, for the Benefit of Posterity, and the same
being as here follows:-

Arisleus, begotten of Pythagoras, a disciple of the disciples by the
grace of thrice great Hermes, learning from the seat of knowledge, unto
all who come after wisheth health and mercy. I testify that my master,
Pythagoras, the Italian, master of the wise and chief of the Prophets,
had a greater gift of God and of Wisdom than was granted to any one
after Hermes. Therefore he had a mind to assemble his disciples, who
were now greatly increased, and had been constituted the chief persons
throughout all regions for the discussion of this most precious Art,
that their words might be a foundation for posterity. He then commanded
Iximidrus, of highest council, to be the first speaker, who said:-

**The First Dictum.**

Iximidrus Saith:- I testify that the beginning of all things is a
Certain Nature, which is perpetual, coequalling all things, and that the
visible natures, with their births and decay, are times wherein the ends
to which that nature brings them are beheld and summoned. Now, I
instruct you that the stars are igneous, and are kept within bounds by
the air. If the humidity and density of the air did not exist to
separate the flames of the sun from living things, then the Sun would
consume all creatures. But God has provided the separating air, lest
that which He has created should be burnt up. Do you not: observe that
the Sun when it rises in the heaven overcomes the air by its heat, and
that the warmth penetrates from the upper to the lower parts of the air?
If, then, the air did not presently breathe forth those winds whereby
creatures are generated, the Sun by its heat would certainly destroy all
that lives. But the Sun is kept in check by the air, which thus conquers
because it unites the heat of the Sun to its own heat, and the humidity
of water to its own humidity. Have you not remarked how tenuous water is
drawn up into the air by the action of the heat of the Sun, which thus
helps the water against itself? If the water did not nourish the air by
such tenuous moisture, assuredly the Sun would overcome the air. The
fire, therefore, extracts moisture from the water, by means of which the
air conquers the fire itself. Thus, fire and water are enemies between
which there is no consanguinity, for the fire is hot and dry, but the
water is cold and moist. The air, which is warm and moist, joins these
together by its concording medium; between the humidity of water and the
heat of fire the air is thus placed to establish peace. rind look ye all
how there shall arise a spirit from the tenuous vapour of the air,
because the heat being joined to the humour, there necessarily issues
something tenuous, which will become a wind. For the heat of the Sun
extracts something tenuous out of the air, which also becomes spirit and
life to all creatures. All this, however, is disposed in such manner by
the will of God, and a coruscation appears when the heat of the Sun
touches and breaks up a cloud.

The Turba saith:- Well hast thou described the fire, even as thou
knowest concerning it, and thou hast believed the word of thy brother.

**The Second Dictum.**

Exumedrus saith:- I do magnify the air according to the mighty speech of
Iximidrus, for the work is improved thereby. The air is inspissated, and
it is also made thin; it grows warm and becomes cold. The inspissation
thereof takes place when it is divided in heaven by the elongation of
the Sun; its rarefaction is when, by the exaltation of the Sun in
heaven, the air becomes warm and is rarefied. It is comparable with the
complexion of Spring, in the distinction of time, which is neither warm
nor cold. For according to the mutation of the constituted disposition
with the altering distinctions of the soul, so is Winter altered. The
air, therefore, is inspissated when the Sun is removed from it, and then
cold supervenes upon men.

Whereat the Turba said:- Excellently hast thou described the air, and
given account of what thou knowest to be therein.

**The Third Dictum.**

Anaxagoras saith:- I make known that the beginning of all those things
which God hath created is weight and proportion, for weight rules all
things, and the weight and spissitude of the earth is manifest in
proportion; but weight is not found except in body. And know, all ye
Turba, that the spissitude of the four elements reposes in the earth;
for the spissitude of fire falls into air, the spissitude of air,
together with the spissitude received from the fire, falls into water;
the spissitude also of water, increased by the spissitude of fire and
air, reposes in earth. Have you not observed how the spissitude of the
four elements is conjoined in earth! The same, therefore, is more
inspissated than all.

Then saith the Turba:- Thou hast well spoken. Verily the earth is more
inspissated than are the rest. Which, therefore, is the most rare of the
four elements and is most worthy to possess the rarity of these four?

He answereth:- Fire is the most rare among all, and thereunto cometh
what is rare of these four. But air is less rare than fire, because it
is warm and moist, while fire is warm and dry; now that which is warm
and dry is more rare than the warm and moist.

They say unto him:- The which element is of less rarity than air!

He answereth:- Water, since cold and moisture inhere therein, and every
cold humid is of less rarity than a warm humid.

Then do they say unto him:- Thou hast spoken truly. What, therefore, is
of less rarity than water?

He answereth:- Earth, because it is cold and dry, and that which is cold
and dry is of less rarity than that which is cold and moist.

Pythagoras saith:- Well have ye provided, O Sons of the Doctrine, the
description of these four natures, out of which God hath created all
things. Blessed, therefore, is he who comprehends what ye have declared,
for from the apex of the world he shall not find an intention greater
than his own! Let us, therefore, make perfect our discourse.

They reply:- Direct every one to take up our speech in turn. Speak thou,
O Pandolfus!

**The Fourth Dictum.**

But Pandolfus saith:- I signify to posterity that air is a tenuous
matter of water, and that it is not: separated from it. It remains above
the dry earth, to wit, the air hidden in the water, which is under the
earth. If this air did not exist, the earth would not remain above the
humid water.

They answer:- Thou hast said well; complete, therefore, thy speech.

But he continueth:- The air which is hidden in the water under the earth
is that which sustains the earth, lest it should be plunged into the
said water; and it, moreover, prevents the earth from being overflowed
by that water. The province of the air is, therefore, to fill up and to
make separation between diverse things, that is to say, water and earth,
and it is constituted a peacemaker between hostile things, namely, water
and fire, dividing these, lest they destroy one another.

The Turba saith:- If you gave an illustration hereof, it would be
clearer to those who do not understand.

He answereth:- An egg is an illustration, for therein four things are
conjoined; the visible cortex or shell represents the earth, and the
albumen, for white part, is the water. But a very thin inner cortex is
joined to the outer cortex, representing, as I have signified to you,
the separating medium between earth and water, namely, that air which
divides the earth from the water. The yolk also of the egg represents
fire; the cortex which contains the yolk corresponds to that other air
which separates the water from the fire. But they are both one and the
same air, namely, that which separates things frigid, the earth from the
water, and that which separates the water from the fire. But the lower
air is thicker than the upper air, and the upper air is more rare and
subtle, being nearer to the fire than the lower air. In the egg,
therefore, are four things- earth, water, air, and fire. But the point
of the Sun, these four excepted, is in the centre of the yolk, and this
is the chicken. Consequently, all philosophers in this most excellent
art have described the egg as an example, which same thing they have set
over their work.

**The Fifth Dictum.**

Arisleus saith:- Know that the earth is a hill and not a plain, for
which reason the Sun does not ascend over all the zones of the earth in
a single hour; but if it were flat, the sun would rise in a moment over
the whole earth.

Parmenides saith:- Thou hast spoken briefly, O Arisleus!

He answereth: Is there anything the Master has left us which bears
witness otherwise? Yet I testify that God is one, having never
engendered or been begotten, and that the head of all things after Him
is earth and fire, because fire is tenuous and light, and it rules all
things on earth, but the earth, being ponderous and gross, sustains all
things which are ruled by fire.

**The Sixth Dictum.**

Lucas saith:- You speak only about four natures; and each one of you
observes something concerning these. Now, I testify unto you that all
things which God hath created are from these four natures, and the
things which have been created out of them return into them, In these
living creatures are generated and die, and all things take place as God
hath predestinated.

Democritus, the disciple of Lucas, answereth:- Thou hast well spoken, O
Lucas, when dealing with the four natures!

Then saith Arisleus:- O Democritus, since thy knowledge was derived from
Lucas, it is presumption to speak among those who are well acquainted
with thy master!

Lucas answereth:- albeit Democritus received from me the science of
natural things, that knowledge was derived from the philosophers of the
Indies and from the Babylonians; I think he surpasses those of his own
age in this learning.

The Turba answereth:- When he attains to that age he will give no small
satisfaction, but being in his youth he should keep silence.

**The Seventh Dictum.**

Lucusta saith:- All those creatures which have been described by Lucas
are two only, of which one is neither known nor expressed, except by
piety, for it is not seen or felt.

Pythagoras saith:- Thou hast entered upon a subject which, if completed,
thou wilt describe subtly. State, therefore, what is this thing which is
neither felt, seen, nor known.

Then he:- It is that which is not known, because in this world it is
discerned by reason without the clients thereof, which are sight,
hearing, taste, smell, and touch. O Crowd of the Philosophers, know you
not that it Is only sight which can distinguish white from black, and
hearing only which can discriminate between a good and bad word!
Similarly, a wholesome odour cannot be separated by reason from one
which is fetid, except through the sense of smell, nor can sweetness be
discriminated from bitterness save by means of taste, nor smooth from
rough unless by touch.

The Turba answereth:- Thou hast well spoken, yet hast thou omitted to
treat of that particular thing which is not known, or described, except
by reason and piety.

Saith he:- Are ye then in such haste! Know that the creature which is
cognised in none of these five ways is a sublime creature, and, as such,
is neither seen nor felt, but is perceived by reason alone, of which
reason Nature confesses that God is a partaker.

They answer:- Thou hast spoken truly and excellently.

And he:- I will now give a further explanation. Know that this creature,
that is to say, the world, hath a light, which is the Sun, and the same
is more subtle than all other natures, which light is so ordered that
living beings may attain to vision. But if this subtle light were
removed, they would become darkened, seeing nothing, except the light of
the moon, or of the stars, or of fire, all which are derived from the
light of the Sun, which causes all creatures to give light. For this God
has appointed the Sun to be the light of the world, by reason of the
attenuated nature of the Sun. And know that the sublime creature before
mentioned has no need of the light of this Sun, because the Sun is
beneath that creature, which is more subtle and more lucid. This light,
which is more lucid than the light of the Sun, they have taken from the
light of God, which is more subtle than their light. Know also that the
created world is composed of two dense things and two rare things, but
nothing of the dense is in the sublime creature. Consequently the Sun is
rarer than all inferior creatures.

The Turba answereth:- Thou hast excellently described what thou hast
related. And if, good Master, thou shalt utter anything whereby our
hearts may be vivified, which now are mortified by folly, thou wilt
confer upon us a great boon!

**The Eighth Dictum.**

Pythagoras saith:- I affirm that God existed before all things, and with
Him was nothing, as He was at first. But know, all ye Philosophers, that
I declare this in order that I may fortify your opinion concerning these
four elements and arcana, as well as in the sciences thereof, at which
no one can arrive save by the will of God. Understand, that when God was
alone, He created four things- fire, air, water, and earth, out of which
things He afterwards created all others, both the sublime and the
inferior, because He predestinated from the beginning that all creatures
extracted from water should multiply and increase, that they might dwell
in the world and perform His judgments therein. Consequently, before
all, He created the four elements, out of which He afterwards created
what He willed, that is to say, diverse creatures, some of which were
produced from a single element.

The Turba saith:- Which are these, O Master!

And he:- They are the angels, whom He created out of fire.

But the Turba:- Which, then, are created out of two?

And he:- Out of the elements of fire and air are the sun, moon, and
stars composed. Hence the angels are more lucid than the sun, moon, and
stars, because they are created from one substance, which is less dense
than two, while the sun and the stars are created from a composition of
fire and air.

The Turba saith:- And what concerning the creation of Heaven?

Then he:- God created the Heaven out of water and air, whence this is
also composed of two, namely, the second of the rarer things, which is
air, and the second of the denser things, which is water.

And they:- Master, continue thy discourse concerning these three, and
rejoice our hearts with thy sayings, which are life to the dead.

But the other answereth:- I notify to you that God hath further made
creatures out of three and out of four; out of three are created flying
things, beasts, and vegetables; some of these are created out of water,
air, and earth, some out of fire, air, and earth.

But the Turba saith:- Distinguish these divers creatures one from
another.

And he:- Beasts are created out of fire, air, and earth; dying things
out of fire, air, and water, because flying things, and all among
vegetables which have a spirit, are created out of water, while all
brute animals are from earth, air, and fire. Yet in vegetables there is
no fire, for they are created out of earth, water, and air.

Whereat the Turba saith:- Let us assume that a fire, with your
reverence's pardon, does reside in vegetables.

And he:- Ye have spoken the truth, and I affirm that they contain fire.

And they:- Whence is that fire?

He answereth:- Out of the heat of the air which is concealed therein;
for I have signified that a thin fire is present in the air, but the
elementary fire concerning which you were in doubt is not produced,
except in things which have spirit and soul. But out of four elements
our father Adam and his sons were created, that is, of fire, air, water,
and likewise earth. Understand, all ye that are wise, how everything
which God hath created out of one essence dies not until the Day of
Judgment. The definition of death is the disjunction of the composite,
but there is no disjunction of that which is simple, for it is one.
Death consists in the separation of the soul from the body, because
anything formed out of two, three, or four components must disintegrate,
and this is death. Understand, further, that no complex substance which
lacks fire eats, drinks, or sleeps, because in all things which have a
spirit fire is that which eats.

The Turba answereth:- How is it, Master, that the angels, being created
of fire, do not eat, seeing thou assertest that fire is that which eats!

And he: Hence ye doubt, each having his opinion, and ye are become
opponents, but if ye truly knew the elements, ye would not deny these
things. I agree with all whose judgment it is that simple fire eats not,
but thick fire. The angels, therefore, are not created out of thick
fire, but out of the thinnest of very thin fire; being created, then, of
that which is most simple and exceedingly thin, they neither eat, drink,
nor sleep.

And the Turba:- Master, our faculties are able to perceive, for by God's
assistance we have exhausted thy sayings, but our faculties of hearing
and of sight are unable to carry such great things. May God reward thee
for the sake of thy disciples, since it is with the object of
instructing future generations that thou hast summoned us together from
our countries, the recompense of which thou wilt not fail to receive
from the Judge to come.

Arisleus saith:- Seeing that thou hast gathered us together for the
advantage of posterity, I think that no explanations will be more useful
than definitions of those four elements which thou hast taught us to
attain.

And he:- None of you are, I suppose, ignorant that all the Wise have
propounded definitions in God.

The Turba answereth:- Should your disciples pass over anything, it
becomes you, O Master, to avoid omissions for the sake of future
generations.

And he:- If it please you, I will begin the disposition here, since
envious men in their books have separated that, or otherwise I will put
it at the end of the book.

Whereat the Turba saith:- Place it where you think it will be dearest
for future generations.

And he:- I will place it where it will not be recognised by the foolish,
nor ignored by the Sons of the Doctrine, for it is the key, the
perfection and the end.

**The Ninth Dictum.**

Eximenus saith:- God hath created all things by his word, having said
unto them: Be, and they were made, with the four other elements, earth,
water, air, and tire, which He coagulated, and things contrary were
commingled, for we see that fire is hostile to water, water hostile to
fire, and both are hostile to earth and air. Yet God hath united them
peacefully, so that they love one another. Out of these four elements,
therefore, are all things created- heaven and the throne thereof; the
angels; the sun, moon. and stars; earth and sea, with all things that
are in the sea, which indeed are various, and not alike, for their
natures have been made diverse by God, and also the creations. But the
diversity is more than I have stated; each of these natures is of
diverse nature, and by a legion of diversities is the nature of each
diverse. Now this diversity subsists in all creatures, because they were
created out of diverse elements. Had they been created out of one
element, they would have been agreeing natures. But diverse elements
being here mingled, they lose their own natures, because the dry being
mixed with the humid and the cold combined with the hot, become neither
cold nor hot; so also the humid being mixed with the dry becomes neither
dry nor humid. But when the four elements are commingled, they agree,
and thence proceed creatures which never attain to perfection, except
they be left by night to putrefy and become visibly corrupt. God further
completed his creation by means of increase, food, life, and government.
Sons of the Doctrine, not without purpose have I described to you the
disposition of these four elements, for in them is a secret arcanum; two
of them are perceptible to the sense of touch and vision, and of these
the operation and virtue are well known. These are earth and water. But
there are two other elements which are neither visible nor tangible,
which yield naught, whereof the place is never seen, nor are their
operations and force known, save in the former elements, namely, earth
and water; now when the four elements are not commingled, no desire of
men is accomplished. But being mixed, departing from their own natures,
they become another thing. Over these let us meditate very carefully.

And the Turba:- Master, if you speak, we will give heed to Your words.

Then he:- I have now discoursed, and that well. I will speak only useful
words which ye will follow as spoken. Know, all present, that no true
tincture is made except from our copper. Do not therefore, exhaust your
brains and your money, lest ye fill your hearts with sorrow. I will give
you a fundamental axiom, that unless you turn the aforesaid copper into
white, and make visible coins and then afterwards again turn it into
redness, until a Tincture: results, verily, ye accomplish nothing. Burn
therefore the copper, break it up, deprive it of its blackness by
cooking, imbuing, and washing, until the same becomes white. Then rule
it.

**The Tenth Dictum.**

Arisleus saith:- Know that the key of this work is the art of Coins.
Take, therefore, the body which I have shewn to you and reduce it to
thin tablets. Next immerse the said tablets in the Water of our Sea,
which is permanent Water, and, after it is covered, set it over a gentle
fire until the tablets are melted and become waters or Etheliae, which
are one and the same thing. Mix, cook, and simmer in a gentle fire until
Brodium is produced, like to Saginatum. Then stir in its water of
Etheliae until it be coagulated, and the coins become variegated, which
we call the Flower of Salt. Cook it, therefore, until it be deprived of
blackness, and the whiteness appear. Then rub it, mix with the Gum of
Gold, and cook until it becomes red Etheliae. Use patience in pounding
lest you become weary. Imbue the Ethelia with its own water, which has
preceded from it, which also is Permanent Water, until the same becomes
red. This, then, is Burnt Copper, which is the Leaven of Gold and the
Flower thereof. Cook the same with Permanent Water, which is always with
it, until the water be dried up. Continue the operation until all the
water is consumed, and it becomes a most subtle powder.

**The Eleventh Dictum.**

Parmenides saith:- Ye must know that envious men have dealt voluminously
with several waters, brodiums, stones, and metals, seeking to deceive
all you who aspire after knowledge. Leave, therefore, all these, and
make the white red, out of this our copper, taking copper and lead,
letting these stand for the grease, or blackness, and tin for the
liquefaction. Know ye, further, that unless ye rule the Nature of Truth,
and harmonize well together its complexions and compositions, the
consanguineous with the consanguineous, and the first with the first, ye
act improperly and effect nothing, because natures will meet their
natures, follow them, and rejoice. For in them they putrefy and are
generated, because Nature is ruled by Nature, which destroys it, turns
it into dust, reduces to nothing, and finally herself renews it,
repeats, and frequently produces the same. Therefore look in books, that
ye may know the Nature of Truth, what putrefies it and what renews, what
savour it possesses, what neighbours it naturally has, and how they love
each other, how also after love enmity and corruption intervene, and how
these natures should be united one to another and made at peace, until
they become gentle in the fire in similar fashion. Having, therefore,
noticed the facts in this Art, set your hands to the work. If indeed, ye
know not the Natures of Truth, do not approach the work, since there
will follow nothing but harm, disaster, and sadness. Consider,
therefore, the teaching of the Wise, how they have declared the whole
work in this saying:- Nature rejoices in Nature, and Nature contains
Nature. In these words there is shewn forth unto you the whole work.
Leave, therefore, manifold and superfluous things, and take quicksilver,
coagulate in the body of Magnesia, in Kuhul, or in Sulphur which does
not burn; make the same nature white, and place it upon our Copper, when
it becomes white. And if ye cook still more, it becomes red, when if ye
proceed to coction, it becomes gold. I tell you that it turns the sea
itself into red and the colour of gold. Know ye also that gold is not
turned into redness save by Permanent Water, because Nature rejoices in
Nature.: Reduce, therefore, the same by means of cooking into a humour,
until the hidden nature appear. If, therefore, it be manifested
externally, seven times imbue the same with water, cooking, imbuing, and
washing, until it become red. O those celestial natures, multiplying the
natures of truth by the will of God! O that potent Nature, which
overcame and conquered natures, and caused its natures to rejoice and be
glad! This, therefore, is that special and spiritual nature to which the
God thereof can give what fire cannot. Consequently, we glorify and
magnify that \[species\], than which nothing is more precious in the
true tincture, or the like in the smallest degree to be found. This is
that truth which those investigating wisdom love. For when it is
liquefied with bodies, the highest operation is effected. If ye knew the
truth, what great thanks ye would give me! Learn, therefore, that while
you are tingeing the cinders, you must destroy those that are mixed. For
it overcomes those which are mixed, and changes them to its own colour.
And as it visibly overcame the surface, even so it mastered the
interior. And if one be volatile but the other endure the fire, either
joined to the other endures the fire. Know also, that if the vapours
have whitened the surfaces, they will certainly whiten the interiors.
Know further, all ye seekers after Wisdom, that one matter overcomes
four, and our Sulphur alone consumes all things.

The Turba answereth: Thou hast spoken excellently well, O Parmenides,
but thou hast not demonstrated the disposition of the smoke to
posterity, nor how the same is whitened!

**The Twelfth Dictum.**

Lucas saith: I will speak at this time, following the steps of the
ancients. Know, therefore, all ye seekers after Wisdom, that this
treatise is not from the beginning of the ruling! Take quicksilver,
which is from the male, and coagulate according to custom. Observe that
I am speaking to you in accordance with custom, because it has been
already coagulated. Here, therefore, is not the beginning of the ruling,
but I prescribe this method, namely, that you shall take the quicksilver
from the male, and shall either impose upon iron, tin, or governed
copper, and it will be whitened. White Magnesia is made in the same way,
and the male is converted with it. But forasmuch as there is a certain
affinity between the magnet and the iron, therefore our nature
rejoices.) Take, then, the vapour which the Ancients commanded you to
take, and cook the same with its own body until tin is produced. Wash
away its blackness according to custom, and cleanse and roast at an
equable fire until it be whitened. But every body is whitened with
governed quicksilver, for Nature converts Nature. Take, therefore,
Magnesia, Water of Alum, Water of Nitre, Water of the Sea, and Water of
Iron; whiten with smoke.: Whatsoever ye desire to be whitened is
whitened with this smoke, because it is itself white, and whitens all
things. Mix, therefore, the said smoke with its faeces until it be
coagulated and become excessively white. Roast this white copper till it
germinates of itself, since the Magnesia when whitened does not suffer
the spirits to escape, or the shadow of copper to appear, because Nature
contains Nature. Take, therefore, all ye Sons of the Doctrine, the white
sulphureous nature, whiten with salt and dew, or with the Flower of
White Salt, until it become excessively white. And know ye, that the
Flower of White Salt is Ether from Ethelia. The same must be boiled for
seven days, till it shall become like gleaming marble, for when it has
reached this condition it is a very great Arcanum, seeing that Sulphur
is mixed with Sulphur, whence an excellent work is accomplished, by
reason of the affinity between them, because natures rejoice in meeting
their own natures. Take, therefore, Mardek and whiten the same with
Gadenbe, that is, wine and vinegar, and Permanent Water. Roast and
coagulate until the whole does not liquefy in a fire stronger than its
own, namely, the former fire. Cover the mouth of the vessel securely,
but let it be associated with its neighbour, that it may kindle the
whiteness thereof, and beware lest the fire blaze up, for in this case
it becomes red prematurely, and this will profit you nothing, because in
the beginning of the ruling you require the white. Afterwards coagulate
the same until you attain the red. Let your fire be gentle in the
whitening, until coagulation take place. Know that when it is coagulated
we call it the Soul, and it is more quickly converted from nature into
nature. This, therefore, is sufficient for those who deal with the Art
of Coins, because one thing makes it but many operate therein. For ye
need not a number of things, but one thing only, which in each and every
grade of your work is changed into another nature.

The Turba saith: Master, if you speak as the Wise have spoken, and that
briefly, they will follow you who do not wish to be wholly shut in with
darkness.

**The Thirteenth Dictum.**

Pythagoras saith:- We posit another government which is not from another
root, but it differs in name. And know, all ye seekers after this
Science and Wisdom, that whatsoever the envious may have enjoined in
their books concerning the composition of natures which agree together,
in savour there is only one, albeit to sight they are as diverse as
possible. Know, also, that the thing which they have described in so
many ways follows and attains its companion without fire, even as the
magnet follows the iron, to which the said thing is not vainly compared,
nor to a seed, nor to a matrix, for it is also like unto these. And this
same thing, which follows its companion without fire, causes many
colours to appear when embracing it, for this reason, that the said one
thing enters into every regimen, and is found everywhere, being a stone,
and also not a stone; common and precious; hidden and concealed, yet
known by everyone; of one name and of many names, which is the Spume of
the Moon. This stone, therefore, is not a stone, because it is more
precious; without it Nature never operates anything; its name is one,
yet we have called it by many names on account of the excellence of its
nature.

The Turba answereth:- O! Master! wilt thou not mention some of those
names for the guidance of seekers?

And he:- It is called White Ethelia, White Copper, and that which flies
from the fire and alone whitens copper. Break up, therefore, the White
Stone, and afterwards coagulate it with milk. Then pound the calx in the
mortar, taking care that the humidity does not escape from the vessel;
but coagulate it in the vessel until it shall become a cinder. Cook also
with Spume of Luna and regulate. For ye shall find the stone broken, and
already imbued with its own water. This, therefore, is the stone which
we call by all names, which assimilates the work and drinks it, and is
the stone out of which also all colours appear. Take, therefore, that
same gum, which is from the scoriae, and mix with cinder of calx, which
you have ruled, and with the faeces which you know, moistening with
permanent water. Then look and see whether it has become a powder, but
if not, roast in a fire stronger than the first fire, until it be
pounded. Then imbue with permanent water, and the more the colours vary
all the more suffer them to be heated. Know, moreover, that if you take
white quicksilver, or the Spume of Luna, and do as ye are bidden,
breaking up with a gentle fire, the same is coagulated, and becomes a
stone. Out of this stone, therefore, when it is broken up, many colours
will appear to you. But herein, if any ambiguity occur to you in our
discourse, do as ye are bidden, ruling the same until a white and
coruscating stone shall be produced, and so ye find your purpose.

**The Fourteenth Dictum.**

Acsubofen saith:- Master, thou hast spoken without envy, even as became
thee, and for the same may God reward thee!

Pythagoras saith:- May God also deliver thee, Acsubofen, from envy!

Then he:- Ye must know, O Assembly of the Wise, that sulphurs are
contained in sulphurs, and humidity in humidity.

The Turba answereth:- The envious, O Acsubofen, have uttered something
like unto this! Tell us, therefore, what is this humidity?

And he:- Humidity is a venom, and when venom penetrates a body, it
tinges it with an invariable colour, and in no wise permits the soul to
be separated from the body, because it is equal thereto. Concerning
this, the envious have said: When one flies and the other pursues, then
one seizes upon the other, and afterwards they no longer flee, because
Nature has laid hold of its equal, after the manner of an enemy, and
they destroy one another. For this reason, out of the sulphureous mixed
sulphur is produced a most precious colour, which varies not, nor flees
from the fire, when the soul enters into the interior of the body and
holds the body together and tinges it. I will repeat my words in Tyrian
dye. Take the Animal which is called Kenckel, since all its water is a
Tyrian colour, and rule the same with a gentle fire, as is customary,
until it shall become earth, in which there will be a little colour. But
if you wish to obtain the Tyrian tincture, take the humidity which that
thing has ejected, and place it therewith gradually in a vessel, adding
that tincture whereof the colour was disagreeable to you. Then cook with
that same marine water until it shall become dry. Afterwards moisten
with that humour, dry gradually, and cease not to imbue it, to cook, and
to dry, until it be imbued with all its humour. Then leave it for
several days in its own vessel, Until the most precious Tyrian colour
shall come out from it to the surface. Observe how I describe the
regimen to you! Prepare it with the urine of boys, with water of the
sea, and with permanent clean water, so that it may be tinged, and
decoct with a gentle fire, until the blackness altogether shall depart
from it, and it be easily pounded. Decoct, therefore, in its own humour
until it clothe itself with a red colour. But if ye wish to bring it to
the Tyrian colour, imbue the same with continual water, and mix, as ye
know to be sufficient, according to the rule of sight; mix the same with
permanent water sufficiently, and decoct until rust absorb the water.
Then wash with the water of the sea which thou hast prepared, which is
water of desiccated calx; cook until it imbibe its own moisture; and do
this day by day. I tell you that a colour will thence appear to you the
like of which the Tyrians have never made. And if ye wish that it should
be a still more exalted colour, place the gum in the permanent water,
with which ye shall dye it alternately, and afterwards desiccate in the
sun. Then restore to the aforesaid water and the black Tyrian colour is
intensified. But know that ye do not tinge the purple colour except by
cold. Take, therefore, water which is of the nature of cold, and steep
wool therein until it extract the force of the tincture from the water.
Know also that the Philosophers have called the force which proceeds
from that water the Flower. Seek, therefore, your intent in the said
water; therein place what is in the vessel for days and nights, until it
be clothed with a most precious Tyrian colour.

**The Fifteenth Dictum.**

Frictes saith:- O all ye seekers after Wisdom, know that the foundation
of this Art, on account of which many have perished, is one only. There
is one thing which is stronger than all natures, and more sublime in the
opinion of philosophers, whereas with fools it is more common than
anything. But for us it is a thing which we reverence. Woe unto all ye
fools! How ignorant are ye of this Art, for which ye would die if ye
knew it! I swear to you that if kings were familiar with it, none of us
would ever attain this thing. O how this nature changeth body into
spirit! O how admirable is Nature, how she presides over all, and
overcomes all!

Pythagoras saith:- Name this Nature, O Frictes!

And he:- It is a very sharp vinegar, which makes gold into sheer spirit,
without which vinegar, neither whiteness, nor blackness, nor redness,
nor rust can be made. And know ye that when it is mixed with the body,
it is contained therein, and becomes one therewith; it turns the same
into a spirit, and tinges with a spiritual and invariable tincture,
which is indelible. Know, also, that if ye place the body over the fire
without vinegar, it will be burnt and corrupted. And know, further, that
the first humour is cold. Be careful, therefore, of the fire, which is
inimical to cold. Accordingly, the Wise have said: "Rule gently until
the sulphur becomes incombustible." The Wise men have already shewn to
those who possess reason the disposition of this Art, and the best point
of their Art, which they mentioned, is, that a little of this sulphur
burns a strong body. Accordingly they venerate it and name it in the
beginning of their book, and the son of Adam thus described it. For this
vinegar burns the body, converts it into a cinder, and also whitens the
body, which, if ye cook well and deprive of blackness, is changed into a
stone, so that it becomes a coin of most intense whiteness. Cook,
therefore, the stone until it be disintegrated, and then dissolve and
temper with water of the sea. Know also, that the beginning of the whole
work is the whitening, to which succeeds the redness, finally the
perfection of the work; but after this, by means of vinegar, and by the
will of Gcd, there follows a complete perfection, Now, I have shewn to
you, O disciples of this Turba, the disposition of the one thing, which
is more perfect, more precious, and more honourable, than all natures,
and I swear to you by God that I have searched for a long time in books
so that I might arrive at the knowledge of this one thing, while I
prayed also to God that he would teach me what it is. My prayer was
heard, He shewed me clean water, whereby I knew pure vinegar, and the
more I did read books, the more was I illuminated.

**The Sixteenth Dictum.**

Socrates saith:- Know, O crowd of those that still remain of the Sons of
the Doctrine, that no tincture can be produced without Lead, which
possesses the required virtue. Have ye not seen how thrice-great Hermes
infused the red into the body, and it was changed into an invariable
colour? Know, therefore, that the first virtue is vinegar, and the
second is the Lead of which the Wise have spoken, which if it be infused
into all bodies, renders all unchangeable, and tinges them with an
invariable colour. Take, therefore, Lead which is made out of the stone
called Kuhul; let it be of the best quality, and let it be cooked till
it becomes black. Then pound the same with Water of Nitre until it is
thick like grease, and cook again in a very bright fire until the
spissitude of the body is destroyed, the water being rejected. Kindle,
therefore, above it until the stone becomes clean, abounding in precious
metal, and exceedingly white. Pound it afterwards with dew and the sun,
and with sea and rain water for 31 days, for 10 days with salt water,
and 10 days with fresh water, when ye shall find the same like to a
metallic stone. Cook the same once more with water of nitre until it
become tin by liquefaction. Again cook until it be deprived of moisture,
and become dry. But know that when it becomes dry it drinks up what
remains of its humour swiftly, because it is burnt lead. Take care,
however, lest it be burnt. Thus we call it incombustible sulphur. Pound
the same with the sharpest vinegar, and cook till it becomes thick,
taking care lest the vinegar be changed into smoke and perish; continue
this coction for 150 days. Now, therefore, I have demonstrated the
disposition of the white lead, all which afterwards follows being no
more than women's work and child's play. Know, also, that the arcanum of
the work of gold proceeds out of the male and the female, but I have
shewn you the male in the lead, while, in like manner, I have discovered
for you the female in orpiment. Mix, therefore, the orpiment with the
lead, for the female rejoices in receiving the strength of the male,
because she is assisted by the male. But the male receives a tingeing
spirit from the female. Mix them, therefore, together, place in a glass
vessel, and pound with Ethelia and very sharp vinegar; cook for seven
days, taking care lest the arcanum smoke away, and leave throughout the
night. But if ye wish it to put on mud (colour), seeing that it is
already dry, again imbue with vinegar. Now, therefore, I have notified
to you the power of orpiment, which is the woman by whom is accomplished
the most great arcanum. Do not shew these unto the evil, for they will
laugh. It is the Ethelia of vinegar which is placed in the preparation,
by which things God perfects the work, whereby also spirits take
possession of bodies, and they become spiritual.

**The Seventeenth Dictum.**

Zimon saith:- O Turba of Philosophers and disciples, now hast thou
spoken about making into white, but it yet remains to treat concerning
the reddening! Know, all ye seekers after this Art, that unless ye
whiten, ye cannot make red, because the two natures are nothing other
than red and white. Whiten, therefore, the red, and redden the white!
Know, also, that the year is divided into four seasons; the first season
is of a frigid complexion, and this is Winter; the second is of the
complexion of air, and this is Spring; then follows the third, which is
summer, and is of the complexion of fire; lastly, there is the fourth,
wherein fruits are matured, which is Autumn. In this manner, therefore,
ye are to rule your natures, namely, to dissolve ill winter, to cook in
spring, to coagulate in summer, and to gather and tinge the fruit in
autumn. Having, therefore, given this example, rule the tingeing
natures, but if ye err, blame no one save yourselves.

The Turba answereth:- Thou hast treated the matter extremely well; add,
therefore, another teaching of this kind for the sake of posterity.

And he:- I will speak of making lead red. Take the copper which the
Master ordered you to take at the beginning of his book, combine lead
therewith, and cook it until it becomes thick; congeal also and
desiccate until it becomes red. Here certainly is the Red Lead of which
the wise spake; copper and lead become a precious stone; mix them
equally, let gold be roasted with them, for this, if ye rule well,
becomes a tingeing spirit in spirits. So when the male and the female
are conjoined there is not produced a volatile wife, but a spiritual
composite. From the composite turned into a red spirit is produced the
beginning of the world. Behold this is the lead which we have called Red
Lead, which is of our work, and without which nothing is effected!

**The Eighteenth Dictum.**

Mundus saith to the Turba:- The seekers after this Art must know that
the Philosophers in their books have described gum in many ways, but it
is none other than permanent water, out of which our precious stone is
generated. O how many are the seekers after this gum, and how few there
are who find it! Know that this gum is not ameliorated except by gold
alone. For there be very many who investigate these applications, and
they find certain things, yet they cannot sustain the labours because
they are diminished. But the applications which are made out of the gum
and out of the honourable stone, which has already held the tincture,
they sustain the labours, and are never diminished. Understand,
therefore, my words, for I will explain unto you the applications of
this gum, and the arcanum existing therein. Know ye that our gum is
stronger than gold, and all those who know it do hold it more honourable
than gold, yet gold we also honour, for without it the gum cannot be
improved. Our gum, therefore, is for Philosophers more precious and more
sublime than pearls, because out of gum with a little gold we buy much.
Consequently, the Philosophers, when committing these things to writing
that the same might not perish, have not set forth in their books the
manifest disposition, lest every one should become acquainted therewith,
and having become familiar to fools, the same would not sell it at a
small price. Take, therefore, one part of the most intense white gum;
one part of the urine of a white calf; one part of the gall of a fish;
and one part of the body of gum, without which it cannot be improved;
mix these portions and cook for forty days. When these things have been
done, congeal by the heat of the sun till they are dried. Then cook the
same, mixed with milk of ferment, until the milk fail; afterwards
extract it, and until it become dry evaporate the moisture by heat. Then
mix it with milk of the fig, and cook it till that moisture be dried up
in the composite, which afterwards mix with milk of the root of grass,
and again cook until it be dry. Then moisten it with rainwater, then
sprinkle with water of dew, and cook until it be dried. Also imbue with
permanent water, and desiccate until it become of the most intense
dryness. Having done these things: mix the same with the gum which is
equipped with all manner of colours, and cook strongly until the whole
force of the water perish; and the entire body be deprived of its
humidity, while ye imbue the same by cooking, until the dryness thereof
be kindled. Then dismiss for forty days. Let it remain in that
trituration or decocting until the spirit penetrate the body. For by
this regimen the spirit is made corporeal, and the body is changed into
a spirit. Observe the vessel, therefore, lest the composition fly and
pass off in fumes. These things being accomplished, open the vessel, and
ye will find that which ye purposed. This, therefore, is the arcanum of
gum, which the Philosophers have concealed in their books.

**The Nineteenth Dictum.**

Dardaris saith:- It is common knowledge that the Masters before us have
described Permanent Water. Now, it behoves one who is introduced to this
Art to attempt nothing till he is familiar with the power of this
Permanent Water, and in commixture, contrition, and the whole regimen,
it behoves us to use invariably this famous Permanent Water. He,
therefore, who does not understand Permanent Water, and its
indispensable regimen, may not enter into this Art, because nothing is
effected without the Permanent Water. The force thereof is a spiritual
blood, whence the Philosophers have called it Permanent Water, for,
having pounded it with the body, as the Masters before me have explained
to you, by the will of God it turns that body into spirit. For these,
being mixed together and reduced to one, transform each other; the body
incorporates the spirit, and the spirit incorporates the body into
tinged spirit, like blood. And know ye, that whatsoever hath spirit the
same hath blood also as well. Remember, therefore, this arcanum!

**The Twentieth Dictum.**

Belus saith:- O disciples, ye have discoursed excellently!

Pythagoras answers:- Seeing that they are philosophers, O Belus, why
hast thou called them disciples?

He answereth:- It is in honour of their Master, lest I should make them
equal with him.

Then Pythagoras saith:- Those who, in conjunction with us, have composed
this book which is called the Turba, ought not to be termed disciples.

Then he:- Master, they have frequently described Permanent Water, and
the making of the White and the Red in many ways, albeit under many
names; but in the modes after which they have conjoined weights,
compositions, and regimens, they agree with the hidden truth. Behold,
what is said concerning this despised thing! A report has gone abroad
that the Hidden Glory of the Philosophers is a stone and not a stone,
and that it is called by many names, lest the foolish should recognise
it, Certain wise men have designated it after one fashion, namely,
according to the place where it is generated; others have adopted
another, founded upon its colour, some of whom have termed it the Green
Stone; by other some it is called the Stone of the most intense Spirit
of Brass, not to be mixed with bodies; by yet others its description has
been further varied, because it is sold for coins by lapidaries who are
called saven; some have named it Spume of Luna; some have distinguished
it astronomically or arithmetically; it has already received a thousand
titles, of which the best is: "That which is produced out of metals." So
also others have called it the Heart of the Sun, and yet others have
declared it to be that which is brought forth out of quicksilver with
the milk of volatile things.

**The Twenty-first Dictum.**

Pandolfus saith:- O Belus, thou hast said so much concerning the
despised stone that thou hast left nothing to be added by thy brethren!
Howsoever, I teach posterity that this despised stone is a permanent
water, and know, all ye seekers after Wisdom, that permanent water is
water of mundane life, because, verily, Philosophers have stated that
Nature rejoices in Nature, Nature contains Nature, and Nature overcomes
Nature. The Philosophers have constituted this short dictum the
principle of the work for reasonable persons. And know ye that no body
is more precious or purer than the Sun, and that no tingeing venom: is
generated without the Sun and its shadow. He, therefore, who attempts to
make the venom of the Philosophers without these, already errs, and has
fallen into that pit wherein his sadness remains. But he who has tinged
the venom of the wise out of the Sun and its shadow has arrived at the
highest Arcanum. Know also that our coin when it becomes red, is called
gold; he, therefore, who knows the hidden Cambar of the Philosophers, to
him is the Arcanum already revealed.

The Turba answereth:- Thou hast even now intelligibly described this
stone, yet thou hast not narrated its regimen nor its composition.
Return, therefore, to the description.

He saith:- I direct you to take an occult and honourable arcanum, which
is White Magnesia, and the same is mixed and pounded with wine, but take
care not to make use of this except it be pure and clean; finally place
it in its vessel, and pray God that He may grant you the sight of this
very great stone. Then cook gradually, and, extracting, see if it has
become a black stone, in which case ye have ruled excellently well. But
rule it thus for the white, which is a great arcanum, until it becomes
Kuhul, closed up with blackness, which blackness see that it does not
remain longer than forty days. Pound the same, therefore, with its
confections, which are the said flower of copper, gold of the Indies
whose root is one, and a certain extract of an unguent, that is, of a
crocus, that is, fixed exalted alum; cook the four, therefore,
permanently for 40 or 42 days. After these days God will show you the
principle(or beginning) of this stone, which is the stone Atitos, of
which favoured sight of God there are many accounts. Cook strongly, and
imbue with the gum that remains. And know ye that so often as ye imbue
the cinder, so often must it be desiccated and again humectated, until
its colour turns into that which ye desire. Now, therefore, will I
complete that which I have begun, if God will look kindly on us. Know
also that the perfection of the work of this precious stone is to rule
it with the residue of the third part of the medicine, and to preserve
the two other parts for imbuing and cooking alternately till the
required colour appears. Let the fire be more intense than the former;
let the matter be cerated, and when it is desiccated it coheres. Cook,
therefore, the wax until it imbibes the gluten of gold, which being
desiccated, imbue the rest of the work seven times until the other two
thirds be finished, and true earth imbibe them all. Finally, place the
same on a hot fire until the earth extract its flower and be
satisfactory. Blessed are ye if ye understand! But, if not, I will
repeat to you the perfection of the work. Take the clean white, which is
a most great arcanum, wherein is the true tincture; imbue sand
therewith, which sand is made out of the stone seven times imbued, until
it drink up the whole, and close the mouth of the vessel effectually, as
you have often been told. For that which ye seek of it by the favour of
God, will appear to you, which is the stone of Tyrian colour. Now,
therefore, I have fulfilled the truth, so do I conjure you by God and
your sure Master, that you show not this great arcanum, and beware of
the wicked!

**The Twenty-Second Dictum.**

Theophilus saith: Thou hast spoken intelligently and elegantly, and art
held free from envy.

Saith the Turba:- Let your discretion, therefore, explain to us what the
instructing Pandolfus has stated, and be not envious.

Then he:- O all ye seekers after this science, the arcanum of gold and
the art of the coin is a dark vestment, and no one knows what the
Philosophers have narrated in their books without frequent reading,
experiments, and questionings of the Wise. For that which they have
concealed is more sublime and obscure than it is possible to make known
in words, and albeit some have dealt with it intelligibly and well,
certain others have treated it obscurely; thus some are more lucid than
others.

The Turba answereth: Thou hast truly spoken.

And he:- I announce to posterity that between boritis and copper there
is an affinity, because the boritis of the Wise liquefies; the copper,
and it changes as a fluxible water. Divide, therefore, the venom into
two equal parts, with one of which liquefy the copper, but preserve the
other to Pound and imbue the same, until it is drawn out into plates;
cook again with the former part of the venom, cook two to seven in two;
cook to seven in its own water for 42 days; finally, open the vessel,
and ye shall find copper turned into quicksilver; wash the same by
cooking until it be deprived of its blackness, and become as copper
without a shadow. Lastly, cook it continuously until it be congealed.
For when it is congealed it becomes a very great arcanum. Accordingly,
the Philosophers have called this stone Boritis; cook, therefore, that
coagulated stone until it becomes a matter like mucra. Then imbue it
with the Permanent water which I directed you to reserve, that is to
say, with the other portion, and cook it many times until its colours
manifest. This, therefore, is the very great putrefaction which extracts
(or contains in itself) the very great arcanum.

Saith the Turba:- Return to thine exposition, O Theophilus!

And he:- It is to be known that the same affinity which exists between
the magnet and iron, also exists assuredly between copper and permanent
water. If, therefore, ye rule copper and permanent water as I have
directed, there will thence result the very great arcanum in the
following fashion. Take white Magnesia and quicksilver, mix with the
male, and pound strongly by cooking, not with the hands, until the water
become thin. But dividing this water into two parts, in the one part of
the water cook it for eleven, otherwise, forty days, until there be a
white flower, as the flower of salt in its splendour and coruscation:
but strongly close the mouth of the vessel, and cook for forty days,
when ye will find it water whiter than milk; deprive it of all blackness
by cooking; continue the cooking until its whole nature be
disintegrated, until the defilement perish, until it be found clean, and
is wholly broken up (or becomes wholly clean). But if ye wish that the
whole arcanum, which I have given you, be accomplished, wash the same
with water, that is to say, the other part which I counselled you to
preserve, until there appear a crocus, and leave in its own vessel. For
the Iksir pounds (or contains) itself; imbue also with the residue of
the water, until by decoction and by water it be pounded and become like
a syrup of pomegranates; imbue it, therefore, and cook, until the weight
of the humidity shall fail, and the colour which the Philosophers have
magnified shall truly appear.

**The Twenty-third Dictum.**

Cerus saith:- Understand, all ye Sons of the Doctrine, that which
Theophilus hath told you, namely, that there exists an affinity between
the magnet and the iron, by the alliance of composite existing between
the magnet and the iron, while the copper is fitly ruled for one hundred
days: what statement can be more useful to you than that there is no
affinity between tin and quicksilver!

The Turba answereth:- Thou hast ill spoken, having disparaged the true
disposition.

And he:- I testify that I say nothing but what is true why are you
incensed against me Fear the Lord, all ye Turba, that you Master may
believe you!

The Turba answereth:- Say what you will.

And he:- I direct you to take quicksilver, in which is the male potency
or strength; cook the same with its body until it becomes a fluxible
water; cook the masculine together with the vapour, until each shall be
coagulated and become a stone. Then take the water which you had divided
into two parts, of which one is for liquefying and cooking the body, but
the second is for cleansing that which is already burnt, and its
companion, which \[two\] are made one. Imbue the stone seven times, and
cleanse, until it be disintegrated, and its body be purged from all
defilement, and become earth. Know also that in the time of forty-two
days the whole is changed into earth; by cooking, therefore, liquefy the
same until it become as true water, which is quicksilver. Then wash with
water of nitre until it become as a liquefied coin. Then cook until it
be congealed and become like to tin, when it is a most great arcanum;
that is to say, the stone which is out of two things. Rule the same by
cooking and pounding, until it becomes a most excellent crocus. Know
also that unto water desiccated with its companion we have given the
name of crocus. Cook it, therefore, and imbue with the residual water
reserved by you until you attain your purpose.

**The Twenty-fourth Dictum.**

Bocascus saith:- Thou hast spoken well, O Belus, and therefore I follow
thy steps!

He answereth:- As it may please you, but do not become envious, for that
is not the part of the Wise.

And Bocascus:- Thou speakest the truth, and thus, therefore, I direct
the Sons of the Doctrine. Take lead, and, as the Philosophers have
ordained, imbue, liquefy, and afterwards congeal, until a stone is
produced; then rule the stone with gluten of gold and syrup of
pomegranates until it be broken up. But you have already divided the
water into two parts, with one of which you have liquefied the lead, and
it has become as water; cook, therefore, the same until it be dried and
have become earth; then pound with the water reserved until it acquire a
red colour, as you have been frequently ordered.

The Turba answereth:- Thou hast done nothing but pile up ambiguous
words. Return, therefore, to the subject.

And he:- Ye who wish to coagulate quicksilver, must mix it with its
equal. Afterwards cook it diligently until both become permanent water,
and, again, cook this water until it be coagulated. But let this be
desiccated with its own equal vapour, because ye have found the whole
quicksilver to be coagulated by itself. If ye understand, and place in
your vessel what is necessary, cook it until it be coagulated, and then
pound until it becomes a crocus like to the colour of gold.

**The Twenty-fifth Dictum.**

Menabdus saith:- May God reward thee for the regimen, since thou
speakest the truth! For thou hast illuminated thy words.

And they:- It is said because thou praisest him for his sayings, do not
be inferior to him.

And he:- I know that I can utter nothing but that which he hath uttered;
however, I counsel posterity to make bodies not bodies, but these
incorporeal things bodies. For by this regimen the composite is
prepared, and the hidden part of its nature is extracted. With these
bodies accordingly join quicksilver and the body of Magnesia, the woman
also with the man, and by means of this there is extracted our secret
Ethelia, through which bodies are coloured; assuredly, if I understand
this regimen, bodies become not bodies, and incorporeal things become
bodies. If ye diligently pound the things in the fire and digest (or
join to) the Ethelias, they become clean and fixed things. And know ye
that quicksilver is a fire burning the bodies, mortifying and breaking
up, with one regimen, and the more it is mixed and pounded with the
body, the more the body is disintegrated, while the quicksilver is
attenuated and becomes living. For when ye shall diligently pound fiery
quicksilver and cook it as required, ye will possess Ethel, a fixed
nature and colour, subject to every tincture, which also overcomes,
breaks, and constrains the fire. For this reason it does not colour
things unless it be coloured, and being coloured it colours. And know
that no body can tinge itself unless its spirit be extracted from the
secret belly thereof, when it becomes a body and soul without the
spirit, which is a spiritual tincture, out of which colours have
manifested, seeing that a dense thing does not tinge a tenuous, but a
tenuous nature colours that which enters into a body. When, however, ye
have ruled the body of copper, and have extracted from it a most tenuous
(subject), then the latter is changed into a tincture by which it is
coloured. Hence has the wise man said, that copper does not tinge unless
first it be tinged. And know that those four bodies which you are
directed to rule are this copper, and that the tinctures which I have
signified unto you are the condensed and the humid, but the condensed is
a conjoined vapour, and the humid is the water of sulphur, for sulphurs
are contained by sulphurs, and rightly by these things Nature rejoices
in Nature, and overcomes, and constrains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Turba Philosophorum (part 2)](turba2)

  
