[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rag04)  [Next](rag06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III.

##### THE ACTION OF WAVES.

WHEN men began, for the first time, to study the drift deposits, they
believed that they found in them the results of the Noachic Deluge; and
hence the Drift was called the Diluvium, and the period of time in which
it was laid down was entitled the Diluvial age.

It was supposed that--

"Somehow and somewhere in the far north a series of gigantic waves was
mysteriously propagated. These waves were supposed to have precipitated
themselves upon the land, and then swept madly over mountain and valley
alike, carrying along with them a mighty burden of rocks and stones and
rubbish. Such deluges were called 'waves of translation.'"\[1\]

There were many difficulties about this theory:

In the first place, there was no cause assigned for these waves, which
must have been great enough to have swept over the tops of high
mountains, for the evidences of the Drift age are found three thousand
feet above the Baltic, four thousand feet high in the Grampians of
Scotland, and six thousand feet high in New England.

In the next place, if this deposit had been swept up from or by the sea,
it would contain marks of its origin. The shells of the sea, the bones
of fish, the remains of seals and whales, would have been taken up by
these great deluges, and carried over the land, and have remained

\[1. "The Great Ice Age," p. 26.\]

{p. 11}

mingled in the *débris* which they deposited. This is not the case. The
unstratified Drift is unfossiliferous, and where the stratified Drift
contains fossils they are the remains of land animals, except in a few
low-lying districts near the sea.

I quote:

"Over the interior of the continent *it contains no marine fossils or
relics*."\[1\]

Geikie says:

"*Not a single trace of any marine organism has yet been detected in
true till*."\[2\]

Moreover, if the sea-waves made these great deposits, they must have
picked up the material composing them either from the shores of the sea
or the beds of streams. And when we consider the vastness of the
drift-deposits, extending, as they do, over continents, with a depth of
hundreds of feet, it would puzzle us to say where were the sea-beaches
or rivers on the globe that could produce such inconceivable quantities
of gravel, sand, and clay. The production of gravel is limited to a
small marge of the ocean, not usually more than a mile wide, where the
waves and the rocks meet. If we suppose the whole shore of the oceans
around the northern half of America to be piled up with gravel five
hundred feet thick, it would go but a little way to form the immense
deposits which stretch from the Arctic Sea to Patagonia.

The stones of the "till" are strangely marked, striated, and scratched,
with lines parallel to the longest diameter. No such stones are found in
river-beds or on sea-shores.

Geikie says:

"We look in vain for striated stones in the gravel which the surf drives
backward and forward on a beach,

\[1. Dana's "Text-Book," p. 220.

2\. "The Great Ice Age," p. 15.\]

{p. 12}

and we may search the *detritus* that beaches and rivers push along
their beds, but *we shall not find any stones at all resembling those of
the till*."\[1\]

But we need not discuss any further this theory. It is now almost
universally abandoned.

We know of no way in which such waves could be formed; if they were
formed, they could not find the material to carry over the land; if they
did find it, it would not have the markings which are found in the
Drift, and it would possess marine fossils not found in the Drift; and
the waves would not and could not scratch and groove the rock-surfaces
underneath the Drift, as we know they are scratched and grooved.

Let us then dismiss this hypothesis, and proceed to the consideration of
the next.

\[1. "The Great Ice Age," p. 69.\]

{p. 13}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Was It Caused By Icebergs?](rag06)
