[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rag18)  [Next](rag20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V.

##### THE CONFLAGRATION OF PHAËTON

Now let us turn to the mythology of the Latins, as preserved in the
pages of Ovid, one of the greatest of the poets of ancient Rome.\[1\]

Here we have the burning of the world involved in the myth of Phaëton,
son of Phœbus--Apollo--the Sun--who drives the chariot of his father; he
can not control the horses of the Sun, they run away with him; they come
so near the earth as to set it on fire, and Phaëton is at last killed by
Jove, as he killed Typhon in the Greek legends, to save heaven and earth
from complete and common ruin.

This is the story of the conflagration as treated by a civilized mind,
explained by a myth, and decorated with the flowers and foliage of
poetry.

We shall see many things in the narrative of Ovid which strikingly
confirm our theory.

Phaëton, to prove that he is really the son of Phœbus, the Sun, demands
of his parent the right to drive his chariot for one day. The sun-god
reluctantly consents, not without many pleadings that the infatuated and
rash boy would give up his inconsiderate ambition. Phaëton persists. The
old man says:

"Even the ruler of vast Olympus, who hurls the ruthless bolts with his
terrific right hand, can not guide

\[1. "The Metamorphoses," book xi, fable 1.\]

{p. 155}

this chariot; and yet, what have we greater than Jupiter? The first part
of the road is steep, and such as the horses, though fresh in the
morning, can hardly climb. In the middle of the heaven it is high aloft,
whence it is often a source of fear, even to myself, to look down upon
the sea and the earth, and my breast trembles with fearful
apprehensions. The last stage is a steep descent, and requires a sure
command of the horses. . . . Besides, the heavens are carried round with
a constant rotation, and carrying with them the lofty stars, and whirl
them with rapid revolution. Against this I have to contend; and that
force which overcomes all other things does not overcome me, and *I am
carried in a contrary direction to the rapid world*."

Here we seem to have a glimpse of some higher and older learning, mixed
with the astronomical errors of the day: Ovid supposes the rapid world
to move, revolve, one way, while the sun appears to move another.

But Phaëton insists on undertaking the dread task. The doors of Aurora
are opened, "her halls filled with roses"; the stars disappear; the
Hours yoke the horses, "filled with the *juice of ambrosia*," the father
anoints the face of his son with a hallowed drug that he may the better
endure the great heat; the reins are handed him, and the fatal race
begins. Phœbus has advised him not to drive too high, or "thou wilt set
on fire the signs of the heavens"--the constellations;--nor too low, or
he will consume the earth.

"In the mean time the swift Pyroeis, and Eoüs and Æthon, the horses of
the sun, and Phlegon, the fourth, fill the air with neighings, sending
forth flames, and beat the barriers with their feet. . . . They take the
road . . . they cleave the resisting clouds, and, raised aloft by their
wings, they pass by the east winds that had arisen from the same parts.
But the weight" (of Phaëton) "was light, and such as the horses of the
sun could not feel; and the yoke was deficient of its wonted weight. . .
. Soon as

{p. 156}

the steeds had perceived this they rush on and leave the beaten track,
and run not in the order in which they did before. He himself becomes
alarmed, and knows not which way to turn the reins intrusted to him; nor
does he know where the way is, nor, if he did know, could he control
them. Then, for the first time, did the cold Triones grow warm with
sunbeams, and attempt, in vain, to be dipped in the sea that was
forbidden to them. And the Serpent, which is situate next to the icy
pole, being before torpid with cold, and formidable to no one, grew
warm, and regained new rage for the heat. And they say that thou,
Boötes, scoured off in a mighty bustle, although thou wert but slow, and
thy cart hindered thee. But when from the height of the skies the
unhappy Phaëton looked down upon the earth lying far, very far beneath,
he grew pale, and his knees shook with a sudden terror; and, in a light
so great, darkness overspread his eyes. And now he could wish that he
had never touched the horses of his father; and now he is sorry that he
knew his descent, and prevailed in his request; now desiring to be
called the son of Merops."

"What can he do? . . . He is stupefied; he neither lets go the reins,
nor is able to control them. In his fright, too, he sees strange objects
scattered everywhere in various parts of the heavens, and the forms of
huge wild beasts. There is a spot where the Scorpion bends his arms into
two curves, and, with his tail and claws bending on either side, he
extends his limbs through the space of two signs of the zodiac. As soon
as the youth beheld him, wet with the sweat of black venom, and
threatening wounds with the barbed point of his tail, bereft of sense he
let go the reins in a chill of horror."

Compare the course which Ovid tells us Phaëton pursued through the
constellations, past the Great Serpent and Boötes, and close to the
venomous Scorpion, with the orbit of Donati's comet in 1858, as given in
Schellen's great work.\[1\]

\[1. "Spectrum Analysis," p. 391.\]

{p. 157}

![](img/15700.jpg)

The path described by Ovid shows that the comet came from the north part
of the heavens; and this agrees with what we know of the Drift; the
markings indicate that it came from the north.

The horses now range at large; "they go through

{p. 158}

the air of an unknown region; . . . they rush on the stars fixed in the
sky"; they approach the earth.

"The moon, too, wonders that her brother's horses run *lower than her
own*, and the scorched clouds send forth smoke, As each region is most
elevated it is *caught by the flames*, and cleft, it makes *vast chasms,
its moisture being carried away*. The grass grows pale; the trees, with
their foliage, are *burned up*, and the dry, standing corn affords fuel
for its own destruction. But I am complaining of trifling ills. *Great
cities perish*, together with their fortifications, and the flames *turn
whole nations into ashes*; woods, together with mountains, are on fire.
Athos burns, and the Cilician Taurus, and Tmolus, and Œta, and Ida, now
dry but once most famed for its springs, and Helicon, the resort of the
virgin Muses, and Hæmus, not yet called Œagrian. *Ætna burns intensely
with redoubled flames*, and Parnassus, with its two summits, and Eryx,
and Cynthus, and Orthrys, and Rhodope, at length to be despoiled of its
snows, and Mimas, and Dindyma, and Mycale, and Cithæron, created for the
sacred rites. Nor does its cold avail even Scythia; Caucasus is on fire,
and Ossa with Pindus, and Olympus, greater than them both, and the lofty
Alps, and the cloud-bearing Apennines.

"Then, indeed, Phaëton *beholds the world see on fire on all sides*, and
he can not endure heat so great, and he inhales with his mouth scorching
air, as though from a deep furnace, and perceives his own chariot to be
on fire. And neither is he able now to bear the ashes and *the emitted
embers*; and on every side he is involved in a *heated smoke*. Covered
with *a pitchy darkness*, he knows not whither he is going, nor where he
is, and is hurried away at the pleasure of the winged steeds. They
believe that it was then that the nations of *the Æthiopians contracted
their black hue*, the blood being attracted. into the surface of the
body. Then was Libya" (Sahara?) "made dry by the heat, the moisture
being carried off; then with disheveled hair the Nymphs *lamented the
springs and the lakes*. Bœotia bewails Dirce, Argos Amymone, and Ephyre
the waters of Pirene. Nor do rivers that

{p. 159}

have banks distant remain secure. Tanais smokes in the midst of its
waters, and the aged Peneus and Teuthrantian Caïcus and rapid Ismenus. .
. . The Babylonian Euphrates, too, was on fire, Orontes was in flames,
and the swift Thermodon and Ganges and Phasis and Ister. Alpheus
*boils*; the banks of Spercheus burn; and the gold which Tagus carries
with its stream melts in the flames. The river-birds, too, which made
famous the Mæonian banks with song, grew hot in the middle of Caÿster.
The Nile, affrighted, fled to the remotest parts of the earth and
concealed his head, which still lies hid; his seven last mouths are
empty, seven channels without any streams. The same fate dries up the
Ismarian rivers, Hebeus together with Strymon, and the Hesperian
streams, the Rhine, the Rhone, and the Po, and the Tiber, to which was
promised the sovereignty of the world."

In other words, according to these Roman traditions here poetized, the
heat dried up the rivers of Europe, Asia, and Africa; in short, of all
the known world.

Ovid continues:

"All the ground bursts asunder, and through the chinks the light
penetrates into Tartarus, and startles the infernal king with his
spouse."

We have seen that during the Drift age the great clefts in the earth,
the fiords of the north of Europe and America, occurred, and we shall
see hereafter that, according to a Central American legend, the red
rocks boiled up through the earth at this time.

"The *ocean, too, is contracted*," says Ovid, "and that which lately was
sea is a surface of parched sand, and the mountains which the deep sea
has covered, start up and increase the number of the scattered Cyclades"
(a cluster of islands in the Ægean Sea, surrounding Delos as though with
a circle, whence their name); "the fishes sink to the bottom, and the
crooked dolphins do not care to raise themselves on the surface into the
air as usual. The bodies of sea-calves float lifeless on their backs on

{p. 160}

the top of the water. The story, too, is that even Nereus himself and
Doris and their daughters *lay hid in the heated caverns*."

All this could scarcely have been imagined, and yet it agrees precisely
with what we can not but believe to have been the facts. Here we have an
explanation of how that vast body of vapor which afterward constituted
great snow-banks and ice-sheets and river-torrents rose into the air.
Science tells us that to make a world-wrapping ice-sheet two miles
thick, all the waters of the ocean must have been evaporated;\[1\] to
make one a mile thick would take one half the waters of the globe; and
here we find this Roman poet, who is repeating the legends of his race,
and who knew nothing about a Drift age or an Ice age, telling us that
the water *boiled* in the streams; that the bottom of the Mediterranean
lay exposed, a bed of dry sand; that the fish floated dead on the
surface, or fled away to the great depths of the ocean; and that even
the sea-gods "hid in the heated caverns."

Ovid continues:

"Three times had Neptune ventured with stern countenance to thrust his
arms out of the water; three times he was unable to endure the scorching
heat of the air."

This is no doubt a reminiscence of those human beings who sought safety
in the water, retreating downward into the deep as the heat reduced its
level, occasionally lifting up their heads to breathe the torrid and
tainted air.

"However, the genial Earth, *as she was surrounded by the sea*, amid the
waters of the main" (the ocean); "the springs dried up on every side
which had hidden themselves in the bowels of their cavernous parent,
burnt up, lifted up her all-productive face as far as her neck, and

\[1. "Science and Genesis," p. 125.\]

{p. 161}

placed her hand to her forehead, and, shaking all things with a *vast
trembling*, she *sank down a little and retired below the spot where she
is wont* to be."

Here we are reminded of the bridge Bifrost, spoken of in the last
chapter, which, as I have shown, was probably a prolongation of land
reaching from Atlantis to Europe, and which the Norse legends tell us
sank down under the feet of the forces of Muspelheim, in the day of
Ragnarok:

"And thus she spoke with a parched voice: 'O sovereign of the gods, if
thou approvest of this, if I have deserved it, why do thy lightnings
linger? Let me, if doomed to perish by the force of fire, perish by thy
flames; and alleviate my misfortune by being the author of it. With
difficulty, indeed, do I open my mouth for these very words. Behold my
scorched hair, and *such a quantity of ashes over my eyes*' (the
Drift-deposits), '*so much, too, over my features*. And dost thou give
this as my recompense? This as the reward of my *fertility* and my duty,
in that I *endure wounds from the crooked plow and harrows*, and am
harassed all the year through, in that I supply green leaves for the
cattle, and corn, a wholesome food, for mankind, and frankincense for
yourselves.

"'But still, suppose I am deserving of destruction, why have the waves
deserved this? Why has thy brother' (Neptune) 'deserved it? Why do the
seas delivered to him by lot *decrease*, and why do they *recede still
farther from the sky?* But if regard neither for thy brother nor myself
influences thee, still have consideration for thy own skies; look around
on either side, see how each pole is *smoking*; if the fire shall injure
them, *thy palace will fall in ruins*. See! Atlas himself is struggling,
and hardly can he bear the glowing heavens on his shoulders.

"'If the sea, if the earth, if the palace of heaven, perish, we are then
jumbled into the old chaos again. Save it from the flames, if aught
still survives, and provide for the preservation of the universe.'

{p. 162}

"Thus spoke the Earth; nor, indeed, could she any longer endure the
vapor, nor say more, and she withdrew her face within herself, *and the
caverns neighboring to the shades below*.

"But the omnipotent father, having called the gods above to witness, and
him, too, who had given the chariot to Phaëton, that unless he gives
assistance all things will perish in direful ruin, mounts aloft to the
highest eminence, from which he is wont to spread the clouds over the
spacious earth; and from which he moves his thunders, and burls the
brandished lightnings. *But then he had neither clouds that he could
draw over the earth, nor showers that he could pour down from the sky*."

That is to say, so long as the great meteor shone in the air, and for
some time after, the heat was too intense to permit the formation of
either clouds or rain; these could only come with coolness and
condensation.

He thundered aloud, and darted the poised lightning from his right ear,
against the charioteer, and at the same moment deprived him both of life
and his seat, and by his ruthless fires restrained the flames. The
horses are affrighted, and, making a bound in the opposite direction,
they shake the yoke from their necks, and disengage themselves from the
torn harness. In one place lie the reins, in another the axle-tree
wrenched from the pole, in another part are the spokes of the broken
wheels, and *the fragments of the chariot torn in pieces are scattered
far and wide*. But Phaëton, the flames consuming his *yellow* hair, *is
hurled headlong*, and is borne in *a long track through the air*, as
sometimes *a star is seen to fall from the serene sky*, although it
really has not fallen. Him the great Eridanus receives in a part of the
world far distant from his country, and bathes his foaming face. The
*Hesperian Naiads* commit his body, smoking from the *three-forked*
flames, to the tomb, and inscribe these verses on the stone: 'Here is
Phaëton buried, the driver of his father's chariot, which, if he did not
manage, still he miscarried in a great attempt.'

"But his wretched father" (the Sun) "

had hidden his

{p. 163}

face overcast with bitter sorrow, and, if only we can believe it, they
say that *one day passed without the sun*. The flames" (of the fires on
the earth) "afforded light, and there was some advantage in that
disaster."

As there was no daily return of the sun to mark the time, that one day
of darkness was probably of long duration; it may have endured for
years.

Then follows Ovid's description of the mourning of Clymene and the
daughters of the Sun and the Naiads for the dead Phaëton. Cycnus, king
of Liguria, grieves for Phaëton until he is transformed into a swan;
reminding one of the Central American legend, (which I shall give
hereafter,) which states that in that day all men were turned into
*goslings* or *geese*, a reminiscence, perhaps, of those who saved
themselves from the fire by taking refuge in the waters of the seas:

"Cycnus becomes a new bird; but he trusts himself not to the heavens or
the air, as being mindful of the *fire unjustly sent from thence*. He
*frequents the pools and the wide lakes*, and, abhorring fire, he
chooses the streams, the very contrary of flames.

"Meanwhile, the father of Phaëton" (the Sun), "in *squalid garb* and
destitute of his comeliness, *just as he is wont to be when he suffers
an eclipse of his disk*, abhors both the light, himself, and the day;
and gives his mind up to grief, and adds resentment to his sorrow."

In other words, the poet is now describing the age of darkness, which,
as we have seen, must have followed the conflagration, when the
condensing vapor wrapped the world in a vast cloak of cloud.

The Sun refuses to go again on his daily journey; just as we shall see
hereafter, in the American legends, he refuses to stir until threatened
or coaxed into action.

{p. 164}

"All the deities," says Ovid, "stand around the Sun as he says such
things, and they entreat him, with suppliant voice, *not to determine to
bring darkness over the world*." At length they induce the enraged and
bereaved father to resume his task.

"But the omnipotent father" (Jupiter) "surveys the vast walls of heaven,
and carefully searches that no part, impaired by the violence of the
fire, may fall into ruin. After he has seen them to be secure and in
their own strength, he examines the earth, and the *works of man*; yet a
care for his own Arcadia is more particularly his object. He *restores,
too, the springs and the rivers*, that had not yet dared to flow, *he
gives grass to the earth, green leaves to the trees*; and orders the
injured forests again to be green."

The work of renovation has begun; the condensing moisture renews the
springs and rivers, the green mantle of verdure once more covers the
earth, and from the waste places the beaten and burned trees put forth
new sprouts.

The legend ends, like Ragnarok, in a beautiful picture of a regenerated
world.

Divest this poem of the myth of Phaëton, and we have a very faithful
tradition of the conflagration of the world caused by the comet.

The cause of the trouble is a something which takes place high in the
heavens; it rushes through space; it threatens the stars; it traverses
particular constellations; it is disastrous; it has yellow hair; it is
associated with great heat; it sets the world on fire it dries up the
seas; its remains are scattered over the earth; it covers the earth with
ashes; the sun ceases to appear; there is a time when he is, as it were,
in eclipse, darkened; after a while he returns; verdure comes again upon
the earth, the springs and rivers reappear, the world is renewed. During
this catastrophe man has hidden himself, swanlike,

{p. 165}

in the waters; or the intelligent children of the earth betake
themselves to deep caverns for protection from the conflagration.

How completely does all this accord, in chronological order and in its
details, with the Scandinavian legend; and with what reason teaches us
must have been the consequences to the earth if a comet had fallen upon
it!

And the most ancient of the ancient world, the nation that stood
farthest back in historical time, the Egyptians, believed that this
legend of Phaëton really represented the contact of the earth with a
comet.

When Solon, the Greek lawgiver, visited Egypt, six hundred years before
the Christian era, he talked with the priests of Sais about the Deluge
of Deucalion. I quote the following from Plato ("Dialogues," xi, 517,
*Timæus*):

"Thereupon, one of the priests, who was of very great age, said, 'O
Solon, Solon, you Hellenes are but children, and there is never an old
man who is an Hellene.' Solon, hearing this, said, 'What do you mean?'
'I mean to say,' he replied, 'that in mind you are all young; there is
no old opinion handed down among you by ancient tradition, nor any
science which is hoary with age. And I will tell you the reason of this:
there have been, and there will be again, many destructions of mankind
arising out of many causes. There is a story which even you have
preserved, that once upon a time Phaëthon, the son of Helios, having
yoked the steeds in his father's chariot, because he was not able to
drive them in the path of his father, burnt up all that was upon the
earth, and was himself destroyed by a thunder-bolt. Now, this has the
form of a myth, but *really signifies a declination of the bodies moving
around the earth and in the heavens, and a great conflagration of things
upon the earth* recurring at long intervals of time: when this happens,
those who live upon the mountains and in dry and lofty places are more
liable to destruction than those who dwell by rivers or on the
sea-shore."'

{p. 166}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Other Legends Of The Conflagration](rag20)
