[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rag09)  [Next](rag11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII.

##### GREAT HEAT A PREREQUISITE.

Now, it will be observed that the principal theories assigned for the
Drift go upon the hypothesis that it was produced by extraordinary
masses of ice--ice as icebergs, ice as glaciers, or ice in continental
sheets. The scientists admit that immediately preceding this Glacial age
the climate was mild and equable, and these great formations of ice did
not exist. But none of them pretend to say how the ice came or what
caused it. Even Agassiz, the great apostle of the ice-origin of Drift,
is forced to confess:

"We have, as yet, no clew to the source of this great and *sudden*
change of climate. Various suggestions have been made--among others,
that formerly the inclination of the earth's axis was greater, or that a
submersion of the continents under water might have produced a decided
increase of cold; but none of these explanations are satisfactory, and
science has yet to find any cause which accounts for all the phenomena
connected with it."\[1\]

Some have imagined that a change in the position of the earth's axis of
rotation, due to the elevation of extensive mountain-tracts between the
poles and the equator, might have caused a degree of cold sufficient to
produce the phenomena of the Drift; but Geikie says--

"It has been demonstrated that the protuberance of the earth at the
equator so vastly exceeds that of any

\[1. "Geological Sketches," p. 210.\]

{p. 59}

possible elevation of mountain-masses between the equator and the poles,
that any slight changes which may have resulted from such geological
causes could have had only an infinitesimal effect upon the. general
climate of the globe."\[1\]

Let us reason together:--

The ice, say the glacialists, caused the Drift. What caused the ice?
Great rains and snows, they say, falling on the face of the land.
Granted. What is rain in the first instance? Vapor, clouds. Whence are
the clouds derived? From the waters of the earth, principally from the
oceans. How is the water in the clouds transferred to the clouds from
the seas? By evaporation. What is necessary to evaporation? *Heat*.

Here, then, is the sequence:

If there is no heat, there is no evaporation; no evaporation, no clouds;
no clouds, no rain; no rain, no ice; no ice, no Drift.

But, as the Glacial age meant ice on a stupendous scale, then it must
have been preceded by heat on a stupendous scale.

Professor Tyndall asserts that the ancient glaciers indicate the action
of heat as much as cold. He says:

"Cold will not produce glaciers. You may have the bitterest northeast
winds here in London throughout the winter without a single flake of
snow. Cold must have the fitting object to operate upon, and this
object--the aqueous vapor of the air--is the direct product of heat. Let
us put this glacier question in another form: the latent heat of aqueous
vapor, at the temperature of its production in the tropics, is about
1,000° Fahr., for the latent heat augments as the temperature of
evaporation descends.

A pound of water thus vaporized at the equator has absorbed one thousand
times the quantity of heat which

\[1. "The Great Ice Age," p. 98.\]

{p. 60}

would raise a pound of the liquid one degree in temperature. . . . It is
perfectly manifest that by weakening the sun's action, either through a
defect of emission or by the steeping of the entire solar system in
space of a low temperature, *we should be cutting off the glaciers at
their source*."\[1\]

Mr. Croll says:

"Heat, to produce *evaporation*, is just as essential to the
accumulation of snow and ice as cold to produce condensation."\[2\]

Sir John Lubbock says:

"Paradoxical as it may appear, the primary cause of the Glacial epoch
may be, after all, *an elevation of the temperature in the tropics*,
causing a greater amount of evaporation in the equatorial regions, and
consequently a greater supply of the raw material of snow in the
temperate regions during the winter months."\[3\]

So necessary did it appear that heat must have come from some source to
vaporize all this vast quantity of water, that one gentleman, Professor
Frankland,\[4\] suggested that the ocean must have been rendered hot by
the internal fires of the earth, and thus the water was sent up in
clouds to fall in ice and snow; but Sir John Lubbock disposes of this
theory by showing that the fauna of the seas during the Glacial period
possessed an Arctic character. We can not conceive of Greenland shells
and fish and animals thriving in an ocean nearly at the boiling-point.

A writer in "The Popular Science Monthly"\[5\] says:

"These evidences of vast accumulations of ice and snow on the borders of
the Atlantic have led some theorists

\[1. "Heat considered as a Mode of Motion," p. 192.

2\. "Climate and Time," p. 74.

3\. "Prehistoric Times," p. 401.

4\. "Philosophical Magazine," 1864, p. 328.

5\. July, 1876, p. 288.\]

{p. 61}

to suppose that the Ice period was attended, if not in part caused, by a
far more abundant evaporation from the surface of the Atlantic than
takes place at present; and it has even been conjectured that submarine
volcanoes in the tropics might have loaded the atmosphere with an
unusual amount of moisture. This speculation seems to me, however, both
improbable and superfluous; improbable, because no traces of any such
cataclysm have been discovered, and it is more than doubtful whether the
generation of steam in the tropics, however large the quantity, would
produce glaciation of the polar regions. The ascent of steam and heated
air loaded with vapor to the altitude of refrigeration would, as it
seems to me, result in the rapid radiation of the heat into space, and
the local precipitation of unusual quantities of rain; and the effect of
such a catastrophe would be slowly propagated and feebly felt in the
Arctic and Antarctic regions.

When we consider the magnitude of the ice-sheets which, it is claimed by
the glacialists, covered the continents during the Drift age, it becomes
evident that a vast proportion of the waters of the ocean must have been
evaporated and carried into the air, and thence cast down as snow and
rain. Mr. Thomas Belt, in a recent number of the "Quarterly Journal of
Science," argues that the formation of ice-sheets at the poles

must have lowered the level of the oceans of the world two
thousand-feet!

The mathematician can figure it out for himself: Take the area of the
continents down to, say, latitude 40°, on both sides of the equator;
suppose this area to be covered by an ice-sheet averaging, say, two
miles in thickness; reduce this mass of ice to cubic feet of water, and
estimate what proportion of the ocean would be required to be vaporized
to create it. Calculated upon any basis, and it follows that the level
of the ocean must have been greatly lowered.

What a vast, inconceivable accession of *heat* to our

{p. 62}

atmosphere was necessary to lift this gigantic layer of ocean-water out
of its bed and into the clouds!

The ice, then, was not the cause of the cataclysm; it was simply one of
the secondary consequences.

We must look, then, behind the ice-age for some cause that would
prodigiously increase the *heat* of our atmosphere, and, when we have
found *that*, we shall have discovered the cause of the drift-deposits
as well as of the ice.

The solution of the whole stupendous problem is, therefore, heat, not
cold.

{p. 63}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II. The Comet.--Chapter I. A Comet Caused the Drift](rag11)
