[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rag16)  [Next](rag18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III.

##### LEGENDS OF THE COMING OF THE COMET.

WE turn now to the legends of mankind.

I shall try to divide them, so as to represent, in their order, the
several stages of the great event. This, of course, will be difficult to
do, for the same legend may detail several different parts of the same
common story; and hence there may be more or less repetition; they will
more or less overlap each other.

And, first, I shall present one or two legends that most clearly
represent the first coming of the monster, the dragon, the serpent, the
wolf, the dog, the Evil One, the Comet.

The second Hindoo "Avatar" gives the following description of the rapid
advance of some dreadful object out of space, and its tremendous fall
upon the earth:

"By the power of God there issued from the essence of Brahma a being
shaped like a boar, *white and exceeding small*; this being, *in the
space of an hour*, grew to the size of an elephant of the largest size,
*and remained in the air*."

That is to say, it was an atmospheric, not a terrestrial creature.

"Brahma was astonished on beholding this figure, and discovered, by the
force of internal penetration, that it could be nothing but the power of
the Omnipotent which had assumed a body and become visible. He now felt
that God is all in all, and all is from him, and all in him;

{p. 133}

and said to Mareechee and his sons (the attendant genii): 'A wonderful
animal has emanated from my essence; at first of the smallest size, it
has in one hour increased to this enormous bulk, and, without doubt, it
is a portion of the almighty power.'"

Brahma, an earthly king, was at first frightened by the terrible
spectacle in the air, and then claimed that he had produced it himself!

"They were engaged in this conversation when that *vara*, or
'boar-form,' suddenly uttered a sound *like the loudest thunder*, and
the echo reverberated and *shook all the quarters of the universe*."

This is the same terrible noise which, as I have already shown, would
necessarily result from the carbureted hydrogen of the comet exploding
in our atmosphere. The legend continues:

"But still, under this dreadful awe of heaven, a certain wonderful
divine confidence secretly animated the hearts of Brahma, Mareechee, and
the other genii, who immediately began praises and thanksgiving. That
*vara* (boar-form) figure, hearing the power of the Vedas and Mantras
from their mouths, again made a loud noise, and *became a dreadful
spectacle*. Shaking the *full flowing mane* which hung down his neck on
both sides, and erecting the humid *hairs* of his body, he proudly
displayed his two most exceedingly white tusks; then, rolling about his
wine-colored (red) eyes, and erecting his *tail*, he descended *from the
region of the air*, and plunged headforemost into the water. The whole
body of water was convulsed by the motion, and began to rise in waves,
while the guardian spirit of the sea, being terrified, began to tremble
for his domain and cry for mercy.\[1\]

flow fully does this legend accord with the descriptions of comets given
by astronomers, the "horrid hair," the mane, the animal-like head!
Compare it with Mr.

\[1. Maurice's "Ancient History of Hindustan," vol. i, p. 304.\]

{p. 134}

Lockyer's account of Coggia's comet, as seen through Newell's large
refracting telescope at Ferndene, Gateshead, and which he described as
having a head like "*a fan-shaped projection of light*, with *ear-like
appendages*, at each side, which sympathetically complemented each other
at every change either of form or luminosity."

We turn to the legends of another race:

The Zendavesta of the ancient Persians\[1\] describes a period of "great
innocence and happiness on earth."

This represents, doubtless, the delightful climate of the Tertiary
period, already referred to, when endless summer extended to the poles.

"There was a 'man-bull,' who resided on an elevated region, which the
deity had assigned him."

This was probably a line of kings or a nation, whose symbol was the
bull, as we see in Bel or Baal, with the bull's horns, dwelling in some
elevated mountainous region.

"At last an evil one, denominated Ahriman, corrupted the world. After
having *dared to visit heaven*" (that is, he appeared first in the high
heavens), "he *descended upon the earth and assumed the form of a
serpent*."

That is to say, a serpent-like comet struck the earth.

"The man-bull was *poisoned by his venom*, and died in consequence of
it. Meanwhile, Ahriman *threw the whole universe into confusion*
(chaos), for that enemy of good mingled himself with everything,
appeared everywhere, and sought to do mischief above and below."

We shall find all through these legends allusions to the poisonous and
deadly gases brought to the earth by the comet: we have already seen
that the gases which are proved to be associated with comets are fatal
to life.

\[1. Faber's "Horæ Mosaicæ," vol. i, p. 72.\]

{p. 135}

And this, be it remembered, is not guess-work, but the revelation of the
spectroscope.

The traditions of the ancient Britons\[1\] tell us of an ancient time,
when

"The profligacy of mankind had provoked the great Supreme to send a
pestilential wind upon the earth. A pure *poison descended, every blast
was death*. At this time the patriarch, distinguished for his integrity,
*was shut up*, together with his select company, in the *inclosure with
the strong door*. (The cave?) Here the just ones were safe from injury.
*Presently a tempest of fire arose. It split the earth asunder* to the
great deep. The lake Llion burst its bounds, and the waves of the sea
lifted themselves on high around the borders of Britain, *the rain
poured down from heaven, and the waters covered the earth*."

Here we have the whole story told briefly, but with the regular sequence
of events:

1\. The poisonous gases.

2\. The people seek shelter in the caves.

3\. The earth takes fire.

4\. The earth is cleft open; the fiords are made, and the trap-rocks
burst forth.

5\. The rain pours down.

6\. There is a season of floods.

When we turn to the Greek legends, as recorded by one of their most
ancient writers, Hesiod, we find the coming of the comet clearly
depicted.

We shall see here, and in many other legends, reference to the fact that
there was more than one monster in the sky. This is in accordance with
what we now know to be true of comets. They often appear in pairs or
even triplets. Within the past few years we have seen Biela's comet
divide and form two separate comets, pursuing

\[1. "Mythology of the British Druids," p. 226.\]

{p. 136}

their course side by side. When the great comet of 1811 appeared,
another of almost equal magnitude followed it. Seneca informs us that
Ephoras, a Greek writer of the fourth century before Christ, had
recorded the singular fact of a comet's separation into two parts.

"This statement was deemed incredible by the Roman philosopher. More
recent observations of similar phenomena leave no room to question the
historian's veracity."\[1\]

The Chinese annals record the appearance of *three* comets--one large
and two smaller ones--at the same time, in the year 896 of our era.

"They traveled together for three days. The little ones disappeared
first and then the large one."

And again:

"On June 27th, A. D. 416, two comets appeared in the constellation
Hercules, and pursued nearly the same path."\[2\]

If mere proximity to the earth served to split Biela's comet into two
fragments, why might not a comet, which came near enough to strike the
earth, be broken into several separate forms?

So that there is nothing improbable in Hesiod's description of two or
three aërial monsters appearing at or about the same time, or of one
being the apparent offspring of the other, since a large comet may, like
Biela's, have broken in two before the eyes of the people.

Hesiod tells us that the Earth united with Night to do a terrible deed,
by which the Heavens were much wronged. The Earth prepared a large
sickle of white iron, with jagged teeth, and gave it to her son Cronus,
and stationed him in ambush, and when Heaven came, Cronus, his son,
grasped at him, and with his "huge sickle, long and jagged-toothed,"
cruelly wounded him.

\[1. Kirkwood, "Comets and Meteors," p. 60.

2\. Ibid., p. 51.\]

{p. 137}

Was this jagged, white, sickle-shaped object a comet?

"And Night bare also hateful Destiny, and black Fate, and Death, and
Nemesis."

And Hesiod tells us that "she," probably Night--

"Brought forth another monster, *irresistible*, nowise like to mortal
man or immortal gods, in a hollow cavern; the divine, stubborn-hearted
Echidna (half-nymph, with dark eyes and fair cheeks; and half, on the
other hand, a *serpent, huge and terrible and vast*), *speckled*, and
*flesh-devouring*, 'neath caves of sacred Earth. . . . With her, they
say that Typhaon (Typhon) associated in love, a terrible and lawless
ravisher for the dark-eyed maid. . . . But she (Echidna) bare Chimæra,
*breathing resistless fire*, fierce and huge, fleet-footed as well as
strong; this monster had three heads: one, indeed, of a grim-visaged
lion, one of a goat, and another of a serpent, a fierce dragon;

![](img/13700.jpg)

COMET OF 1862. Aspect of the head of the comet at nine in the evening,
the 23d August, and the 24th August at the same hour.

{p. 138}

in front a lion, a dragon behind, and in the midst a goat, *breathing
forth the dread strength of burning fire*. Her Pegasus slew and brave
Bellerophon."

The astronomical works show what weird, and fantastic, and goblin-like
shapes the comets assume under the telescope. Look at the representation
on page 137, from Guillemin's work,\[1\] of the appearance of the comet
of 1862, giving the changes which took place in twenty-four hours. If we
will imagine one of these monsters close to the earth, we can readily
suppose that the excited people, looking at "the dreadful spectacle,"
(as the Hindoo legend calls it,) saw it taking the shapes of serpents,
dragons, birds, and wolves.

And Hesiod proceeds to tell us something more about this fiery,
serpent-like monster:

"But when Jove had driven the Titans out from Heaven, huge Earth bare
her youngest-born son, Typhœus (Typhaon, Typhœus, Typhon), by the
embrace of Tartarus (Hell), through golden Aphrodite (Venus), whose
hands, indeed, are apt for deeds on the score of strength, and untiring
the feet of the strong god; and from his shoulders there were a hundred
heads of a serpent, a fierce dragon playing with *dusky tongues*"
(*tongues of fire and smoke?*), "and from the eyes in his wondrous heads
are sparkled beneath the brows; whilst from all his heads *fire was
gleaming*, as he looked keenly. In all his terrible heads, too, *were
voices sending forth every kind of voice ineffable*. For one while,
indeed, they would utter sounds, so as for the gods to understand, and
at another time, again, the voice of a loud-bellowing bull, untamable in
force and proud in utterance; at another time, again, that of a lion
possessing a daring spirit; at another time, again, they would sound
like to whelps, wondrous to hear; and at another, he would hiss, and the
lofty mountains resounded.

\[1. "The Heavens," p. 256.\]

{p. 139}

"And, in sooth, then would there have been done a deed past remedy, and
he, even he, would have reigned over mortals and immortals, unless, I
wot, the sire of gods and men had quickly observed him. Harshly then he
thundered, and heavily and terribly the earth re-echoed around; and the
broad heaven above, and the sea and streams of ocean, and the abysses of
earth. But beneath his immortal feet *vast Olympus trembled*, as the
king uprose and earth groaned beneath. And the *heat from both caught
the dark-colored sea*, both of the thunder and the lightning, and *fire
from the monster*, the heat arising from the thunder-storms, *winds*,
and burning lightning. *And all earth, and heaven, and sea, were
boiling*; and huge billows roared around the shores about and around,
beneath the violence of the gods; and *unallayed quaking arose*. Pluto
trembled, monarch over the dead beneath; and the Titans under Tartarus,
standing about Cronus, trembled also, on account of *the unceasing
tumult and dreadful contention*. But Jove, when in truth he had raised
high his wrath, and had taken his arms, his thunder and lightning, and
smoking bolt, leaped up and smote him from Olympus, and scorched all
around the wondrous heads of the terrible monster.

"But when at length he had quelled it, after having smitten it with
blows, the monster *fell down*, lamed, and *huge Earth groaned*. But the
*flame* from the lightning-blasted monster *flashed forth in the
mountain hollows*, hidden and rugged, when he was stricken, and *much
was the vast earth burnt and melted by the boundless vapor*, like as
pewter, heated by the art of youths, and by the well-bored melting-pit,
or iron, which is the hardest of metals, subdued in the dells of the
mountain by blazing fire, melts in the sacred earth, beneath the hands
of Vulcan. So, I wot, *was earth melted in the glare of burning fire*.
Then, troubled in spirit, he hurled him into wide Tartarus."\[1\]

Here we have a very faithful and accurate narrative of the coming of the
comet:

\[1. "Theogony."\]

{p. 140}

Born of Night a monster appears, a serpent, huge, terrible, speckled,
flesh-devouring. With her is another comet, Typhaon; they beget the
Chimæra, that breathes resistless fire, fierce, huge, swift. And
Typhaon, associated with both these, is the most dreadful monster of
all, born of Hell and sensual sin, a serpent, a fierce dragon,
many-headed, with dusky tongues and fire gleaming; sending forth
dreadful and appalling noises, while mountains and fields rock with
earthquakes; chaos has come; the earth, the sea boils; there is
unceasing tumult and contention, and in the midst the monster, wounded
and broken up, *falls upon the earth*; the earth groans under his
weight, and there he blazes and burns for a time in the mountain
fastnesses and desert places, melting the earth with boundless vapor and
glaring fire.

We will find legend after legend about this Typhon he runs through the
mythologies of different nations. And as to his size and his terrible
power, they all agree. He was no earth-creature. He moved in the air; he
reached the skies:

"According to Pindar the head of Typhon reached to the stars, his eyes
darted fire, his hands extended from the East to the West, terrible
serpents were twined about the middle of his body, and one hundred
snakes took the place of fingers on his hands. Between him and the gods
there was a dreadful war. Jupiter finally killed him with a flash of
lightning, and buried him under Mount Etna."

And there, smoking and burning, his great throes and writhings, we are
told, still shake the earth, and threaten mankind:

And with pale lips men say,  
'To-morrow, perchance to-day,  
Encelidas may arise! "'

{p. 141}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Ragnarok](rag18.md)
