[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rag24)  [Next](rag26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XI.

##### THE ARABIAN MYTHS.

AND when we turn to the Arabian tales, we not only see, by their
identity with the Hindoo and Slavonic legends, that they are of great
antiquity, dating back to the time when these widely diverse races,
Aryan and Semitic, were one, but we find in them many allusions to the
battle between good and evil, between God and the serpent.

Abou Mohammed the Lazy, who is a very great magician, with power over
the forces of the air and the Afrites, beholds a battle between two
great snakes, one tawny-colored, the other white. The tawny serpent is
overcoming the white one; but Abou Mohammed kills it with a rock. "The
white serpent" (the sun) "departed and was *absent for a while*, but
returned"; and the tawny serpent was torn to pieces and scattered over
the land, and nothing remained of her but her head.

And then we have the legend of "the City of Brass," or bronze. It
relates to "an ancient age and period in the olden time." One of the
caliphs, Abdelmelik, the son of Marwan, has heard from antiquity that
Solomon, (Solomon is, in Arabic, like Charlemagne in the middle-age
myths of Europe, the synonym for everything venerable and powerful,) had
imprisoned genii in bottles of brass, and the Caliph desired to procure
some of these bottles.

{p. 269}

Then Talib (the son of Sahl) tells the Caliph that a man once voyaged to
the Island of Sicily, but a wind arose and blew him away "to one of the
lands of God."

"This happened during the black darkness of night."

It was a remote, unfrequented land; the people were black and lived in
caves, and were naked and of strange speech. They cast their nets for
Talib and brought up a bottle of brass or bronze, containing one of the
imprisoned genii, who came out of it, as a blue smoke, and cried in a
horrible voice, "Repentance, repentance, O prophet of God!"

All this was in a Western land. And Abdelmelik sent Talib to find this
land. It was "a journey of two years and some months going, and the like
returning." It was in a far country. They first reach a deserted palace
in a desolate land, the palace of "Kosh the son of Sheddad the son of
Ad, the greater." He read an inscription:

"Here was a people, whom, after their works, thou shalt see wept over
for their lost dominion.

"And in this palace is the last information respecting lords collected
in the dust.

"Death hath destroyed them and disunited them, and in the dust they have
lost what they amassed."

Talib goes on with his troops, until they come to a great pillar of
black stone, sunk into which, to his armpits, was a mighty creature; "he
had two wings and four arms; two of them like those of the sons of Adam,
and two like the fore-legs of lions with claws. He had hair upon his
head like the tails of horses, and two eyes like two burning coals, and
he had a third eye in his forehead, like the eye of the lynx, from which
there appeared sparks of fire."

He was the imprisoned comet-monster, and these

{p. 270}

arms and eyes, darting fire, remind us of the description given of the
apostate angel in the other legends:

![](img/27000.jpg)

THE AFRITE IN THE PILLAR.

"He was tall and black; and he was crying out 'Extolled be the
perfection of my Lord, who hath appointed me this severe affliction and
painful torture until the day of resurrection!'"

{p. 271}

The party of Talib were stupefied at the sight and retreated in fright.
And the wise man, the Sheik Abdelsamad, one of the party, drew near and
asked the imprisoned monster his history. And he replied:

"I am an Afrite of the genii, and my name is Dahish, the son of Elamash,
and I am restrained here by the majesty of God.

"There belonged to one of the sons of Eblis an idol of red carnelian, of
which I was made guardian; and there used to worship it one of the kings
of the sea, of illustrious dignity, of great glory, leading, among his
troops of the genii, a million warriors who smote with swords before
him, and who answered his prayer in cases of difficulty. These genii,
who obeyed him, were under my command and authority, following my words
when I ordered them: all of them were in rebellion against Solomon the
son of David (on both of whom be peace!), and I used to enter the body
of the idol, to command them and to forbid them."

Solomon sent word to this king of the sea that he must give up the
worship of the idol of red carnelian; the king consulted the idol, and
this Afrite, speaking through the idol, encouraged the king to refuse.
What,--he said to him,--can Solomon do to thee, "when thou art in the
midst of this great sea?" And so Solomon came to compel the island-race
to worship the true God; he surrounded his island, and filled the land
with his troops, assisted by birds and wild beasts, and a dreadful
battle followed in the air:

"After this they came upon us all together, and we contended with him in
a wide tract *for a period of two days*; and calamity befell us on the
third day, and the decree of God (whose name be exalted!) was executed
among us. The first who charged upon Solomon were I and my troops: and I
said to my companions, 'Keep in your places in the battle-field while I
go forth to them and challenge *Dimiriat*."' (Dimiriat was the Sun, the

{p. 272}

bright one.) "And lo, *he came forth, like a great mountain, his fires
flaming and his smoke ascending;* and he approached and *smote me with a
flaming fire; and his arrow prevailed over my fire*. He cried out at me
*with a prodigious cry*, so that I imagined the *heaven had fallen* and
closed over me, and the mountains shook at his voice.

![](img/27200.jpg)

DAHISH OVERTAKEN BY DIMIRIAT.

Then he commanded his companions, and they charged upon us all together:
we also charged upon them, and we cried out one to another: *the fires
rose and the smoke ascended*, the hearts of the combatants were almost
cleft asunder, and the battle raged. The birds fought in the air, and
the wild *beasts in the dust*; and I contended with Dimiriat until he
wearied me and I wearied him;

{p. 273}

after which I became weak, and my companions and troops were enervated
and my tribes were routed."

The birds tore out the eyes of the demons, and cut them in pieces until
*the earth was covered with the fragments*, like the trunks of
palm-trees. "As for me, I flew from before Dimiriat, but he followed me
a journey of three months until he overtook me." And Solomon hollowed
out the black pillar, and sealed him in it with his signet, and chained
him until the day of resurrection.

And Talib and his party go on still farther, and find "the City of
Brass," a weird, mysterious, lost city, in a desolate land; silent, and
all its people dead; a city once of high civilization, with mighty,
brazen walls and vast machinery and great mysteries; a city whose
inhabitants had perished suddenly in some great calamity. And on the
walls were tablets, and on one of them were inscribed these solemn
words:

"'Where are the kings and the peoples of the earth? They have quitted
that which they have built and peopled. And in the grave they are
pledged for their past actions. There, after destruction, they have
become putrid corpses. Where are the troops? They repelled not nor
profited. And where is that which they collected and boarded? The decree
of the Lord of the Throne *surprised them*. Neither riches nor refuge
saved them from it.'

"And they saw the merchants dead in their shops; their skins were dried,
and their bones were carious, and they had become examples to him who
would be admonished."

Everywhere were the dead, "lying upon skins, and appearing almost as if
they would speak."

Their death seems to have been due to a long period of terrible heat and
drought.

On a couch was a damsel more beautiful than all the daughters of Adam;
she was embalmed, so as to preserve all her charms. Her eyes were of
glass, filled with quick

{p. 274}

silver, which seemed to follow the beholder's every motion. Near her was
a tablet of gold, on which was inscribed:

"In the name of God, the compassionate, the merciful.... the Lord of
lords, the Cause of causes; the Everlasting, the Eternal. . . . Where
are the kings of the regions of the earth" Where are the Amalekites?
Where are the mighty monarchs? The mansions are void of their presence,
and they have quitted their families and homes. Where are the kings of
the foreigners and the Arabs? They have all died and become rotten
bones. Where are the lords of high degree? They have all died. Where are
Korah and Haman? Where is Sheddad, the son of Add? Where are Canaan and
Pharaoh? God hath *cut them off*, and it is he who cutteth short the
lives of mankind, and he hath made the mansions to be void for their
presence. . . . I am Tadmor, the daughter of the king of the Amalekites,
of those who ruled the countries with equity: I possessed what none of
the kings possessed," (i. e., in extent of dominion,) "and ruled with
justice, and acted impartially toward my subjects; I gave and bestowed;
and I lived a longtime in the enjoyment of happiness and an easy life,
and emancipated both female and male slaves. Thus I did until *the
summoner of death came, and disasters occurred before me*. And the cause
was this: *Seven years* in succession came upon us, *during which no
water descended on us from heaven, nor did any grass grow for us on the
face of the earth*. So we ate what food we had in our dwellings, and
after that we fell upon the beasts and ate, and there remained nothing.
Upon this, therefore, I caused the wealth to be brought, and meted it
with a measure, and sent it, by trusty men, who went about with it
through *all regions*, not leaving unvisited a single large city, to
seek for some food. *But they found it not*, and they returned to us
with the wealth after a long absence. So, thereupon we exposed to view
our riches and our treasures, locked the gates of the fortresses in our
city, and submitted ourselves to the decrees of our Lord; and thus we
all died, as thou beholdest, and left what we had built and what we had
treasured."

{p. 275}

And this strange tale has relations to all the other legends.

Here we have the great demon, darting fire, blazing, smoking, the
destructive one; the rebel against the good God. He is overthrown by the
bright-shining one, Dimiriat, the same as the Dev-Mrityu of the Hindoos;
he and his forces are cut to pieces, and scattered over the land, and
he, after being chased for months through space, is captured and
chained. Associated with all this is a people of the Bronze Age--a
highly civilized people; a people living on an island in the Western
Sea, who perished by a calamity which came on them suddenly; "a summoner
of death" came and brought disasters; and then followed a long period of
terrible heat and drought, in which not they alone, but all nations and
cities, were starved by the drying up of the earth. The demon had
devoured the cows-the clouds; like Cacus, he had dragged them backward
into his den, and no Hercules, no Indra, had arisen to hurl the electric
bolt that was to kill the heat, restore the clouds, and bring upon the
parched earth the grateful rain. And so this Bronze-Age race spread out
their useless treasures to the sun, and, despite their miseries, they
praise the God of gods, the Cause of causes, the merciful, the
compassionate, and lie down to die.

And in the evil-one, captured and chained and sealed by Solomon, we seem
to have the same thing prefigured in Revelation, xx, 2:

"2. And he laid hold on the dragon, the old serpent, which is the devil
and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years.

"3. And he cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a
seal upon him, that he should no more seduce the nations."

{p. 276}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. The Book Of Job](rag26.md)
