[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rag19)  [Next](rag21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VI.

##### OTHER LEGENDS OF THE CONFLAGRATION.

THE first of these, and the most remarkable of all, is the legend of one
of the Central American nations, preserved not by tradition alone, but
committed to writing at some time in the remote past.

In the "Codex Chimalpopoca," one of the sacred books of the Toltecs, the
author, speaking of the destruction which took place by fire, says:

"The third sun" (or era) "is called *Quia-Tonatiuh*, sun of rain,
because there fell a *rain of fire; all which existed burned; and there
fell a rain of gravel*."

"They also narrate that while the sandstone, which we now see *scattered
about*, and the *tetzontli* (*amygdaloide poreuse*--trap or basaltic
rocks), '*boiled with great tumult*, there also rose the rocks of
vermilion color.'"

That is to say, the basaltic and red trap-rocks burst through the great
cracks made, at that time, in the surface of the disturbed earth.

"Now, this was in the year *Ce Tecpatl*, One *Flint*, it was the day
*Nahui-Quiahuit*l, Fourth Rain. Now, in this day, in which men were lost
and destroyed *in a rain of fire*, they *were transformed into
goslings*; the *sun itself was on fire*, and everything, together with
the houses, was consumed."\[1\]

\[1. "The North Americans of Antiquity," p. 499.\]

{p. 167}

Here we have the whole story told in little: "Fire fell from heaven,"
the comet; "the sun itself was on fire"; the comet reached to, or
appeared to reach to, the sun; or its head had fallen into the sun; or
the terrible object may have been mistaken for the sun on fire. "*There
was a rain of gravel*"--the Drift fell from the comet. There is also
some allusion to the sandstones scattered about; and we have another
reference to the great breaks in the earth's crust, caused either by the
shock of contact with the comet, or the electrical disturbances of the
time; and we are told that the trap-rocks, and rocks of vermilion color,
boiled up to the surface with great tumult. Mankind was destroyed,
except such as fled into the seas and lakes, and there plunged into the
water, and lived like "goslings."

Can any one suppose that this primitive people invented all this? And if
they did, how comes it that their invention agreed so exactly with the
traditions of all the rest of mankind; and with the revelations of
science as to the relations between the trap rocks and the gravel, as to
time at least?

We turn now to the legends of a different race, in a different stage of
cultivation--the barbarian Indians of California and Nevada. It is a
curious and wonderful story:

"The natives in the vicinity of Lake Tahoe ascribe its origin to a great
natural convulsion. There was a time, they say, when their tribe
possessed the whole earth, and were strong numerous, and rich; but a day
came in which a people rose up stronger than they, and defeated and
enslaved them. Afterward the Great Spirit sent an immense wave across
the continent from the sea, and this wave ingulfed both the oppressors
and the oppressed, all but a very small remnant. Then the task-masters
made the remaining people raise up a great temple, so that

{p. 168}

they, of the ruling caste, should have a refuge in case of another
flood, and on the top of this temple the masters worshiped a column of
perpetual fire."

It would be natural to suppose that this was the great deluge to which
all the legends of mankind refer, and which I have supposed, elsewhere,
to refer to the destruction of "Atlantis"; but it must be remembered
that both east and west of the Atlantic the traditions of mankind refer
to several deluges--to a series of catastrophes--occurring at times far
apart. It may be that the legend of the Tower of Babel refers to an
event far anterior in time even to the deluge of Noah or Deucalion; or
it may be, as often happens, that the chronology of this legend has been
inverted.

The Tahoe legend continues:

"Half a moon had not elapsed, however, before the earth was again
troubled, this time with strong convulsions and thunderings, upon which
the masters took refuge in their great tower, closing the people out.
The poor slaves fled to the Humboldt River, and, getting into canoes,
paddled for life *from the awful sight behind them*; for the land was
tossing like a troubled sea, and casting up fire, smoke, and ashes. *The
flames went up to the very heavens, and melted many stars*, SO THAT THEY
RAINED DOWN IN MOLTEN METAL UPON THE EARTH, forming the ore" \[gold?\]
"that white men seek. The Sierra was mounded up from the bosom of the
earth; while the place where the great fort stood sank, leaving only the
dome on the top exposed above the waters of Lake Tahoe. The inmates of
the temple-tower clung to this dome to save themselves from drowning;
but the Great Spirit walked upon the waters in his wrath, and took the
oppressors one by one, *like pebbles*, and threw them far into the
recesses of a great cavern on the east side of the lake, called to this
day the Spirit Lodge, where the waters shut them in. There must they
remain till the last great volcanic burning, which is to overturn the

{p. 169}

whole earth, is to again set them free. In the depths of cavern-prison
they may still be heard, wailing and their cave, moaning, when the snows
melt and the waters swell in the lake."\[1\]

Here we have the usual mingling of fact and myth. The legend describes
accurately, no doubt, the awful appearance of the tossing earth and the
falling fire and *débris*; the people flying to rivers and taking
shelter in the caves) and some of them closed up in the caves for ever.

The legend, as is usual, accommodates itself to the geography and
topography of the country in which the narrators live.

In the Aztec creation-myths, as preserved by the Fray Andres de Olmos,
and taken down by him from the lips of those who narrated the Aztec
traditions to him, we have an account of the destruction of mankind by
the sun, which reads as follows:

The sun had risen indeed, and *with the glory of the cruel fire about
him*, that not even the eyes of the gods could endure; but he moved not.
There he lay on the horizon; and when the deities sent Tlotli, their
messenger, to him, with orders that he should go on upon his way, his
ominous answer was that he would never leave that place *till he had
destroyed and put an end to them all*. Then a great fear fell upon some,
while others were moved only to anger; and among the others was one
Citli, who immediately strung his bow and advanced against the
glittering enemy. By quickly lowering his head the sun avoided the first
arrow shot at him; but the second and third had attained his body in
quick succession, when, filled with fury, he seized the last and
launched it back upon his assailant. And the brave Citli laid shaft to
string never more, for the arrow of the sun pierced his forehead. Then
all was dismay in the assembly of the gods, and *despair filled their
hearts*, for they saw that

\[1. Bancroft's "Native Races," vol. iii, p. 89.\]

170 THE LEGENDS.

they could not prevail against the shining one; and they agreed to die,
and to cut themselves open through the breast. . Xololt was appointed
minister, and he killed his companions one by one, and last of all he
slew himself also. . . . Immediately after the death of the gods, the
sun began his motion in the heavens; and a man called Tecuzistecatl, or
Tezcociztecatl, who, when Nanahuatzin leaped into the fire, had retired
into a cave, now emerged from his concealment as the moon. Others say
that instead of going into a cave, this Tecuzistecatl had leaped into
the fire after Nanahuatzin, but that the heat of the fire being somewhat
abated he had come out less brilliant than the sun. Still another
variation is that the sun and moon came out equally bright, but this not
seeming good to the gods, one of them took a rabbit by the heels and
slung it into the face of the moon, dimming its luster with a blotch
whose mark may be seen to this day."\[1\]

Here we have the same Titanic battle between the gods, the godlike men
of old--"the old ones"--and the Comet, which appears in the Norse
legends, when Odin, Thor, Prey, Tyr, and Heimdal boldly march out to
encounter the Comet and fall dead, like Citli, before the weapons or the
poisonous breath of the monster. In the same way we see in Hesiod the
great Jove, rising high on Olympus and smiting Typhaon with his
lightnings. And we shall see this idea of a conflict between the gods
and the great demon occurring all through the legends. And it may be
that the three arrows of this American story represent the three comets
spoken of in Hesiod, and the Fenris-wolf, Midgard-serpent, and Surt or
Garm of the Goths: the first arrow did not strike the sun; the second
and the third "attained its body," and then the enraged sun launched the
last arrow back at Citli, at the earth; and thereupon despair filled the
people, and they prepared to die.

\[1. Bancroft's "Native Races," vol. iii, p. 62.\]

{p. 171}

The Avesta, the sacred book of the ancient Persians, written in the Zend
dialect, tells the same story. I have already given one version of it:

Ahura Mazda is the good god, the kind creator of life and growth; he
sent the sun, the fertilizing rain. He created for the ancestors of the
Persians a beautiful land, a paradise, a warm and fertile country. But
Ahriman, the genius of evil, created Azhidahaka, "*the biting snake of
winter*." "He had triple jaws, three heads, six eyes, the strength of a
thousand beings." He brings ruin and winter on the fair land. Then comes
a mighty hero, Thraetaona, who kills the snake and rescues the
land.\[1\]

In the Persian legends we have Feridun, the hero of the Shah-Nameh.
There is a serpent-king called Zohak, who has committed dreadful crimes,
assisted by a demon called Iblis. As his reward, Iblis asked permission
to kiss the king's shoulder, which was granted. Then from the shoulder
sprang two dreadful serpents. Iblis told him that these must be fed
every day with the brains of two children. So the human race was
gradually being exterminated. Then Feridun, beautiful and strong, rose
up and killed the serpent-king Zohak, and delivered his country. Zohak
is the same as Azhidahaka in the Avesta--"the biting snake of
winter."\[2\] He is Python; he is Typhaon; he is the Fenris-wolf; he is
the Midgard-serpent.

The Persian fire-worship is based on the primeval recognition of the
value of light and fire, growing out of this Age of Darkness and winter.

In the legends of the Hindoos we read of the fight between Rama, the
sun-god (*Ra* was the Egyptian god of the sun), and Ravana, a giant who,
accompanied by the

\[1. Poor, "Sanskrit Literature," p. 144.

2\. Ibid., p. 158.\]

{p. 172}

Rakshasas, or demons, made terrible times in the ancient land where the
ancestors of the Hindoos dwelt at that period. He carries away the wife
of Rama, Sita; her name signifies "a furrow," and seems to refer to
agriculture, and an agricultural race inhabiting the furrowed earth. He
bears her struggling through the air. Rama and his allies pursue him.
The monkey-god, Hanuman, helps Rama; a bridge of stone, sixty miles
long, is built across the deep ocean to the Island of Lanka, where the
great battle is fought: "*The stones which crop out through Southern
India are said to have been dropped by the monkey builders!*" The army
crosses on the bridge, as the forces of Muspelheim, in the Norse
legends, marched over the bridge "Bifrost."

The battle is a terrible one. Ravana has ten heads, and as fast as Rama
cuts off one another grows in its place. Finally, Rama, like Apollo,
fires the terrible arrow of Brahma, the creator, and the monster falls
dead.

"Gods and demons are watching the contest from the sky, and flowers fall
down in showers on the victorious hero."

The body of Ravana is *consumed by fire*. Sita, the furrowed earth, goes
through *the ordeal of fire*, and comes out of it purified and redeemed
from all taint of the monster Ravana; and Rama, the sun, and Sita, the
earth, are separated *for fourteen years*; Sita *is hid in the dark
jungle*, and then they are married again, and live happily together ever
after.

Here we have the battle in the air between the sun and the demon: the
earth is taken possession of by the demon; the demon is finally consumed
by fire, and perishes; the earth goes through an ordeal of fire, a
conflagration; and for fourteen years the earth and sun do not see each
other; the earth is hid in a dark jungle; but

{p. 173}

eventually the sun returns, and the loving couple are again married, and
live happily for ever after.

The Phoibos Apollo of the Greek legends was, Byron tells us--

The lord of the unerring bow,  
The god of life and poetry and light,  
The sun in human limbs arrayed, and brow  
All radiant from his triumph in the fight.  
The shaft had just been shot, the arrow bright  
With an immortal's vengeance; in his eye  
And nostril beautiful disdain, and might,  
And majesty flash their full lightnings by,  
Developing in that one glance the deity."

This fight, so magnificently described, was the sun-god's battle with
Python, the destroyer, the serpent, the dragon, the Comet. What was
Python doing? He was "stealing the springs and fountains." That is to
say, the great heat was drying up the water-courses of the earth.

"The arrow bright with an immortal's vengeance," was the shaft with
which Apollo broke the fiend to pieces and tumbled him down to the
earth, and saved the springs and the clouds and the perishing ocean.

When we turn to America, the legends tell us of the same great battle
between good and evil, between light and darkness.

Manibozho, or the Great Hare Nana, is, in the Algonquin legends, the
White One, the light, the sun. "His foe was the glittering prince of
serpents"-the Comet.\[1\]

Among the Iroquois, according to the Jesuit missionary, Father Brebeuf,
who resided among the Hurons in 1626, there was a legend of two
brothers, Ioskeba and Tawiscara, which mean, in the Oneida dialect, the
*White One*, the light, the sun, and the *Dark One*, the night.

\[1. Brinton's "Myths," p. 182.\]

{p. 174}

They were twins, born of a virgin mother, who died in giving them life.
Their grandmother was the moon (the *water* deity), called *At-aeusic*,
a word which signifies "she bathes herself," derived from the word for
*water*.

"The brothers quarreled, and finally came to blows, the former using the
horns of a stag, the latter the wild rose. He of the weaker weapon was
very naturally discomfited and sorely wounded. Fleeing for life, the
blood gushed from him at every step, and as it fell *turned into
flint-stones*. The victor returned to his grandmother in the *far east*,
and established his lodge on *the borders of the great ocean*, whence
the sun comes. In time he became *the father of mankind*, and special
guardian of the Iroquois. The earth was at first arid and sterile, but
he destroyed the gigantic frog which had swallowed all the waters, and
guided the torrents into smooth streams and lakes. The woods he stocked
with game; and, having learned from the great tortoise who supports the
world how to make fire, taught his children, the Indians, this
indispensable art. . . . Sometimes they spoke of him as the sun, but
this is only figuratively."\[1\]

Here we have the light and darkness, the sun and the night, battling
with each other; the sun fights with a younger brother, another
luminary, the comet; the comet is broken up; it flies for life, the red
blood (the red clay) streaming from it, and *flint-stones* appearing on
the earth wherever the blood (the clay) falls. The victorious sun
re-establishes himself in the east. And then the myth of the sun merges
into the legends concerning a great people, who were the fathers of
mankind who dwelt "in the east," on the borders of the great eastern
ocean, the Atlantic. "The earth was at first arid and sterile," covered
with *débris* and stones; but the returning sun, the White One, destroys
the gigantic frog, emblem of cold and water, the great snows and
ice-deposits; this

\[1. Brinton's "Myths of the New World," p. 184.\]

{p. 175}

frog had "swallowed all the waters," that is to say, the falling rains
had been congealed in these great snow-banks and glaciers; the sun melts
them, and kills the frog; the waters pour forth in deluging floods;
Manibozho "guides the torrents into smooth streams and lakes"; the woods
return, and become once more full of animal life. Then the myth again
mixes up the sun and the sun-land in the east. From this sun-land,
represented as "a tortoise," always the emblem of an island, the
Iroquois derive the knowledge of "how to make fire."

This coming of the monster, his attack upon and conquest of the sun, his
apparent swallowing of that orb, are all found represented on both sides
of the Atlantic, on the walls of temples and in great earth-mounds, in
the image of a gigantic serpent holding a globe in its mouth.

This long-trailing object in the skies was probably the origin of that
primeval serpent-worship found all over the world. And hence the
association of the serpent in so many religions with the evil-one. In
itself, the serpent should no more represent moral wrong than the
lizard, the crocodile, or the frog; but the hereditary abhorrence with
which he is regarded by mankind extends to no other created thing. He is
the image of the great destroyer, the wronger, the enemy.

Let us turn to another legend.

An ancient authority\[1\] gives the following legend of the Tupi Indians
of Brazil:

"Monau, without beginning or end, author of all that is, seeing the
ingratitude of men, and their contempt for him who had made them thus
joyous, withdrew from them, and sent upon them *tata*, the divine *fire,
which burned all that was on the surface of the earth*. He

\[1. "Une Fête Brésilienne célébré à Rouen en 1550," par M. Ferdinand
Denis, p. 82.\]

{p. 176}

swept about the fire in such a way that *in places he raised mountains,
and in others dug valleys*. Of all men one alone, Irin Magé, was saved,
whom Monau carried into the heaven. He, seeing all things destroyed,
spoke thus to Monau: 'Wilt thou also destroy the heavens and their
garniture? Alas! henceforth where will be our home? Why should I live,
since there is none other of my kind? Then Monau was so filled with pity
that he *poured a deluging rain on the earth, which quenched the fire*,
and flowed on all sides, forming the ocean, which we call the *parana*,
the great waters."\[1\]

The prayer of Irin Magé, when he calls on God to save the garniture of
the heavens, reminds one vividly of the prayer of the Earth in Ovid.

It might be inferred that heaven meant in the Tupi legend the heavenly
land, not the skies; this is rendered the more probable because we find
Irin asking where should he dwell if heaven is destroyed. This could
scarcely allude to a spiritual heaven.

And here I would note a singular coincidence: The fire that fell from
heaven was the divine *tata*. In Egypt the Dame of deity was "ta-ta," or
"pta-pta," which signified father. This became in the Hebrew "ya-ya,"
from which we derive the root of Jah, Jehovah. And this word is found in
many languages in Europe and America, and even in our own, as, "da-da,"
"daddy," father. The Tupi "*tata*" was fire from the supreme father.

Who can doubt the oneness of the human race, when millions of threads of
tradition and language thus cross each other through it in all
directions, like the web of a mighty fabric?

We cross from one continent to another, from the torrid part of South
America to the frozen regions of North America, and the same legend
meets us.

\[1. Brinton's "Myths of the New World," p. 227.\]

{p. 177}

The Tacullies of British Columbia believe that the earth was formed by a
musk-rat, who, diving into the universal sea, brought up the land in his
mouth and spit it out, until he had formed "quite an island, and, by
degrees, the whole earth":

"In some unexplained way, this earth became afterward peopled in every
part, and it remained, *until a fierce fire, of several days' duration,
swept over it, destroying all life*, with two exceptions; one man and
one woman *hid themselves in a deep cave in the heart of a mountain*,
and from these two has the world since been repeopled."\[1\]

Brief as is this narrative, it preserves the natural sequence of events:
First, the world is made; then it becomes peopled in every part; then a
fierce fire sweeps over it for several days, consuming all life, except
two persons, who save themselves by hiding in a deep cave; and from
these the world is repeopled. How wonderfully does all this resemble the
Scandinavian story!

It has oftentimes been urged, by the skeptical, when legends of Noah's
flood were found among rude races, that they had been derived from
Christian missionaries. But these myths can not be accounted for in this
way; for the missionaries did not teach that the world was once
destroyed by fire, and that a remnant of mankind escaped by taking
refuge in a cave; although, as we shall see, such a legend really
appears in several places hidden in the leaves of the Bible itself.

We leave the remote north and pass down the Pacific coast until we
encounter the Ute Indians of California and Utah. This is their legend:

"The Ute philosopher declares the sun to be a living personage, and
explains his passage across the heavens along an appointed way by giving
an account of a fierce

\[1. Bancroft's "Native Races," vol. iii, p. 98\]

{p. 178}

personal conflict between Ta-vi, the sun-god, and Ta-wats, one of the
supreme gods of his mythology.

"In that, long ago, the time to which all mythology refers, the sun
roamed the earth at will. *When he came too near with his fierce heat
the people were scorched, and when he hid away in his cave for a long
time, too idle to come forth, the night was long and the earth cold*.
Once upon a time Ta-wats, the hare-god, was sitting with his family by
the camp-fire in the solemn woods, anxiously waiting for the return of
Ta-vi, the wayward sun-god. Wearied with long watching, the hare-god
fell asleep, and the sun-god came so near that he scorched the naked
shoulder of Ta-wats. Foreseeing the vengeance which would be thus
provoked, he fled back to his cave beneath the earth. Ta-wats awoke in
great anger, and speedily determined to go and fight the sun-god. After
a long journey of many adventures the hare-god came to the brink of the
earth, and there watched long and patiently, till at last the sun-god
coming out he shot an arrow at his face, but the fierce heat consumed
the arrow ere it had finished its intended course; then another arrow
was sped, but that also was consumed; and another, and still another,
till only one remained in his quiver, but this was the magical arrow
that had never failed its mark. Ta-wats, holding it in his hand, lifted
the barb to his eye and baptized it in a divine tear; then the arrow was
sped and *struck the sun-god full in the face, and the sun was shivered
into a thousand fragments, which fell to the earth, causing a general
conflagration*. Then Ta-wats, the hare-god, fled before the destruction
he had wrought, and as he fled the burning earth consumed his feet,
consumed his legs, consumed his body, consumed his bands and his
arms--all were consumed but the head alone, which bowled across valleys
and over mountains, fleeing destruction from the burning earth, until at
last, swollen with heat, the eyes of the god burst and the tears *gushed
forth in a flood which spread over the earth and extinguished the fire*.
The sun-god was now conquered, and he appeared before a council of the
gods to await sentence. In that long council were established the days
and the nights, the seasons and the years, with the length

{p. 179}

thereof, and the sun was condemned to travel across the firmament by the
same trail day after day till the end of time."\[1\]

Here we have the succession of arrows, or comets, found in the legend of
the Aztecs, and here as before it is the last arrow that destroys the
sun. And here, again, we have the conflagration, the fragments of
something falling on the earth, the long absence of the sun, the great
rains and the cold.

Let us shift the scene again.

In Peru--that ancient land of mysterious civilization, that brother of
Egypt and Babylon, looking out through the twilight of time upon the
silent waters of the Pacific, waiting in its isolation for the world
once more to come to it-in this strange land we find the following
legend:

"*Ere sun and moon was made*, Viracocha, the White One, rose from the
bosom of Lake Titicaca, and presided over the erection of those wondrous
cities whose ruins still dot its islands and western shores, and whose
history is totally lost in the night of time."\[2\]

He constructed the sun and moon and created the inhabitants of the
earth. These latter attacked him with murderous intent (the comet
assailed the sun?); but "scorning such unequal contest he manifested his
power by hurling the lightning on the hill-sides and *consuming the
forests*," whereupon the creatures he had created humbled themselves
before him. One of Viracocha names was *At-achuchu*. He civilized the
Peruvians, taught them arts and agriculture and religion; they called
him "The teacher of all things." *He came from the east* and disappeared
in the Western Ocean. Four civilizers followed him who

emerged from the cave

\[1. "Popular Science Monthly," October, 1879, p, 799.

2\. Brinton's; "Myths of the New World," p. 192.\]

{p. 180}

Pacarin Tampu, the House of Birth.\[1\] These four brothers were also
called Viracochas, *white men*.

Here we have the White One coming from the east, hurling his lightning
upon the earth and causing a conflagration; and afterward civilized men
emerged from a cave. They were white men; and it is to these cave-born
men that Peru owed its first civilization.

Here is another and a more amplified version of the Peruvian legend:

The Peruvians believed in a god called At-achuchu, already referred to,
the creator of heaven and earth, and the maker of all things. From him
came the first man, Guamansuri.

This first mortal is mixed up with events that seem to refer to the Age
of Fire.

He descended to the earth, and "there seduced the sister of certain
Guachemines, rayless ones, or Darklings"; that is to say, certain Powers
of Darkness, "who then possessed it. For this crime they destroyed him."
That is to say, the Powers of Darkness destroyed the light. But not for
ever.

"Their sister proved pregnant, and died in her labor, giving birth to
two eggs," the sun and moon. "From these emerged the two brothers,
Apocatequil and Piguerao."

Then followed the same great battle, to which we have so many references
in the legends, and which always ends, as in the case of Cain and Abel,
in one brother slaughtering the other. In this case, Apocatequil "was
the more powerful. By touching the corpse of his mother (the sun?) he
brought her to life, he drove off and slew the Guachemines (the Powers
of Darkness), and, directed by

\[1. Brinton's "Myths of the New World," p. 193.\]

{p. 181}

At-achuchu, released the race of Indians from the soil by turning it up
with a golden spade."

That is to say, he dug them out from the cave in which they were buried.

"For this reason they adored him as their maker. He it was, they
thought, who produced the thunder and the lightning by *hurling stones
with his sling;* and the thunder-bolts that fall, said they, are his
children. Few villages were willing to be without one or more of these.
They were in appearance *small, round, smooth stones*, but had the
admirable properties of securing fertility to the fields, protecting
from lightning," etc.\[1\]

I shift the scene again; or, rather, group together the legends of three
different localities. I quote:

"The Takahlis" (the Tacullies already referred to) "of the North Pacific
coast, the Yurucares of the Bolivian Cordilleras, and the Mbocobi of
Paraguay, each and all attribute the destruction of the world to a
*general conflagration*, which swept over the earth, consuming
everything living *except a few who took refuge in a deep cave*."\[2\]

The Botocudos of Brazil believed that the world was once destroyed by
the moon falling upon it.

Let us shift the scene again northward:

There was once, according to the Ojibway legends, a boy; the sun burned
and spoiled his bird-skin coat; and he swore that he would have
vengeance. He persuaded his sister to make him a noose of her own hair.
He fixed it just where the sun would strike the land as it rose above
the earth's disk; and, sure enough, he caught the sun, and held it fast,
so that it did not rise.

"The animals who ruled the earth were immediately put into *great
commotion. They had no light.* They called a council to debate upon the
matter, and to appoint

\[1. Brinton's "Myths of the New World," p. 165.

2\. Ibid., p. 217.\]

{p. 182}

some one to go and cut the cord, for this was a very hazardous
enterprise, as the rays of the sun would *burn up whoever came so near*.
At last the dormouse undertook it, for at this time the dormouse was the
largest animal in the world" (the mastodon?); "when it stood up it
looked like a mountain. When it got to the place where the sun was
snared, its back began to *smoke and burn with the intensity of the
heat*, and the top of its carcass was reduced to *enormous heaps of
ashes*. It succeeded, however, in cutting the cord with its teeth and
freeing the sun, but it was *reduced to very small size*, and has
remained so ever since."

This seems to be a reminiscence of the destruction of the great
mammalia.\[1\] The "enormous heaps of ashes" may represent the vast
deposits of clay-dust.

Among the Wyandots a story was told, in the seventeenth century, of a
boy whose father was killed and eaten by a bear, and his mother by the
Great Hare. He was small, but of prodigious strength. He climbed a tree,
like Jack of the Bean-Stalk, until he reached heaven.

"He set his snares for game, but when he got up at night to look at them
he found *everything on fire*. His sister told him he had caught the sun
unawares, and when the boy, Chakabech, went to see, so it was. But he
dared not go near enough to let him out. But by chance he found a little
mouse, and blew upon her until she grew so big" (again the mastodon)
"that she could set the sun free, and he went on his way. But while he
was held in the snare, *day failed down here on earth*."

It was the age of darkness\[2\]

The Dog-Rib Indians, far in the northwest of America, near the
Esquimaux, have a similar story: Chakabech becomes Chapewee. He too
climbs a tree, but it is in pursuit

\[1. Tylor's "Early History of Mankind," p. 848.

2\. Le Jeune (1637), in "Rélations des Jesuits dans la Nouvelle France,"
vol. i, p. 54.\]

{p. 183}

of a squirrel, until he reaches heaven. He set a snare made of his
sister's hair and caught the sun. "*The sky was instantly darkened*.
Chapewee's family said to him, 'You must have done something wrong when
you were aloft, *for we no longer enjoy the light of day*.' 'I have,'
replied he, 'but it was unintentionally.' Chapewee sent a number of
animals to cut the snare, but the intense *heat reduced them all to
ashes*." At last the ground-mole working in the earth cut the snare but
lost its sight, "and its nose and teeth have ever since been brown as if
burnt."\[1\]

The natives of Siberia represented the mastodon as a great mole
burrowing in the earth and casting up ridges of earth--the sight of the
sun killed him.

These sun-catching legends date back to a time when the races of the
earth had not yet separated. Hence we find the same story, in almost the
same words, in Polynesia and America.

Maui is the Polynesian god of the ancient days. He concluded, as did
Ta-wats, that the days were too short. He wanted the sun to slow-up, but
it would not. So he proceeded to catch it in a noose like the Ojibway
boy and the Wyandot youth. The manufacture of the noose, we are told,
led to the discovery of the art of rope-making. He took his brothers
with him; he armed himself, like Samson, with a jaw-bone, but instead of
the jaw-bone of an ass, he, with much better taste, selected the jawbone
of his mistress. She may have been a lady of fine conversational powers.
They traveled far, like Ta-wats, even to the very edge of the place
where the sun rises. There he set his noose. The sun came and put his
head and fore-paws into it; then the brothers pulled the ropes

\[1. Richardson's "Narrative of Franklin's Second Expedition," p. 291.\]

{p. 184}

tight and Maui gave him a great whipping with the jawbone; he screamed
and roared; they held him there for a long time, (the Age of Darkness,)
and at last they let him go; and weak from his wounds, (obscured by
clouds,) he crawls slowly along his path. Here the jaw of the wolf
Fenris, which reached from earth to heaven, in the Scandinavian legends,
becomes a veritable jaw-bone which beats and ruins the sun.

It is a curious fact that the sun in this Polynesian legend is *Ra*,
precisely the same as the name of the god of the sun in Egypt, while in
Hindostan the sun-god is Ra-ma.

In another Polynesian legend we read of a character who was satisfied
with nothing, "even pudding would not content him," and this
unconscionable fellow worried his family out of all heart with his new
ways and ideas. He represents a progressive, inventive race. He was
building a great house, but the days were too short; so, like Maui, he
determined to catch the sun in nets and ropes; but the sun went on. At
last he succeeded; he caught him. The good man then had time to finish
his house, but the sun cried and cried "until the island of Savai was
nearly drowned."\[1\]

And these myths of the sun being tied by a cord are, strange to say,
found even in Europe. The legends tell us:

"In North Germany the townsmen of Bösum sit up in their church-tower and
hold the sun by a cable all day long; taking care of it at night, and
letting it up again in the morning. In 'Reynard the Fox,' the day is
bound with a rope, and its bonds only allow it to come slowly on. The
Peruvian Inca said the sun is like a tied beast, who goes ever round and
round, in the same track."\[2\]

That is to say, they recognized that he is not a god, but the servant of
God.

\[1. Tyler's "Early Mankind," p. 347.

2\. Ibid., p. 352.\]

{p. 185}

Verily the bands that knit the races of the earth together are wonderful
indeed, and they radiate, as I shall try to show, from one spot of the
earth's surface, alike to Polynesia, Europe, and America.

Let us change the scene again to the neighborhood of the Aztecs:

We are told of two youths, the ancestors of the Miztec chiefs, who
separated, each going his own way to conquer lands for himself:

"The braver of the two, coming to the vicinity of Tilantongo, armed with
buckler and bow, was *much vexed and oppressed by the ardent rays of the
sun*, which he took to be the lord of that district, striving to prevent
his entrance therein. Then the young man strung his bow, and advanced
his buckler before him, and drew shafts from his quiver. He shot these
against the great light even till the going down of the same; then he
took possession of all that land, seeing that he had *grievously wounded
the sun* and forced him to hide behind the mountains. Upon this story is
founded the lordship of all the caciques of Mizteca, and upon their
descent from this mighty archer, their ancestor. Even to this day, the
chiefs of the Miztecs blazon as their arms a plumed chief with bow and
arrows and shield, and the sun in front of him setting behind gray
clouds."\[1\]

Are these two young men, one of whom attacks and injures the sun, the
two wolves of the Gothic legends, the two comets, who devoured the sun
and moon? And did the Miztec barbarians, in their vanity, claim descent
from these monstrous creatures of the sky? Why not, when the historical
heroes of antiquity traced their pedigree back to the gods; and the
rulers of Peru, Egypt, and China pretended to be the lineal offspring of
the sun? And there are not wanting those, even in Europe, who

\[1. Bancroft's "Native Races," vol. iii, p. 73.\]

{p. 186}

yet believe that the blood-royal differs in some of its constituents
from the blood of the common people

"What, will the aspiring blood of Lancaster  
Sink in the ground? "

In the Aztec legends there were four ages, or suns, as they were termed.
The first terminated, according to Gama, in a destruction of the people
of the world by hunger; the second ended in a destruction by winds; in
the third, *the human race was swept away by fire*, and the fourth
destruction was by water. And in the Hindoo legends we find the same
series of great cycles, or ages: one of the Shastas teaches that the
human race has been destroyed four times--first by water, secondly by
winds, thirdly the earth swallowed them, and *lastly fire consumed
them*.\[1\]

I come now to a most extraordinary record:

In the prayer of the Aztecs to the great god Tezcatlipoca, "the supreme,
invisible god," a prayer offered up in time of pestilence, we have the
most remarkable references to the destruction of the people by stones
and fire. It would almost seem as if this great prayer, noble and
sublime in its language, was first poured out in the very midst of the
Age of Fire, wrung from the human heart by the most appalling calamity
that ever overtook the race; and that it was transmitted from age to
age, as the hymns of the Vedas and the prayers of the Hebrews have been
preserved, for thousands of years, down to our own times, when it was
carefully transcribed by a missionary priest. It is as follows:

"O mighty Lord, under whose wing we find defense and shelter, thou art
invisible and impalpable, even as night and the air. How can I, that am
so mean and worthless, dare to appear before thy majesty? Stuttering

\[1. Brinton's "Myths of the New World," p. 232.\]

{p. 187}

and with rude lips I speak, ungainly is the manner of my speech as one
leaping among furrows, as one advancing unevenly; for all this I fear to
raise thine anger, and to provoke instead of appeasing thee;
nevertheless, thou wilt do unto me as may please thee. O Lord, *thou
hast held it good to forsake us in these days*, according to the counsel
that thou hast as well in heaven as in hades,--alas for us, in that
thine *anger and indignation has descended upon us in these days*; alas
in that the many and grievous afflictions of thy wrath have overgone,
and swallowed us up, *coming down even as stones, spears, and arrows
upon the wretches that inhabit the earth!*--this is the sore pestilence
with which we are afflicted and *almost destroyed*. O valiant and
all-powerful Lord, the common people are almost *made an end of and
destroyed;* a great destruction the ruin and pestilence already make in
this nation; and, what is most pitiful of all, the little children, that
are innocent and understand nothing, only to play with *pebbles and to
heap up little mounds of earth, they too die, broken and dashed to
pieces as against stones and a wall*--a thing very pitiful and grievous
to be seen, for there remain of them not even those in the cradles, nor
those that could not walk or speak. Ah, Lord, how *all things become
confounded!* of young and old and of men and women there *remains
neither branch nor root;* thy nation, and thy people, and thy wealth,
*are leveled down and destroyed*.

"O our Lord, protector of all, most valiant and most kind,

what is this?

"Thine anger and thine indignation, does it glory or delight in *hurling
the stone, and arrow, and spear? The FIRE of the pestilence, made
exceeding hot, is upon thy nation*, as a fire in a hut, *burning and
smoking, leaving nothing upright or sound*. The grinders of thy teeth,"
(the falling stones), "are employed, and thy bitter whips upon the
miserable of thy people, who have become lean, and of little substance,
even as a hollow green cane.

Yea, *what doest thou now*, O Lord, most strong, compassionate,
invisible, and impalpable, whose will all things obey, upon whose
disposal depends the rule of the world, to whom all are subject,--what
in thy divine breast

{p. 188}

hast thou decreed? Peradventure, hast thou altogether forsaken thy
nation and thy people? Hast thou verily determined that it *utterly
perish*, and that there be no more memory of it in the world, *that the
peopled place become a wooded hill, and* A WILDERNESS OF STONES?
Peradventure, wilt thou permit that the temples, and the places of
prayer, and the altars, built for thy service, *be razed* and destroyed,
and no memory of them left?

"Is it, indeed, possible that thy wrath and punishment and vexed
indignation are altogether implacable, and will go on to the end to our
destruction? Is it already fixed in thy divine counsel that there is to
be no mercy nor pity for us, *until the arrows of thy fury are spent to
our utter perdition and destruction?* Is it possible that this lash and
chastisement is not given for our correction and amendment, but only for
*our total destruction and obliteration;* that THE SUN SHALL NEVER MORE
SHINE UPON US, *but that we must remain in* PERPETUAL DARKNESS and
silence; that never more wilt thou look upon us with eyes of mercy,
neither little nor much?

"Wilt thou after this fashion destroy the wretched sick that can not
find rest, nor turn from side to side, whose mouth and teeth *are filled
with earth and scurf?* It is a sore thing to tell how we are all in
darkness, having none understanding nor sense to watch for or aid one
another. We are all as drunken, and without understanding: without hope
of any aid, *already the little children perish of hunger*, for there is
none to give them food, nor drink, nor consolation, nor caress; none to
give the breast to them that suck, *for their fathers and mothers have
died and left them orphans*, suffering for the sins of their fathers."

What a graphic picture is all this of the remnant of a civilized
religious race hiding in some deep cavern, in darkness, their friends
slaughtered by the million by the falling stones, coming like arrows and
spears, and the pestilence of poisonous gases; their food-supplies
scanty; they themselves horrified, awe-struck, despairing, fearing that
they would never again see the light; that this dreadful day was the end
of the human race

{p. 189}

and of the world itself! And one of them, perhaps a priest, certainly a
great man, wrought up to eloquence, through the darkness and the terror,
puts up this pitiful and pathetic cry to the supreme God for mercy, for
protection, for deliverance from the awful visitation.

How wonderful to think that the priesthood of the Aztecs have through
ages preserved to us, down to this day, this cavern-hymn--one of the
most ancient of the utterances of the heart of man extant on the
earth--and have preserved it long after the real meaning of its words
was lost to them!

The prayer continues

"O our Lord, all-powerful, full of mercy, our refuge, though indeed
thine anger and indignation, thine arrows and stones, have sorely hurt
this poor people, let it be as a father or a mother that rebukes
children, pulling their ears, pinching their arms, whipping them with
nettles, pouring chill water upon them, all being done that they may
amend their puerility and childishness. Thy chastisement and indignation
have lorded and prevailed over these thy servants, over this poor
people, even as rain falling upon the trees and the green canes, being
touched of the wind, drops also upon those that are below.

"O most compassionate Lord, thou knowest that the common folk are as
children, that being whipped they cry and sob and repent of what they
have done. Peradventure, already these poor people by reason of their
chastisement weep, sigh, blame, and murmur against themselves; in thy
presence they blame and bear witness against their bad deeds, and punish
themselves therefor. Our Lord, most compassionate, pitiful, noble, and
precious, let a time be given the people to repent; let the past
chastisement suffice; let it end here, to begin again if the reform
endure not. Pardon and overlook the sins of the people; cause thine
anger and thy resentment to cease; repress it again within thy breast
*that it destroy no further*; let it rest there; let it cease, for of a
surety *none can avoid death nor escape to anyplace*."

{p. 190}

"We owe tribute to death; and all that live in the world are vassals
thereof; this tribute shall every man pay with his life. None shall
avoid from following death, for it is thy messenger what hour soever it
may be sent, hungering and thirsting always to devour all that are in
the world and so powerful that none shall escape; then, indeed, shall
every man be judged according to his deeds. O most pitiful Lord, at
least take pity and have mercy upon the children that are in the
cradles, upon those that can not walk Have mercy also, O Lord, upon the
poor and very miserable, who have nothing to eat, nor to cover
themselves withal, nor a place to sleep, who do not know what thing a
happy day is, whose days pass altogether in pain, affliction, and
sadness. Than this, were it not better, O Lord, if thou shouldst forget
to have mercy upon the soldiers and upon the men of war whom thou wilt
have need of some time? Behold, it is better to die in war and go to
serve food and drink in the house of the Sun, than to die in this
pestilence and descend to hades. O most strong Lord, protector of all,
lord of the earth, governor of the world and universal master, let the
sport and satisfaction thou hast already taken in this past punishment
suffice; *make an end of this smoke and fog* of thy resentment; *quench
also the burning and destroying fire of thine anger;* let *serenity come
and clearness;* let the small birds of thy people begin to sing and"
(to) "*approach the sun; give them* QUIET WEATHER; so that they may
cause their voices to reach thy highness, and thou mayest know
them."\[1\]

Now it may be doubted by some whether this most extraordinary
supplication could have come down from the Glacial Age; but it must be
remembered that it may have been many times repeated in the deep cavern
before the terror fled from the souls of the desolate fragment of the
race; and, once established as a religious prayer, associated with such
dreadful events, who would dare to change a word of it?

\[1. Bancroft's "Native Races," vol. iii, p. 200.\]

{p. 191}

Who would dare, among ourselves, to alter a syllable of the "Lord's
Prayer"? Even though Christianity should endure for ten thousand years
upon the face of the earth; even though the art of writing were lost,
and civilization itself had perished, it would pass unchanged from mouth
to mouth and from generation to generation, crystallized into
imperishable diamonds of thought, by the conservative power of the
religious instinct.

There can be no doubt of the authenticity of this and the other ancient
prayers to Tezcatlipoca, which I shall quote hereafter. I repeat what H.
H. Bancroft says, in a foot-note, in his great work:

"Father Bernardino de Sahagun, a Spanish Franciscan, was *one of the
first preachers sent to Mexico*, where he was much employed in the
instruction of the native youth, working for the most part in the
province of Tezcuco. While there, in the city of Tepeopulco, in the
latter part of the sixteenth century, he began the work, best known to
us as the 'Historia General de las Cosas de Nueva España,' from which
the above prayers have been taken. It would be hard to imagine a work of
such a character constructed after a better fashion of working than his.
Gathering the principal natives of the town in which he carried on his
labors, he induced them to appoint him a number of persons, the most
learned and experienced in the things of which he proposed to write.
These learned Mexicans being collected, Father Sahagun was accustomed to
get them to paint down in their native fashion the various legends,
details of history and mythology, and so on, that he wanted; at the foot
of the said. pictures these learned Mexicans wrote out the explanations
of the same in the Mexican tongue; and this explanation the Father
Sahagun translated into Spanish. That translation purports to be what we
now read as the 'Historia General.'"\[1\]

\[1. "The Native Races of the Pacific States," vol. iii, p. 231.\]

{p. 192}

Sahagun was a good and holy man, who was doubtless inspired of God, in
the face of much opposition and many doubts, to perpetuate, for the
benefit of the race, these wonderful testimonials of man's existence,
condition, opinions, and feelings in the last great cataclysm which
shook the whole world and nearly destroyed it.

Religions may perish; the name of the Deity may change with race and
time and tongue; but He can never despise such noble, exalted, eloquent
appeals from the hearts of millions of men, repeated through thousands
of generations, as these Aztec prayers have been. Whether addressed to
Tezcatlipoca, Zeus, Jove, Jehovah, or God, they pass alike direct from
the heart of the creature to the heart of the Creator; they are of the
threads that tie together matter and spirit.

In conclusion, let me recapitulate

1\. The original surface-rocks, underneath the Drift, are, we have seen,
decomposed and changed, for varying depths of from one to one hundred
feet, by fire; they are metamorphosed, and their metallic constituents
vaporized out of them by heat.

2\. Only tremendous heat could have lifted the water of the seas into
clouds, and formed the age of snow and floods evidenced by the secondary
Drift.

3\. The traditions of the following races tell us that the earth was
once swept by a great conflagration:

a\. The ancient Britons, as narrated in the mythology of the Druids.

b\. The ancient Greeks, as told by Hesiod.

c\. The ancient Scandinavians, as appears in the *Elder Edda* and
*Younger Edda*.

d\. The ancient Romans, as narrated by Ovid.

e\. The ancient Toltecs of Central America, as told in their sacred
books.

{p. 193}

f\. The ancient Aztecs of Mexico, as transcribed by Fray de Olmos.

g\. The ancient Persians, as recorded in the Zend-Avesta.

h\. The ancient Hindoos, as told in their sacred books.

i\. The Tahoe Indians of California, as appears by their living
traditions.

Also by the legends of--

j\. The Tupi Indians of Brazil.

k\. The Tacullies of British America.

1\. The Ute Indians of California and Utah.

m\. The Peruvians.

n\. The Yurucares of the Bolivian Cordilleras.

o\. The Mbocobi of Paraguay.

p\. The Botocudos of Brazil.

q\. The Ojibway Indians of the United States.

r\. The Wyandot Indians of the United States.

s\. Lastly, the Dog-rib Indians of British Columbia.

We must concede that these legends of a world-embracing conflagration
represent a race-remembrance of a great fact, or that they are a
colossal falsehood--an invention of man.

If the latter, then that invention and falsehood must have been
concocted at a time when the ancestors of the Greeks, Romans, Hindoos,
Persians, Goths, Toltecs, Aztecs, Peruvians, and the Indians of Brazil,
the United States, the west coast of South America, and the northwestern
extremity of North America, and the Polynesians, (who have kindred
traditions,) all dwelt together, as one people, alike in language and
alike in color of their hair, eyes, and skin. At that time, therefore,
all the widely separated regions, now inhabited by these races, must
have been without human inhabitants; the race must have been a mere
handful, and dwelling in one spot.

{p. 194}

What vast lapses of time must have been required before mankind slowly
overflowed to these remote regions of the earth, and changed into these
various races speaking such diverse tongues!

And if we take the ground that this universal tradition of a
world-conflagration was an invention, a falsehood, then we must conclude
that this handful of men, before they dispersed, in the very infancy of
the world, shared in the propagation of a prodigious lie, and
religiously perpetuated it for tens of thousands of years.

And then the question arises, How did they hit upon a lie that accords
so completely with the revelations of science? They possessed no great
public works, in that infant age, which would penetrate through hundreds
of feet of *débris*, and lay bare the decomposed rocks beneath;
therefore they did not make a theory to suit an observed fact.

And how did mankind come to be reduced to a handful? If men grew, in the
first instance, out of bestial forms, mindless and speechless, they
would have propagated and covered the world as did the bear and the
wolf. But after they had passed this stage, and had so far developed as
to be human in speech and brain, some cause reduced them again to a
handful. What was it? Something, say these legends, some fiery object,
some blazing beast or serpent, which appeared in the heavens, which
filled the world with conflagrations, and which destroyed the human
race, except a remnant, who saved themselves in caverns or in the water;
and from this seed, this handful, mankind again replenished the earth,
and spread gradually to all the continents and the islands of the sea.

{p. 195}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Legends Of The Cave-Life](rag21.md)
