[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rag29)  [Next](rag31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III.

##### THE BRIDGE.

THE deep-sea soundings, made of late years in the Atlantic, reveal the
fact that the Azores are the mountaintops of a colossal mass of sunken
land; and that from this center one great ridge runs southward for some
distance, and then, bifurcating, sends out one limb to the shores of
Africa, and another to the shores of South America; while there are the
evidences that a third great ridge formerly reached northward from the
Azores to the British Islands.

When these ridges--really the tops of long and continuous
mountain-chains, like the Andes or the Rocky Mountains, the backbone of
a vast primeval Atlantic-filling, but, even then, in great part, sunken
continent, were above the water, they furnished a wonderful feature in
the scenery and geography of the world; they were the pathways over
which the migrations of races extended in the ancient days; they wound
for thousands of miles, irregular, rocky, wave-washed, through the great
ocean, here expanding into islands, there reduced to a narrow strip, or
sinking into the sea; they reached from a central civilized land--an
ancient, long-settled land, the land of the godlike race--to its
colonies, or connections, north, south, east, and west; and they
impressed themselves vividly on the imagination and the traditions of
mankind, leaving their image even in the religions of the world unto
this day.

As, in process of time, they gradually or suddenly settled

{p. 377}

into the deep, they must at first have formed long, continuous strings
of islands, almost touching each other, resembling very much the
Aleutian Archipelago, or the Bahama group; and these islands continued
to be used, during later ages, as the stepping-stones for migrations and
intercourse between the old and the new worlds, just as the discovery of
the Azores helped forward the discovery of the New World by Columbus; he
used them, we know, as a halting-place in his great voyage.

When Job speaks of "the island of the innocent," which was spared from
utter destruction, he prefaces it by asking, (chap. xxii):

"15. Hast thou marked *the old way* which wicked men have trodden?

"16. Which were (was?) cut down out of time, *whose foundation was
overflown with a flood*."

And in chapter xxviii, verse 4, we have what may be another allusion to
this "way," along which go the people who are on their journey, and
which "divideth the flood," and on which some are escaping.

The Quiche manuscript, as translated by the Abbé Brasseur de
Bourbourg,\[1\] gives an account of the migration of the Quiche race to
America from some eastern land in a very early day, in "the day of
darkness," ere the sun was, in the so-called glacial age.

When they moved to America they wandered for a long time through forests
and over mountains, and "they had a *long passage to make, through the
sea, along the shingle and pebbles and drifted sand*." And this long
passage was through the sea "which was parted for their passage." That
is, the sea was on both sides of this long ridge of rocks and sand.

\[1. Tylor's "Early Mankind," p. 308.\]

{p. 378}

The abbé adds:

"But it is not clear how they crossed the sea; they passed as though
there had been no sea, for they passed over scattered rocks, and these
rocks were rolled on the sands. This is why they called the place
'ranged stones and torn-up sands,' the name which they gave it in their
passage within the sea, the water being divided when they passed."

They probably migrated along that one of the connecting ridges which,
the sea-soundings show us, stretched from Atlantis to the coast of South
America.

We have seen in the Hindoo legends that when Rama went to the Island of
Lanka to fight the demon Ravana, he built a bridge of stone, sixty miles
long, with the help of the monkey-god, in order to reach the island.

In Ovid we read of the "settling down a little" of the island on which
the drama of Phaëton was enacted.

In the Norse legends the bridge Bifrost cuts an important figure. One
would be at first disposed to regard it as meaning, (as is stated in
what are probably later interpolations,) the rainbow; but we see, upon
looking closely, that it represents a material fact, an actual structure
of some kind.

Gylfe, who was, we are told, A king of Sweden in the ancient days,
visited Asgard. He assumed the name of Ganglere, (the walker or
wanderer). I quote from the "*Younger Edda, The Creation*":

"Then asked Ganglere, 'What is the path from earth to heaven?'"

The earth here means, I take it, the European colonies which surround
the ocean, which in turn surrounds Asgard; heaven is the land of the
godlike race, Asgard. Ganglere therefore asks what is, or was, in the
mythological past, the pathway from Europe to the Atlantic island.

{p. 379}

"Har answered, laughing, 'Foolishly do you now ask. Have you not been
told that the gods made a bridge from earth to heaven, which is called
Bifrost? You must have seen it. It may be that you call it the rainbow.
It has three colors, is very strong, and is made with more craft and
skill than other structures. Still, however strong it is, it will break
when the sons of Muspel come to ride over it, and then they will have to
swim their horses over great rivers in order to get on.'"

Muspel is the blazing South, the land of fire, of the convulsions that
accompanied the comet. But how can Bifrost mean the rainbow? What rivers
intersect a rainbow?

"Then said Ganglere, 'The gods did not, it seems to me, build that
bridge honestly, if it shall be able to break to pieces, since they
could have done so if they had desired.' Then made answer Har: 'The gods
are worthy of no blame for this structure. Bifrost is indeed a good
bridge, but there is nothing in the world that is able to stand when the
sons of Muspel come to the fight.'"

Muspel here means, I repeat, the heat of the South. Mere heat has no
effect on rainbows. They are the product of sunlight and falling water,
and are often most distinct in the warmest weather.

But we see, a little further on, that this bridge Bifrost was a real
structure. We read of the roots of the ash-tree Ygdrasil, and one of its
roots reaches to the fountain of Urd:

Here the gods have their doomstead. The *Asas ride hither every day over
Bifrost*, which is also called Asa-bridge."

And these three mountain-chains going out to the different continents
were the three roots of the tree Ygdrasil, the sacred tree of the
mountain-top; and it is to this "three-pronged root of the
world-mountain" that the

{p. 380}

Hindoo legends refer, (see page 238, *ante*): on its top was heaven,
Olympus; below it was hell, where the Asuras, the comets, dwelt; and
between was Meru, (Mero Merou,) the land of the Meropes, Atlantis.

The *Asas* were clearly a human race of noble and godlike qualities. The
proof of this is that they perished in Ragnarok; they were mortal. They
rode over the bridge every day going from heaven, the heavenly land, to
the earth, Europe.

We read on:

"Kormt and Ormt,  
And the two Kerlaugs  
These shall Thor wade  
Every day,  
When he goes to judge  
Near the Ygdrasil ash;  
*For the Asa-bridge  
Burns all ablaze--*  
The holy waters roar."

These rivers, Kormt and Ormt and the two Kerlaugs, were probably breaks
in the long ridge, where it had gradually subsided into the sea. The
Asa-bridge was, very likely, dotted with volcanoes, as the islands of
the Atlantic are to this day.

"Then answered Ganglere, 'Does fire burn over Bifrost?' Har answered:
'The red which you see in the rainbow is burning fire. The frost-giants
and the mountain-giants would go up to heaven if Bifrost were passable
for all who desired to go there. Many fair places are there in heaven,
and they are protected by a divine defense.'"

We have just seen (p. 371, *ante*) that the home of the godlike race,
the *Asas*, to wit, heaven, Asgard, was surrounded by the ocean, was
therefore an island; and that around the outer margin of this ocean, the
Atlantic,

\[1. Elder Edda, "Grimner's Lay," 29.\]

{p. 381}

the godlike race had given lands for the ice-giants to dwell in. And now
we read that this Asa-bridge, this Bifrost, reached from earth to
heaven, to wit, across this gulf that separated the island from the
colonies of the ice-giants. And now we learn that, if this bridge were
not defended by a divine defense, these troublesome ice-giants would go
up to heaven; that is to say, the bold Northmen would march across it
from Great Britain and Ireland to the Azores, to wit, to Atlantis.
Surely all this could not apply to the rainbow.

But we read a little further. Har is reciting to Ganglere the wonders of
the heavenly land, and is describing its golden palaces, and its mixed
population of dark and light colored races, and he says:

"Furthermore, there is a dwelling, by name Himinbjorg, *which stands at
the end of heaven, where the Bifrost bridge is united with heaven*."

And then we read of Heimdal, one of the gods who was subsequently killed
by the comet:

"He dwells in a place called Himinbjorg, near Bifrost. He is the ward,"
(warder, guardian,) "of the gods, and sits *at the end of heaven,
guarding the bridge against the mountain-giants*. He needs less sleep
than a bird; sees an hundred miles around him, and as well by night as
by day. *His teeth are of gold*."

This reads something like a barbarian's recollection of a race that
practiced dentistry and used telescopes. We know that gold filling has
been found in the teeth of ancient Egyptians and Peruvians, and that
telescopic lenses were found in the ruins of Babylon.

But here we have Bifrost, a bridge, but not a continuous structure,
interrupted in places by water, reaching from Europe to some Atlantic
island. And the island-people regarded it very much as some of the
English look

{p. 382}

upon the proposition to dig a tunnel from Dover to Calais, as a source
of danger, a means of invasion, a threat; and at the end of the island,
where the ridge is united to it, they did what England will probably do
at the end of the Dover tunnel: they erected fortifications and built a
castle, and in it they put a ruler, possibly a sub-king, Heimdal, who
constantly, from a high lookout, possibly with a field-glass, watches
the coming of the turbulent Goths, or Gauls, or Gael, from afar off.
Doubtless the white-headed and red-headed, hungry, breekless savages had
the same propensity to invade the civilized, wealthy land, that their
posterity had to descend on degenerate Rome.

The word *Asas* is not, as some have supposed, derived from Asia. Asia
is derived from the *Asas*. The word *Asas* comes from a Norse word,
still in use in Norway, *Aas*, meaning *a ridge of high land*.\[1\]
Anderson thinks there is some connection between *Aas*, the high ridge,
the mountain elevation, and *Atlas*, who held the world on his
shoulders.

The *Asas*, then, were the civilized race who inhabited a high,
precipitous country, the meeting-point of a number of ridges. Atlas was
the king, or god, of Atlantis. In the old time all kings were gods. They
are something more than men, to the multitude, even yet.

And when we reach "Ragnarok" in these Gothic legends, when the jaw of
the wolf Fenris reached from the earth to the sun, and he vomits fire
and poison, and when Surt, and all the forces of Muspel, "ride over
Bifrost, *it breaks to pieces*." That is to say, in this last great
catastrophe of the earth, the ridge of land that led from the British
Islands to Atlantis goes down for ever.

\[1. The Younger Edda," Anderson, note, p. 226.\]

{p. 383}

And in Plato's description of Atlantis, as received by Solon from the
Egyptian priests, we read:

"There was an island" (Atlantis) "situated in front of the straits which
you call the Columns of Hercules; the island was larger than Libya and
Asia put together, and *was the way to other islands*, and from the
islands *you might pass through the whole of the opposite continent*,"
(America,) "which surrounds the true ocean."

Now this is not very clear, but it may signify that there was continuous
land communication between Atlantis and the islands of the
half-submerged ridge, and from the islands to the continent of America.
It would seem to mean more than a passage-way by boats over the water,
for that existed everywhere, and could be traversed in any direction.

I have quoted on p. 372, *ante*, in the last chapter, part of the
Sanskrit legend of Adima and Héva, as preserved in the Bagaveda-Gita,
and other sacred books of the Hindoos. It refers very distinctly to the
bridge which united the island-home of primeval humanity with the rest
of the earth. But there is more of it:

When, under the inspiration of the prince of demons, Adima and Héva
begin to wander, and desire to leave their island, we read:

"Arriving at last at the extremity of the island"--

We have seen that the bridge Bifrost was connected with the extremity of
Asgard--

"they beheld a smooth and narrow arm of the sea, and beyond it a vast
and apparently boundless country," (Europe?) "*connected with their
island by a narrow and rocky pathway, arising from the bosom of the
waters*."

This is probably a precise description of the connecting ridge; it
united the boundless continent, Europe, with

{p. 384}

the island; it rose out of the sea, it was rocky; it was the broken
crest of a submerged mountain-chain.

What became of it? Here again we have a tradition of its destruction. We
read that, after Adima and Héva had passed over this rocky bridge--

"No sooner did they touch the shore, than trees, flowers, fruit, birds,
all that they had seen from the opposite side, vanished in an instant,
*amidst terrible clamor; the rocks by which they had crossed sank
beneath the waves*, a few sharp peaks alone remaining above the surface,
to indicate the place of the bridge, *which had been destroyed by divine
displeasure*."

Here we have the crushing and instant destruction by the Drift, the
terrific clamor of the age of chaos, and the breaking down of the bridge
Bifrost under the feet of the advancing armies of Muspel; here we have
"the earth" of Ovid "settling down a little" in the ocean; here we have
the legends of the Cornishmen of the lost land, described in the poetry
of Tennyson; here we have the emigrants to Europe cut off from their
primeval home, and left in a land of stones and clay and thistles.

It is, of course, localized in Ceylon, precisely as the mountain of
Ararat and the mountain of Olympus crop out in a score of places,
wherever the races carried their legends. And to this day the Hindoo
points to the rocks which rise in the Indian Ocean, between the eastern
point of India and the Island of Ceylon, as the remnants of the Bridge;
and the reader will find them marked on our maps as" Adam's Bridge"
(*Palam Adima*). The people even point out, to this day, a high
mountain, from whose foot the Bridge went forth, over which Adima and
Héva, crossed to the continent; and it is known in modern geography as
"Adam's Peak." So vividly have the traditions of a vast antiquity come
down to us! The legends

{p. 385}

of the Drift have left their stamp even in our schoolbooks.

And the memory of this Bridge survives not only in our geographies, but
in our religions.

Man reasons, at first, from below upward; from godlike men up to
man-like gods; from Cæsar, the soldier, up to Cæsar, the deity.

Heaven was, in the beginning, a heavenly city on earth; it is
transported to the clouds; and there its golden streets and sparkling
palaces await the redeemed.

This is natural: we can only conceive of the best of the spiritual by
the best we know of the material; we can imagine no musical instrument
in the bands of the angels superior to a harp; no weapon better than a
sword for the grasp of Gabriel.

This disproves not a spiritual and superior state; it simply shows the
poverty and paucity of our poor intellectual apparatus, which, like a
mirror, reflects only that which is around it, and reflects it
imperfectly.

Men sometimes think they are mocking spiritual things when it is the
imperfection of material nature, (which they set so much store by,) that
provokes their ridicule.

So, among all the races which went out from this heavenly land, this
land of high intelligence, this land of the master race, it was
remembered down through the ages, and dwelt upon and sung of until it
moved upward from the waters of the Atlantic to the distant skies, and
became a spiritual heaven. And the ridges which so strangely connected
it with the continents, east and west, became the bridges over which the
souls of men must pass to go from earth to heaven.

For instance:

The Persians believe in this bridge between earth and

{p. 386}

paradise. In his prayers the penitent in his confession says to this
day:

"I am wholly without doubt in the existence of the Mazdayaçnian faith;
in the coming of the resurrection of the latter body; in the stepping
*over the bridge Chinvat*; as well as in the continuance of paradise."

The bridge and the land are both indestructible.

Over the midst of the Moslem hell stretches the bridge Es-Sirat, "finer
than a hair and sharper than the edge of a sword."

In the Lyke-Wake Dirge of the English north-country, they sang of

The Brig of Dread  
Na braider than a thread."

In Borneo the passage for souls to heaven is across a long tree; it is
scarcely practicable to any except those who have killed a man.

In Burmah, among the Karens, they tie strings across the rivers, for the
ghosts of the dead to pass over to their graves.

In Java, a bridge leads across the abyss to the dwelling-place of the
gods; the evil-doers fall into the depths *below*.

Among the Esquimaux the soul crosses an awful gulf over a stretched
rope, until it reaches the abode of "the great female evil spirit below"
(beyond?) "the sea."

The Ojibways cross to paradise on a great snake, which serves as a
bridge.

The Choctaw bridge is a slippery pine-log.

The South American Manacicas cross on a wooden bridge.

Among many of the American tribes, the Milky Way is the bridge to the
other world.

\[1. Poor, "Sanskrit Literature," p. 151.\]

{p. 387}

The Polynesians have no bridge; they pass the chasm in canoes.

The Vedic Yama of the Hindoos crossed the rapid waters, and showed the
way to our Aryan fathers.

The modern Hindoo hopes to get through by holding on to the cow's tail!

Even the African tribes, the Guinea negroes, believe that the land of
souls can only be reached by crossing a river.

Among some of the North American tribes "the souls come to a great
lake," (the ocean,) "where there is a *beautiful island*, toward which
they have to paddle in a canoe of white stone. On the way there arises a
storm, and the wicked souls are wrecked, and the heaps of their bones
are to be seen under the water, but the good reach the happy
*island*."\[1\]

The Slavs believed in a pathway or road which led to the other world; it
was both the rainbow (as in the Gothic legends) and the Milky Way; and,
since the journey was long, they put boots into the coffin, (for it was
made on foot,) and coins to pay the ferrying across a wide sea, even as
the Greeks expected to be carried over the Styx by Charon. This abode of
the dead, at the end of this long pathway, was *an island*, a warm,
fertile land, called *Buyau*.\[2\]

In their effort to restore the dead men to the happy island-home, the
heavenly land, beyond the water, the Norsemen actually set their dead
heroes afloat in boats on the open ocean.\[3\]

Subsequently they raised a great mound over boat, warrior, horses,
weapons, and all. These boats are now being dug up in the north of
Europe and placed in the

\[1. Tylor's "Early Mankind," p. 362.

2\. Poor, "Sanskrit and Kindred Literatures," pp. 3 71, 372.

3\. Ibid.\]

{p. 388}

great museums. They tell a marvelous religious and historical story.

I think the unprejudiced reader will agree with me that these legends
show that some Atlantic island played an important part in the very
beginning of human history. It was the great land of the world before
the Drift; it continued to be the great land of the world between the
Drift and the Deluge. Here man fell; here he survived; here he renewed
the race, and from this center he repopulated the world.

We see also that this island was connected with the continents east and
west by great ridges of land.

The deep-sea soundings show that the vast bulk of land, of which the
Azores are the outcroppings, are so connected yet with such ridges,
although their crests are below the sea-level; and we know of no other
island-mass of the Atlantic that is so united with the continents on
both sides of it.

Is not the conclusion very strong that Atlantis was the island-home of
the race, in whose cave Job dwelt; on whose shores Phaëton fell; on
whose fields Adam lived; on whose plain Sodom and Gomorrah stood, and
Odin and Thor and Citli died; from which the Quiches and the Aztecs
wandered to America; the center of all the races; the root of all the
mythologies?

{p. 389}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Objections Considered](rag31.md)
