[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tsf05)  [Next](tsf07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0806504560/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Sacred Fire*, by B.Z. Goldberg, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

### CHAPTER IV

### THE SPIRIT OF LOVE IN GOD AND MAN

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><em>Even as the passion of man<br />
Is the love of the gods</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

#### I

As you look upon the map of Europe, you notice a strip of land hanging
down like an old man's whiskers into the Mediterranean waters. This is
the troublesome Balkan peninsula, mother of many conflicts, including
the last great war. Further down, the whiskers grow thin and scattered,
splitting up into tiny bits. This is the land of the ancient Greeks, the
clever people who stood at the gateway of the continents, collecting all
that came out of the East and sending it forth into the West, retouched
a bit here and there, with the attached label "made in Greece."

Among the numerous things the Greeks collected were also gods. Many a
Greek divinity when scratched will be found to hail from some country
back east, or from an island in one of the seas not far off. It may have
seen better days on the banks of the Nile, in the streets of Babylon, in
the bushes of Ethiopia, or in Cathay. But its locks were evenly trimmed
and its nose straightened à la Greek.

Like all good collectors, the Greeks had a sense of order.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They could not let
all these gods roam aimlessly about Hellas. So a mountain was dedicated
to the folk that were divine, where they might live their own lives with
as little interference in the affairs of man as man deemed necessary.
All gods were delegated to Mount Olympus.

Once on the mountain, they went about their lives much the same as the
humans in the valley below. There, god struggled with god for power or
love, the 'vanquished undergoing torture or eternal imprisonment. There,
they loved and suffered, their hearts eaten away by jealousy; there,
they also loved and were happy, basking in the sunshine of bliss. On
Olympus they were born, grew up, begat children, and there, some of them
perished, like the mere humans at the foot of the mountain.

Fate and luck played their parts above as well as below. Some of the
gods, for all their divine presence, cut no figure at all, while others
dominated, not only their immediate family, but the very length and
breadth of Olympus. There was Hera, mother of gods, not much of a figure
in the feasts and festivities on the mountain, yet a kindly creature, in
whose arms her many children might find peace and protection. Yonder was
Aphrodite, charming in her beauty, sprung from the foam of the sea when
Poseidon was good naturedly at play. There was Pan, the merrymaker of
the divine dwelling-place, stirring the heart with love and laughter.
There was chaste Artemis, athletic goddess of the hunt; Hermes with his
winged feet, fleet messenger of the gods; and the swart and limping
Hephæstus, their mechanic, hammering out the heavy armors on his smoky
forge. And there was Pallas Athena, goddess of wisdom and learning,
sprung fully armed from the head of Zeus, best loved of all the

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

gods and goddesses, but most cherished by the intellectual Athenians.

One could go on indefinitely naming the worthies among the gods, not to
mention the lesser lights sauntering about and in between the mighty on
the Mount. Yet, to one

<span id="img_05600"></span>

[![When gods made merry](tn/05600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05600.jpg)  
When gods made merry  

who knew his way among them, they were not so numerous after all. Many
were the names entered on the Divine Register and many the passports
held by the Keeper of Records of individual divinities. Yet, in their
essence, many were much the same, changing only with time and locality.
Gods like Fascinus, Tutunus, Mutinus, Liber, Bacchus, all bore different
names; but they were all one

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

god. They were the same as Priapus, a naturalized citizen on Olympus,
having been born in Lampsacus on the Hellespont.

Once we leave Hellas and wander about lands and continents peopled by
man and god, the aliases among gods are by far greater than among men.
The very same lady, fanning the embers of love in the hearts of humans,
whom we know as Venus, was called Mylitta, or Milidath, by the
Assyrians, which to them meant genetrix, mother. To the Persians she was
Anahita, and the Arabs called her Alitta. The Chaldeans knew her as
Delephat, the Babylonians as Ishtar, the Saracens as Cobar. In the Bible
we read of her as Assera, or Astarte. Wherever she was and whatever her
name, she was female, young, beautiful, desirable, guarding over the
passion of sex and over the sentiment of love.

Thus, setting out on our venture among the gods, we must be guided
neither by name nor by origin. Our criterion should be the function of
the divinity—the thing he was supposed to do for mankind, in return for
which he was rewarded in worship.

#### II

Many were the favors that the worthies on the Mount were bestowing upon
man below. Whatever he found in the world about him, whether it was a
ready cave or a ripe fruit, man took it as a gift from the gods. All
that he got by his own effort was also accredited to the divine powers.
Were they not guiding him along the path of success, steadying his bow
and properly setting his net? Pious people today see "the finger of the
Lord" in many things happening about them. Old Anthropology Adam was

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

even more god-intoxicated. His world was absolutely god-controlled.

Man may ever have been the ungrateful creature he is now reputed to be.
Yet he was never an ingrate to his god. He always returned full value in
worship, prayer, and sacrifice for the favors that the higher powers
bestowed upon him. If Zeus had ever called the gods and people together
for an accounting, the final balance would have shown a divine
indebtedness to mankind, rather than the contrary.

Among all these divine gifts there was one that man even more fully
appreciated; one might say, over-appreciated. It was that awe-inspiring
power that ushered in new life, birth, generation. Whether it was a new
stalk breaking out of the black soil, the first quiver of a new leaf
upon the limb of a tree, the thud of a new born dropping in the herd, or
the first cry of a babe on the bed of hides in his cave—it delighted
man's heart. It overwhelmed him with its shroud of mystery no less than
with the boundless joy he felt, yet could not explain.

Standing there at the scene of regeneration, Old Anthropology Adam had
neither benefit of priest or of sacrament, nor the thought or the
knowledge of religion as such. Still, there he was, a worshipper before
what was to be later revealed to him as "divine presence." He was awed,
mystified, rejoicing, adoring. Above all, he was exalted, well on the
way toward the state of ecstasy, in which his heart seemed to be melting
away in happiness; a state man was later to conceive of as entering into
communion with the "all", the cosmos, the universe, God.

Of all that man received from the hands of the gods nothing was so
highly prized as the gift of love and none

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

was more readily and with greater exaltation repaid in its own kind. The
generative god served man via sex; man worshipped him in return
sexually. The god whose will it was to bring abundance to the earth
would be glad to see man, his humble servant, seeking in his own small
way to enhance abundance about him. The power whose function it was to
cause births through the union of the sexes would feel flattered to see
humans in union. It was a way of realizing the will of the god among
men. It was akin to our belief that a righteous God would have
righteousness prevail in human society—a realization of the Kingdom of
Heaven upon earth. Sex worship thus became the appropriate recompense,
reward, blessing—however one may designate the religious attitude—for
the revered god of love and procreation.

Like all forms of religious service, the worship of the creative power
was not only pleasing to the god, but it also enraptured man. It carried
with it the usual pleasures accompanying the exercise of the sexual
function. Furthermore, by its fusion with other mental components
entering into the religious attitude, passion became fired and
all-embracing. Grief and pain often intensify passion; fear, awe, and
devotion are oil on the flame of love.

Still, sex worship did for man even more than that. It was the redeemer
of his imprisoned soul. It provided an outlet for those sexual passions
which the race had known in its infancy, but which later had apparently
been driven out of heart and mind. Memories of them may have lingered
on, as they had not been entirely effaced from the earth. At all events,
the desire was there, smouldering beneath the heap of suppressions.

Once, man was a free agent sexually. He could mate

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

with any female that came his way. Now, he was in chains. Sex worship
came to break the fetters and, if only for a brief space of time, to
bring back to man the freedom that had been his. What was forbidden at
large in the bush not only was permitted, but, in fact, became a duty in
the temple of the gods.

#### III

When, in the temple, man was free to do as he pleased sexually, he
pleased to do it with all the freedom possible. Venturing far out across
land and sea to India, we come upon a people, Kauchiluas by name. On the
day of a festival we may follow them along the crooked path through
fields of corn until we reach the woods. Further, we cannot go. Beyond,
it is only for their own and for the initiated. Yet we do know what is
happening there.

The Kauchiluas enter the temple individually. Here the sexes separate,
the males proceeding further inside, while the females remain for a few
minutes with the priest. They remove their bodices and deposit them in a
box held by the divine representative, each receiving a number or check
for the bodice deposited. Presently they join the males and the service
is begun.

There is song and prayer and dance. As the ritual advances, hearts beat
faster and eyes dilate in the glimmer of the burning fire in the front.
Then the priest marches about the temple with the box of bodices
offering it to each male, who takes one. The woman who has the number
corresponding to that garment thereby becomes his partner for the
remainder of the service. She may be a stranger, a young girl, or an old
woman; she may be his own sister, or his very mother. Whoever she is, it
is her

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

most sacred religious duty to join with him in the fulfillment of the
last sacrament of the worship—the union of the sexes. This rite is
exercised in communion within the temple and is accompanied by shrieks
and wild exercises of an orgiastic nature.

This service was engaged in by all present, by the most devout and
pure-minded women, by persons who were otherwise as modest and chaste as
any group of men and women today. To them, this promiscuous union was a
sacred and solemn observance; yet, while it lasted, it was an
overwhelming passion of sexual fury.

The bodice of the Kauchilua woman was the magic wand that converted an
act strictly interdicted as a deadly sin into a sacred duty. There, in
the temple, all the veneer that social custom had placed upon the
exercise of the sexual function was removed. Accompanied by prayer and
song, they reverted to the original form of sex relationship, absolute
promiscuity.

The Kauchiluas were by no means the only people to dispose of all their
sex taboos in worship. There were many such cases in all parts of the
world. It was the same at the sacrifice of the Cartavaya to the Indian
god Krishna. Again, it was a feature of the Soma-sacrifice in the Vedic
ritual. Among the Nicaraguans, who were otherwise a people unusually
strict in sex matters, the women could choose any man they might wish in
their annual festival. In the frenzy of religio-sexual excitement, their
choice was neither discriminating nor limited. In fact, the more strict
a people was in matters of sex, the more likely the individuals were to
break out in orgy at their worship. This we see in the story of the
tribe of Tarahumare.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

Here we have a peaceful, orderly, and reserved people. Whether dancing
or singing they never lost their decorum and ever behaved with great
formality and fitting solemnity. In fact, their self-control so
impressed the traveler, who first came upon them, that he did not
hesitate to state that "in the ordinary course of his existence, the
uncivilized Tarahumare is too bashful and modest to enforce his
matrimonial rights and privileges; and only by means of the national
drink *tesvino* is the race kept alive and increasing."

Yet there was a place in their ceremony when formality and solemnity
gave way to what the writer quoted above describes as "debauch." For
this very drink of *tesvino* was an essential part of the worship. It
was generously imbibed at the close of formal services, and, as the
intoxicant was becoming effective, men and women entered into open
promiscuous sexual relationship in which they engaged until well nigh
dawn.

Without *tesvino*, religious worship could not dissolve the chains of
sexual constraint for the Tarahumares. Among other primitive peoples, it
also failed in this liberating function in at least one respect: incest.
Promiscuous as the worshippers in the temple were, they still observed
the taboo on incestuous relationship. Contact between parent and child
persisted in the orgiastic rites of secret sects past and present, but
it was banished from the temple of the gods. However, all other forms of
sexual promiscuity as a feature of religious worship continued for many
thousands of years.

#### IV

Sacrifice is one element that early found its way into the worship of
all gods. Its origin was humble indeed. It

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

may have been a bribe to a menacing god to stay his hand, a gift to a
supernatural power to secure his favor, or a reward to an obliging
divinity who did man's bidding. Again, it was sometimes just a fine for
an act displeasing to the gods, imposed upon a person by his own guilty
conscience. However it originated, the concept of sacrifice grew with
the human mind. It gathered intellectual and emotional values as it
rolled along the path of human progress.

As fear gave way to love in the heart of primitive man, and he came to
adore his gods rather than to look upon them in dread and horror,
sacrifice began to take on a devotional aspect. The dominant note became
that of homage. Just as the lover enjoys bringing a gift to his love and
is exalted by the very act of giving, so is the devotee happy to offer
what is nearest and dearest to him to his god out of sheer love for the
divinity.

In the worship of the generative divinities sacrifice also came to play
its part. Here, perhaps even more than in the worship of other gods, it
secured a hold upon the people to an overwhelming extent, more for what
man got out of it directly than for what the gods might offer in return.
For sacrifice in sex worship came to be another outlet for the collected
sexual energies of man, diverted from their natural course through the
numerous social inhibitions.

Although the sacrifice to the gods of generation was to be sexual, it
could assume several different forms. It could be the product of the
sexual union, the firstborn. Like the lover who brings his beloved a
gift and is himself first treated to it by the grateful recipient,
primitive man offered to the generative god the first gift of new life
received through his influence. The firstborn was also

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

the thing man waited for so long, the object that was most precious to
him. In many a corner of the world, the firstborn—whether crop or fruit
or animal, not even excluding human—was sacrificed to the divine being.
The Phœnicians offered the dearest child, the firstborn, to propitiate
their god. In Exodus we read that "All that openeth the womb is mine,"
and in old Judea the firstborn was commonly considered an object for
sacrifice. Even today the firstborn Jewish child, if it be a son,
rightfully belongs to the descendant of the tribe of Levi, the
priesthood of the temple. The father has to redeem the firstborn from
the *cohen*. Thirty days after the birth, a ceremony is performed which
is called "the redemption of the son" and in which the father gives the
*cohen* anything of value. The latter receives it in lieu of the boy.
After the transfer is made, there is a jolly party and a feast according
to the means of the parents. In practically all cases the *cohen*
returns the ransom before he leaves the house.

Just as the fruit of the sexual union was offered in sacrifice to the
god of fertility, so did the agents in this process, that is, the organs
of procreation, also become material for sacrifice. Both foreskin and
hymen are the appropriate parts to be rendered to the divinity. The
hymen is the guardian at the gateway of generation. Its presence is a
sign that no generative services have as yet been brought by the female
individual. It is destroyed in the very process so dear to the god of
fertility. It is, therefore, sacred to the god and must be sacrificed at
his altar.

The Roman bride offered her hymen directly to the god of generation,
Priapus. To his temple she repaired with her parents and the groom. The
latter waited in

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

the ante-room while the young maiden alone entered into the sacred
chamber of the temple. There, in the representation hewn out of marble,
was Priapus himself, a strong, nude male, in passion. The youthful bride
embraced him in fear and trembling, and when she left the sacred
chamber, she was a virgin no longer.

A similar custom prevails even today in some parts of India. A writer,
who was long a sojourner there, relates: "Many a day have I sat at early
dawn in the door of my tent, pitched in a sacred grove, and gazed at the
little group of females stealthily emerge from the adjoining village,
each with a garland or bunch of flowers, and when none were thought to
see, accompany their prayer for *pulee-pullum* (child fruit) with a
respectful abrasion of a certain part of their person on a phallus."

To the westerner, watching stealthily, it was, perhaps, a quaint, erotic
scene. To the maidens about to enter matrimony, this was a solemn
sacrifice of their hymen to the god within whose power it was to bless
them with many births, assuring them of the love of their husbands, or
to curse them with barrenness, causing them to be hated and despised.

Among very primitive peoples the god was personified in the ceremony,
not by an inanimate object, but by his priest. In many places, this
divine representative acted openly, even demanding a fee. Again, he
played the part of the god under cover, in the dark of the night. So it
was that some brides believed they had actually consorted with the
divinity, while others realized, perhaps, that it was with the priest.
But the priest here became impersonal. He was no longer a mere human but
rather the divine representative upon earth. He played a rôle similar to

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

that of the modern priest when, as the confessor, he takes the place of
Christ in forgiving the sins of the contrite penitent.

The custom of having the priest act as the representative of the god is
practiced in India even at the present time. It is not uncommon for a
husband to accompany his wife to the priest and to remain a reverential
spectator of the

<span id="img_06600"></span> ![A Hindu goddess offering a
lingam](img/06600.jpg)  
A Hindu goddess offering a lingam

act representing the union of god and woman. In certain parts of the
country, there are definite days each year on which women call at the
temples to receive from the priests the sacred blessing that they are
unable to obtain from the god of creation through the medium of their
husbands.

Where a king or lord assumed a theocratic function as was usual in
ancient times, it was customary for him to

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

substitute for the god at this hymeneal sacrifice. In our own times, the
Justice of the Peace claims the right to kiss the bride first. He is
entirely ignorant of the fact that therein he merely claims a mild
substitute for the first right to the bride that should be his according
to ancient custom.

In the male, there is nothing to correspond to the hymen, which so
symbolically represents the transition' from virginity to the realm of
sex experience. Still, the foreskin is the nearest to it. Like the
hymen, it undergoes a change in sexual intercourse. Again, like the
hymen, it can be removed with pain, yet with little danger to the life
of the individual. We thus have the circumcision operation at the time
of puberty as the sacrifice of the male agent in the sexual process.
This ceremony is performed among the Jews on the eighth day after birth;
among the Arabs at the age of thirteen; but by other peoples in various
parts of the world as a tribal rite of initiation corresponding to the
modern confirmation ceremony.

The sacrificial meaning of both circumcision and hymeneal rupture
becomes even more apparent in the perversions of some religious sects.
Among those people who live religion very intensely and vividly, we find
the true intent of the rite unmitigated by the consideration of
individual well being and the interest of the group. We see it in the
actual incisions in the female organs, such as removing the clitoris, or
in the infibulation of the labia minora. We see it again in the
castrations following great religious excitations in both ancient and
modern times.

In the heat of religious passion, the avid worshippers of Cybele lost
all sense of reality and ran about like mad men with furious eyes and
streaming hair. At times they joined

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

in wild, fantastic dance amidst the cries and shouts of drunken song.
Again, they broke up and rushed about through the woods, falling upon
each other and flogging themselves relentlessly with iron chains. And
all the time they carried burning torches or brandished sacred knives.

For hours the drunken, furious orgy went on and in the excitement of the
dance, drink, and flogging, they forgot themselves completely. In the
pain and frenzy of the approaching ecstasy, they thrust the knives upon
their bodies in the name of the goddess. Unconscious of the resulting
anguish, they continued their mad dance and waved about the severed
portions of their bodies, while the blood streamed from the gaping
wounds. When the fury had died away, they approached the altar to
present their goddess with the spoils of their virility. They had made
the great sacrifice for her and now they were to adopt woman's dress and
serve her in the temple—eunuch priests.

#### V

As religion develops and love ever plays a larger part in it, the idea
of sacrifice becomes more and more sacred, the sacrificial object ever
growing in holiness. Hence, once the agents of the sexual process were
offered in sacrifice to the generative divinity, it is only natural that
they came to be looked upon as something sacred. When one took an oath
in olden times and, as we do today, had to put his hand upon a sacred
object, he placed it upon his genitals. When Abraham is stricken with
age and desires his servant Eliezer, who is also the Elder of his
household, to swear that he will take a wife for his son Isaac, not from
the daughters of Canaan, but from Abraham's own people, he says:

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

"Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh and I will make thee swear by
the Lord, the God of heaven and the God of earth. . . ."

The thigh was a generic term for the organ of creation. In the Bible,
one refers to his descendants as those "who came out of my thigh."

Travelers tell of a people whose priests on various occasions go about
uncovered so that the worshippers of the generative divinity may pay the
lingam the homage usually paid when sacred objects are exposed to the
veneration of the pious. In Canara and other districts of India, the
priests went about naked in the streets, ringing the bells that they
held in their hands. It was to call out the women to the religious duty
of piously embracing their sacred organs.

'The old idea of the sanctity of the lingam survives in the Christian
attitude of reverence toward the Holy Prepuce, the foreskin of Jesus.
Until very recently, there were twelve such prepuces extant in European
churches, and many a legend was woven about them. One of these, the
pride possession of the Abbey Church of Coulomb, in the diocese of
Chartres, France, was believed to possess the miraculous power of
rendering all sterile women fruitful. It had the added virtue of
lessening the pains of childbirth.

Where the sanctity of the organs of generation had worn off, there still
existed a certain attitude toward them—akin to sacred. The genitals were
taboo. They were out of the range of usual experience, not to be touched
or mentioned by name. The Mosaic law had no pity upon those who violated
this taboo.

"When men strive together one with another, and the

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

wife of one draweth near to deliver her husband out of the hand of him
that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand and taketh him by the
secrets, then thou shalt cut off her hand; thine eye shalt have no
pity." The punishment was to be so severe because she had touched an
object that was most taboo.

In many parts of the world, among savages, to uncover oneself before a
person is to curse him. In Russia and other places in eastern Europe,
one expresses spite or defiance by making a fist with the tip of the
thumb extended between the index and the middle fingers. This is called
a "fig" and is symbolic of the male genital. Although, when used as
suggested, it may be very effective in producing the desired result,
very few people are aware of its original significance. As late as the
latter part of the eighteenth century, in Naples, this same figure was
used as an amulet and worn to guard against the evil eye.

#### VI

There was yet another sacrifice that man could offer to the god of
generation—the sacrifice of coition. Just as he created his god in his
own image, so did he bestow upon him that which he himself cherished
most. Respectable old Herodotus was shocked to find that all people,
with the exception of the Greeks and the Egyptians, cohabited within
their temples.

In principle, the first sex experience was to be with the god himself.
There was involved in it the sacrifice of the hymen as well as the first
act of coition. In the absence of the god, his priest or temporal
representative could fill his place. There were yet other surrogates,
such as the stranger and the group as a whole.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

In a world where the group is small, every one is known, and travelers
are rare, a stranger becomes an oddity. His coming and going are veiled
in mystery. So it was that he came to be looked upon as a divine
emissary, a possible angel in the flesh. To the Jew of the Middle Ages,
every stranger was a potential Elijah the prophet, in disguise. To the
Christian, he was possibly the wandering Jew or a reincarnation of
Christ or some saint. To the Easterner, the stranger was a sacred man,
and that accounts for the famed hospitality of the Orient. The same halo
hung about him already in primitive times. What was due to a god was
frequently given to the stranger and what was expected from the divinity
was looked for in the possible gift some passing traveler might bring.

No wonder, then, that the virgin coition was also to be performed with a
stranger. We read of maidens, among primitive peoples, being brought to
the altar of the generative goddess at least once before their nuptials,
to be sacrificed to a stranger. This did not at all detract from their
value in marriage. In fact, to this day a husband in the Kamerun has
small opinion of his wife if she has had only limited sex experience
before her marriage, for "if she were pretty men would have come to
her."

Among the American Indians, when girls enter into womanhood, they are
taken to a hut, painted, and made to cohabit with strangers while songs
are offered to the. goddess Iteque. Similarly must the Santal girl, once
in her life, cohabit with a stranger in the temple of Talkupi Ghat. And
when we reach the stage of so-called temple prostitution, it is the
stranger again who takes away the prettiest girl, the girl that is first
to be initiated.

Not only the stranger, but the group as a unit may take

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

what rightfully belongs to the gods. A vestige of this attitude we have
in the popular concept of *vox populi vox dei*—the voice of the people
is the voice of god. We have it again in the unusual theological powers
which a conclave of ministers will assume for themselves. A hundred
rabbis will void a marriage vow against the rule for divorce. A church
council will decide upon substantiation and the figure of the cross.

The tribe as a whole may delegate to itself the privilege that accrues
only to the god. In Serang a maiden must herself provide the food for
her wedding feast. Yet she has nothing with which to get it but her
maidenhood. So she calls at the temple and there, after prayer and song,
she is ceremoniously bathed and clothed in a skirt of fiber. Now she is
at the service of every man until she has collected as much as she needs
for the feast.

At the feast, a pot filled with water is covered with a leaf. An old
woman takes the index finger of the girl's right hand and thrusts it
through the leaf. This symbolizes the fact that her hymen has been
broken. The leaf is then displayed on the ridge of the roof. It is a
sign for the old men of the village that it is their night, and during
that evening, they all have access to her room.

Herodotus tells us that among the people of Lydia, the bride, on her
wedding night, accorded her favor to all the guests for which they, in
return, presented her with gifts. Possibly our custom of wedding
presents is a forgotten hang-over of such rewards to the bride for her
amorous favors, just as our privilege of kissing her may be a mild form
of another and more severe claim upon the newly wed maiden by all the
members of the clan.

It was not only the first coition that became a sacrifice.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

Any sexual union, if executed within the temple and under the auspices
of the divinity, might be offered to the god of generation. Soon, any
man, a lonesome stranger or a tired soul, weary with the burdens of
life, could come to the temple to find escape from worldly troubles
through the gateway of love. He had only to pay the god for the
privilege of representing him, and the union in which he joined was then
but another sacrifice of coition. Hence, we find the widespread custom
of the duty upon every woman, at least once in her life, to come to the
temple and to give herself to anyone for a donation to the god. Little
did it matter how humble or how noble she might be; she must offer
herself to the first bidder.

We are told by Herodotus that once in her lifetime every woman born in
Chaldea had to enter the inclosure of the temple of Aphrodite, sit
therein, and offer herself to a stranger. Many of the wealthy were too
proud to mix with the rest and repaired to the temple in closed
chariots, followed by numerous attendants. The greater number seated
themselves in long lanes on the sacred pavement. The place was thronged
with strangers passing down the lanes to make their choice. Once a woman
had taken her place there, she could not return home until a stranger
had thrown into her lap a silver coin and had led her away with him
beyond the limits of the sacred enclosure. As he threw her the money, he
pronounced the words: "May the goddess Mylitta make thee happy."

A similar custom prevailed among the American Indians. Among the ancient
Algonquins and Iroquois as well as among some South American tribes,
there was a festival during which the women of all ranks extended to
.whosoever wished, the same privileges that the matrons of ancient

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Babylon granted
even to the slaves and strangers in . the temple of Mylitta. It was one
of the duties of religion.

In the course of time, this custom passed out of existence. No longer
could the group take the place of the god in the sacrament of sex. Yet
it continued in a different form. What the group could not do as a whole
with all the individuals participating in it, some individuals
representing the group could still do for the god of generation. Instead
of the entire group joining in promiscuous sexual union, certain
individuals were selected by the group to execute the act on behalf of
the entire assemblage.

In those temples in India where there is no general sexual union, there
is still a ceremonial performance of coition by a chosen couple. It is
carried out in a so-called "vacant enchanted place," which is rendered
pure by sprinkling it with wine. Secret charms are whispered three times
over the woman, following which the sexual act is consummated.

When Captain Cook visited one of the Pacific Islands, he and his party
invited the natives to a religious ceremony. In return, the natives
performed a rite of their own. After the usual Indian ritual, a tall,
strong young man and a slight girl of about twelve stepped forward and,
upon an improvised altar, joined in sexual union, the elder women
advising and assisting the young girl in the performance of her amorous
duty. The entire audience stood silent as they looked on in solemn
reverence.

Various were the forms that the sexual sacrifice assumed in the temples
of the gods. In one case, it may have been just the hymeneal offering of
the first union in sex. In another, it may have been a union at any time
during the life of the woman. In still another, the sacrifice was to be
repeated annually, or every time a certain festival was

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

celebrated. These variations were effected by the religious institution
itself, the priests, and the social traditions of the group.

Still other variations found their origin in the different attitudes of
the individual women. One woman may have brought the single sacrifice
more out of necessity than out of inner desire. To her, it may have been
a painful

<span id="img_07500"></span>

[![A Hindu god in copulation](tn/07500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07500.jpg)  
A Hindu god in copulation  

duty of which she was glad that no more was required. To another woman,
the one sacrifice may have left only greater desire for a repetition of
the worship. In terms of our modern psychology, this distinction would
be one of sexual sensibility and erotic propensities. To the primitive
man, the distinction was in degree of piety. It was the extent to which
one was devoted to the god and ready to serve him.

Five times a day the Azan is chanted on the balcony of

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

the minaret. It is the call to the faithful Moslem to wash his face,
hands and feet, and bend down in prayer. North-light, meridian, and
sunset are reminders to the Jew to "listen that the Lord is his God, the
Lord is One." Morning, noon, and evening the Angelus bell tells over and
over again to the faithful Christian the story of Christ's advent upon
the earth and reminds him of the worship he owes his God.

There are those whose lives are merely intermissions between acts of
worship. There are others whose worship is a rare and thin sprinkling
over a secular existence. This was true in primitive times as it is
today. There were women whose sexual sacrifice at the temple was an
incident of small significance in their lives. There were other women
who were devotees of the divinities, bent upon serving them continually.
In time, such persons came to be the priestesses of the god and acquired
as much dignity in the temple as the priests who performed the rites of
worship. He who chanted the incantations or carried the idol was no more
entitled to the dignity of the priesthood than she who honored the god
in her own sentient flesh.

There were priestesses who devoted themselves entirely to the god,
sleeping in the sacred chamber and never leaving the temple. Their lives
were given wholly to the divine being. They offered themselves directly
to him, foregoing all the joys of secular living. There were others who
did not cohabit with the god directly, but with his representatives, the
stranger, the passer-by, anyone who might call in the divine name. They
were offering themselves in sexual sacrifice. The procreative god was
served by the act of procreation performed in the temple. The priest
partook of the sacrifice of the firstborn. The priestess partook

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

of the sacrifice of coition. In the latter we have the origin of the
institution of temple priestesses, which has so shocked the prudes of
later times.

#### VII

The execution of the sexual union as a sacrifice to the gods gave rise
to a very important and almost universal institution of pagan religion.
We know it by the unsavory name of prostitution,—temple or religious
prostitution. Perhaps it was unsavory at the time the Roman writers were
preserving it from historical oblivion. Whatever we know of it, we owe
to writers who belonged to a later culture and who looked at it
adversely, if not with actual disgust; who saw it in its disintegrating,
degenerating ugliness, when it was dying a shameful death.

In its inception, however, there was nothing degrading about it. To the
primitive man, it was both honorable and pious. He looked at it in some
such fashion as this:

Sexual union is a pious act pleasing to the gods. Every woman is
enjoined by the god to sacrifice at least one such union in his honor.
The god being divine and physically absent, a surrogate is necessary to
receive the sacrifice. He may be a priest, a stranger, or a group.
Whoever the surrogate is, he who is thus honored must himself bring an
offering to the god; he must show his appreciation of this privilege by
contributing his mite for the divine needs. In our own plain, prosaic
words, we might say: he must pay for it. Now, let us remember: pay, not
the woman, but the god for partaking of her sacrificial favor.

When the priest was the surrogate, no one was to inquire how he squared
it with the god. Presumably, he repaid it in prayer and worship.
Sometimes, it was the woman herself,

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

or her family, who provided the recompense which was due from the
priest. Whenever the surrogate was not of the god's human family, that
is, not of the priesthood, he contributed to the upkeep of the god's
house in coin or in gift from field or forest.

When the man threw the coin to his choice of the women aligned at the
temple and said: "May the goddess Mylitta make thee happy," he was not
buying the woman's body. He was participating in a religious ceremony in
which his share consisted not only in uniting with the woman but also in
bringing an offering to the god—in this case, a monetary one, since the
priests must live and the temple of the divine being must be kept up.

In fact, one may question the justice of applying to this institution
the term "prostitution." By the latter we seek to signify a sexual union
in which one of the partners fulfills his part for reward or material
gain outside the field of sexuality. It is the motive that determines
whether a sexual union is prostitutional or not. Certainly, the woman
who came piously to the temple, waiting in prayerful mood to be chosen
by anyone at all, be he ever so unattractive physically, and receiving
for herself no monetary or material compensation,—certainly, this woman
cannot be called a prostitute.

True, in its later development, this institution of sacrificial sexual
union did assume a semblance of prostitution. As time went on, the
temple priestesses easily outnumbered the priests. In some temples,
there were as many as a thousand of them.

Our churches and synagogues are built in locations where they may be
most eaqly accessible to the public. A modern house of worship will not
disdain to advertise its services so

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

as to attract a greater number of worshippers. The pagan temples
followed a similar course in their attempt to attract a large
attendance. They were even more concerned with it, since the economic
factor here played a greater rôle. The human family of the god was large
and their material needs were considerable. In consequence, their
temples were built on crossroads and, in cities with a port, not far
distant from the docks. For it was the traveler, most in need of the
sexual sacrifice, who was sure to call at the temple. It was he, too,
that was to be favored, and in many cases, when a woman came to offer
herself at the temple, she was to do so only to a stranger, as he was
possibly a divine representative.

With so many priestesses and so many worshippers, the service had to
become systematized, the fee or monetary sacrifice definitely fixed, and
the share of the priestesses in the proceeds justly apportioned. No
wonder, then, that to infidel eyes this looked more like a brothel than
a house of worship. Did not any man call there, just as he calls on a
legalized house of prostitution, pays the fee, and takes a woman in
sexual embrace?

But the fact that the services of the temple priestesses had been so
definitely systematized need not be deprecatory of the temple
priesthood. System is a necessary feature in any large human
institution, religious as well. Our worship today is only too well
systematized. Nor need we be shocked by the payment offered for the
services of the priestesses, since it was really the sacrifice of the
male. The priestess offered her sexual function to the god, the man
offered his coin. In fact, both were offering coin in addition to the
sexual union, for the temple was receiving the payment from the male on
account of the female. She

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span id="img_08000"></span>

[![Venus in a phallic shrine](tn/08000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08000.jpg)  
Venus in a phallic shrine  

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

was as much a partner to the monetary contribution to the temple as she
was a partner to the sexual intercourse.

Even her sharing the fee with the temple need not be surprising
considered from the pagan viewpoint. When the farmer brought his
first-born to the temple, it was sacrificed to the gods; yet, only a
small part went to the god directly, that is, was burnt at the altar.
The greater portion was returned to the donor and he was supposed to
feast upon it in the temple court. And a goodly portion went to the
priest. Just as the priest received his portion of the sacrificial lamb,
so did the priestess receive her part of the fee for the sexual
sacrifice. The one is no more prostitution than the other.

After all, the term prostitution is psychological in nature. There is
nothing inherent in the physical union of the sexes to make one
prostitutional and the other legitimate or respectable. It is the way in
which society looks upon a sexual union and the way the partners feel
about it that determines whether it is prostitutional or not. In those
times and places where the institution of temple priestesses was
established, society did not look upon it as prostitutional. Quite to
the contrary, it was the most respectable and pious vocation a woman
could select, or have selected for her by her parents or guardians. Nor
did the temple priestess view herself as a prostitute. She saw herself a
servant of the god, possibly bringing more joy and gladness to the
divinity than to herself.

#### VIII

There were several paths by which a woman found her way to the temple
priesthood. She may have come as a virgin to marry the god, where such
marriages between

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

divinities and humans were performed. In this case, she was wedded to
the god according to the rite of the tribe. After being initiated by the
priests, she was the divine spouse and could, therefore, receive all his
worshippers. The priests, in addition to consecrating her to her
love-life, may have trained leer in the art of love. In proportion to
her amorous talents, her fame and fortune grew to the extent that she
was paid by lay married women for private instruction in the *ars
amandi*.

Again, she may have come after her marriage, preferring the exalted
erotic life in the temple to the cheerless existence of a primitive wife
in servitude. In that case, she approached the divine dwelling-place,
bearing upon her head some such gift as a cocoanut and a packet of
sugar. She was received by the priest and given cakes and rice to eat.
After her consecration, she was assigned to temple duty, such as
sweeping and purifying the floor by washing it with cow-dung and water,
and waving a fly-whisk before the god. In the meanwhile, she was
instructed in the art of the sexual sacrifice by priest or priestess
and, in time, she assumed her place before the god of generation.

More often, perhaps, she was brought to the temple by her father or
brother, at an age when she was not yet old enough to have an opinion in
the matter or to understand its significance. Her father may have had a
guilty conscience; perhaps he had broken his marriage vow. He may have
committed adultery, and the punishment for this would be visited upon
the entire tribe. The tribe, in turn, would wreak its vengeance upon
him. It were best to mend things before it was too late. So he took his
female child, possibly not more than five years of age, and brought her
to the temple in expiation. It was not much of a

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

sacrifice, girls being of little account anyway. In addition, it
conferred an amount of distinction—one was somehow associated with the
priesthood.

Occasionally, she got there by accident. Times were hard for the tribe;
somehow the god or goddess was not pleased with the worship of the
people. Then, a number of girls were collected and, *en masse*, admitted
to the temple so that the divine frown might disappear. In another case,
all may have been well with the tribe. Gods were pleased and man
grateful. Once more, girls were consecrated to the divinity. Xenophon
dedicated fifty courtesans to the Corinthian Venus, in pursuance of the
vow he had made beseeching the goddess to give him victory in the
Olympian games. Pindar makes Xenophon address the priestesses thus:

"O, young damsels, who receive all strangers and give them hospitality,
priestesses of the goddess Pitho in the rich Corinth, it is you who, in
causing the incense to burn before the image of Venus and in inviting
the mother of love, often merit for us her celestial aid and procure for
us the sweet moments which we taste on the luxurious couches where is
gathered the delicate fruit of beauty."

However a girl came into the temple, she had a long period of training
before her. This training was neither in religion nor in sex, but
primarily in the graces of lovemaking and companionship. For the
vocation of the temple priestess was complicated, indeed. She was
catering not to the Western man, but to the man of the East whose loving
was as refined as it was intricate.

To the Occidental man, love is either highly spiritual—romance and
chivalry, or purely physical, mere sexual union. The prostitute of the
West answers the call of his

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

physical love. She receives her guest in the dark and only for a brief
moment. The man comes to her when his passion runs high; the minute the
passion is spent he leaves. The Chinese or Indian prostitute is first of
all a companion and an entertainer. She will delight her guests
intellectually by conversation, or artistically by playing or singing;
she may dance and she may serve tea. What follows is a relationship
gradually drifted into, not an act bought and paid for.

The temple priestess is, therefore, trained for Oriental love-making.
For ten hours each day these little girls are instructed in singing and
dancing. From the age of seven or eight to fourteen or fifteen, they
dance six times daily. They are taught, too, to acquire charm and poise
and to make their bodies attractive through the use of fine clothes,
sweet-scented powders, and delicate perfumes whose exotic fragrance
enhance their allurement. Their minds are also trained and they become
delightful conversationalists.

A pen picture of the priestess in action is offered us by Savarin: "The
suppleness of their bodies is inconceivable. One is astonished at the
mobility of their features, to which they give at will an impression
agreeable to the part they play. Their indecent attitudes are often
carried to excess. Their looks, gestures, all speak in such an
expressive manner that it is not possible to misunderstand what they
mean. At the commencement of the dance they throw aside, with their
veils, the modesty of their sex. A long, very light silken robe descends
to their heels enclosed by a rich girdle. Their long black hair floats
in perfumed tresses over their shoulders; a gauze chemise, almost
transparent, veils their breasts. To the measure of their movements, the

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

form and contours of their bodies are successively displayed. The sound
of the flute, of the tambourine and cymbals, regulates their steps and
hastens or slows their motions. They are full of love and passion; they
appear intoxicated; they are Bacchantes in delirium; then they seem to
forget all restraint and give themselves up to the disorder of their
senses."

The sexual sacrifices by these priestesses were usually carried on in
the ante-rooms of the temple but sometimes, also, outside, in the court
or out buildings, or even along the banks of the sacred rivers. The
price was always considerable. In India, in comparatively recent times
the sacred fee was from ten to forty dollars, while the Nizam of
Haldabad offered a thousand pounds sterling for three nights. Stories of
Egypt and Greece indicate that the fee was considerable. King Cheops,
impoverished, sacrificed his daughter to procure the necessary funds for
the pyramid he was building. Flora, a priestess, was the benefactress of
her town, erecting at her own expense a statue to the father of Croesus.

To what extent favors were highly paid for in antiquity may be gleaned
from the following anecdote of a famous courtesan, Archidice. A young
Egyptian became infatuated with her and offered her all his possessions
for one night of love. Archidice disdained his offer. In despair, the
lover besought Venus to give him in his dream what the beautiful
Archidice refused him in reality. The prayer was answered and the young
Egyptian had the dream he so much desired. When Archidice heard of it,
she had the young man arrested and taken before the judges to make him
pay for his voluptuous dream. The judges decided

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

that Archidice should, in turn, pray to Venus for a dream of silver in
repayment for a fictitious lover.

In India, there were even wandering troupes of priestesses led by old
women, former servants of the temple. Raynal describes their activity:

"To the monotonous and rapid sounds of the tom-tom these Bayaderes,
warmed by a desire to please and by the odors with which they are
perfumed, end by becoming beside themselves. Their dances are poetic
pantomimes of love. The place, the design, the attitude, measure, sounds
and cadences of these ballets, all breathe of passion and are expressive
of voluptuousness and its fury.

"Everything conspires to the prodigious success of such women—art and
the richness of ornament, the skill with which they make themselves
beautiful. Long dark hair falling over their lovely shoulders or
arranged in pretty tresses is loaded with sparkling jewels, glittering
among natural flowers. Precious stones flash from their jewel-decked
necklaces and tinkling bracelets. . . . The art of pleasure is the whole
life occupation and only happiness of the Bayaderes. It is extremely
difficult to resist their seductions."

The institution of temple priestesses was widely spread and quite
extensively developed. Strabo said that there were as many as a thousand
of them at the temple of Corinth. There were nigh twelve thousand such
priestesses in Madras in quite recent times. There was not a country in
which the institution was not present in some form. It was a natural
development out of the sex worship which was universally followed.
Beginning with a god of generation and reaching a stage of sexual
sacrifice, a priesthood for the sacrifice was a natural and logical
consequence.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

#### IX

There was another way in which man sought to tap divinity by his sexual
emotion. To our eyes it would seem most unholy, as pitiable as it was
unnatural. And yet it was there, exercised in all the piety and
seriousness man is capable of. For not only did man create his gods in
his own image but he also served them in his likeness. The man whose sex
life was contrary to nature, set upon members of his own sex, served his
generative god homosexually.

The Armenian father who brought his daughter to the temple of the
goddess to be there consecrated as a priestess, often brought a son
along as well. The son, too, was consecrated and his service was just as
much a sexual sacrifice. The priest of Cybele who castrated himself in
religious frenzy assumed feminine dress not without a purpose. He
continued in the service of the temple and like the priestess served man
for the required fee. There were male priests serving males in the
temples of all the gods. The homosexual priest had a special designation
in both the Hebrew and Babylonian languages. *Kadosha* was the name
applied to the temple priestess engaged in sexual worship; *kadosh* was
the word for the male in the same service.

In Tahiti, there were special divinities for homosexual worship. It was
the god Chin himself who instituted homosexualism in Yucatan and
sanctified it. His priests, therefore, wore feminine dress. What Chin
was in the primitive world for the homosexual man, Mise, Pudicitia and
Bona Dea were for the homosexual woman in antiquity. In these services
artificial lingams were used by the women worshippers. There were
divinities, like the Phrygian Cotytto, that were homosexually worshipped
in some places

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

by men and in others by women. And at the service to Demeter at Pellene
not only were men excluded but even male dogs so that there would be no
disturbing element whatever for the rites to be performed.

Among the Santees, an American Indian tribe, if a man had a nightmare
and dreamed of the terrible goddess, the moon, he had to appease the
divinity by putting on feminine dress, serving as a woman and offering
himself to men. In other tribes, the medicine men had to be effeminate
and always wore the dress of women. In old Japan, according to Xavier,
priests were to have sexual relations not with women but with men.
Arabic travelling merchants reported, in the ninth century, that the
Chinese resorted to pederasty in the worship of their icons. Leo
Africanus tells of an order of women Satacat in northern Africa that
served the gods in tribadistic fashion.

Even the gods resorted to homosexual practices. Zeus, their very father,
came down from Mount Olympus attracted by a rosy-faced, bright-eyed
youth. It was Ganymede, the most beautiful of mortals, whom the god,
disguised as an eagle, seduced and carried away to the Mount. There,
Ganymede became the object of love among the divinities for whom he
acted as cup-bearer. And Zeus, to compensate the boy's father for the
loss of his son, sent him a team of beautiful, light-footed horses.

The key to this strange way of serving a god must, as already indicated,
be sought in the homosexual tendency that we find creeping up throughout
the entire history of man. There were special lupanars for boys in
Greece which were frequented by both men and women and were subject to
the same tax and regulations as other lupanars. Dufour tells us that
"Rome was filled" with male hierodules

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span id="img_08900"></span>

[![Siva as the Hermaphroditic God, the eye in the center of his forehead
symbolizing the union of the two creative forces](tn/08900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08900.jpg)  
Siva as the Hermaphroditic God, the eye in the center of his forehead
symbolizing the union of the two creative forces  

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

who "rented themselves out like the girls of the town. There were houses
especially devoted to this kind of prostitution and there were procurers
who followed no other business than that of renting out, for profit, a
hoard of degraded slaves and even free men." Some of the greatest men of
Rome, especially among the Cæsars, though not infrequently among the
poets as well, were publicly known to be homosexual. They frequently
gave themselves to men for gain—monetary or political. There seems to be
no people on earth that did not know of this sexual relationship. In
fact, it seems to have come down the animal line with man, for this very
practice is found even among animals. It still is not uncommon. Less
than a century ago, there were legalized brothels of men for homosexual
practice in Paris just as there had been in Greece and Rome. The late
Doctor Ivan Bloch described a ball of homosexuals in Berlin. There were
some thousand of them; some in men's clothes, others in the dress of
women, and still others in futuristic attire. At present, in America,
homosexualism seems to be on the increase, especially in the artistic
circles.

How did man come to prefer a member of his own sex to a person of the
opposite one? This is a very interesting question but it need not
concern us here. Suffice it to say that at first man's sexual nature is
indefinite. It is a vague, blind yearning that has to be set to a person
and to a sex, and that is conditioned by first associations and
experience. There are environmental and social conditions that give
man's instinct a homosexual turn. These obtained in the past as they
still do today. That is why the homosexual tendency was ever present,
running parallel with the so-called natural instinct.

Was homosexual worship merely a reflection of homosexual

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

living? Quite likely it was, although by a stretch of the imagination
one may derive it in another way:

Originally the gods were hermaphroditic and were, therefore, worshipped
by the union of the opposite sexes. As the hermaphroditic divinity
separated itself into god and goddess, the worshippers, in some places,
may also have separated by sexes, the male serving the god, the female
the goddess. When members of one sex exclusively worship a generative
god, their service is well in danger of becoming homosexual. Still, it
seems more simple and doubtless more psychological to assume that
homosexual man preceded the homosexual worshipper; and that even in
homosexualism man only offered to his god what was dearest to him and
all-embracing in his life.

.       .       .       .       .       .       .

On the shore of the island of Cyprus, in the waters of the
Mediterranean, there once was a townlet called Amathonte. It lay well in
the shade of Mount Olympus, yet it dared to defy the gods.

Its women were modest, reserved, contemptuous of all carnal pleasures.
They covered their bodies and were disdainful of the flesh. One day,
Venus was washed upon their shore. As the women came down to see her,
they noticed her nudity and treated her with scorn. So when Venus came
to her own, she descended to punish the women of Amathonte. She called
them together and ordered them to prostitute themselves to all corners,
so that they might glory in the very flesh they had so disdained. The
women had no other recourse but to do as commanded by Venus. Still, they
did it so reluctantly and with such distaste as to defeat the purpose of
the goddess. Then Venus came down again and turned these women into
stone.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

And this was the end of the women of Amathonte, the women who denied the
call of the flesh. They who feign would live were turned into stone
while life went on. For in time, in this very city of Amathonte, a
temple to Venus was erected, and other women came to live there, women
who instead of denying love lived to worship it, who instead of
rebelling against the flesh lived to triumph in it.

And amid the stones that once were women, the song of love was heard,
love, natural, physical, permeating the

<span id="img_09200"></span>

[![In the Temple of Siva](tn/09200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09200.jpg)  
In the Temple of Siva  

entire existence of mankind. And woman's rebellion against sex defeated
its own purpose.

There was yet another revolt against sex—by man; and this is the story
of Siva and his lingam:

Siva was a great god. With Brahma and Vishnu, he was master of the
universe, his own function being generation and aiding new life to
emerge out of death, like the

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

spring out of the arms of winter. It was Brahma himself who said: "Where
is he who opposes Siva and yet is happy?"

But the great god Siva himself was not happy, for he was bereaved of his
mate and he was tired and weary. So he wandered about the land and came
to the forest of Daruvanam, where the sages live—the sages and their
wives.

And when the sages came out to see the great god Siva and noticed that
he was haggard and sad, they treated him with scorn and only saluted him
with bent heads.

Siva was tired and weary and said nothing but: "Give me alms." Thus the
god went about begging along the roads of Daruvanam. But wherever he
came the womenfolk looked at him and felt a pang at the heart. At once
their minds were perturbed and their hearts agitated by the pains of
love. They forsook the beds of the sages and followed the great god
Siva.

And as the sages saw their wives leaving with Siva, they pronounced a
curse upon him:

"May his lingam fall to the ground."

Was it the effectiveness of the curse, or did Siva himself shed his
lingam in affliction at the loss of his consort? Whatever the cause,
there it was—his lingam—sticking into the ground and Siva himself gone.

As the lingam fell, it penetrated the lower worlds. Its length increased
and its top towered above the heavens. The earth quaked and all there
was upon it. The lingam became fire and caused conflagration wherever it
penetrated. Neither god nor man could find peace or security.

So both Vishnu and Brahma came down to investigate and to save the
universe. Brahma ascended to the heavens to ascertain the upper limits
of Siva's lingam, and Vishnu

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

betook himself to the lower regions to discover its depth. Both returned
with the news that the lingam was infinite: it was lower than the deep
and higher than the heavens.

And the two great gods both paid homage to the

<span id="img_09400"></span>

[![Siva leaning on the lingam](tn/09400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09400.jpg)  
Siva leaning on the lingam  

lingam and advised man to do likewise. They further counseled man to
propitiate Parvati, the goddess, that she might receive the lingam into
her yoni.

This was done and the world was saved. Mankind was taught that the
lingam is not to be cursed or ignored; that it is infinite in its
influence for good or evil; and that rather

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

than wishing it destroyed, they should worship it by offering it flowers
and perfumes and by burning fires before it.

Whether it was the goddess Venus or the god Siva, whether it was the
feminine principle or the masculine, the worship of the god or of the
goddess came as a punishment for sex ignored. Love suppressed, offended,
and imprisoned came to be rescued by the gods of religion.

<span id="img_09500"></span> ![](img/09500.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Love's Hidden Ways](tsf07)
