[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cota08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301018/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Consciousness of the Atom*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_lect7"></span>

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

### LECTURE VII.

### COSMIC EVOLUTION.

It might well be considered ridiculous for anyone to undertake to give a
lecture on Cosmic Evolution, because, of course, it is a subject which
neither I nor any other mortal knows anything about, and consequently we
are utterly unable to express ourselves upon it. Nevertheless, there are
certain deductions we can make under the law of analogy which may lead
us to very interesting realms of thought. We have for several weeks been
considering the evolution of the atom from stage to stage, until we
included the entire solar system under the term "atom".

We studied first, along general lines, the atom of substance, then we
studied the human atom, and later we applied what we knew about both
these atoms to the still larger sphere, or atom, a planet, which we
called a planetary atom; then we extended the idea still further to the
atom of the solar system, predicating it as having a position within a
still greater whole.

We studied three methods of evolution, or development, in connection
with this subject. We considered the aspects which were evolved by means
of these atoms, their qualities, or psychic nature, and we saw how in
the atom of substance the only psychic quality we could postulate about
it was the quality of intelligence. We passed on them to atomic forms,
subhuman forms, and saw how the forms in the two kingdoms of nature, the
vegetable and

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

animal, demonstrated another quality of the Deity, that of sensation,
feeling, or embryo love and emotion; we found that in the animal kingdom
also a third quality, that of rudimentary mind, began to show itself,
and that when we arrived at the human atom, we had three aspects
demonstrating, intelligence, love, and a central will. We extended this
concept to the planet and to the solar system, and found that, working
out through the form of the solar system, we had a great Intelligence or
Mind; that the object of His utilisation of form was the demonstration
of another quality, love or wisdom, the whole being energised by a great
central WILL. We deduced therefrom that this central Will might be the
manifestation of an Entity Who informs the entire system, from the very
lowest atom of substance up to that great Life Who energises the
planetary scheme.

Having laid down these fundamentals we passed on to the consideration of
the evolution of the conscious life within the atomic form, finding that
a higher type of consciousness is consistently evolved by each atom;
that the human consciousness is distinguished from all other lower forms
in that it is self-conscious; that man is an intelligent will,
consciously performing every action, becoming aware of his surroundings,
and working out a definite line of activity with a specific objective in
view. The self-consciousness of man leads on again to something wider
still, to the consciousness of the great planetary Spirit, which may
perhaps be best expressed in the term 'group consciousness'. As
evolution proceeds man will pass from the stage of self-consciousness in
which you and I now are, to a realisation of what is meant by group
consciousness, something as yet practically unknown, except as some
beautiful ideal, and a dream which may, at some distant time,
materialise. Group consciousness, again, will logically

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

lead on to that which we, for lack of a better term, might call
God-consciousness, though I deprecate the use of the word God because of
the many quarrels it causes in the world between the different thinkers
of the human family. These differences are founded largely upon
differences in phraseology, upon the terms used to express fundamental
ideas, and upon varying methods of organisation. When the scientist, for
instance, speaks of force, or energy, and the Christian speaks of God,
and the Hindu uses terms analogous to the 'I am that I am', or the Self,
they are all speaking of one and the same great life, but have lost much
time in endeavouring to prove each other wrong, and to demonstrate the
accuracy of their own interpretation.

We next saw that, roughly speaking, atomic evolution could be divided
into two parts or stages; one stage we called the atomic stage, and
another we called, for lack of a better term, the radio-active stage.
The atomic stage is that in which the atom pursues its own self-centred
life, is concerned entirely with its own evolution, and the effect of
the contacts it makes. As evolution proceeds, it becomes apparent that
in time the atom begins to react to a greater life outside itself, and
in this you have the period analogous to that of the form-building
stage, in which these atoms of substance are attracted by a greater
charge of energy, or positive electrical force, (if you like to call it
such) which draws them, or attracts them to itself, and builds out of
them a form; these atoms of substance, in turn, become then electrons.
We found, then, how, in your case and mine, as in the case of every
self-conscious unit, the same procedure is followed, and that you have a
central life holding within the sphere of its influence the atoms that
constitute the different bodies, mental, emotional, and physical; that
we manifest, that we move and carry on our life, and work out our
purposes,

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

by attracting to ourselves the atoms of substance that are adequate to
our needs, and through which we can make the necessary contacts. These
atoms are to us, the central life, what the electrons are to the central
positive charge in the atom of substance. Then we saw that if this is
true, namely, that there is a self-centred stage, or purely atomic
period, for the atom, and for the human atom, then again for the atom of
the planet, indwelt by its central spiritual life, we should be able to
predicate logically a similar state of affairs. Thus we were led into
the field of speculation. We considered then whether all that transpires
upon our planet may not be due to the self-centred condition of the
Entity Who is working out His purposes by means of it. Finally we
carried forward the same idea in connection with the solar system
itself.

We passed on then to the consideration of the second stage, that which
the scientist has been studying in connection with the atom of the
chemist and physicist for the last twenty years, the radio-active stage;
we saw how there was a condition analogous to this in the evolution of
the human atom, and that there is a period preceding it which parallels
the atomic stage, wherein man is purely selfish, entirely self-centred,
and pays no attention to the welfare of the group of which he is a part.
This prior stage is very apparent in the world today. A large percentage
of the human family is in the atomic stage, but we must remember that it
is a protective and necessary one; it is passed through by every unit of
the human family in the process of finding its place within the group,
and enables it to develop something of value to give to that group when
the second stage is entered.

In the world today there are also units of the human family who are
passing into the second stage, they are becoming radio-active and
magnetic, they influence other

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

forms and are becoming group conscious; they are passing out of the "I
am" stage into the "I am that" realisation; the life and purpose of the
great Entity of Whose body they are a part, is beginning to be cognised
by them; they are becoming aware of the purpose back of the life of the
planetary Spirit Who is the subjective impulse lying behind objective
manifestation upon our earth. They are beginning to co-operate with His
plans, to work for the betterment of their group; and the difference
between them and other atoms of the human family is that they are now
group conscious, they have a wider horizon, a group recognition, and a
larger purpose. At the same time they do not lose their
self-consciousness, nor their own individual identity, and their own
spheroidal life remains, but they put the whole force and energy which
flows through them not into the working out of their own plans, but into
an intelligent co-operation with the greater Life of which they are a
part. Such men are few and far between, but when they are more in
number, then we can look for a change in world conditions, and for that
time to arrive, of which St. Paul speaks when he says: "There should be
no division in the body, but the members should have the same care one
for another. Whether one member suffer, all members suffer with it, or
one member be honoured, all rejoice with it... . it is the same God
which worketh all in all. There are diversities of gifts but the same
spirit; there are differences of ministries (or service) but the same
Lord." When we are all group conscious, when we are all aware of the
purpose which lies back of manifestation upon our planet, when we are
consciously active, and throwing all our energy into the working out of
group plans, then we shall have what the Christian calls the
"millennium".

Now, if you have in the evolution of the atom of substance, and the
human atom, these two stages, if they are

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

the basis of all future development, then within the planetary atom you
will have the same two stages, that in which the planetary Life is
working out His own plans, and a later one in which He falls in with the
greater plans of the Life which animates the solar system. Not yet being
in a position to have an interview with the planetary Spirit, I am
unable to tell you whether He is as yet co-operating in the purposes of
the solar Logos; but we might be able to get some idea of the general
purpose by the study of race evolution and the development of the great
international plans within the planet. We must bear in mind also, that,
though we human beings consider ourselves as the highest and greatest
manifestation upon the planet, there may be other evolutions through
which the central Life may be working, of which we know as yet but
little, We must study not only man, but should consider also the angel
evolution, or the deva evolution, as the Hindu calls it. This opens up
for us an immense field of study and speculation.

Again, within the solar system we shall expect to find analogous stages.
We shall find, probably, that the great Life animating the entire solar
system, the great Entity Who is using it for the working out of a
definite purpose, energises it by means of these great centres of force
which we call planetary atoms; that these centres, in their turn, work
by means of lesser centres or groups, passing their energy on down
through groups of human atoms to the various kingdoms of nature, and
thus to the little atom of substance which, in its turn, reflects the
entire solar system. This question of atomic life, if we think it out,
is vastly interesting, and leads us into many lines of conjecture. One
of the main points of interest which it opens up is the intimate
correlation, and close interaction of the atoms of every kind, and the
all-pervading unity which must ultimately be recognised. If we have
found that

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

there comes a stage in the evolution of all atoms of every kind in which
they feel and search for their place within the group, and from being
positive become negative in regard to a greater life, if it is true in
all these manifestations of consciousness there is a self-conscious
stage and a group conscious stage, is it not logical and possible that
perhaps, after all, our solar system is but an atom within a greater
whole? May there not be for our solar system, and our solar Logos, a
central larger life towards which the informing Spirit within the solar
sphere is gradually attracted, and towards Whose consciousness our Deity
aspires? Are there anywhere indications of such an attractive force, or
goal? Are there greater spheres of solar life outside our system, that
have a definite effect upon it? This may be but a speculation, but it
has its points of interest. If we study astronomical books, and seek to
ascertain whether astronomers say that this is so, we shall meet with a
vast amount of contradictory opinion; we shall find that some
astronomers say that within the Pleiades is a central point around which
our solar system revolves; others say that in the constellation of
Hercules, is the point of magnetic attraction for our solar system. On
the other hand, you will find this flatly contradicted. We shall find
some astronomers talking about "star-drift," and saying that the drift,
or trend, of certain stars is in a specific direction; others argue that
the distances are so vast that it is impossible to determine whether
certain systems are following a definite orbit or not.

Nevertheless, if we go to some of the ancient books, those which we call
mythological ( and a myth may be defined as something which holds a
great truth hidden until we are ready to understand it), and if we study
the ancient books of the East, we shall find that in all of them there
are two or three constellations which are regarded as having

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

a peculiarly intimate relation to our solar system. Towards these views
modern astronomers as yet hold an agnostic attitude, and from the point
of view of materialistic science, rightly so. What I seek to emphasize
here is that a topic upon which scientists and astronomers are divided,
yet which is nevertheless a subject of contention, and one upon which
the oriental books sound a clear note, must have a basis in fact, and
that there is probably an aspect of truth in the assertion. I would
personally suggest here that that aspect of truth will be found, not
along *physical* lines of interpretation, but along the lines of
*consciousness;* that it is the psychic evolution that is going on
within all atoms (using psychic in the sense of the subjective
consciousness) which is hinted at in these books, and the emphasis is
laid upon our having an occult relationship with other solar systems.
Here the truth may perhaps be found. The life subjective may be one; the
energy flowing between them may be one; but in the physical form lies
diversity. Perhaps in the evolution of the intelligence, in the
manifestation of love, or group consciousness, and in the development of
will or purpose, lies unity, the one-ness of the subjective life, and
the eventual recognition that within the form, and in the form only,
lies separation and differentiation.

The ancient books of the East point out, in considering this subject,
that the seven stars of the Great Bear, the seven stars of the Pleiades,
and the sun Sirius, have a very close connection with our solar system,
and that they hold an intimate psychic magnetic relation to our solar
Logos. We have seen that the goal for the atom of substance is
self-consciousness; and that for the Entity Who is evolving through a
planet, the goal may be God consciousness. Now, of course, when you
consider the solar Logos words fail, yet for Him also there must be a
goal. You

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

can call this Absolute Consciousness, if you like. Let us again
illustrate this. Our body, we have been told, is made up of a
multiplicity of little lives, or cells, or atoms, each having its own
individual consciousness. This corresponds to its self-consciousness.
The consciousness of the physical body, viewed as a whole, might, from
the atom's point of view, be regarded as its group consciousness. Then
we have the consciousness of man, the thinker. He is the one who
energises the body, and turns it to his will; that is, to the atom in
his body, analogous to what we might call God consciousness. Our
self-conscious realisation is as far removed from that of the atom as
the consciousness of the solar Logos is from ours. Now to the atom in
our body that consciousness of the solar Logos might be called Absolute
Consciousness, might it not? This thought can be extended to the human
atom, to the planetary atom, and you can further predicate that the
solar Logos reaches out to a consciousness beyond His own analogous to
that which stretches between the atom in your body and Him. Here you
have a very marvellous vista opening up. Yet this is, in itself,
encouraging; for if we study closely the cell in a physical body, and
consider the long road that has been travelled between its
consciousness, and that which a man now knows to be his, we have for
ourselves the promise and hope of future achievement, and the incentive
to persist in our endeavour.

The old books of the East have held secreted for many ages the truth
about much which is only now beginning to sink into the consciousness of
the occidental. They taught the radio-activity of matter thousands of
years ago, and so perhaps, after all, there may be an equal amount of
truth in their teaching about the constellations. Perhaps in the stars
that we can see in the distant heavens, and in the life that is evolving
within them, we have the objective

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

of our solar Logos, and the influences that are flowing towards him,
attracting him towards them, and making him, in due course of time,
radio-active. In the Eastern books they say that in the sun Sirius lies
the source of wisdom, and that the influence or the energy of love
emanates from there. Then they say that there is a constellation that is
even more closely connected with our solar Logos, the reason being that
He is not, as yet, sufficiently evolved so that He can respond
completely to Sirius, but He can respond to the influence of the seven
sisters or the Pleiades. This group is a most interesting one. If you
will go to the dictionary and look up the word "electricity", you will
find it suggested that it may be traced back to the star Electra, one of
the seven sisters, and supposed by some to be the little lost Pleiad.
The Eastern teachers say that in the mystery of electricity is hidden
all knowledge, and that when we have fathomed that we shall know all
there is to be known. What the relationship of the Pleiades to our solar
system may be, it is not possible for us to say, but even our Christian
Bible recognises it, and Job speaks of "the sweet influences of the
Pleiades," whilst some of the Oriental Scriptures affirm that the
connection lies in sound, or vibration. Perhaps the Pleiades are the
source of the atomic life of our Logos, the active intelligent aspect,
that one which was first developed, and which we might call electrical
matter.

Then there is the Great Bear. There is much that is interesting said
about the relation between the Great Bear and the Pleiades in Oriental
writings. The seven sisters are said to be the seven wives of the seven
stars of the Great Bear. Now what is perhaps the truth back of that
legend? If the Pleiades are the source of electrical manifestation, the
active intelligent aspect of the solar system, and their energy that
which animates all matter, they may

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

perhaps represent the negative aspect, whose polar opposite, or the
positive aspect, is their seven husbands, the seven stars of the Great
Bear. Perhaps the union of these two is what produces our solar system.
Perhaps these two types of energy, one from the Pleiades, and the other
from the Great Bear, meet, and in their conjunction produce that blazing
forth in the heavens which we call our solar system.

The relationship of these two constellations, or rather their subjective
relationship, must surely have some basis in fact, or we would not have
it hinted at in the different mythologies. There must be something that
connects them, out of all the myriads of constellations, with our solar
system. But when we endeavour to give it a purely physical application
we go astray. If we work it out along the lines of the subjective life,
and connect it with energy, quality, or force, we are liable to stumble
upon truth, and find out some of the reality which may
[underlie](errata.htm#4.md) what appears at first sight to be a senseless
fable. Anything that widens our horizon, that enables us to take a
broader vision and a clearer view of what is going on in the
evolutionary process, is of value to us, not because the accumulation of
ascertained facts is of value, but because of what it enables us to do
within ourselves; our ability to think in wider and larger terms is
increased; we are enabled to look beyond our self-centred point of view,
and to include within our consciousness other and different aspects than
our own. In doing this we are developing group consciousness, and we
shall realise eventually that the apparently stupendous facts which we
fought and died for down the ages, and emphasised as the entire truth,
were after all but fragments of a plan, and infinitesimal portions of a
gigantic sum total. Perhaps, therefore, when we come back to earth
again, and can look back upon the

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

things that interest us now, and which we consider so important, we
shall find how erroneous facts were as we then apprehended them. Facts,
after all, do not matter; the facts of the last century are not facts
now, and in the next century scientists may laugh at our dogmatic
assertions, and wonder how we could have looked upon matter as we did.
It is the development of the life, and the relationship of the life to
all that is around, that really matters; and, above all, the effect that
we are having upon those with whom we are associated, and the work we
do, which affects, for better or for worse, the group in which we find
ourselves.

 

In closing this series of lectures, I cannot do better than quote again
from St. Paul, where he says: "I reckon that the sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us……for we are saved by hope……for I am persuaded that
neither death nor life, nor angels nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God."

 

FINIS

 

 

 
