[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cota06)  [Next](cota08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301018/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Consciousness of the Atom*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_lect5"></span>

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

### LECTURE V.

### THE EVOLUTION OF CONSCIOUSNESS.

Last week we studied, very inadequately, the evolution of man, the
thinker, the tenant of the bodies, and the one who uses them during the
cycle of evolution. We saw that he was the summation of the evolutions
which had preceded him. We led up to our study of that evolution in two
previous lectures in which we considered first the substance, or atomic
matter prior to its building up into a form, or the tiny atom before it
was incorporated in a vehicle of some kind. Then we studied the building
of forms by means of the great law of attraction, which gathered the
atoms together, causing them to cohere and vibrate in unison, and thus
producing a form, or an aggregation of atoms. We came to the recognition
that in atomic substance we had one aspect of the Godhead, of the Deity,
and of the central Force or energy of the solar system, manifesting
under the aspect of intelligence, and we saw that in the form aspect of
nature another quality of the Deity became manifest, that of love or
attraction, the cohesive force which holds the form unified. Then we
studied the human being, or man, and noted how in him all the three
divine aspects met; and recognised man as a central will manifesting
through a form composed of atoms, and demonstrating the three qualities
of God, that of intelligence, of love-wisdom, and of will or power.

Today we are stepping out of the matter aspect of manifestation which we
have been dealing with in the previous lectures, into the consideration
of the consciousness within the form. We have seen that the atom may be
regarded

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

as the central life, manifesting through a spheroidal form, and showing
the quality of mind; but the human atom may also be considered as a
central positive life, utilising a form and demonstrating the different
qualities we have enumerated; and then we said that, if we were right in
our hypothesis about the atom, if we were right in considering the human
being as an atom, then we night extend this primary conception to the
planet, and say that within the planetary atom there is a great Life,
manifesting through a form, and showing specific qualities whilst
working out a specified aim; and we extended this same concept also to
the great sphere of the solar system, and to the Deity Who indwells it.

Let us take up the question of consciousness itself, and study the
problem a little and concern ourselves with the reaction of the life
within the form. If I can thus give you a few general ideas in line with
what has been earlier said, I shall be able to lay another stone upon
the structure I am endeavouring to build.

The word *consciousness* comes from two Latin words: *con*, with; and
*scio*, to know; and means literally 'that with which we know'. If you
take a dictionary and look up this word you will find it defined
somewhat as follows: "The state of being aware", or the condition of
perceiving, the ability to respond to stimuli, the faculty of
recognising contacts, and the power to synchronise vibration. All these
phrases might be included in any definition of consciousness, but the
one I want to lay emphasis upon this evening is that which the Standard
Dictionary gives, and which I have earlier quoted. The average thinker
who takes up the majority of the text-books dealing with this subject,
is apt to find them very confusing, for they divide consciousness and
the state of being aware into numerous divisions and subdivisions, until
one is left in a state of

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

complete bewilderment. Tonight we will only touch upon three types of
consciousness, which we might enumerate as follows: Absolute
consciousness, universal consciousness, and individual consciousness,
and of these three it is only possible, really, to define two in any way
with clarity.

Absolute consciousness, to the ordinary thinker, is practically
impossible of recognition. It has been defined in one book as, "that
consciousness in which everything is, the possible as well as the
actual", and concerns everything that can be possibly conceived of as
having occurred, or occurring, or going to occur. This is, possibly,
absolute consciousness, and from the standpoint of the human being is
the consciousness of God, Who contains within Himself the past, the
present, and the future. What, then, is universal consciousness? It
might be defined as consciousness, thinking time and space,
consciousness with the idea of location and succession involved within
it, or, in reality, group consciousness, the group itself forming either
a greater or a lesser unit. Finally, individual consciousness may be
defined as just as much of the universal consciousness as a separated
unit can contact and can conceive of for itself.

Now, to understand these vague expressions—absolute, universal, and
individual consciousness—it might be helpful if I endeavoured somewhat
to illustrate. It might be done as follows: In our earlier lectures we
have seen that we must consider the atom in the human body as a little
entity, a tiny, intelligent life, and a microscopic, active sphere. Now
taking that little cell as our starting point we may get, by its means,
some concept of what these three types of consciousness are, by viewing
them from the standpoint of the atom and man. Individual consciousness
to the tiny atom in a man's body would be its own vibratory life, its
own internal activity, and all that specifically concerns

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

itself. Universal consciousness to the little cell might be considered
as the consciousness of the entire physical body, viewing it as the unit
which incorporates the atom. Absolute consciousness to the atom might be
considered as the consciousness of the thinking man who is energising
the body. That would be to the atom something so remote to its own inner
internal life as to be practically inconceivable and unknown, yet it
nevertheless sweeps into the line of its will the form and the atom
within the form, and all that concerns them. This idea has only to be
extended to man, considered as an atom or cell within the body of a
great Entity, and one can then work out along similar lines This
conception of a threefold consciousness. It might here be wise if we
were to come down and consider more practical matters than absolute
consciousness.

Occidental science is coming gradually to the conclusion of the esoteric
philosophy of the East, that consciousness must be predicated not only
of the animal and of the human being, but that it must be recognised
also as extending through the vegetable on into the mineral kingdom, and
that *self* consciousness must be regarded as the consummation of the
evolutionary growth of consciousness in the three lower kingdoms. It is
not possible in the short time now at my disposal, to go into that most
fascinating study of the development of consciousness in the animal
kingdom, in the vegetable kingdom, and its appearance also in the
mineral kingdom; we should find, should we do so, that even minerals
show symptoms of awareness, of reaction to stimuli; that they manifest
signs of fatigue, and that it is possible to poison a mineral and to
murder it, much as you can murder a human being. The fact that flowers
have consciousness is being more readily recognised, and articles of
very deep interest have been published on the consciousness of plants,
opening up a very

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

wide range of thought. We have seen that in atomic matter the only thing
that we can safely predicate is that it shows intelligence, the power to
select, and to discriminate. This is the predominant feature of
consciousness as it manifests through the mineral kingdom. In the
vegetable kingdom another quality appears, that of sensation or feeling
of a rudimentary nature. It is responsive in a different way to the
mineral. In the animal kingdom a third reaction appears; not only is the
animal showing signs of sensation in greatly increased degree to the
similar response in the vegetable kingdom, but it also shows signs of
intellect, or embryo mind. Instinct is a recognised faculty of all
animal units, and the word comes from the same root as the word
"instigate." When the power to instigate begins within any animal form
it is a sign that an embryo mentality is beginning to manifest. In all
these kingdoms you have different grades and types of consciousness
showing themselves, whilst in man you have the first symptoms of
selfconsciousness, or the faculty in man whereby he becomes aware that
he is a separated identity, that he is the indwelling impulse within the
body, and the one who is in process of becoming aware by means of these
bodies. This has been long taught in the East, and "esoteric philosophy
teaches that everything lives and is conscious, but that not all life
and consciousness is similar to the human", and it also emphasises the
fact that "vast intervals exist between the consciousness of the atom
and of the flower, between that of a flower and a man, between that of a
man and a God." As Browning has said: "In man begins anew a tendency to
God." He is not a God yet, but a God in the making; he is working out
the image of God, and will some day produce it in perfection. He is the
one who is seeking to demonstrate the subjective, divine, threefold life
through the medium of the objective.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

The method of the evolutionary development of consciousness in a human
being is but a repetition on a higher turn of the spiral, of the two
stages which we noted in the evolution of the atom, that of atomic
energy and of group coherence. In the world at present can be seen the
human family at the atomic stage of manifestation, leading on to a goal
not yet achieved, the group stage.

If there is one thing apparent to all of us who are in any way
interested in the faculty of awareness, and who are in the habit of
noting that which passes around us, it is that of the different grades
of mentality which we meet everywhere, and the different types of
consciousness among men. We meet people who are alert, alive, aware of
all that is going on, keenly conscious, responsive to thought currents
of various kinds in human affairs, and conscious of contacts of every
kind; then we meet people who seem to be asleep; there is apparently so
little that interests them; they seem utterly unaware of contact; they
are yet in a stage of inertia, and are not capable of responding to much
outer stimuli; they are not mentally alive. One notices it, also, in
children; some respond so quickly, while others we call stupid. It is
not really that one is more or less essentially stupid than another; it
is simply due to the inner stage of evolution of the child, to its more
frequent incarnations, and the longer period that it has been occupied
in becoming aware.

Let us now take the two stages, the atomic and the form stage, and see
how the consciousness of the human being develops, bearing ever in mind
that in the human atom is stored up all that has been gained in the
earlier stages in the three lower kingdoms of nature. Man is the gainer
by that vast evolutionary process which lies behind him. He starts with
all that has been gained therein latent within him. He is self
conscious, and has before him a

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

definite goal, the attainment of group consciousness. For the atom of
substance the goal had been the attainment of selfconsciousness. For the
human being the goal is a greater Consciousness, and a wider range of
awareness.

The *atomic stage* which we are now considering is, for us, a peculiarly
interesting one, because it is the stage in which the majority of the
human family find themselves. In it we pass through the period (a most
necessary one) of self-centredness, that cycle in which the man is
principally concerned with his own affairs, with that which primarily
interests him, and lives his own intense, internal, vibratory life. For
a long period back of us, and perhaps at the present stage, ( for I do
not believe that many of us would feel insulted if we were not regarded
as having attained perfection, or having achieved the goal) we are most
of us intensely selfish, and only mentally interested in the things that
are going on in the world, and then probably because our hearts are
touched, and we do not like being uncomfortable, or we are interested
because it is the fashion; and yet, in spite of this mental attitude,
our whole attention is focussed upon the things which concern our own
individual life. We are in the atomic stage, intensely active in
connection with our own personal problems. Watch the throngs in the
streets of any great city, and you will see everywhere people in the
atomic stage, centred entirely in themselves, occupied only with their
own business, intent upon their own pleasure getting, desirous only of
having a good time, and only incidentally occupied with affairs which
concern the group. This is a necessary and protective stage, and one of
essential value to every unit of the human family. The realisation of
this, therefore, will surely lead us all to be patient with our brothers
and sisters who may so often irritate us.

What are the two factors whereby we evolve in and

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

out of the atomic stage. In the Orient for many ages the method of
evolution has been regarded as a twofold one. A man has been taught that
he evolves and becomes aware first by means of the five senses, and
later through the development of the faculty of discrimination, coupled
with dispassion. Here in the West we have primarily emphasised the five
senses, and have not taught that discrimination which is so essential.
If you watch the development of a little child you will become aware,
for instance, that a baby develops the five senses in a certain ordered
sequence, usually. The first sense it develops is hearing; it will move
its head when there is a noise. Then the next sense to be noted is that
of touch, and it begins to feel about with its little hands. The third
sense which seems to awaken is that of sight. I do not mean by this that
a baby cannot see, or that it is born blind, like a kitten, but it is
often several weeks before a baby consciously sees and looks with
recognition. The faculty has always been there, but there has been no
realisation. So it is with the graded expansions of consciousness and
realisations that lie ahead of man today. In these three paramount, or
major senses, hearing, touch, and sight, you have a very interesting
analogy to, and connection with the threefold manifestation of Deity,
the self, the not-self, and the relation between. The self, occultly,
hears and responds to vibration, thus realising Itself. It becomes aware
of the not-self, and of its tangibility, through touch, but it is only
when sight or conscious recognition comes in that the relation between
the two is established. Two more senses are utilised by the self in
making its contacts, those of taste and smell, but they are not so
essential to the development of intelligent awareness as are the other
three. Through these five senses we make every contact that it is
possible to make upon the physical plane; through them

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

we learn, we grow, we become aware, and we develop; through them all the
great instincts are evolved; they are the great protective senses, not
only enabling us to contact our environment, but also protecting us from
that environment.

Having, then, learnt to be intelligent units by means of these five
senses, and having, through their medium, expanded our consciousness, we
reach a certain crisis, and another factor comes in, that of intelligent
discrimination. Here I am referring to the discrimination which a
selfconscious unit demonstrates. I refer to that conscious choice which
you and I evidence, and which we will be forced to utilise as the power
of evolution drives us on to the point where we will learn to
distinguish between the self and the not-self, between the real and the
unreal, between the life within the form, and the form which it uses,
between the knower and that which is known. Here we have the whole
object of evolution, the attainment of the consciousness of the real
self through the medium of the not-self.

We pass through a long period or cycle of many lives, wherein we
identify ourselves with the form, and are so one with the not-self that
we recognise no difference, being entirely occupied with the things
which are transient and impermanent. It is this identification with the
not-self which leads to all the pain, dissatisfaction, and sorrow in the
world, and yet we must remember that through this reaction of the self
to the not-self we inevitably learn, and finally break loose from the
impermanent and the unreal. This cycle of identification with the unreal
parallels the stage of individual consciousness. As the atom of
substance has. to find its way into some form, and add its quota of
vitality to a greater unit, so through the evolutionary development of
consciousness the human

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

atom has likewise to reach a point where it recognises its place in a
greater Whole, and shoulders its responsibility in group activity. This
is the stage which a great number of the human family are now
approaching. Men are realising, as never before, the difference between
the real and the unreal, between the permanent and the impermanent;
through pain and suffering they are awakening to the recognition that
the not-self suffices not, and they are searching without and also
within, for that which will more adequately meet their needs. Men are
seeking to understand themselves, to find the kingdom of God within
themselves, and through Mental Science, New Thought, and the study of
psychology they will arrive at certain realisations which will prove
invaluable to the human race. The indication is therefore to be found
that the *form stage* is rapidly approaching, and that men are passing
out of the atomic period into something infinitely better and greater.
Man is beginning to sense the vibration of that greater Life within
Whose body he is but as an atom, and he is commencing, in a small way,
to make a conscious response to that greater call, and to find possible
channels whereby he can understand that greater Life which he senses,
but as yet does not know. If he persists in this, he will find the group
to which he belongs, and will then change his centre. No longer will he
be limited by his own little atomic wall, but he will pass beyond it,
and become, in his turn, a conscious, active, intelligent part of the
greater whole.

And how is this change brought about? The atomic stage was developed by
means of the five senses, and through the utilisation of the faculty of
discrimination. The stage at which a man awakens to group realisation,
and becomes a conscious participant in the activities of the group, is
brought about in two ways, through meditation,

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

and through a series of initiations. Now when I use the word
"meditation" I do not mean what is perhaps usually understood by that
word, a negative, receptive, state of mind, or a state of trance. There
is much misconception these days as to what meditation really is, and
there is a great deal of so called meditation which has been truly
described by a person not so long ago, as "I shut my eyes, and open my
mouth, and wait for something to happen." The true meditation is
something that requires the most intense application of the mind, the
utmost control of thought, and an attitude which is neither negative nor
positive, but an equal balance between the two. In the Eastern
Scriptures the man who is attempting meditation and achieving its
results, is described as follows—and from a consideration of these words
may come much help and illumination to us: "The Maha Yogi, the great
ascetic, in whom is centred the highest perfection of austere penance
and *abstract meditation*, by which the most unlimited powers are
attained, marvels and miracles are worked, the highest spiritual
knowledge is acquired, and *union with the great Spirit of the universe
is eventually attained*." Here this union with the group life is held to
be the product of meditation, and there is no other method of
attainment.

True meditation (of which the preliminary stages are concentration upon
and application to any particular line of thought) will differ for
different people and different types. The religious man, the mystic,
will centre his attention upon the life within the form, upon God, upon
Christ, or upon that which embodies for him the ideal. The business man,
or the professional man, who, during his hours of work, is one-pointedly
centred upon the matter he has on hand, and who keeps his attention
fixed upon the particular problem he has to solve, is learning to

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

meditate. Later on, when he comes to the more spiritual aspect of
meditation, he will find that he has covered the hardest part of the
road. The person who is reading a difficult book, and reads with the
full force and power of his brain, getting at that which lies behind the
written word, may be meditating as much as it is possible for him to
meditate at this time. I say this for our encouragement, because we live
in a cycle in which books about meditation are written, and many schools
of meditation are found. All of them embody some aspect of the truth,
and may be doing much good, but they may not embody that which is best
for any particular individual. We need to find our own way of
concentrating, to ascertain our own method of approach to that which
lies within, and to study for ourselves this question of meditation.

I would like here to sound a word of warning. Avoid those schools and
methods which combine forms of breathing exercises with meditation,
which teach different types of physical postures, and teach their
students to centre their attention upon physical organs or centres.
Those who follow these methods are heading towards disaster, and apart
from the physical dangers involved, and the risk of insanity and nervous
disorders, they are occupying themselves with the form, which is
limitation, and not with the spirit, which is life. The goal will not be
achieved that way. For most of us the intellectual concentration which
results in mind control, and the ability to think clearly and to think
only that which we wish to think, must precede true meditation, which is
a thing few people know much about. This true meditation, which it is
impossible for me to enlarge upon here, will result in a definite change
of polarisation, will open up to man ranges of experiences undreamt of
hitherto, will reveal to him contacts that as yet he does not realise,
and will enable

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

him to find his place within the group. He will be no longer confined by
the wall of his personal life, but will begin to merge that life within
the greater whole. He will no longer be occupied with the things of
selfish interest, but will give his attention to the problems of the
group. He will no longer give his time to the culture of his own
identity, but will seek to understand that greater Identity of which he
is a part. This is really what all advanced men are beginning more or
less to do. Little as the average man may realise it, great thinkers,
such as Edison and others, arrive at a solution of their problems along
the line of meditation. By a brooding concentration, by a constant
recollection, and by strenuous application to the particular line of
thought which interests them, they produce results, they tap the inner
reservoirs of inspiration and of power, and bring down from the higher
levels of the mental plane results which benefit the group. When we
ourselves have done a certain amount of work along the line of
meditation, when we are cultivating group interest and not self
interest, when we have developed physical bodies that are strong and
clean, and emotional bodies that are controlled, and not swayed by
desire, when we have mental bodies that are our instruments and not our
masters, then we shall know the true meaning of meditation.

When a man has made his contact through meditation with the group to
which he belongs, and becomes, therefore, ever more and more group
conscious, he is then in a position to take what are called a series of
initiations. These initiations are simply expansions of consciousness,
brought about with the help of Those Who have already achieved the goal,
Who have already identified Themselves with the group, and Who are a
conscious part of the body of the Heavenly Man. With Their assistance,
and through

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Their aid, a man
will gradually awaken to the realisation that is Theirs.

There is great interest everywhere today in this subject of initiation,
and an over-emphasis has been laid upon its ceremonial aspect. We need
to remember that every great unfoldment of consciousness is an
initiation. Every step forward along the path of awareness is an
initiation. When an atom of substance was built into the form, it was
for that atom an initiation. It became aware of another type of force,
and its range of contact became wider. When the consciousness of the
vegetable and animal kingdom merged, and the life passed from the lower
kingdom into the higher, that was an initiation. When the consciousness
of the animal expanded into that of the human being, still another great
initiation took place. All the four kingdoms have been entered by an
initiation, or through an expansion of consciousness. Ahead of the human
family lies now the fifth, or spiritual kingdom, and it is likewise
entered through a certain initiation, as can be seen by those who
intelligently read their New Testament. And in all these cases these
initiations have been brought about by the help of Those who already
know. Thus we have within the evolutionary scheme not great gaps between
one kingdom and another, and between one state of awareness and another,
but a gradual development of consciousness, and one in which we, each
one of us, have had and will have our share. If we can remember this
universality of initiation we shall have a better proportioned point of
view in connection with it. Every time that we become more aware of our
environment, and our mental content is increased, it is an initiation on
a tiny scale. Every time our horizon widens, and we think and see more
broadly, it is an initiation, and herein to us lies the value of life
itself, and the greatness of our opportunity.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

One point I wish to make here is this: every initiation has to be
self-initiated. That final stage when definite help is brought to us
from outside sources is not achieved because there are great Beings
anxious to help us, Who come to us where we are and seek to lift us. It
comes to us because we have done the necessary work, and nothing can
stop it coming. It is our right. Those who have achieved can and will
and do aid and assist us, but Their hands are tied until we have done
our share of the undertaking. Nothing therefore that we do to increase
our usefulness in the world, no steps that we take to build better
bodies, no effort that we make to gain selfcontrol and to equip our
mental body, is ever lost; it is all something which we are adding to
the total we are piling up, which will some day bring us to a great
revelation, and every hourly, daily effort that we make, swells the tide
of energy which will sweep us to the portal of initiation. The meaning
of the word "initiation" is to "to go into." It means simply that an
initiate is one who has taken the first steps into the spiritual
kingdom, and has had the first series of spiritual revelations, each one
of which is a key to a still greater revelation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture VI. The Goal of Evolution](cota08)
