[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pdm05) 
[Next](pdm07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1602063931/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pythagoras and the Delphic Mysteries*, by Edouard Shuré, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

### CHAPTER V

#### MARRIAGE OF PYTHAGORAS—REVOLUTION AT CROTON—THE MASTER'S END—THE SCHOOL AND ITS DESTINY

AMONG the women who followed the master's teaching was a maiden of great
beauty. Her father, an inhabitant of Croton, was named Brontinos. His
daughter's name was Theano. Pythagoras was now sixty years of age, but
mastery over passion and a pure life wholly consecrated to his mission,
had kept him in perfect health and strength. The youth of the soul, that
immortal flame the great initiate draws from his spiritual life and
nourishes on the hidden forces of nature, shone forth in him, throwing
into subjection all around. The Grecian mage was not at the decline, but
rather at the height of his might. Theano was attracted to Pythagoras by
the almost supernatural radiance emanating from his person. Grave and
reserved, she had sought from the master an explanation of the mysteries
she loved though without understanding them. When,

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

however, beneath the light of truth and the tender glow which gradually
enveloped her, she felt her inmost soul expand like the mystic rose with
its thousand petals, when she felt that this blossoming forth came from
him and his words—she silently conceived for the master a boundless
enthusiasm and a passionate love.

Pythagoras had made no effort to attract her. His love and affection
were bestowed on all his disciples; he thought only of his school, of
Greece and the future of the world. Like many great adepts, he had
denied himself the pleasures of earthly love to devote himself to his
work. The magic of his will, the spiritual possession of so many souls
he had formed and who remained devoted to him as to a well-loved father,
the mystic incense of all those unexpressed affections which came to
him, and that exquisite fragrance of human sympathy which bound together
the Pythagorean brethren—all this took the place of voluptuousness, of
human happiness and love. One day, as he was alone, meditating on the
future of his school in the crypt of Proserpine, he saw coming to him,
with grave, resolute steps, this beautiful virgin to whom he had never
spoken in private. She sank on her knees at his feet, and with downcast
eyes begged the master—the one

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

who could do everything!—to set her free from an impossible, an unhappy
love which was consuming her, body and soul. Pythagoras wished to know
the name of the one she loved. After much hesitation, Theano confessed
that it was himself, but that, ready for any sacrifice, she would submit
to his will. Pythagoras made no reply. Encouraged by his silence, she
raised her head with suppliant look. Her eyes seemed to contain the very
essence of a life and soul offered as a sacrifice to the master.

The sage was greatly disturbed; he could overcome his senses and
imagination, but the electric flash from that soul had pierced his own.
In this virgin, matured by passion, her countenance transfigured by a
sentiment of utter devotion, he had found his companion, and caught a
faint glimpse of a more complete realization of his work. With troubled
look, Pythagoras raised the maiden to her feet, and Theano saw from the
master's eyes that their destinies were for ever united.

By his marriage with Theano, Pythagoras affixed the *seal of
realization* to his work. The union and fusion of the two lives was
complete. One day when the master's wife was asked what length of time
elapsed before a woman could become

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

pure after intercourse with a man, she replied: "If it is with her
husband, she is pure all the time; if with another man, she is never
pure." Many women would smilingly remark that to give such a reply one
must be the wife of Pythagoras, and love him as Theano did.

And they would be in the right, for it is not marriage which sanctifies
love, it is love which justifies marriage. Theano entered so thoroughly
into the thought and life of her husband, that after his death she
became a centre for the Pythagorean order, and a Greek author quotes her
opinion as that of an authority on the doctrine of Numbers. She bore
Pythagoras two sons, Arimnestes and Telauges, and a daughter Damo. At a
later date Telauges became the master of Empedocles, to whom he handed
down the secrets of the doctrine.

The family of Pythagoras offered the order a real model to follow. His
house was called the Temple of Ceres, and his court the Temple of the
Muses. In domestic and religious festivals, the mother led the women's
chorus, and Damo that of the maidens. In all respects Damo was worthy of
her parents. Pythagoras entrusted to her certain writings expressly
forbidding her to communicate them to any one outside the family. After

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

the dispersion of the Pythagoreans, Damo fell into great poverty. She
was offered a large sum for the precious manuscript, but, faithful to
her father's will, she always refused to part with it.

Pythagoras lived in Croton for thirty years. Within twenty years this
extraordinary man had acquired such power that those who called him a
demi-god were not looked upon as exaggerating. This power seemed to have
something miraculous about it, no like influence had ever been exercised
by a philosopher. It extended not merely to the school of Croton and its
ramifications in other towns on the coast of Italy, but even to the
politics of all these small states. Pythagoras was a reformer in the
whole acceptation of the term. Croton, a colony of Achaïa, had an
aristocratic constitution. The *Council of the Thousand*, drawn from the
noblest families, carried on the legislative and kept watch over the
executive power. Popular assemblies existed, though their power was
restricted. Pythagoras, who wished the State to be all order and
harmony, was no more enamoured of oligarchical compression than of the
chaos of demagogy. Accepting the Doric constitution as it was, he simply
tried to introduce a fresh mechanism into it. The idea was a bold one,
for it consisted in the creation, over and above the

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

political power, of a scientific one with a deliberative and
consultative voice in questions of vital interest, and becoming the
key-stone, the supreme regulator of the State. Above the Council of the
Thousand, he organized the *Council of the Three Hundred*, chosen by the
former, but recruited from among the initiates alone. The number was
sufficient for the task. Porphyrus relates that two thousand of the
citizens of Croton gave up their wonted mode of living and united in
order to live together with their wives and children after placing their
possessions in one common stock. It was thus the wish of Pythagoras that
at the head of the State there should be a scientific government, not so
mysterious though quite as important as the Egyptian priesthood. What he
realized for a short time remained the dream of all such initiates as
dealt with politics, viz. the introduction of the principle of
initiation and examination into the government of the State, and the
reconciliation in this superior synthesis of the elective or democratic
principle with a government constituted of a select number of
intelligent and virtuous citizens. The result was that the Council of
the Three Hundred formed a kind of political, scientific and religious
order, of which Pythagoras himself was the recognized head. The members
were

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

bound to him by a solemn and an awful oath of absolute secrecy, as was
the case in the Mysteries. These societies or ἑταιρείαι spread from
Croton, the seat of the original society, throughout almost the whole of
the towns in Greater Greece, where they exercised a powerful political
influence. The Pythagorean order also tended to become the head of the
State throughout the whole of Southern Italy. Its ramifications extended
to Tarentum, Heracleium, Metapontum, Rhegium, Himera, Catana,
Agrigentum, Sybaris and, according to Aristoxenes, even among the
Etruscans. As regards the influence of Pythagoras on the government of
these rich and mighty cities, nothing loftier, nothing more liberal or
pacific could be imagined. Wherever he appeared, order, justice and
concord were restored. Once, when summoned into the presence of a tyrant
of Sicily, he persuaded him, by his eloquence alone, to restore the
wealth he had unjustly acquired and to abdicate a power he had usurped.
Such towns as were subject to one another he made independent and free.
So beneficent were his actions that when he went into a town the
inhabitants would say: "He has not come to teach but rather to heal."

The sovereign influence of a great mind and

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

character, that magic of soul and intelligence, arouses jealousy and
hatred which is only the more terrible and violent because it is itself
the less capable of attack. His sway lasted a quarter of a century; the
reaction came when the indefatigable adept had reached the age of
ninety. It began in Sybaris, the rival of Croton, where a rising of the
people took place and the aristocratic party was overthrown. Five
hundred exiles asked the inhabitants of Croton to receive them, but the
Sybarites demanded their extradition. Dreading the anger of a hostile
town, the magistrates of Croton were on the point of complying with this
demand when Pythagoras intervened. At his entreaty, they refused to hand
over the unhappy suppliants to their implacable enemies, whereupon
Sybaris declared war upon Croton. The Croton army, however, commanded by
the famous athlete, Milon, a disciple of Pythagoras, completely defeated
the Sybarites. The downfall of Sybaris followed; the town was taken and
plundered, utterly destroyed and converted into a wilderness of ruins.
It is impossible to admit that Pythagoras could have approved of so
terrible a revenge, which was altogether opposed to his principles, as,
indeed, to those of all initiates. Neither he nor Milon, however, could
check the

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

unbridled passions of a conquering army, when once inflamed by
long-standing jealousy and excited by an unjust attack.

Revenge, whether in individuals or in nations, always brings about a
recoil of the passions let loose. The Nemesis of this vengeance was a
terrible one; its consequences fell on Pythagoras and the whole of his
order. After taking Sybaris, the people demanded a division of the land.
Not content with obtaining this, the democratic party proposed a change
of constitution, depriving the Council of the Thousand of its
privileges, and suppressing the Council of the Three Hundred; they were
no longer willing to admit any other authority than universal suffrage.
Naturally the Pythagoreans, members of the Council of the Thousand, were
opposed to a reform which was contrary to their principles and was
undermining the patient work of their master. They had already become
the object of that dull hatred which mystery and superiority ever arouse
in the masses. Their political attitude excited the anger of the
demagogy, and personal hatred against the master proved the spark which
kindled the fire.

A certain Cylon had, some time before this, offered himself as a
candidate for the School. Pythagoras, who was very strict in accepting

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

disciples, refused him because of his violent and headstrong
disposition. This rejected candidate became a bitter enemy. When public
opinion began to turn against Pythagoras he organized a club, a large
popular society in opposition to that of the Pythagoreans. He succeeded
in attracting to himself the principal leaders of the people, and at the
meetings hatched a revolution which was to begin by the expulsion of the
Pythagoreans. Cylon rises to his feet in front of a sea of upturned
excited faces and reads extracts stolen from the secret book of
Pythagoras, entitled: The Sacred Word (*hiéros logos*). These extracts
are then travestied and wrongly interpreted. A few of the speakers make
an attempt to defend the brothers of silence, who respect even dumb
animals. Such are greeted with outbursts of laughter. Cylon ascends the
tribune again and again. He demonstrates that the religious catechism of
the Pythagoreans is a crime against liberty. "And that is a slight
charge," he adds. "Is this master, this would-be demi-god, whose least
word is blindly obeyed, and who has merely a command to give, to have
all his brethren exclaiming: 'The master has said it!'—any other than
the tyrant of Croton, and the worst of all tyrants, an occult one? What
else than scorn and disdain for the people is this

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

indissoluble friendship which unites all the members of the Pythagorean
ἑταιρείαι composed of? They are never tired of repeating the words of
Homer when he says that the prince should be the shepherd of his people.
In their eyes the people are evidently nothing better than a worthless
flock. The very existence of the order, I say, is a permanent conspiracy
against the rights of the people. Until it is destroyed liberty will be
a vain word in Croton!" One of the members of the meeting, animated by a
feeling of loyalty, exclaimed: "Let Pythagoras and his followers be
given an opportunity, at any rate, to justify their conduct in our
presence before we condemn them." Cylon replied haughtily: "Have not
these Pythagoreans deprived you of the right to judge and decide upon
public matters? What right have they to ask you to listen to them now?
They did not consult you when they deprived you of the right to exercise
justice, now it is your turn to strike without listening to them!" Such
vehement opinions were greeted with rounds of applause, and popular
frenzy and passion rose higher than ever.

One evening, when forty of the principal members of the order had met at
the abode of Milon, the tribune collected his followers and the

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

house was surrounded. The Pythagoreans, who had the master with them,
barricaded the doors. The enraged crowd set fire to the building, which
speedily became enveloped in flames. Thirty-eight Pythagoreans, the very
first of the master's disciples and constituting the flower of the
order, along with Pythagoras himself, perished either in the flames or
at the hands of the people. Archippus and Lysis alone escaped
massacre. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22)

Thus died this mighty sage, this divine man whose effort it had been to
instil his own wisdom into human rule and government. The murder of the
Pythagoreans was the signal for a democratic revolution in Croton and
about the Gulf of Tarentum. The towns of Italy expelled from their walls

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

the unfortunate disciples of the master. The order was dispersed;
fragments of it, however, spread throughout Sicily and Greece,
propagating everywhere the master's words and teachings. Lysis became
the teacher of Epaminondas. After fresh revolutions, the Pythagoreans
were permitted to return to Italy on condition they no longer formed a
political body. They were still united in a touching fraternity, and
looked upon themselves as one family. One of them who had fallen upon
sickness and poverty was kindly taken in by an inn-keeper. Before dying
he traced a few mysterious signs on the door of the inn and said to the
host: "Do not be uneasy, one of my brothers will pay my debt." A year
afterwards, as a stranger was passing by this inn he saw the signs and
said to the host: "I am a Pythagorean; one of my brothers died here;
tell me what I owe you on his account." The order existed for two
hundred and fifty years; the ideas and traditions of the master have
come down to the present times.

The regenerating influence of Pythagoras over Greece was immense. This
influence was exercised in mysterious though certain fashion, by means
of the temples he had visited. At Delphi we have seen that he gave new
might to the science of divination, strengthened the priestly influence,
and by

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

his art formed a model Pythoness. Thanks to this inner reform, which
aroused enthusiasm in the very heart of the sanctuaries and in the soul
of the initiates, Delphi became more than ever the moral centre of
Greece. This was especially evident during the Median wars. Scarcely had
thirty years elapsed since the death of Pythagoras when the Asiatic
cyclone, predicted by the Samian sage, burst out upon the coasts of
Hellas. In this epic struggle of Europe against a barbaric Asia, Greece,
representing liberty and civilization, has behind her the science and
genius of Apollo. He it is whose patriotic and religious inspiration
stirs up and silences the springing rivalry between Sparta and Athens.
It is he, too, who is the inspirer of men like Miltiades and
Themistocles. At Marathon, enthusiasm is so great that the Athenians
believe they see two warriors, clad in light, fighting in their ranks.
Some recognize in them Theseus and Echetos; others, Castor and Pollux.
When the invasion of Xerxes, tenfold more formidable than that of
Darius, breaks over Thermopylæ and submerges Hellas, it is the Pythoness
who, on her tripod, points out the way of safety to the envoys from
Athens, and helps Themistocles to gain the victory at Salamis. The pages
of Herodotus thrill with her broken phrases: "Abandon the homesteads

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

and lofty hills if the city is built in a circle . . . fire and dreadful
Mars mounted on a Syrian chariot will bring your towers to ruins . . .
temples are tottering in their fall, their walls are dripping with cold
sweat, whilst black blood is falling from their pinnacles . . . depart
from my sanctuary. Let a wooden wall be your impregnable bulwark. Flee!
turn your backs on numberless enemies on foot and on horseback! O divine
Salamis! How deadly wilt thou be to those born of woman!" <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23) In the account given by Eschylus the
battle begins with a cry resembling the pæan, Apollo's hymn: "Soon the
day, led on white coursers, spreads throughout the world its resplendent
light. Immediately a mighty shout, resembling a sacred chant, rises from
the ranks of the Greeks and the echoes of the island respond in a
thousand loud-sounding voices." What wonder that, intoxicated with the
wine of victory, the Greeks at the battle of Mycale, in the presence of
stricken Asia, chose as a rallying cry: "Hebe, Eternal Youth!" Yes, it
is the breath

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

of Apollo that moves through these wonderful Median wars. Religious
enthusiasm, which works miracles, carries off both living and dead,
throws a dazzling light on victory, and gives a golden glory to the
tomb. All the temples were plundered and destroyed, that of Delphi alone
remained intact. The Persian hosts advanced to spoil the holy town. A
quiver of dread came over all. The solar god, however, said through the
voice of the pontiff: "I will defend myself!" Orders were given from the
temple that the city be deserted, the inhabitants take refuge in the
grottoes of Parnassus, and the priests alone keep sacred guard on the
threshold of the sanctuary. The Persian army enters the town, all still
as death; the statues alone look down as the hosts march along. A black
cloud gathers at the foot of the gorge, the thunders roll and the
lightning flashes on the invaders. Two enormous rocks roll down from the
summit of Parnassus, crushing to death great numbers of Persians. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) At the same time noises and shouts

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

issue from the Temple of Minerva, flames leap from the ground beneath
the very feet of the invaders. A Before such wonders the barbarians fall
back in terror and the dismayed army takes to flight. The god has
undertaken his own defence.

Would these wonders have happened, would these victories humanity looks
upon as its own have taken place, had not Pythagoras, thirty years
earlier, appeared in the Delphic sanctuary to kindle there the sacred
fire? This may, indeed, be questioned.

One word more regarding the master's influence on philosophy. Before his
time, there had been natural philosophers on the one hand, and moral
philosophers on the other; Pythagoras included in a vast synthesis,
morality, science and religion. This synthesis is nothing else than the
esoteric doctrine, whose full glory I have endeavoured to reveal in the
very basis of Pythagorean initiation. The philosopher of Croton was not
the inventor but the light-bearing arranger of these fundamental truths,
in the scientific order of things. Consequently I have chosen his system
as offering the most favourable framework to a complete account

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

of the doctrine of the Mysteries as well as of true theosophy.

Those who have followed the master up to this point will have seen that
at the basis of the doctrine there shines the sun of the one Truth.
Scattered rays may be discovered in philosophies and religions, but here
is their centre. What must be done to attain thereto? Observation and
reasoning are not sufficient. In addition to and above all else is
intuition. Pythagoras was an adept and an initiate of the highest order.
His was the direct vision of the spirit, his the key to the occult
sciences and the spiritual world. It was from the primal fount of Truth
that he drew his supplies. And as he joined to these transcendent
faculties of an intellectual and spiritualized soul, a careful and
minute observation of physical nature and a masterly classification of
ideas by the aid of his lofty reason, no one could have been better
equipped than himself to build up the edifice of the knowledge of the
Kosmos.

In truth this edifice was never destroyed. Plato, who took from
Pythagoras the whole of his metaphysics, had a complete idea thereof,
though he unfolded it with less clearness and precision. The Alexandrine
school occupied the upper storeys of the edifice, whilst modern science
has taken the

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

ground-floor and strengthened its foundations. Numerous philosophical
schools and mystical or religious sects have inhabited its many
chambers. No philosophy, however, has yet embraced the whole of it. It
is this whole I have endeavoured to reveal here in all its harmony and
unity.

 

 

 

 

THE END

 

 

 

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_  
*Richard Clay & Sons, Limited, London and Bungay*.

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[173:1](pdm06.htm#fr_22) This is the version of
Diogenes of Laërte regarding the death of Pythagoras—according to
Dicearchus, quoted by Porphyry, the master escaped massacre, along with
Archippus and Lysis. He wandered from town to town until he reached
Metapontum, where he died of hunger in the Temple of the Muses. The
inhabitants of Metapontum, on the other hand, affirmed that the sage
they had taken in, died peacefully in their city. They pointed out to
Cicero his house, seat and tomb. It is noteworthy that, long after the
master's death, those cities which had persecuted Pythagoras most, at
the time of the democratic change of opinion, claimed for themselves the
honour of having offered him refuge and protection. The towns around the
Gulf of Tarentum claimed that they each contained the ashes of the
philosopher with as much desperation as the towns of Ionia disputed
among one another the honour of having given birth to Homer.—See this
question discussed in M. Chaignet's conscientious work: *Pythagore et la
philosophie pythagoricienne*.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[176:1](pdm06.htm#fr_23) In temple language the
term *son of woman* indicated the lower degree of initiation, woman here
signifying nature. Above these were the *sons of man* or initiates of
the Spirit and the Soul, the *sons of the Gods* or initiates of the
cosmogonic sciences, and the sons of God or initiates in the supreme
science. The Pythoness calls the Persians *sons of woman*, giving them
this name from the character of their religion. Interpreted literally,
her words would be devoid of meaning.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[177:1](pdm06.htm#fr_24) "These may still be
seen in the enclosure of Minerva," said Herodotus, VIII. 39. The
invasion of the Gauls, which took place two centuries later, was
repelled in like manner. Here, too, a storm gathers, thunderbolts fall
time after time on the Gauls; the earth quakes beneath their feet, they
see supernatural visions; and the temple of Apollo is saved. These facts
seem to prove that the priests of Delphi were acquainted with the
science of cosmic fire and knew how to handle electricity by occult
power as did <span id="page_178">p. 178</span> the Chaldæan magi.—See
Amédée Thierry, *Histoire des Gaulois*, I. 246.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Advertisements](pdm07)
