[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](peck36)  [Next](peck38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BLACK SATIN

On the South Coast of New South Wales (not the Illawarra coast, which is
not the South Coast) is a wonderful tract of deeply undulated forest,
wild and jungled bush. The highlands of this big territory overhang a
strip of well-scrubbed and verdant bush which rolls north and south,
showing the creeks and gullies by the deepness of the purple, and which,
eastward, thins out to paddocks of perpetual grass with broad waters
spread in them, and they in turn slip downward to curved edges and
curved broad beaches of gleaming yellow sand broken into scallops by
lion-like promontories that gaze out-ever out--over the great blue
expanse of Pacific Sea.

These highlands are but foothills, though far-flung, of Australia's
Great Dividing Range. They have been pressed to where they are by great
weight. It is as though one day they will be pressed on and will cover
the jungle and will be engulfed out over the beaches.

The jungle is the home of giant gums and dense myrtle, of umbrageous fig
and tall palm, of sassafras and supplejack. The millions of shafted
trees rear their topmost boughs up into the clouds and stand as great
pillars, and the voice of animal and bird reverberates as the human
voice does amongst fluted pillars of a great cathedral. But the movement
of wallaby and bandicoot and bushrat, of the lyre-bird as he scratches,
of the spotted native eat and the wallaroo, is silent, for there is a
carpet of fallen leaves that allows no more sound than does the
Axminster or the Brussels of the mansion.

All the wonder growth of our best Australian bush in this piece of
country. Gullies are deep and dark. Rolling ridges are rounded and
ferned. Down in the depths the creeks lie still. All the ferns, all the
mosses, all the deep-green, rank-grown underscrub hem the chill waters
of the little sunless creeks and close them about. Trailing vines and
heavy myrtles make the gullies almost impenetrable. Up the slope of the
mountain the scrub is less, and massed burrawangs hang out their fronds
as if to repel the wanderer.

In one of the densest of the gullies, where the Eugenias and the
Ceratopetalums hide the carpet of fallen leaves, lived a family of satin
birds. The King of the Family was jet-black.

Down on the shores of the great wide Casuarina-fringed lagoons lived a
family of aborigines. Their king was jet-black, and his totem was the
satin bird of like colour. When the hunters tired of fishing, and when
they wearied of crossing the sand-dunes and the glaring, shimmering
beachglaring and shimmering on every fine day of summer-to poke off the
mussels and spear the butterfish and groper, they pushed through the
Ceratopetalums and the burrawangs, and, following the tortuous bed of
the principal creek amid the ferns and the moss and the vines and the
myrtles, gradually ascending, they entered the sub-tropical patch where
the ferns were huge and lank and staghorns clustered on rocks and trees,
and the beautiful Dendrobium clung, and the supplejacks and leatherwoods
and bangalow palms ran up in slender height, and that pretty massive
parasite-the wild fig-made its umbrageous shade, as has been written.
Here they rested.

No shaft of sunlight ever penetrated through this dense foliage. Never
did the fallen nor clinging plants here feel drying wind or see a
sunbeam. It was never dry.

The porcupine pushed his spikey body through, slowly raising and
lowering his banded quills, and the fat bandicoot snouted for roots, and
sleek tiger-cats lay in wait for the pretty green tree-snake, and for
other venomous reptiles; the brown-banded and carpet and diamond snakes
twined among the vines or lay coiled between the damply warm roots.

Above, in the upper branches, the colonies of pretty flock and top-knot
pigeons clattered, and a little lower the parrots and gill-birds
shrieked. Below them the wrens and tits mingled with fantails' both
black and brown, and down on the ground the little seed-eaters darted,
while the coy lyre-bird stood and made his mocking calls or scratched
powerfully to unearth his meats-the grubs and bugs and roaches of the
damp underscrub.

When they had rested enough the straying hunters, with singleness of
thought, arose and pushed on and up.

A wall of rock rose sheer with just one narrow cleft down which the
water rushed or fell, and on the level crest of that a view above the
figs and other tops out over the Ceratopetalums and burrawangs, and
across the shimmering surface of the lake above the now hazy sand-dunes
and beach to the wide, flat, blue sea, met the admiring gaze of the men.

But there was still far to go.

A wide slope down again to the level at the back of the ridge where the
water of the creek was a miniature lake with just the narrow cleft cut
through the wall, and down where the vines grew again and the eucalypti
were mingled with turpentine.

A few hours' tramping and struggling with impending vines here, and they
came to the gully of the satin birds. The darting, timid birds with the
shining greenish plumage sat stock still while they watched the party of
hunters. The jet-black king had chosen a burnt patch on the side of a
Richea, and there he clung, his colour and that of the grass-tree making
him almost invisible.

Then one of the hunters spied the home of his favourite grub on the side
of this grass-tree, and as he detoured to get it the black satin thought
he was discovered and he sprang out. He was very fat and heavy, and the
surrounding scrub was thick, so he flapped awkwardly into the
entanglement of Clematis and Eugenias.

This was his mistake and proved his undoing. Like a flash the nullah was
flung, and with a grunt of satisfaction the aborigine rushed forward and
seized his victim.

Now one of the party was the brother of the king of the group, and he,
too, was of the satinbird totem. He asked to be allowed to examine the
king of the satin birds, and, without touching it, having satisfied
himself that it was really the totem of his father and himself, he said
that it must not be again produced so that he could see it. The man who
killed it must hide it, and it must be cooked and eaten quite out of
sight of any man whose totem it was.

The black bird was hidden in the bag that was worn attached to the rope
of fur around the black man's waist.

The giant range was still far ahead and there were many miles of this
wooded country to be traversed before the party could reach the blue top
that met the sky, and they pushed on until it was too dark to go
further. No food was eaten that evening, and the dead satin bird
remained fully feathered in the bag of the captor.

During the night he rolled in his sleep and the bag was emptied.

The black satin slipped beside the bird man.

In the morning when he awoke he saw what had happened, and because he
was a bird man he was very frightened. He had been taught that he must
never handle the king of the satin birds. The whole family was to him
tabu, but the most tabu was the black one.

People who were tree people or flower people, or indeed of any other
totem, could handle the satin bird and eat it.

However, as the custom was, he said nothing. All day he wondered what
would be the ill that would come to him.

Once, in going over the deep creek by traversing one of the hundred logs
that lay from bank to bank-a creek that wound along the foot of the
enormous range-he slipped, and a jagged broken limb caused a deep wound
in his leg and he thought that that was perhaps the punishment.

After that the real ascent, with all its difficulties and dangers,
began. The men were behind a high pointed mass of mountain rocks that
held a huge stone poised on its top and they were shut in by that and
the surrounding steeps and by a wall of thousands of feet which was yet
to be climbed, and then the sun went out.

Unnoticed, the day had changed.

Buried as they were in the dense forest the sky was out of their ken.

It had dulled. Deep clouds had spread over it, and now as they scaled
into a higher air they found it to be raw and chill and a wind was
blowing with a grim, steady persistence that foreshadowed rain in
plenty.

Presently a fierce gust swept along the side, and after that the heavy
rain fell. The black men huddled together and were at first undecided
about what to do.

Presently it was agreed that the best thing was to return to the shelter
of the gully behind the sharp-topped mount, there to await the passing
of the rain. They lit fires and the man with the black satin turned his
back to the rest to pluck it, and he took fire from the little heap, and
out of the sight of the others he cooked his bird.

The son of the king ran no risks. He, too, parted from the group, and
did his own cooking and he ate in silence. They all had berries and
pieces of wallaby flesh. Only the satin was to any of them a totem
thing.

Suddenly there came a roar from the mountain" side. Huge boulders were
crashing down the steep. A rock had given way, and it came on, bringing
others, and felling trees, and the group of blacks were right in its
path. They scrambled up and each ran, holding the cooked food in the
hands, to escape.

The falling mass was almost upon them. It was coming far more swiftly
than any of them could run. Though it was impeded by trees so also were
they by the scrub. The wound in the leg of the king's son prevented him
from going as fast as the others, and the man with the piece of satin
bird in his hand stayed to aid him. He grasped the arm of the other and
they sped on, stumbling and falling, but progressing. Then their hands
slipped together and each touched the totem.

Then they were paralysed. They fell. A big tree crashed.

The rest escaped. They got out of the path of the avalanche of rocks.

When the falling debris was stilled and the rain was ceasing and the
wind was lessening they retraced their strides and they found the
unlucky pair.

This put an end to their adventure. All knew what was their own totem,
of course, and all knew that an outraged ancestor would have a revenge
when he saw a disrespect, whether intentional or not. The ancestors were
all jealous gods and they found ways of visiting such a sin upon
everyone connected with it.

They returned the way they went out. There were the usual lamentations
and the usual mourning period. The wives especially were required to
show great sorrow, and by painting themselves with white clay, and
pulling out their hair, and by cutting themselves in various places,
particularly straight down the middle of the head so that blood ran over
the face and down the neck, they satisfied the onlookers that they were
genuinely grieved. No one ever went exactly to the place of the tragedy.
Therefore, when, long years afterwards, white men were clambering about
that steep of the great Curockbilly Range, they found the bones, and a
derelict remnant of that once virile family told enough for me to write
the true story of the black satin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The End: The Aborigines](peck38.md)
