[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](peck01)  [Next](peck03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PRELUDE.

## A PRINCESS

In a little settlement for aborigines not far from Sydney lives the last
full-blooded person of the once-powerful Cammary Tribe. She lives in the
past. The present has no lure for her, and very little interest.

She has to eat and she has to sleep and she has to dress.

She looks for no pleasure, but she finds pleasure in the thoughts she
has of her earliest childhood, and the knowledge she has of the real
South Coast aborigine.

She is a princess, and she is also the sister-in-law of the man who was
the last king of his group.

Both groups were of the one tribe, and each group had its king.

She has the true aboriginal cast of countenance, and she speaks most
fluently to those who can understand or only partly understand the
language of her people.

And her people are of two groups, for she said to the writer, "My mother
was of the North; my father was of the South; I speak between the two!"

And her English is of a pleasing kind, for it is not in any sense
"pidgin." It is soft in accent and musical in tone.

She does not know her age, for, as she puts it, "I did not go to
school."

She knew many beautiful legends.

But they have nearly all gone from her, for she never told them. She
heard them and forgets nearly all. She hears no more, for they are
seldom spoken of by the remnant of her race.

Time was when the story-teller was an honoured man, when he dressed for
his part, when the young people were educated in the lore of the land
and the law of the land, by means of legend.

But there is so much white blood in the people that practically none
wish to bear the stories of the "Alcheringa," and so the stories have
faded.

But not all.

And the religious beliefs!

They are still very real to this "Last of Her Tribe."

Just as real as ours are to us.

"Don't think that the white man told us about God," said Ellen.

"My people always knew about Him. Their fathers told them. Our God was
never a wooden idol, nor a thing carved by human hands. He was always up
in the Heavens where He lived, and from where He looked down upon all
the world, and sought out the evil doers and punished them in many ways.
From His throne He caused by His will the food to come upon the trees
and the game to add to the larder. And He made the rain to fall, and He
shook the earth with His thunder, and He threatened with the lightning!
And there were good men who could see Him and get Him to move!"

So said Ellen.

To pray to Him was the most natural thing for the people to do, and
there were those whose principal mission it was to do that. They were
the good men-the Clergymen, the Priests.

He made it the duty, too, of the people to inflict punishment upon the
wrong doers that were caught and proved to be malefactors. Therefore it
was, that men were sometimes stood up and speared, and women were beaten
with nullahs.

There were the doctors, also. These men gave much time to the study and
practice of the healing art, and sorcery and witchery did not escape
their especial notice-just as the white people have their crystal
readers and fortune-tellers to-day right in all our capital cities.

The doctors knew much of the effect of the eating of herbs and the
drinking of water in which herbs had been steeped. They provided the
leaves and the bark that were thrown into the water-holes in order to
stupefy fish, as well as the medicines for the cure of the ills of the
people. In their sorcery they played upon the emotions just as our
mesmerists and evangelists do.

All this the old Princess of the aboriginal settlement tells, but not to
everyone. Only to those who have a sympathy and an understanding, and a
readable wish to learn the deeper things of the aboriginal mind.

There is, in a gully near Appin, a place that was sacred for, possibly,
many thousands of years.

The gully is deep, and the head of it is a big round water-hole with
precipitous sides, ever one of which the water pours in a roaring,
tumbling, spraying fall.

The fall is governed now by the gates and spillways of the Cataract Dam,
but until that was built it was governed only by the rains that fell and
the winds that blew.

And the way down to the pool was always difficult.

None but the priest ever descended there, and when he did he carried
with him the flint rod that served as the bell in the church steeple of
the white man does-to call-but with the difference that the bell calls
the people, and the flint called the gods or the spirits.

Tap, tap, tap, tap went the flint on the sandstone, and ages of tapping
wore a hole that is not even seen by the great majority that clamber
there now, much less understood.

My Black Princess heard of that Sacred Place when she was a tiny child.

She has never been to Appin, but her father and other great men of her
group have been there and they told of the Sacred Spot when they
returned to the coast.

It was a church, and nothing else, yet built, not with hands, but by the
will of the God that the aborigines knew.

Our name for the Princess is Ellen, and Ellen's eyes glowed when she
told the writer of her God.

And how they glowed when the writer told Ellen of the Sacred Spot near
Appin, and when he showed that he knew the meaning of the worn hole and
the ages of tapping!

"The place is 'kulkul,'" said Ellen, "and 'kurringaline,' and yet it is
not 'pourangiling.' No 'kurru' are there!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Royal Visit](peck03.md)
