[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](peck34)  [Next](peck36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# MULGANI

This is a true tale about some black people who lived in this country
before any white people set foot in it--long before.

Unlike the other stories which are legends that have actually been told
as legends, this was not told regarding one specific happening nor one
particularised person nor persons. It was done by many. It may be called
a type story. Just what is said the people thought was really thought by
many, and just what is said the imagined people did was really done by
many.

In that way it is brought before readers what was thought and what was
done, though Mulgani is created to bring it all.

Read first what a tribe was. It was a very large number of people who
were broken up into many groups, big and little. These groups thought
themselves a family, and the names they had were family names. We whites
call just a father and mother and their children a family. The
aborigines considered that all children belonged as much to all the
uncles and aunts and cousins as to the actual father and mother, and
uncles and aunts were those men and women whose brothers and sisters the
actual father and mother might have married, seeing that they belonged
to the proper totems. So their idea of family was much wider than ours.

Mulgani was a pretty little aboriginal baby. She was born hundreds and
hundreds of years ago.

Let me now tell you how to speak of the black people. You should say
"aborigine" when you mean a person, but "aboriginal" when you mean the
kind of person. For the bigger people who read this book I will tell
that the word "aborigine" is a noun and the word "aboriginal" is an
adjective. Therefore we say that a story (for instance) is an aboriginal
story and the first teller of it was an aborigine.

Mulgani was a Katungal. Her people lived away down on the South Coast of
New South Wales, at Twofold Bay. An atlas here would be a useful book to
have beside you as you read, for in it you can see the names of the
places.

Now there was to be a great ceremony at a pretty spot near where is now
the Excelsior Coal Mine at Thirroul.

Mulgani's father heard about it. A messenger had arrived at Twofold Bay
and he brought with him a piece of stick about a foot long and about an
inch in diameter. It was a piece of waratah stem and on it were cut some
marks. Some of these marks were just circles cut right round it, and
between the circles little cuts were made that looked like four-legged
stools. Then again there were spots or dots. The marks were a strange
written language, for they could be deciphered by a few men of the
people wherever the stick was shown. To be a messenger was no easy task,
for before he could have his intentions understood, and before he could
reach the readers of whatever tribe or group he wished to visit, he ran
the risk of being misunderstood and perhaps speared. Of course he
carried weapons with him. But when he came in sight of a camp he waited
quietly, generally sitting on a log or on the ground. Then when he was
seen he threw his spears to the ground. After being received he was
allowed to go back and recover the spears. No one of the visited people
were ever known to steal such spears. It is known, though, that
messengers have been killed by mistake or mischance or for some serious
reason and their weapons remained where they were laid down, and were
found there long years afterwards.

Mulgani was only a few weeks old. She was not yet even black. She was a
dark brown colour, but the real black that commenced under her
fingernails was spreading, and soon she would be as black as any
aborigine could be.

Her father and mother were watching her very closely, for they were
anxious, not wishing her to be too long becoming as black as they were.
She had been, as was usual, kept covered with fat-the fat of the wombat
if such animals were native to the district-and powdered charcoal. Her
aunts saw to that, and it was done for two reasons: first that she might
appear black, and secondly that she might be put out in the sun and
burnt by it without it hurting her tender skin. The wind, too, would
have chapped her, but the covering prevented it.

Now her father was very fond of flowers. He had made many trips to the
mountains that lie away to the west of Twofold Bay-the Muniong Range we
call them-and he had seen all the trees and shrubs and plants of the
bush. He had picked some and had brought them back to Mulgani's mother
before Mulgani was born, and the mother wished that she could go to the
mountains and get some for herself.

And now this messenger had come with the message-stick to tell the
Karungals about the big ceremony, and although Mulgani was only a few
days old, the father and mother intended to go to it.

But the father had to attend a night school for a few nights.

He had not ever been taught how to prepare Styphelia berries or Geebungs
(called Persoonia by the botanists) and Astrolomas or Ground berries.
These berries were often eaten raw, but because Mulgani's father had
been told that he must not eat them unless they were cooked he had never
eaten them at all. He got quite enough of other foods that were not
forbidden him. Of course they were mostly cooked too. Now that he was
with many others going on a very long journey, taking his wife and
little child, it was considered that there might be some difficulty in
obtaining enough food, therefore no article must be neglected, and there
were certain ways for all the people to live, and those ways were taught
them at the proper corroborees. If they were not treated correctly there
was the danger of magic being in them. Of course we can see that the
magic was only the poison that so many fruits have, and which is
nullified by some sort of preparation. This idea of magic was not of a
lot of primitive people with no sense nor reason at all. The people were
primitive, but they had sense and knowledge, and there is a basis for
every thought and every custom. No doubt some time away back in the ages
a blackfellow was made sick by eating the green geebung, and that
happening was ascribed simply to magic. We must not belittle a
blackfellow because he speaks of magic. Why, see this:-Only a little
while ago I heard a woman-a white woman-say that waratahs should riot be
kept in a house because they brought bad luck. What is that but
blackfellow's magic. And for no reason at all. No one ever became
unlucky, no one ever died, or was made sick, by the waratah. There is no
basis for the idea. Then that white woman was far more ignorant than the
blacks in that respect. That some flowers do make us sick is well known.
If we do not call the reason magic, then it is because we have found out
that it is the superabundance of pollen that is the cause of the
sickness. The wattle flower is one of those in which there is danger
because of its great quantity of pollen.

Anyhow tiny Mulgani's father was very anxious to go to the school, and
he was very pleased when he found that the king had ordered such a
school to be held. Everybody of the group that lived around Twofold Bay
could attend.

Many schools were secret, and only the teachers and the special scholars
and those who had already been to such schools were allowed to be
present. Such schools were those at which things were taught and
ceremonies were enacted that might be described as sacred. And all
schools were termed by white people "corroborees," and for a long time
they were thought to be nothing more than dances. There were dances,
too, and they also are called corroborees.

After the school those who were to travel to the great ceremony set out.

The way was long and in places difficult. Mulgani was often carried by
one or other of her aunts.

Sometimes the party was right on the beach, sometimes on the sandhills
and sometimes in the scrub. But never did they go too far from the sight
and the sound of the waves. On the sand-hills there were very pretty
flowers-the Mesembryanthemum, a very brilliant and dainty vine and just
at the bases the big yellow Hibbertia, and gleaming purple masses of
Hardenbergia.

The Malelucas were in blossom and the sweet scent that they give out was
a great pleasure to the travellers, though of course Mulgani was far too
young to notice such a thing as that.

They came to the Shoalhaven River. The party travelled up it on the high
rocky sides for many miles. Then they came across a camp of people of
their own tribe, but of course a different group. Here they were
welcomed and given the best of food. It was better than any they had got
since starting out.

While they rested in this camp Mulgani's father went out and gathered
the Styphelia berries and the Astrolomas, and what he did not cook he
put in the dilly bag that was carried by his wife. It was delightful to
see how the wallabies were cooked and how the best parts were given to
those who should by right of birth or age have them.

The travellers stayed there for about a week, and during that time every
day Mulgani was put on the ground out in the sun. She was quite happy,
and her father and mother showed with pride that she was now all black.

Many of the people of this group joined the travellers. They had heard
of the intended ceremony and the summons and were awaiting the coming of
this party.

Soon they came to the country of the tall, swaying cabbage-palms and the
staghorns and the treeferns. Many of the big detached rocks had the
dendrobiums with their long creamy fronds of flowers, and the sweet
scent was better by far than that of the tea-trees they had passed
through, for the flower of the Dendrobium speciosum is more sweetly
scented than almost any other in our Australian bush. There is, however,
one other that must be mentioned here, though the travellers did not see
it. It is the Symphyonema paludosum. It grows only in swampy places, and
such swamps do not occur anywhere along the route taken, though they are
not very far away for they are on the top of the range under which the
ceremony took place.

In another week the party reached the spot and they found a big
gathering of people. Some had come from over the range.

There were fires and smoke and feasting and singing and the beating of
drums. There were corroborees, some of them, such as dances, for the
whole of the gathering; and there were also those secret ones for only
the special people.

Mulgani was a toddler before she was brought back to her own country.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend of the Pleiades](peck36)
