[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](peck12)  [Next](peck14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE FIRST KANGAROO

## (Two Stories)

According to the inhabitants of the South-Eastern parts of the
country-around the Monaro District, Mount Kosciusko, Goulburn, the
Currockbilly Ranges, Mittagong, Burragorang and as far north as the
Nepean River, there was a time when no kangaroos were in the land.

It is said by those people that the first kangaroo was borne to
Australia upon the greatest wind that ever blew.

That wind came from the plains. It swept around the Macdonnell Range
districts, whirling this way and that, careered back towards the
north-western regions, across probably somewhere over Perth and
Fremantle, swept over the Australian Bight, and finally blew out
somewhere in Tasman's Sea. During all this terrible wandering and
blowing the first kangaroo had a weary time.

He could not land. He was blown before that aimless wind and was tossed
up and down. In his endeavours to gain a foothold his hind legs
stretched out, and if they had not grown long as they did, he would
never have alighted except in the sea, where he would have been drowned.

The chief was searching out new country. His tribe had cleaned out the
particular spot where they had rested for many months, and game had
become scarce. So the chief put on the paint that brought good luck, and
sallied out to find a new and prolific pasture. He had travelled very
many days without seeing a place any better, and was about to return to
his people. But the little native bee which gathered pollen from the
wattle just before him attracted his attention, and as he watched it he
saw it dive down to a pool that lay in the black soil at the foot of the
flowering tree. The black cautiously bent down, and with that dexterity
which he possessed in a remarkable degree, he clasped, as he bent over
the drinking insect, its wings between the forefinger and thumb of his
right hand. He carried the bee to where he had noticed a hornet's nest,
and detaching some of the cells of that, he moistened the substance, and
stuck a little of it on the bee's back. Then he searched about for a
cotton bush, and soon found one. The pods were bursting and the white
balls were ready to fall. He stuck some cotton on the wax and released
the bee. The strange feeling and the strange load caused the little
insect to make a "bee-line" for home, and it was no trouble for the
black to follow and keep it in sight.

On and on he went, never looking down nor to the right nor to the left,
but always up, following the flight of the bee.

However, he was destined not to see the nest. Up in the sky something
arrested his sight, and at once he lost the bee.

Indeed, he forgot it.

The strangest mass of cloud he had ever seen was there. It was sepia
coloured with black edges. It seethed and curled and split. It billowed
and curled and broke-and frayed out. Long spirals of lighter colour
worked wonderful patterns against the brown, but drawing out and
contracting, waving like giant battle-plane streamers, now straight as
spears, now bent over like millions of boomerangs, now detaching, then
adhering; the awe-striking masses of vapour came On from the west. Big
rocks were tumbling there. Huge walls built up and tottered over and
tumbled and crashed. Giant forests were born and waved in a giant storm
and were felled. And with all that turmoil of vapour up aloft, the earth
below was calm and serene. It faced an inevitable, and that inevitable
was a catastrophe.

Suddenly it grew dark.

A night in the daytime descended in a second, blotting out everything.
But in the heavens a wondrous light appeared. Long streams of liquid
fire started from the south, and shot sheer across the heavens from pole
to pole. They waved from west to east. Red and yellow, purple and brown,
pink and grey, golden and black, white and pale green. All these colours
in long straight fingers stretched from pole to pole, waved and crossed,
and passed away towards the east. The unfortunate black man had never
seen such a sight.

But he had heard of it.

It seemed to him that perhaps once in a lifetime a man was privileged to
see such a thing. He cowered before it.

Then came the tornado. With the wind the lights waved out and the clouds
passed, and the night (for it was really night then) showed starlight
and clear.

But the wind roared on. Just above the trees a dull black shape passed
over. It had long legs that hung down and clawed. The claws were not far
above the black man's head. It was distinctly an animal. He could see
the body and the neck, the head, the ears and the eyes, but in a few
minutes it was gone.

Somewhere he seemed to know that it was food to eat. So he took heart.
He really believed it was sent by the great spirit, for he was painted
with the signs, and he was meat-hungry, and he was out, not on his own
behalf, but searching for food for his people.

So he lay down to sleep, believing that in the morning he would find
meat.

All night the wind blew. It was still blowing in the morning.

And he was so sure that it was to bring him some good thing that he
moved not a yard.

The bees were again in the wattles. But he watched for the other
creature.

It came.

It floated as before, being borne on the wind. The long legs still
dangled and clawed. The black man followed. It led him an awful trip,
but at last be saw it catch its claws in a tree-top and the wind passed
over it and it fell. But like a flash it was up on its feet, and with
great hops on those long legs it bounded through the bush and was lost
to sight.

The chief returned. He retraced his steps. There were bees and birds,
and there were many ferns which gave succulent roots. And seed-bearing
grasses abounded. So to there the tribe moved their camp and they stayed
for many a day. Now and then they sighted the new animal that had made
its legs grow long by endeavouring to grasp the earth, but it was a very
long time before it was speared. It must have caused a mate to come from
somewhere, because the speared one proved to be young and others were
seen. The flesh was good and the skin was covered with very warm fur.

Years afterwards someone found out how to tan it. The red blood-like
kino of the bloodwood tree was soaked in water to dye the fur. A woman
had wanted it dyed. The skin was allowed to be immersed in this coloured
water for some days, and when it was removed not only was the fur dyed
red, but the skin itself was changed. It was more serviceable. So ever
afterwards those blacks soaked all their animal skins in a solution of
this gum, and thus they tanned them.

Everyone had seen the aerial wonder, and they believed their chief had
been answered by the Great Spirit and the kangaroo was sent from over
the seas to succour them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Second Kangaroo Story](peck14)
