[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](peck10)  [Next](peck12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# HOW THE WHITE WARATAH BECAME RED

There is really a white waratah.

It occurs in New South Wales and in Tasmania.

It is not a distinct variety unless we consider a flower a variety
simply because of its colour.

The white of New South Wales and that of Tasmania are speciosissima and
truncata respectively, though the plants always bear blooms of the
colour even though they are in close proximity to those of the usual
glowing red.

In Tasmania white waratahs are in some profusion. In New South Wales
pink ones have been found, and they surely have in some way been
impregnated. Occasionally the white ones have had a creamy tinge at the
base of the pistils and in such cases the flowers have obtained some
food that is usually the property of the foliage.

In New South Wales white waratahs have been found, and may still be
found at Mittagong, at Sherbrooke and on the Jamberoo Mountain.

The natives of Sherbrooke had a legend of the changing of the white to
red, and perhaps this story shows that it was believed that the first
were white and the change to red was a later tffect. Of this we are not
sure.

In the dense dark jungle there, a sleek and beautiful wonga pigeon
lived. The rich soil in the gullied and sunken flats produced wonderful
vegetation. Supplejacks and bloodwoods, cedars and monstrous turpentine!
Great bushy lillypillies, overgrown myrtles, big laurels, towering
eucalypts (E. Consideniana, the White Ash, E. Smithii, even E.
Sieberiana, the Silver-top) shut out the daylight. Climbing plants grew
there, with sweet smelling Sassafras (Atherosperma moschatum) and white
Musk Daisy-bush (Olearia argophylla). In their shade the Flying Fox had
camped for centuries unmolested.

Underfoot, the carpet of dark fallen leaves was feet thick. Down in
there the horrible leech waved and swayed in his blind search for an
animal to fasten upon in order to get his fill of blood, while the brown
bottle-tick lost no time in detaching himself from his habitat to bury
his proboscis in some unfortunate passer-by, in the same quest as the
leech.

In there, too, were gorgeous parrots and pretty pigeons and bower-birds,
and tits and wrens, and such a host of the feathered tribes as to make
them seem like a moving mass of wings and swaying feathers.

Big brush wallabies softly hopped or curled in a tangled bower; the bush
rat and the bandicoot peeked from their seclusion, and the native cat
slunk about as only felines can.

There, in this deep, dank, dark, sweet-smelling Australian jungle
stepped daintily and cooed quickly and loudly, that proud wonga.

Sailing serenely up above it all were the hawk and the eagle.

While the wonga remained indoors she was safe.

Up over the cliff, where the country was flat, the bush was rocky and
open and dry. A dryer air pervaded, the ground was no carpet of fallen
leaves, but a hot, sandy or gravelled area with but few fallen leaves,
for there was no underscrub.

The hawk's piercing eye saw every move there.

The white waratah gazed skyward and felt dreadfully alone. All around
the waratahs grew and perhaps they were red, and this one was the only
one without colour, and it longed to be crimson like its neighbours of
its own botanical genus.

The handsome wonga had lost her mate. Her grey spots glowed against
their bed of white; her little pink legs strode briskly on, and she
scratched and scratched and turned up insects and grubs, and she fed
well.

But when her thoughts turned to companionship she discovered that she
was lonely. So she coo-ed and coo-ed, ever more and more rapidly, and in
higher and higher tones.

She stretched herself upon tip-toes and searched the jungle. She ceased
to look for a surfeit of food, and she stepped on and on, always
approaching the creek where beyond it the cliff rose, and above it was
the open forest.

Up out there she would go!

So she opened her wings, and, heavy as she was, she rose with a great
and ponderous flapping.

Increasing her speed, she swept by the trees over the brook, and up the
cliff, alighting just at the foot of the white waratah.

Then she heard the call of her mate.

Foolish bird that she was!

He was still down in the darkened jungle.

His morning could not have been so successful as hers, or he was
hungrier to start with, or perhaps he required more.

She opened her wings again.

Too late!

A rush through the air, like a streak of lightning or a shooting star!

Swish!

The hawk was down through the branchless space and upon the beautiful
wonga beneath the white waratah.

But she was heavier than he reckoned.

There was a struggle, and in it a whirl of feathers-white and grey and
green and golden-shimmered!

The hawk certainly rose, but he did not carry the wonga far.

The pigeon was torn, and her life was ebbing with the flow of her blood.
Her last struggle was her release, and from a height of a few feet she
wrenched herself free and fell upon the white waratah. Her little claws
grasped the colourless pistils.

The eagle above all espied the hawk, and he had then to fight another
battle in which he was the loser.

So the white waratah was stained with the blood of the wonga pigeon, and
the bird, still clinging to the reddened pistils, died.

Later, the white waratah threw out its clusters of follicles, and they
were streaked with red.

The seeds were streaked in the same way.

And all the plants that came from them bore flowers as red as waratahs
could be.

But they had to wait for three years to know that.

Not so the parent bush. Always afterwards its flowers were white, and
whenever the natives saw one such bloom they pricked their fingers and
allowed their blood to stain it.

Therefore there are not many white waratahs in New South Wales.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How The Sky Was Lifted Up](peck12)
