[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tolkien](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](two04)  [Next](two06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VKXH3K/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Worm Ouroboros*, by E. R. Eddison, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

# INTRODUCTION

THE Worm Ouroboros, no worm, but the Serpent itself, is a wonderful
book. As a story or as prose it is wonderful, and, there being a cause
for every effect, the reason for writing it should be as marvellous
again.

Shelley had to write the Prometheus Unbound, he was under compulsion;
for a superhuman energy had come upon him, and he was forced to create a
matter that would permit him to imagine, and think, and speak like a
god. It was so with Blake, who willed to appear as a man but existed
like a mountain; and, at their best, the work of these poets is inhuman
and sacred. It does not greatly matter that they had or had not a
message. It does not matter at all that either can be charged with
nonsense or that both have been called madmen--the same charge might be
laid against a volcano or a thunderbolt--or this book. It does not
matter that they could transcend human endurance, and could move
tranquilly in realms where lightning is the norm of speed. The work of
such poets is sacred because it outpaces man, and, in a realm of their
own, wins even above Shakespeare.

An energy such as came on the poets has visited the author of this book,
and his dedicatory statement, that "it is neither allegory nor fable but
a story to be read for

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

its own sake," puts us off with the assured arrogance for of the poet
who is too busy creating to have time for school-mastering. But, waking
or in dream, this author has been in strange regions and has supped at a
torrent which only the greatest know of.

The story is a long one--this reader would have--liked it twice as long.
The place of action is indicated, casually, as the planet Mercury, and
the story tells of the, wars between two great kingdoms of that planet,
and the final overthrow of one.

Mr. Eddison is a vast man. He needed a whole cosmos to play in, and
created one; and he forged a prose to tell of it that is as gigantic as
his tale. In reading this book the reader must a little break his way
in, and must surrender prejudices that are not allowed for. He may think
that the language is more rotund than is needed for a tale, but, as he
proceeds, he will see that only such a tongue could be spoken by these
colossi; and, soon, he will delight in a prose that is as life-giving as
it is magnificent.

Mr. Eddison's prose never plays him false; it rises and falls with his
subject, and is tender, humorous, sour, precipitate and terrific as the
occasion warrants. How nicely the Kaga danced for the Red Foliot.

"Foxy-red above, but with black bellies, round furry faces, innocent
amber eyes and great soft paws. . . . On a sudden the music ceased, and
the dancers were still, and standing side by side, paw in furry paw,
they bowed shyly to the company, and the Red Foliot called them to, him,
and kissed them on the mouth, and sent them to their seats."

"Corund leaned on the parapet and shaded his eyes with his hand, that
was broad as a smoked haddock, and covered on the back with yellow hairs
growing somewhat sparsely as the hairs on the skin of a young elephant."

"A dismal tempest suddenly surprised them. For forty days it swept them
in hail and sleet over wide wallowing ocean, without a star, without a
course."

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

"Night came down on the hills. A great wind moaning out of the hueless
west tore the clouds as a ragged garment, revealing the lonely moon that
fled naked betwixt them."

"Dawn came like a lily, saffron-hued, smirked with smoke-gray streaks,
that slanted from the north."

"He was naked to the waist, his hair, breast and arms to the armpits
clotted and adrop with blood and in his hands two bloody daggers."

Quotations can give some idea of the rhythm of his sentences, but it can
give none of the massive sweep and intensity of his narrative. Milton
fell in love with the devil because the dramatic action lay with him,
and, in this book, Mr. Eddison trounces his devils for being naughty
(the word "bad" has not significance here), but he trounces the Wizard
King and his kingdom with affection and delight. What gorgeous monsters
are Gorice the Twelfth and Corund and Corinius. The reader will not
easily forget them; nor Gorice's great antagonist Lord Juss; nor the
marvellous traitor, Lord Gro, with whom the author was certainly in
love; nor the great fights and the terrible fighters Lords Brandoch Daha
and Goldry Bluszco, and a world of others and their wives; nor will he
forget the mountain Koshtra Pivrarcha, that had to be climbed, and was
climbed--as dizzying a feat as literature can tell of.

"So huge he was that even here at six miles distance the eye might not
at a glance behold him, but must sweep back and forth as over a broad
landscape, from the ponderous roots of the mountain, where they sprang
black and sheer from the glacier up the vast face, where buttress was
piled upon buttress, and tower upon tower, in a blinding radiance of
ice-hung precipice and snow-filled gully, to the lone heights where,
like spears menacing high heaven, the white teeth of the summit-ridge
cleft the sky."

Mr. Eddison's prose does not derive from the English Bible. His mind has
more affinities with Celtic imaginings and method, and his work is
Celtic in that it is inspired

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

by beauty and daring rather than by thoughts and moralities. He might be
Scotch or Irish: scarcely the former, for, while Scotland loves
full-mouthed verse, she, like England, is prose-shy. But, from whatever
heaven Mr. Eddison come, he has added a masterpiece to English
literature.

JAMES STEPHENS

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Induction](two06.md)
