[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2624) 
[Next](sbe2626) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080127X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part II (SBE26)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3">3:6:3</span></span>

#### THE VAISAR*G*INA OFFERINGS AND LEADING FORWARD OF AGNI AND SOMA.

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:1">3:6:3:1</span></span>1. Verily
he who consecrates himself, consecrates himself for the sake of this
All; for he consecrates himself for the sacrifice, and this All indeed
results from <span id="fr_412"></span>[2](#fn_410) the sacrifice; having
prepared the sacrifice for which he consecrates himself, he now sets
free (or produces) this All.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:2">3:6:3:2</span></span>2. The
reason why he performs the Vaisar*g*ina offerings is this. They are
called Vaisar*g*ina, because he sets free (vi-sar*g*) this All;
wherefore let him who takes part in the rite <span
id="fr_413"></span>[3](#fn_411) touch (the sacrificer) from behind; but
if he have to go elsewhere (on business) he need not heed this. When he
sacrifices, he sets free this All.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:3">3:6:3:3</span></span>3. And
again why he performs the Vaisar*g*ina offerings. Vish*n*u, forsooth, is
the sacrifice; by his strides he obtained (vi-kram) for the gods that
all-pervading power (vikrânti) which now belongs to them; by his first
step he gained this same (earth); by the second, the region of air; and
by the last,

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

the heaven. And that same pervading power Vish*n*u, the sacrifice,
obtains by his strides for this (sacrificer) when he sacrifices: this is
why he performs the Vaisar*g*ina offerings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:4">3:6:3:4</span></span>4. In the
afternoon, having covered the altar (with sacrificial grass), and handed
(to the sacrificer and his wife) one half of the fast-milk, they enter
(the hall), put fire-wood on <span id="fr_414"></span>[1](#fn_412), and
prepare the under-layer (of gravel). He (the Adhvaryu) puts the butter
on (the old Gârhapatya), and cleans the spoons. The sacrificer takes the
king (Soma) on his lap. He (the Adhvaryu) scatters about the (dust of
the) foot-print of the Soma-cow behind the (new) Gârhapatya for the sake
of a firm standing, for it is with the foot that one stands firmly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:5">3:6:3:5</span></span>5. Now
some divide it (the dust) into four parts <span
id="fr_415"></span>[2](#fn_413): one fourth part (they put) into the
under-layer whereon they take up the Âhavanîya (for transferring it to
the high altar); with one fourth part they anoint the axle; one fourth
part (they put) into this underlayer (for taking out the Âgnîdhrîya
fire); and one fourth part he scatters about behind the Gârhapatya.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:6">3:6:3:6</span></span>6. But
let him not do this; let him rather scatter it about entirely behind the
Gârhapatya. Having then purified the ghee, he takes thereof four
ladlings (with the sruva), both in the *g*uhû and in the upabh*ri*t; and
clotted ghee <span id="fr_416"></span>[3](#fn_414) in five ladlings,
with (Vâ*g*. S. V, 35),

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Thou art a light
endowed with all forms, the flame of the All-gods;' for the clotted ghee
belongs to the All-gods. When the wood is well kindled, they hold the
spoons for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:7">3:6:3:7</span></span>7. He
then offers <span id="fr_417"></span>[1](#fn_415), with, 'Thou, O Soma,
wilt widely withhold thy protection from the life-injuring <span
id="fr_418"></span>[2](#fn_416) hatreds put forth by others, Hail!'
Thereby he takes a firm stand on this resting-place, the earth, and
gains this world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:8">3:6:3:8</span></span>8. He
then offers the second oblation to (Soma) the Nimble, with, 'May the
Nimble graciously accept the butter, Hail!' For he (Soma) spake upon
that time, 'Verily I am afraid of the Rakshas: do ye make me to be too
small for their deadly shaft, so that the evil spirits (the Rakshas)
shall not injure me on the way; and take me across in the form of a
drop, for the drop is nimble.' And accordingly, having made him too
small for the deadly shaft, they lead him safely across in the form of a
drop, from fear of the Rakshas, for the drop is nimble: this is why he
offers the second oblation to (Soma) the Nimble.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:9">3:6:3:9</span></span>9. They
lift the (burning) fire-wood, and place it on the support. He then says
(to the Hot*ri*), 'Recite for Agni, taken forward!' or (say some),
'--for Soma, led forward.' But let him say, 'Recite for Agni, taken
forward <span id="fr_419"></span>[3](#fn_417)!'

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:10">3:6:3:10</span></span>10.
They take the pressing-stones, the Soma-trough (dro*n*a-kala*s*a);
Vâyu's cups <span id="fr_420"></span>[1](#fn_418), the (twenty pieces
of) fire-wood, the enclosing-sticks of kârshmarya wood (Gmelina
Arborea), one prastara of a*s*vavâla grass <span
id="fr_421"></span>[2](#fn_419), and the two Vidh*ri*tis of sugarcane;
that barhis (which was used before <span
id="fr_422"></span>[3](#fn_420)) is tied up therewith. Further, the two
spits for (roasting) the omenta <span id="fr_423"></span>[4](#fn_421),
the two ropes (for binding the stake and victims), the two
churning-sticks (for producing fire), the adhimanthana chip, and the two
v*ri*sha*n*a <span id="fr_424"></span>[5](#fn_422),--having taken up all
these they go forward (to the Âgnîdhra): thus the sacrifice goes
upwards <span id="fr_425"></span>[6](#fn_423).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:11">3:6:3:11</span></span>11.
While they proceed thither, he makes (the sacrificer) say the text
(Vâ*g*. S. V, 36; Rig-veda I, 189, 1), 'O Agni, lead us on a good path
unto wealth, thou, O God, that knowest all works! keep thou from us the
sin that leadeth astray, and we will offer unto thee most ample
adoration!' He thereby places Agni in front, and Agni marches in front
repelling the evil spirits; and they take him thither on a (way) free
from danger and

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

injury. They proceed, and reach the Âgnîdhra; and he (the Adhvaryu) puts
(the fire) down on the Âgnîdhra hearth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:12">3:6:3:12</span></span>12.
Thereon, when laid down, he offers with the text (Vas. S. V, 37), 'May
this Agni make wide room for us; may he march in front smiting the
haters! May he gain riches in the winning of riches: may he, fiercely
rushing, conquer the enemies, Hail!' By means of him (Agni) he thus
takes a firm stand in that resting-place, the aerial region, and gains
that world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:13">3:6:3:13</span></span>13. In
the same place they deposit the pressing-stones, the Soma-trough, and
Vâyu's cups <span id="fr_426"></span>[1](#fn_424). Having then taken up
the other (objects), they proceed and deposit them north of the
Âhavanîya.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:14">3:6:3:14</span></span>14. The
Adhvaryu takes the sprinkling-water, and sprinkles first the fire-wood,
and then the altar. They then hand to him the altar-grass. He puts it
down with the knot towards the east, and sprinkles it. Having poured
(the remaining sprinkling-water) upon (the root ends of the
altar-grass), and untied the knot,--the Prastara-hunch of a*s*vavâla
grass is tied together (with the altar-grass),--he takes that; and
having taken the Prastara, he spreads the altar-grass in a single layer.
Having spread the altar-grass, he lays the enclosing-sticks of
kârshmarya-wood round (the fire). Having laid the enclosing-sticks
around, he puts two kindling-sticks (on the fire); and having put on the
two kindling-sticks,

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:15">3:6:3:15</span></span>15. He
offers with the text (Vâ*g*. S. V., 38), 'Stride thou widely, O
Vish*n*u, make wide room for our abode! drink the ghee, thou born of
ghee,

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

and speed the lord of the sacrifice ever onwards, Hail!' Thereby he
takes a firm stand in that resting-place, the sky: he thus gains that
world by offering with that (verse).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:16">3:6:3:16</span></span>16. And
as to his offering with a verse addressed to Vish*n*u, it was thus that
they made him (Soma) to be too small for the deadly shaft and led him
safely across in the form of a drop, for the drop is nimble. And having
attained to safety, he now makes him the one he really is, namely, the
sacrifice, for Vish*n*u is the sacrifice: therefore he offers with a
verse addressed to Vish*n*u.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:17">3:6:3:17</span></span>17.
After depositing the spoons <span id="fr_427"></span>[1](#fn_425) and
touching water, he makes the king (Soma) enter (the Havirdhâna shed).
The reason why he makes the king enter, after depositing the spoons and
touching water, is this. The ghee is the thunderbolt, and Soma is seed:
hence it is after depositing the spoons and touching water that he makes
the king enter, lest he should injure the seed Soma with the
thunderbolt, the ghee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:18">3:6:3:18</span></span>18. He
spreads the black deer-skin on the enclosed part of the southern
Soma-cart, and sets him down thereon with (Vâ*g*. S. V, 39), 'O divine
Savit*ri*, this is thy Soma: shield him; may they not injure thee!'
whereby he makes him over to the God Savit*ri* for protection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:19">3:6:3:19</span></span>19.
Having quitted his hold of him, he (the sacrificer) renders homage to
him with, 'Now, O divine Soma, hast thou, a god, joined the gods, and

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

here I the men with increase of wealth.' Now Agni and Soma have seized
him who consecrates himself between their jaws <span
id="fr_428"></span>[1](#fn_426), for that consecration-offering belongs
to Agni and Vish*n*u, and Vish*n*u forsooth is no other than Soma; and
he himself that consecrates himself is the food of the gods: thus they
have seized him between their jaws, and he now expressly redeems himself
from Soma, when he says, 'Now, O divine Soma, hast thou, a god, joined
the gods, and here (have I joined) the men with increase of
wealth;'--increase of wealth means abundance: 'with abundance' he
thereby means to say.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:20">3:6:3:20</span></span>20. He
then walks out (of the cart-shed), with, 'Hail! I am freed from
Varu*n*a's noose!' For he, truly, is in Varu*n*a's noose who is in
another's mouth: he now frees himself from Varu*n*a's noose, when he
says, 'Hail! I am freed from Varu*n*a's noose.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:6:3:21">3:6:3:21</span></span>21. He
then puts a kindling-stick on the Âhavanîya in this way <span
id="fr_429"></span>[2](#fn_427), 'O Agni, protector of vows, on thee, O
protector of vows--' for Agni is lord of vows to the gods, wherefore he
says, 'O Agni, protector of vows, on thee, O protector of vows'--'what
bodily form of thine hath been on me, (may) that (be) on thee; what
bodily form of mine has been on thee, (may) that (be) here on me! Our
vows, O lord of vows, (have been performed) rightly: the lord of
consecration hath

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

approved my consecration; the lord of penance hath approved my penance.'
Thereby he frees himself visibly from Agni, and sacrifices with a self
(body) now his own: hence they now partake of his food, for he is a man
(again); hence they now use his (real) name, for he is a man. And as to
their not eating (of his food) heretofore, it is as one would not eat of
sacrificial food, before offering has been made thereof: therefore let
no one partake of the food of one consecrated. He now loosens his
fingers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_410"></span>[155:2](sbe2625.htm#fr_412) Or, corresponds to
(anu).

<span id="fn_411"></span>[155:3](sbe2625.htm#fr_413) That is, a
blood-relation of the sacrificer, dwelling together with him. Cf. also
[p. 40](sbe2608.htm#page_40), note [1](sbe2608.htm#fn_111).

<span id="fn_412"></span>[156:1](sbe2625.htm#fr_414) Viz. on the
Âhavanîya of the Prâ*k*înava*ms*a (hall) now serving as the Gârhapatya,
and generally called *s*âlâdvârya, i.e. the one near the (front or
eastern) hall-door.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[156:2](sbe2625.htm#fr_415) See [p.
121](sbe2620.htm#page_121), note [2](sbe2620.htm#fn_322).

<span id="fn_414"></span>[156:3](sbe2625.htm#fr_416) P*ri*shad-â*g*ya
(lit. mottled butter) is clarified butter mixed with sour milk.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[157:1](sbe2625.htm#fr_417) He offers some ghee
from a substitute spoon (pra*k*aranî), as the proper offering-spoons now
filled with ghee and clotted ghee have to be carried with the fire to
the Âgnîdhra.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[157:2](sbe2625.htm#fr_418) Mahîdhara explains
'tanûk*ri*t' by 'tanû*m* k*ri*ntanti *k*indanti.' It ought rather to
mean 'body-making,'--? from 'the enemies that assume (various) forms.'

<span id="fn_417"></span>[157:3](sbe2625.htm#fr_419) The Kâ*n*va text,
on the contrary, enjoins that he is to say, 'Recite for Soma . . .!' In
the Hot*ri*'s ritual this is called the <span id="page_158">p.
158</span> Agnîshoma-pra*n*ayana. For the seventeen verses (brought up
to twenty-one by repetitions) of the Hot*ri*, see Ait. Br. I, 30 (Haug,
Translation, p. 68); Â*s*v. IV, 10. The Soma is carried either by the
Brahman himself or by the sacrificer. Kâty. XI, 1, 13, 14.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[158:1](sbe2625.htm#fr_420) The 'Vâyavya' are
wooden cups shaped like a mortar. It seems here to include all the
Soma-cups, see IV, 1, 3, 7-10; Kâty, VIII, 7, 5.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[158:2](sbe2625.htm#fr_421) See [III, 4, 1,
17](sbe2615.htm#3:4:1:17)-[18](sbe2615.htm#3:4:1:18).

<span id="fn_420"></span>[158:3](sbe2625.htm#fr_422) Viz. at the
guest-offering, see [p. 103](sbe2617.htm#page_103), note
[3](sbe2617.htm#fn_269). It was tied up with the three objects mentioned
immediately before.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[158:4](sbe2625.htm#fr_423) The vapâ*s*rapa*n*î
are sticks of kârshmarya wood.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[158:5](sbe2625.htm#fr_424) For these objects,
see [p. 90](sbe2615.htm#page_90), note [5](sbe2615.htm#fn_241).

<span id="fn_423"></span>[158:6](sbe2625.htm#fr_425) 'Thus that
sacrifice goes upwards to yonder heavenly world, and, the sacrifice
being the sacrificer, the sacrificer thus goes thither,' Kâ*n*va text.
See [III, 6, 1, 28](sbe2623.htm#3:6:1:28), where the gods are said to
have attained immortality from the Âgnîdhrîya.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[159:1](sbe2625.htm#fr_426) Also the two
fringed filtering-cloths (da*s*âpavitre), according to the Kâ*n*va rec.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[160:1](sbe2625.htm#fr_427) 'He then deposits
the Prastara on the mound ([p. 140](sbe2622.htm#page_140), note
[2](sbe2622.htm#fn_377)), deposits there the *g*uhû and the upabh*ri*t
and the p*ri*shadâ*g*ya; and having touched the sacrificial materials
and touched water, he takes the king and enters (the cart-shed),' &c.
Kâ*n*va rec.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[161:1](sbe2625.htm#fr_428) See [III, 3, 4,
21](sbe2614.htm#3:3:4:21).

<span id="fn_427"></span>[161:2](sbe2625.htm#fr_429) Thus (iti), viz.
with the following modifications of the corresponding formula, used at
the 'intermediary consecration,' [III, 4, 3, 9](sbe2617.htm#3:4:3:9).
Perhaps 'iti' may mean 'thus,' i.e. while still keeping his fingers
turned in; or, it may mean 'as such' (as a free man).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 6, 4. Fourth Brâhma*n*a](sbe2626)
