[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2606) 
[Next](sbe2608) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080127X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part II (SBE26)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1">3:2:1</span></span>

### SECOND ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:1">3:2:1:1</span></span>1. South
of the Âhavanîya he spreads two black antelope skins on the ground, with
the neck parts towards the east: thereon he consecrates him. If there
are two (skins), they are an image of these two worlds (heaven and
earth), and thus he consecrates him on these two worlds.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:2">3:2:1:2</span></span>2. They
are joined (fitted) together along their edge <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77), for these two worlds are also, as it
were, joined together at their edge. At the hind part they are fastened
together through holes: thus, after uniting (mithunîk*ri*tya) these two
worlds, he consecrates him thereon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:3">3:2:1:3</span></span>3. But if
there be only one (skin), then it is an image of these (three) worlds;
then he consecrates him on these (three) worlds. Those (hairs) which are
white are an image of the sky; those which are black are (an image) of
this (earth);--or, if he likes, conversely: those which are black are an
image of the sky, and those which are white are (an image) of this
(earth). Those which are of a brownish yellow colour <span
id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78), are an image of the atmosphere. Thus he
consecrates him on these (three) worlds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:4">3:2:1:4</span></span>4. And
let him, in that case, turn in the hind end (of the skin) <span
id="fr_79"></span>[3](#fn_79): thus, after uniting these worlds with
each other, he consecrates him thereon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:5">3:2:1:5</span></span>5. He
then squats down behind the two skins, with his face towards the east
and with bent (right) knee; and while touching them thus <span
id="fr_80"></span>[4](#fn_80) at a place

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

where the white and black (hair) join, he mutters (Vâ*g*. S. IV, 9), 'Ye
are the images of the *Rik* and Sâman;'--an image doubtless is what is
conformable <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81): 'Ye are conformable to,
the *rik*s and sâmans' he thereby means to say.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:6">3:2:1:6</span></span>6. 'I
touch you.' Now, he who is consecrated becomes an embryo, and enters
into the metres: hence he has his hands closed, since embryos have their
hands closed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:7">3:2:1:7</span></span>7. And
when he says, 'I touch you,' he means to say, 'I enter into you.' 'Do ye
guard me up to the goal of this sacrifice!' whereby he says, 'Do ye
protect me until the completion of this sacrifice!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:8">3:2:1:8</span></span>8. He
then kneels down with his right knee (on the skin), with the text, 'Thou
art a refuge: afford me refuge!' for the skin (*k*arma) of the black
deer it is indeed among men, but among the gods it is a refuge
(*s*arma): therefore he says, 'Thou art a refuge: afford me refuge.'
'Homage be to thee: injure me not!' Now he who raises himself upon the
sacrifice <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_81) doubtless raises himself
to one that is his better; for the black deer skin is a (means of)
sacrifice. Hereby, now, he propitiates that sacrifice, and thus that
sacrifice does not injure him: for this reason he says, 'Homage be to
thee: injure me not!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:9">3:2:1:9</span></span>9. He
must indeed sit down first on the hind part (of the skin). Were he, on
the other hand, to sit down at once in the middle (of the skin), and
were

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

any one there to curse him, saying, 'He shall either become demented or
fall down headlong!' then that would indeed come to pass. Let him
therefore first sit down on the hind part (of the skin).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:10">3:2:1:10</span></span>10. He
then girds himself with the zone. For once upon a time when the Aṅgiras
were consecrated, they were seized with weakness, for they had prepared
no other food but fast-milk. They then perceived this (source of)
strength (viz. the zone), and this (source of) strength they put in (or
round) the middle of their body as a (means of attaining) completion:
and thereby they attained completion. And so does he now put that
(source of) strength in the middle of his body and thereby attain
completion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:11">3:2:1:11</span></span>11. It
is made of hemp. Hempen it is in order to be soft. Now when Pra*g*âpati,
having become an embryo, sprung forth from that sacrifice, that which
was nearest to him, the amnion, became hempen threads: hence they smell
putrid. And that which was the outer membrane (and placenta) became the
garment of the consecrated. Now the amnion lies under the outer
membrane, and hence that (zone) is worn under the garment. And in like
manner as Pra*g*âpati, having become an embryo, sprung forth from that
sacrifice, so does he become an embryo and spring forth from that
sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:12">3:2:1:12</span></span>12. It
(the cord) is a triple one, because food is threefold, food being
cattle. (Moreover) the father and mother (are two), and that which is
born is a third: hence it is a triple (cord).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:13">3:2:1:13</span></span>13. It
is intertwined with a shoot of reed (mu*ñg*a) grass, for the sake of
chasing away the evil spirits, the reed being a thunderbolt. It is
plaited after

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

the manner of a braid of hair. For were it to be twisted <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_82) sunwise (from left to right) as any other
cords, it would be human; and were it twisted contrary to the course of
the sun, it would be sacred to the Fathers: hence it is plaited after
the manner of a braid of hair.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:14">3:2:1:14</span></span>14. He
girds himself with it, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. IV, 10), 'Thou art the
strength of the Aṅgiras,'--for the Aṅgiras perceived this (source of)
strength; 'soft as wool, bestow thou strength on me!' there is nothing
obscure in this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:15">3:2:1:15</span></span>15. He
then tucks up the end of his (nether) garment, with the text, 'Thou art
Soma's tuck.' For heretofore it was the tuck of him, the unconsecrated;
but now that he is consecrated, it is that of Soma <span
id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_83): therefore he says, 'Thou art Soma's
tuck.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:16">3:2:1:16</span></span>16. He
then wraps up (his head) <span id="fr_85"></span>[3](#fn_84). For he who
is consecrated becomes an embryo; and embryos are enveloped both by the
amnion and the outer membrane: therefore he covers (his head).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:17">3:2:1:17</span></span>17. He
covers himself, with the text, 'Thou art Vish*n*u's refuge, the refuge
of the sacrificer.' He who is consecrated indeed becomes both Vish*n*u
and a sacrificer; for when he is consecrated, he is Vish*n*u; and when
he sacrifices, he is the sacrificer: therefore he says, 'Thou art
Vish*n*u's refuge, the refuge of the sacrificer.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:18">3:2:1:18</span></span>18.
Thereupon he ties a black deer's horn to the

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

end (of his garment <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_85)). Now the gods
and the Asuras, both of them sprung from Pra*g*âpati, entered upon their
father Pra*g*âpati's inheritance: the gods came in for the Mind and the
Asuras for Speech. Thereby the gods came in for the sacrifice and Asuras
for speech; the gods for yonder (heaven) and the Asuras for this
(earth).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:19">3:2:1:19</span></span>19. The
gods said to Ya*gñ*a (m., the sacrifice), 'That Vâ*k* (f., speech) is a
woman: beckon her, and she will certainly call thee to her.' Or it may
be, he himself thought, 'That Vâ*k* is a woman: I will beckon her and
she will certainly call me to her.' He accordingly beckoned her. She,
however, at first disdained him from the distance: and hence a woman,
when beckoned by a man, at first disdains him from the distance. He
said, 'She has disdained me from the distance.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:20">3:2:1:20</span></span>20.
They said, 'Do but beckon her, reverend sir, and she will certainly call
thee to her.' He beckoned her; but she only replied to him, as it were,
by shaking her head: and hence a woman, when beckoned by a man, only
replies to him, as it were, by shaking her head. He said, 'She has only
replied to me by shaking her head.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:21">3:2:1:21</span></span>21.
They said, 'Do but beckon her, reverend sir, and she will certainly call
thee to her.' He beckoned her, and she called him to her; and hence a
woman at last calls the man to her. He said, 'She has indeed called me.'

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:22">3:2:1:22</span></span>22. The
gods reflected, 'That Vâ*k* being a woman, we must take care lest she
should allure him <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_86).--Say to her,
"Come hither to me where I stand!" and report to us her having come.'
She then went up to where he was standing. Hence a woman goes to a man
who stays in a well-trimmed (house). He reported to them her having
come, saying, 'She has indeed come.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:23">3:2:1:23</span></span>23. The
gods then cut her off from the Asuras; and having gained possession of
her and enveloped her completely in fire, they offered her up as a
holocaust, it being an offering of the gods <span
id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_87). And in that they offered her with an
anush*t*ubh verse, thereby they made her their own; and the Asuras,
being deprived of speech, were undone, crying, 'He ’lava*h*! he
’lava*h* <span id="fr_89"></span>[3](#fn_88)!'

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:24">3:2:1:24</span></span>24.
Such was the unintelligible speech which they then uttered,--and he (who
speaks thus) is a Mle*kkh*a (barbarian). Hence let no Brahman speak
barbarous language, since such is the speech of the Asuras. Thus alone
he deprives his spiteful enemies of speech; and whosoever knows this,
his enemies, being deprived of speech, are undone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:25">3:2:1:25</span></span>25.
That Ya*gñ*a (sacrifice) lusted after Vâ*k* (speech <span
id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_89)), thinking, 'May I pair with her!' He
united with her.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:26">3:2:1:26</span></span>26.
Indra then thought within himself, 'Surely a great monster will spring
from this union of Ya*gñ*a and Vâ*k*: \[I must take care\] lest it
should get the better of me.' Indra himself then became an embryo and
entered into that union.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:27">3:2:1:27</span></span>27. Now
when he was born after a year's time, he thought within himself, 'Verily
of great vigour is this womb which has contained me: \[I must take
care\] that no great monster shall be born from it after me, lest it
should get the better of me!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:28">3:2:1:28</span></span>28.
Having seized and pressed it tightly, he tore it off and put it on the
head of Ya*gñ*a (sacrifice <span id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_90));for the
black (antelope) is the sacrifice: the black deer skin is the same as
that sacrifice, and the black deer's horn is the same as that womb. And
because it was by pressing it tightly together that Indra tore out (the
womb), therefore it (the horn) is bound tightly (to the end of the
garment); and as Indra,

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

having become an embryo, sprang from that union, so is he (the
sacrificer), after becoming an embryo, born from that union (of the skin
and the horn).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:29">3:2:1:29</span></span>29. He
ties it (to the end of the garment) with the open part upwards, for it
is in this way that the womb bears the embryo. He then touches with it
his forehead close over the right eyebrow, with the text, 'Thou art
Indra's womb,'--for it is indeed Indra's womb, since in entering it he
enters thereby <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_91), and in being born he
is born therefrom: therefore he says, 'Thou art Indra's womb.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:30">3:2:1:30</span></span>30.
Thereupon he draws (with the horn) the ('easterly') line, with the text,
'Make the crops full-eared!' Thereby he produces the sacrifice; for when
there is a good year, then there is abundant (material) for sacrifice;
but when there is a bad year, then there is not even enough for himself:
hence he thereby produces the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:31">3:2:1:31</span></span>31. And
let not the consecrated henceforth scratch himself either with a chip of
wood or with his nail. For he who is consecrated becomes an embryo; and
were any one to scratch an embryo either with a chip of wood or his
nail, thereby expelling it, it would die <span
id="fr_93"></span>[2](#fn_92). Thereafter the consecrated would be
liable to be affected with the itch; and--offspring (retas) coming after
the consecrated--that offspring would then also be liable to be born
with the itch. Now his

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

own womb <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_93) does not injure its
offspring, and that black deer's horn being indeed his own womb, that
(horn) does not injure him; and therefore the consecrated should scratch
himself with the black deer's horn and with nothing but the black deer's
horn.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:32">3:2:1:32</span></span>32. He
(the Adhvaryu) then hands to him a staff, for driving away the evil
spirits,--the staff being a thunderbolt.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:33">3:2:1:33</span></span>33. It
is of Udumbara wood (Ficus Glomerata), for him to obtain food and
strength,--the Udumbara means food and strength: therefore it is of
Udumbara wood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:34">3:2:1:34</span></span>34. It
reaches up to his mouth,--for so far extends his strength: as great as
his strength is, so great it (the staff) is when it reaches up to his
mouth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:35">3:2:1:35</span></span>35. He
makes it stand upright, with the text, 'Stand up, O tree, erect; guard
me from injury on to the goal of this sacrifice!' whereby he means to
say, 'Standing erect, protect me till the completion of this sacrifice!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:36">3:2:1:36</span></span>36. It
is only now that some bend the fingers inward <span
id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_94) and restrain their speech, because, they
argue, only from now will he not have to mutter anything. But let him
not do so; for in like manner as if one were to try to overtake some one
who runs away, but could not overtake him, so does he not overtake the
sacrifice. Let him therefore turn in his fingers and restrain his speech
on that (former) occasion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:37">3:2:1:37</span></span>37. And
when the consecrated (after restraining his speech) utters either a
*rik*, or a sâman, or a ya*g*us <span id="fr_96"></span>[3](#fn_95),

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

he thereby takes a firmer and firmer hold of the sacrifice: let him
therefore turn in his fingers and restrain his speech on that (former)
occasion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:38">3:2:1:38</span></span>38. And
when he restrains his speech--speech being sacrifice--he thereby
appropriates the sacrifice to himself <span
id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_96). But when, from speech restrained, he
utters any sound (foreign to the sacrifice), then that sacrifice, being
set free, flies away. In that case, then, let him mutter either a *rik*
or a ya*g*us addressed to Vish*n*u, for Vish*n*u is the sacrifice:
thereby he again gets hold of the sacrifice; and this is the atonement
for that (transgression).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:39">3:2:1:39</span></span>39.
Thereupon some one <span id="fr_98"></span>[2](#fn_97) calls out,
'Consecrated is this Brâhman, consecrated is this Brâhman:' him, being
thus announced, he thereby announces to the gods: 'Of great vigour is
this one who has obtained the sacrifice; he has become one of yours:
protect him!' this is what he means to say. Thrice he says it, for
threefold is the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:2:1:40">3:2:1:40</span></span>40. And
as to his saying, 'Brâhman,' uncertain, as it were, is his origin
heretofore <span id="fr_99"></span>[3](#fn_98); for the Rakshas, they
say, pursue women here oil earth, and so the Rakshas implant their seed
therein. But he, forsooth, is truly born, who is born of the Brahman
(neut.), of the sacrifice: wherefore let him address even a Râ*g*anya,
or a Vai*s*ya, as Brâhman, since he who is born of the sacrifice is born
of the Brahman (and hence a Brâhma*n*a). Wherefore they say, 'Let no one
slay a sacrificer of Soma; for by (slaying) a Soma-sacrificer he becomes
guilty of a heinous sin <span id="fr_100"></span>[4](#fn_99)!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[25:1](sbe2606.htm#fr_75) Saishâ mîmâ*m*saiva,
'This, however, is mere speculation,' Kâ*n*va recension.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[25:2](sbe2606.htm#fr_76) See I, 2, 5, 14, with
note. The sacrifice represents the sacrificer himself, and thus he makes
sure of his offering up his entire Self, and obtaining a new divine
Self, and a place among the immortals.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[26:1](sbe2607.htm#fr_77) The two skins are
fitted together at the inner sides, and stretched along the ground by
means of wooden pins driven into the ground and passed through holes all
round the edge of the skins; the hairy sides of the latter remaining
outside (above and below). At their hind parts they are tacked together
by 'means of a thong passed through the holes and tied together in a
loop.'

<span id="fn_78"></span>[26:2](sbe2607.htm#fr_78) Yâny eva babhrû*n*iva
harî*n*i. The Kâ*n*va text reads, Yâny eva madhye babhrû*n*i vâ harî*n*i
vâ, 'those in the centre (or between the black and white) which are
either brown or yellow (grey).'

<span id="fn_79"></span>[26:3](sbe2607.htm#fr_79) According to Kâty.
VII, 3, 21 it would seem that the two hind feet, or one of them, should
be doubled up (at the joint) and sewed under. According to the Sûtras of
the Black Ya*g*us, on the other hand, the right fore-foot is turned
under.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[26:4](sbe2607.htm#fr_80) According to the
Sûtras of the Black Ya*g*us, he is to touch at <span id="page_27">p.
27</span> the same time the white hair with his thumb and the black with
his fore-finger. Sây. on Taitt. S. I, 2, 2 (vol. i, p. 297).

<span id="fn_81"></span>[27:1](sbe2607.htm#fr_82) *S*reyâ*m*sa*m* vâ
esha upâdhirohati yo manushya*h* san ya*gñ*am upâdhirohati. Kâ*n*va
recension.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[29:1](sbe2607.htm#fr_83) Twisted and plaited is
here expressed by the same term 's*ri*sh*t*a.'

<span id="fn_83"></span>[29:2](sbe2607.htm#fr_84) Literally, but now (it
being that) of (him) the consecrated, (it is that) of Soma.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[29:3](sbe2607.htm#fr_85) With his upper
garment, or, according to others, with a turban. Kay. VII, 3, 28 scholl.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[30:1](sbe2607.htm#fr_86) The Mâdhyandinas tied
the horn to the unwoven end (thrum, da*s*â) of the nether garment which
was tucked through (par. 13) and then allowed to hang down in front. The
Kâ*n*vas, on the other hand, tied it to the hem of the upper garment
(uttarasi*k*e! Kâ*n*va text); cf. Kâty. VII, 3, 29 scholl.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[31:1](sbe2607.htm#fr_87) Yoshâ vâ iya*m* vâg
yad ena*m* na yuvitâ. The St. Petersburg Dict. (s. v. yu) takes it
differently, 'That Vâ*k* is indeed a woman, since she does not wish to
draw him towards herself (i.e. since she does not want him to come near
her).' Sâya*n*a, on the other hand, explains it elliptically, 'Since she
has not joined him (no confidence can be placed in her).' The Kâ*n*va
text reads: Ta u ha devâ bibhayâ*m* *k*akrur yoshâ vâ iyam iti yad vâ
enam na yuvîteti. Perhaps in our passage also we should read 'yuvîta'
(as proposed by Delbrück, Syntact. Forschungen III, p. 79), and
translate, 'Verily that Vâ*k* is a woman: (it is to be feared) that she
will \[or, it is to be hoped that she will not\] allure him \[viz. so.
that Ya*gñ*a also would fall to the share of the Asuras\];' 'Dass sie
ihn nur nicht an sich fesselt!' For similar elliptic constructions with
yad and the optative, see paragraphs [26](sbe2607.htm#3:2:1:26) and
[27](sbe2607.htm#3:2:1:27); and II, 2, 4, 3 \['Dass er mich nur nicht
auffrisst!'\]; [IV, 3, 5, 3](sbe2654.htm#4:3:5:3) ('Dass uns nur die
Rakshas nichts zu Leide thun!'); [IV, 6, 9, 1](sbe2678.htm#4:6:9:1). One
would expect an 'iti' here.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[31:2](sbe2607.htm#fr_88) And therefore
requiring no priests’ portion &c. to be taken from it.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[31:3](sbe2607.htm#fr_89) According to Sâya*n*a,
'He ’lavo' stands for 'He ’rayo (i.e. ho, the spiteful (enemies))!'
which the Asuras were unable to pronounce correctly. The Kâ*n*va text,
however, reads, te hâttavâ*k*o ’surâ hailo haila ity etâ*m* ha vâ*k*a*m*
vadanta*h* parâbabhûvu*h*; (? i, e. He <span id="page_32">p. 32</span>
ilâ, 'ho, speech.') A third version of this passage seems to be referred
to in the Mahâbhâshya (Kielh.), p. 2.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[32:1](sbe2607.htm#fr_90) Compare the
corresponding legend about Ya*gñ*a and Dakshi*n*â (priests’ fee), Taitt.
S. VI, 1, 3, 6.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[32:2](sbe2607.htm#fr_91) 'Ya*gñ*asya
*s*îrshan;' one would expect 'k*ri*sh*n*a(sâra)sya *s*îrshan.' The
Taitt. S. reads 'tâm m*ri*geshu ny adadhât.'

<span id="fn_91"></span>[33:1](sbe2607.htm#fr_92) In the Kâ*n*va text
'ata*h* (therewith)' refers to the head of the sacrificer,--sa ya*k*
*kh*irasta upasp*ris*aty ato vâ enâm etad agre pravi*s*an pravi*s*aty
ato vâ agre *g*âyamâno *g*âyate tasmâ*k* *kh*irasta upaspri*s*ati.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[33:2](sbe2607.htm#fr_93) Apâsyan mrityet =
apaga*kkh*an m*ri*tim prâpnuyât, Sây.--? apâsyet, 'he would force it out
and it would die.' The Kâ*n*va text has merely 'ayam m*ri*tyet (!).'

<span id="fn_93"></span>[34:1](sbe2607.htm#fr_94) That is, the womb from
which he (the sacrificer) is born.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[34:2](sbe2607.htm#fr_95) II, 1, 3, 25.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[34:3](sbe2607.htm#fr_96) Viz. in muttering the
formulas mentioned above, [III, 2, 1, 5](sbe2607.htm#3:2:1:5) seq.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[35:1](sbe2607.htm#fr_97) Or, puts it in
himself, encloses it within himself.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[35:2](sbe2607.htm#fr_98) That is, some one
other than the Adhvaryu, viz. the Pratiprasthât*ri* or some other
person, Kâty. VII, 4, 11 scholl.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[35:3](sbe2607.htm#fr_99) That is, inasmuch as
he may be of Rakshas origin

<span id="fn_99"></span>[35:4](sbe2607.htm#fr_100) Viz. of the crime of
Brâhmanicide (brahmahatyâ).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 2, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe2608)
