[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2605) 
[Next](sbe2607) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080127X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part II (SBE26)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4">3:1:4</span></span>

### FOURTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:1">3:1:4:1</span></span>1. All
formulas of the consecration are audgrabha*n*a (elevatory), since he who
is consecrated elevates himself (ud-grabh) from this world to the world
of the gods. He elevates himself by means of these same formulas, and
therefore they say that all formulas of the consecration are
'audgrabha*n*a.' Now they also (specially) designate these intermediate
ones as 'audgrabha*n*a,' because these are libations <span
id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68), and a libation is a sacrifice. For the
muttering of a sacrificial formula is an occult (form of sacrifice), but
a libation is a direct (form of) sacrifice: hence it is by this same
sacrifice that he elevates himself from this world to the world of the
gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:2">3:1:4:2</span></span>2. And
again, the three libations which he makes with the dipping-spoon (sruva)
are said to be 'âdhîtaya*g*us <span id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69).' The
fourth libation is made for the sake of completeness; while the fifth,
which is made with the offering-spoon (sru*k*, viz. the *g*uhû), is the
real audgrabha*n*a-libation: for he makes it with an

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

anush*t*ubh verse, and the anush*t*ubh is speech, and the sacrifice also
is speech.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:3">3:1:4:3</span></span>3. By
means of the sacrifice the gods obtained that supreme authority which
they now wield. They spake, 'How may this (world) of ours be
unattainable by men!' They then sipped the sap of the sacrifice, as bees
would suck out honey; and having drained the sacrifice and effaced its
traces by means of the sacrificial stake, they disappeared: and because
they effaced (scattered, yopaya) therewith, therefore it is called yûpa
(stake).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:4">3:1:4:4</span></span>4. Now
this was heard by the *Ri*shis. They collected the sacrifice, just as
this sacrifice is collected (prepared) <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70); for even so does he now collect the
sacrifice, when he offers those (audgrabha*n*a) libations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:5">3:1:4:5</span></span>5. He
offers five libations, because the sacrifice is commensurate to the
year, and there are five seasons in the year: thus he gains it (the
year) in five (divisions), and therefore he makes five libations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:6">3:1:4:6</span></span>6. Now
then of the oblation (Vâ*g*. S. IV, 7): 'To the Purpose, to the Impulse,
to Agni, hail!' At the outset he indeed purposes to sacrifice. What part
of the sacrifice (is contained) in this (first libation), that he now
collects and makes his own.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:7">3:1:4:7</span></span>7. 'To
Wisdom, to Thought, to Agni, hail!' with wisdom and thought he indeed
conceives that he may sacrifice. What part of the sacrifice (is
contained) in this (second libation), that he now collects and makes his
own.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:8">3:1:4:8</span></span>8. 'To
Initiation, to Penance, to Agni, hail!' This is merely uttered, but no
libation is made.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:9">3:1:4:9</span></span>9. 'To
Sarasvatî, to Pûshan, to Agni, hail!' Now Sarasvatî is speech, and the
sacrifice also is speech. And Pûshan represents cattle, because Pûshan
means prosperity (push*t*i), and cattle also means prosperity, since the
sacrifice means cattle. What part of the sacrifice (is contained) in
this (third libation), that he now collects and makes his own.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:10">3:1:4:10</span></span>10. As
to this they say, 'These (three) libations are offered indefinitely;
they are unestablished, without a god: therein is neither Indra, nor
Soma, nor Agni.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:11">3:1:4:11</span></span>11. 'To
the Purpose, to the Impulse, to Agni, hail!'--not any one (god we
obtain) from this <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71)! But Agni surely
is definite, Agni is established: when he offers in Agni (the fire),
surely those (libations) are thereby made definite, are thereby
established: for this reason he offers at all libations with, 'To Agni,
hail!' Moreover, these libations are called 'âdhîtaya*g*û*m*shi.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:12">3:1:4:12</span></span>12. 'To
the Purpose, to the Impulse, to Agni, hail!' he says; for by his own
mind he purposes to sacrifice, and from his own mind he impels it (the
sacrifice) when he performs it: these two deities the Purpose and the
Impulse--are meditated upon (âdhîta) in his mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:13">3:1:4:13</span></span>13. 'To
Wisdom, to Thought, to Agni, hail!' he says; for with wisdom and thought
he indeed conceives that he may sacrifice: these two deities--

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wisdom and
Thought--are meditated upon in his mind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:14">3:1:4:14</span></span>14. 'To
Sarasvatî, to Pûshan, to Agni, hail!' he says; for Sarasvatî is speech,
and the sacrifice also is speech: this deity--Speech--is meditated upon
in his mind. Pûshan, on the other hand, means cattle, for Pûshan means
prosperity (push*t*i), and cattle means prosperity, since the sacrifice
means cattle: hence cattle-are meditated upon in his mind. And because
these deities are meditated upon (â-dhîta) in his mind, therefore (these
libations) are called âdhîtaya*g*û*m*shi.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:15">3:1:4:15</span></span>15. He
then offers the fourth libation, with the text, 'Ye divine, vast,
all-soothing Waters! Heaven and Earth, wide Ether! let us render homage
unto B*ri*haspati with offering, hail!' This (libation) truly is nearer
to the sacrifice, since he praises the waters, and water is sacrifice.
'Heaven and Earth! wide Ether!' he says, because he thereby praises the
worlds. 'Let us render homage unto B*ri*haspati, with offering, hail!'
he says; for B*ri*haspati is the Brahman, and the sacrifice also is the
Brahman: for this reason also this (libation) is nearer to the
sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:16">3:1:4:16</span></span>16. But
the fifth libation which he makes with the offering-spoon (sru*k*),
doubtless is the veritable sacrifice; for he offers it with an
anush*t*ubh (verse), and the anush*t*ubh is speech and so is the
sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:17">3:1:4:17</span></span>17. In
the first place he pours the butter, which remains in the dhruvâ, into
the *g*uhû. He then ladles with the sruva three times butter from the
melting-pot into the *g*uhû: with what he takes the third time he fills
the sruva <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72).

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:18">3:1:4:18</span></span>18. He
offers, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. IV, 8; Rig-veda V, 50, I), 'May every
mortal espouse the friendship of the divine guide! every one prayeth for
wealth: let him choose glory, that he may prosper, hail!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:19">3:1:4:19</span></span>19. Now
this (verse and libation) consists of five parts in respect of
deities <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73): 'vi*s*vo devasya' refers to
the Vi*s*ve Devâ*h*; 'netur' to Savit*ri*; 'marto vurîta' to Mitra;
'dyumna*m* v*rin*îta' to B*ri*haspati, since B*ri*haspati means dyumna
(glory); and 'pushyase' (for prospering) refers to Pûshan.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:20">3:1:4:20</span></span>20.
This (libation), then, consists of five parts, in respect of
deities;--fivefold is the sacrifice, fivefold the animal victim, and
five seasons there are in the year: the latter he accordingly gains by
this (libation) consisting of five parts in respect of deities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:21">3:1:4:21</span></span>21. He
offers this libation with an anush*t*ubh verse, because the anush*t*ubh
is speech, and the sacrifice is speech; so that he thereby obtains the
real sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:22">3:1:4:22</span></span>22. As
to this they say, 'Let him offer only this one: for whatever object the
others are offered, that object he gains even by this one.' And,
indeed <span id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_74), if

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

he offers only this one, he would offer a full-offering; and the full
means everything: hence he gains everything by this (oblation). And by
filling the dipping-spoon (sruva), he fills the offering-spoon (*g*uhû),
and the latter he offers full. This, however, is a mere statement (of
others’ views) <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](sbe2607.htm#fn_75), but all
(five) libations are offered.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:4:23">3:1:4:23</span></span>23. He
offers this one with an anush*t*ubh verse. Being an anush*t*ubh verse,
it consists of thirty-one syllables. Now there are ten fingers, ten
toes, ten vital airs, and the thirty-first is the body wherein those
vital airs are contained; for this much constitutes man, and the
sacrifice is a man, the sacrifice is of the same proportion as a
man <span id="fr_76"></span>[2](sbe2607.htm#fn_76). Thus, whatever the
extent of the sacrifice, whatever its measure, to that extent he takes
possession of it by means of this (libation), when he offers it with an
anush*t*ubh verse of thirty-one syllables.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[20:1](sbe2606.htm#fr_68) While all the formulas
of the Dîkshâ are supposed to be of an 'elevatory (audgrabha*n*a)'
character, the designation 'audgrabha*n*âni (yagû*m*shi, or elevatory
formulas)' is specially applied to the five libations described in the
succeeding paragraphs. The Kâ*n*va text reads,--atha yad etâny avântarâm
audgrabha*n*ânîty âkhyâyanta âhutayo hy etâ âhutir by eva ya*gñ*a*h*
paroksham iva hi tad yad ya*g*ur *g*apaty etena hi tad
ya*gñ*enodg*ri*bh*n*îte.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[20:2](sbe2606.htm#fr_69) I.e. ya*g*us for some
'meditated' object.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[21:1](sbe2606.htm#fr_70) Sam-bh*ri*; on the
technical meaning of this verb (to equip, prepare) and the noun
sambhâra, see part i, p. 276, note 1.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[22:1](sbe2606.htm#fr_71) This last sentence has
probably to be taken ironically. In the Kâ*n*va text it seems to form
part of the objection raised: Sa yat sarveshv agnaye svâheti *g*uhoty
anaddheva vâ etâ âhutayo hûyante ’pratish*th*itâ iva na hi kasyai *k*ana
devatkyai hûyante \|\| âkutyai prayu*g*a iti tan nâgnir nendro na somo,
medhâyai manasa iti nâto ’nyatara*k* *k*anaivam eva sarveshv, agnir uvâ
addhâ . . .

<span id="fn_72"></span>[23:1](sbe2606.htm#fr_72) The third time he
holds the sruva over the *g*uhû and pours <span id="page_24">p.
24</span> ghee from the pot into the sruva, so as to fill it; after
which he pours it from the sruva into the *g*uhû. Kâty. VII, 3, 18 comm.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[24:1](sbe2606.htm#fr_73) The Taitt. S. (VI, 1,
2, 5) divides the couplet into its four pâdas, which it assigns to
Savit*ri*, the Fathers, the Vi*s*ve Devâ*h*, and Pûshan respectively.
The various reading 'vi*s*ve' of the Black Ya*g*us, instead of
'vi*s*va*h*,' is very remarkable.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[24:2](sbe2606.htm#fr_74) The author here
states, in his own words, the reasons (by 'vai') which have led the
teachers referred to to maintain that by offering this one oblation one
gains all the objects in view. The Kâ*n*va text includes the entire
passage regarding the fivefold division of the formula and oblation
(pars. 19-21) in the argument of those teachers. For a detailed
description of the pûr*n*âhuti, or full-offering, <span id="page_25">p.
25</span> see part i, p. 302, note 2. A similar view, that the
full-offering renders other oblations unnecessary, is there given (II,
2, 1, 5).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 2, 1. Second Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe2607)
