[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2603) 
[Next](sbe2605) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080127X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part II (SBE26)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2">3:1:2</span></span>

### SECOND BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:1">3:1:2:1</span></span>1. Let
him perform the rite of consecration (dîkshâ) <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) in the afternoon. Previously to the
shaving

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

of his hair and beard he may eat of what he likes, or whatever comes to
hand; for hereafter his food consists of fast-milk (vrata) only. But, if
he does not care to eat, he need not eat anything.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:2">3:1:2:2</span></span>2.
Thereupon they enclose a place <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) north
of the hall, and place a vessel of water in it. Beside this the barber
takes up his position. He (the sacrificer) then shaves his hair and
beard, and cuts his nails. For impure, indeed, is that part of man where
water does not reach him. Now at the hair and beard, and at the nails
the water does not reach him: hence when he shaves his hair and beard,
and cuts his nails, he does so in order that he may be consecrated after
becoming pure.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:3">3:1:2:3</span></span>3. Now
some shave themselves all over, in order that they may be consecrated
after becoming pure all over; but let him not do this. For even by
shaving the hair of his head and his beard, and by cutting his nails, he
becomes pure: let him therefore shave only the hair of his head and his
beard, and cut his nails.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:4">3:1:2:4</span></span>4. In the
first place he cuts his nails, first of the right hand--for in human
(practice) those of the left hand (are cut) first, but with the gods in
this manner. First (he cuts those) of the thumbs--for in human
(practice) those of the little fingers (are cut) first, but with the
gods in this manner.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:5">3:1:2:5</span></span>5. He
first passes (the comb) through his right whisker--for in human
(practice they comb) first the left whisker, but with the gods in this
manner.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:6">3:1:2:6</span></span>6. His
right whisker he moistens first, with the text, 'May these divine waters
be propitious

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

unto me! The reason why he says, 'May these divine waters be propitious
unto me,' is this: the waters are a thunderbolt, for the waters are
indeed a thunderbolt; hence wherever these waters flow they produce a
hollow, and whatever they come near that they destroy (lit. burn up).
Hereby, then, he appeases that same thunderbolt; and thus appeased, that
thunderbolt does not injure him. This is why he says, 'May these divine
waters be propitious unto me!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:7">3:1:2:7</span></span>7.
Thereupon he lays a stalk of sacrificial grass on (the hair of the
whisker), with the text, 'O plant, protect me!' For the razor is a
thunderbolt, and thus that thunderbolt, the razor, does not injure him.
Thereto he applies the razor, with the text, 'O knife, injure him not!'
for the razor is a thunderbolt, and thus that thunderbolt, the razor,
does not injure him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:8">3:1:2:8</span></span>8. Having
cut off (part of the stalk and hair), he throws it into the vessel of
water. Silently he moistens the left whisker; silently he lays the stalk
of grass on it; and having silently applied the razor thereto and cut
through (it and the hair), he throws them into the vessel of water.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:9">3:1:2:9</span></span>9. He
then hands the razor to the barber, and the latter shaves off the hair
and beard. When he has shaved the hair and beard <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31),--

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:10">3:1:2:10</span></span>10. He
bathes. For impure, indeed, is man: he is foul <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32) within, in that he speaks untruth;--and
water is pure: he thinks, 'May I be consecrated, after becoming
pure;'--and water is cleansing: he thinks, 'May I become consecrated
after being cleansed!' This is the reason why he bathes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:11">3:1:2:11</span></span>11. He
bathes, with the text (Vâ*g*. S. IV, 2; Rig-veda X, 17, 10), 'May the
waters, the mothers, cleanse us!' whereby he says, 'May they
cleanse <span id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33)!' 'May the purifiers of ghee
purify us with (heavenly) ghee!' For he, indeed, is thoroughly purified
whom they have purified with ghee <span id="fr_34"></span>[3](#fn_34):
accordingly he says, 'May the purifiers of ghee purify us with
ghee!'--'For they, the divine, take away all taint;' now 'all' means
'every,' and 'taint' means what is impure; for they do take away from
him every impurity: therefore he says, 'For they, the divine, take away
all taint.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:12">3:1:2:12</span></span>12. He
steps out (from the water) towards the north-east <span
id="fr_35"></span>[4](#fn_35), with the text, 'Cleansed and pure

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I go forth from
them;' for cleansed and pure he indeed goes forth from them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:13">3:1:2:13</span></span>13. He
then puts on a (linen) garment, for completeness’ sake: it is indeed his
own skin he thereby puts on himself. Now that same skin which belongs to
the cow was originally on man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:14">3:1:2:14</span></span>14. The
gods spake, 'Verily, the cow supports everything here (on earth); come,
let us put on the cow that skin which is now on man: therewith she will
be able to endure rain and cold and heat.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:15">3:1:2:15</span></span>15.
Accordingly, having flayed man, they put that skin on the cow, and
therewith she now endures rain and cold and heat.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:16">3:1:2:16</span></span>16. For
man was indeed flayed; and hence where-ever a stalk of grass or some
other object cuts him, the blood trickles out. They then put that skin,
the garment, on him; and for this reason none but man wears a garment,
it having been put on him as his skin. Hence also one should take care
to be properly clad, so that he may be completely endued with his own
skin. Hence also people like to see even an ugly person properly clad,
since he is endued with his own skin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:17">3:1:2:17</span></span>17. Let
him, then, not be naked in the presence of a cow. For the cow knows that
she wears his skin, and runs away for fear lest he should take the skin
from her. Hence also cows draw fondly near to one who is properly clad.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:18">3:1:2:18</span></span>18. Now
the woof of this cloth belongs to Agni, and the warp to Vâyu <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36), the thrum to the Fathers,

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

the fore-edge <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) to the snakes, the
threads to the All-gods, and the meshes to the asterisms. For thus
indeed all the deities are concerned therein; and hence it is the
garment of the consecrated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:19">3:1:2:19</span></span>19. Let
it (if possible) be a new one <span id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38), for
the sake of unimpaired vigour. Let him (the Adhvaryu) tell (the
Pratiprasthât*ri*) to beat it, in order that whatsoever part of it an
unclean woman has spun or woven may become clean. And if it be a new
one, let him sprinkle it with water, so that it become clean. Or let him
be consecrated in one which is laid aside to be worn (daily) after
bathing, without being soaked (in some sharp cleansing substance) <span
id="fr_39"></span>[3](#fn_39).

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:20">3:1:2:20</span></span>20. He
puts it round him, with the text, 'Thou art the covering <span
id="fr_40"></span>[4](#fn_40) of consecration and penance;' heretofore,
indeed, this was the covering of him as one unconsecrated, but now it is
that of consecration and penance: hence he says, 'thou art the covering
of consecration and penance.' 'I put thee on, the kindly and
auspicious;' whereby he means to say, 'I put thee on, the kindly and
pleasing one;'--

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'fostering a fair
appearance;' for evil indeed is that appearance which he has heretofore
fostered while unconsecrated; but now (he fosters) a fair appearance:
therefore he says, 'fostering a fair appearance.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:2:21">3:1:2:21</span></span>21. He
(the Adhvaryu) then makes him enter the hall. Let him not eat (the
flesh) of either the cow or the ox; for the cow and the ox doubtless
support everything here on earth. The gods spake, 'Verily, the cow and
the ox support everything here: come, let us bestow on the cow and the
ox whatever vigour belongs to other species <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41)!' Accordingly they bestowed on the cow and
the ox whatever vigour belonged to other species (of animals); and
therefore the cow and the ox eat most. Hence, were one to eat (the
flesh) of an ox or a cow, there would be, as it were, an eating of
everything, or, as it were, a going on to the end (or, to destruction).
Such a one indeed would be likely to be born (again) as a strange being,
(as one of whom there is) evil report, such as 'he has expelled an
embryo from a woman,' 'he has committed a sin <span
id="fr_42"></span>[2](#fn_42);' let him therefore not eat (the flesh) of
the cow and the ox. Nevertheless Yâ*gñ*avalkya said, 'I, for one, eat
it, provided that it is tender.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[5:1](sbe2604.htm#fr_29) The rite described in
the following paragraphs is called apsudîkshâ, or 'consecration in
water.'

<span id="fn_30"></span>[6:1](sbe2604.htm#fr_30) It is to be square and
covered in on all sides with mats, and with a door on the east side.
Kâty. VII, I, 25 scholl.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[7:1](sbe2604.htm#fr_31) The text has, when he
shaves (vapati) the hair and beard \[when he shaves himself (vapate),
K.\] he bathes.' According to this it would seem that he does not bathe
unless he shaves (?). See, however, Kâty. VII, 2, 22, where the shaving
is said to be optional, but not so, according to the commentary, the
bathing. There seems also to be some doubt as to where the bathing is to
take place. While, according to Karka, the sacrificer is to bathe in the
vessel of water in the tent; according to other authorities he is to
<span id="page_8">p. 8</span> do so in some tank, or other kind of
bathing-place of standing water. Cf. Taitt. S. VI, 1, 1, tîrthe snâti;
tîrtham eva samânânâm bhavati.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[8:1](sbe2604.htm#fr_32) I now take pûti (with
Dr. Lindner) in the sense of 'foul, filthy, fetid,' and would correct
the passage (I, 1, 1, 1) accordingly. Professor Ludwig (Göttinger Gel.
Anz. 1883, p. 49) proposes to take pûti in the sense of 'pure,' both
here and in I, 1, 1, 1.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[8:2](sbe2604.htm#fr_33) The Kâ*n*va recension
has the better reading, 'For they, indeed, now cleanse him when he
bathes.' According to Taitt. S. VI, 1, 1, 3, he also sips (a*s*nâti)
some water with the view of internal purification.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[8:3](sbe2604.htm#fr_34) Lit. 'for that indeed
is well purified, whom they purified (i.e. when they purify anybody)
with ghee.' The imperfect is rather strange. See also [III, 1, 3,
22](sbe2605.htm#3:1:3:22). The Kâ*n*vas read, 'For that, indeed, is well
purified what is purified (yad pûyate) with ghee.'

<span id="fn_35"></span>[8:4](sbe2604.htm#fr_35) Prâṅ ivodaṅ =
uttarapûrvârdham, Kâty. VII, 2, 15, i.e. 'towards the north with. a
slight turn to the east.' Dr. Lindner takes 'udaṅ' <span id="page_9">p.
9</span> as meant to explain the preposition 'ud.' This, however, does
not account for the 'iva.'

<span id="fn_36"></span>[9:1](sbe2604.htm#fr_36) Agne*h* paryâso
bhavati, vâyor anu*kh*âdo (?). The Black Ya*g*us <span id="page_10">p.
10</span> (T. S. VI, 1, 1) reads, agnes tûshâdhânam (*s*alâkopadhâna*m*
tûshâ*h*, (tatra tantûnâm pûra*n*a*m* tûshâdhânam; Sây.), vâyor
vâtapânam vâyunâ *s*osha*n*a*m* vâtapânam, S.). The warp (prâ*k*înatâna)
and woof (otu), on the other hand, are by the Black Ya*g*us ascribed to
the Âdityas and Vi*s*ve Devâ*h* respectively.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[10:1](sbe2604.htm#fr_37) Praghâta, apparently
the closely-woven part at both ends of the cloth from whence the loose
threads of the nîvi, or unwoven fringe (thrum), come out. The Black
Ya*g*us ascribes it to the plants.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[10:2](sbe2604.htm#fr_38) Literally, 'unbeaten
(ahata), unwashed.'

<span id="fn_39"></span>[10:3](sbe2604.htm#fr_39) That is to say, if it
be not a new garment, it should be one that has not been washed by a
washerman (with mautra, &c.), but worn daily after bathing.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[10:4](sbe2604.htm#fr_40) Or, outward form,
tanu. Its meaning sometimes comes very near to that of 'skin,' assigned
to it by the lexicographers. Cf. [III, 2, 2, 20](sbe2608.htm#3:2:2:20);
[4, 3, 9](sbe2617.htm#3:4:3:9).

<span id="fn_41"></span>[11:1](sbe2604.htm#fr_41) Vayasâm, cf. [III, 3,
3, 3](sbe2613.htm#3:3:3:3). The Kâ*n*va rec. has 'yad anyeshâ*m*
vayasâ*m* vîrya*m* yad anyeshâm pa*s*ûnâm.'

<span id="fn_42"></span>[11:2](sbe2604.htm#fr_42) A different
translation of this passage is proposed by Professor Delbrück (Synt.
Forsch. III, p. 25); but the Kâ*n*va text (sâ ta*m* he*s*varo ’dbhutam
abhi*g*anitor *g*âyâyâ vâ garbha*m* niravadhîd yad yeti tad u hovâ*k*a)
shows that we have here, as frequently, to supply î*s*vara*h* to the
infinitive in tos. The Kâ*n*va yad vâ ('or some such thing') would also
seem to indicate that we ought to translate:--(as of one of whom) there
is evil report: 'he has committed some such (iti) sin as the producing
of abortion.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 1, 3. Third Brâhma*n*a](sbe2605)
