[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2655) 
[Next](sbe2657) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080127X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part II (SBE26)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2">4:4:2</span></span>

### SECOND BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:1">4:4:2:1</span></span>1. He
proceeds with (the offering of) Soma's rice-pap; for Soma is the
sacrificial food of the gods; and here now sacrificial food is prepared
for Soma on his part; and thus Soma is not excluded therefrom. It is a
rice-pap (*k*aru), for rice-pap is food for the gods, since rice-pap is
boiled rice, and boiled rice is clearly food: therefore it is a
rice-pap.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:2">4:4:2:2</span></span>2.
Neither at the morning feast, nor at the midday feast does he offer it,
for those two press-feasts, the morning feast and the midday feast, are
the exclusive feasts of the gods; and Soma is sacred to the
Fathers <span id="fr_848"></span>[1](#fn_845).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:3">4:4:2:3</span></span>3. But
were he to offer it at the morning feast, or at the midday feast, he
would cause discord between the gods and Fathers. He offers it at the
evening feast, because the evening feast belongs to the All-gods <span
id="fr_849"></span>[2](#fn_846): thus he does not cause discord. He
recites no invitatory prayer (but only an offering prayer), for the
Fathers have passed away once for all: hence he recites no invitatory
prayer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:4">4:4:2:4</span></span>4.
Having, in the first place, taken ghee in four ladlings, and having
called (on the Agnîdh) for the *S*rausha*t*, he says, 'Recite the
offering prayer of the ghee!' and offers as the Vasha*t* is uttered.
Whatever oblations have been offered previous to this (*k*aru),
therefrom he separates this one (to Soma), and thus he causes no
discord.

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:5">4:4:2:5</span></span>5. Having
poured (into the spoon) an 'underlayer' of ghee, he makes two cuttings
from the rice-pap; and bastes them with ghee above. Having called for
the *S*rausha*t*, he says, 'Recite the offering prayer of the Saumya
(rice-pap)!' and offers as the Vasha*t* is uttered.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:6">4:4:2:6</span></span>6. He
then takes ghee a second time by four ladlings, and having called for
the *S*rausha*t*, he says, 'Recite the offering prayer of the ghee!' and
offers as the Vasha*t* is uttered. From whatever oblations he intends to
offer hereafter, he thereby separates this one (to Soma), and thus he
causes no discord. If he chooses, he may offer (ghee) on both sides
(before and after the Soma's rice-pap); or, if he chooses, he may offer
on one side only <span id="fr_850"></span>[1](#fn_847).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:7">4:4:2:7</span></span>7. Now
there is an offering-spoon called 'pra*k*ara*n*î.' Therein the Adhvaryu
takes ghee by four ladlings (with the dipping-spoon) and pours it on the
Dhish*n*ya hearths by means of fagots (held over them). The reason why
he pours ghee on the hearths by means of fagots is this. Because, on a
former occasion <span id="fr_851"></span>[2](#fn_848), the gods said to
those (Gandharva

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Soma-wardens), 'At
the third pressing an offering of ghee shall fall to your share, but not
one of Soma, for the Soma-draught has been taken from you, wherefore ye
are not worthy of a Soma-offering,' that same offering of ghee now falls
to their share at the evening pressing, but not one of Soma, in that he
pours ghee on the hearths by means of fagots. One after another, in the
order in which they were thrown up, and with the same formulas <span
id="fr_852"></span>[1](#fn_849), he pours ghee upon them; on the
Mâr*g*âlîya last of all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:8">4:4:2:8</span></span>8. Now
some make a second pouring on the Âgnîdhrîya hearth, thinking, 'In the
North (or upwards) shall this sacred work of ours be accomplished!' but
let him not do it in this way, but rather the Mâr*g*âlîya last <span
id="fr_853"></span>[2](#fn_850).

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:9">4:4:2:9</span></span>9. Now,
while the Adhvaryu pours ghee on the hearths by means of fagots, the
Pratiprasthât*ri* draws the Pâtnîvata <span
id="fr_854"></span>[3](#fn_851) cup. For from the sacrifice creatures
are produced; and being produced from the sacrifice, they are produced
from union; and being produced from union, they are produced from the
hind part of the sacrifice;--hence he thereby produces them from a
productive union, from the hind part of the sacrifice: therefore he
draws the Pâtnîvata cup.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:10">4:4:2:10</span></span>10. He
draws it with the Upâ*ms*u vessel. If he

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

draws the Sâvitra libation with the Upâ*ms*u vessel, (he draws) this one
with the Antaryâma vessel; and if he draws the Sâvitra with the
Antaryâma vessel (he draws) this one with the Upâ*ms*u vessel;--for one
and the same indeed are the Upâ*ms*u and Antaryâma, being breath, and
that which is the out-breathing is also the in-breathing. Now the breath
(prâ*n*a, masc.) is male, and the wife is female: a productive union is
thus brought about.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:11">4:4:2:11</span></span>11. He
draws it without a puroru*k* <span
id="fr_855"></span>[1](#fn_852),---the puroru*k* being manhood,--lest he
should bestow manhood on women: therefore he draws it without a
puroru*k*.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:12">4:4:2:12</span></span>12. He
thus draws it from that (Âgraya*n*a graha) with (Vâ*g*. S. VIII, 9),
'Thou art taken with a support: Of thee, divine Soma, begotten by
B*ri*haspati'--B*ri*haspati is the priesthood: of thee, divine Soma, the
priest-begotten' he thereby means to say--'Of thee, the potent juice of
the powerful (manly) juice' he means to say when he says 'of thee, the
potent juice'--'May I prosper the draughts of thee, the mated one <span
id="fr_856"></span>[2](#fn_853)!' he does not now draw it for the wives,
lest he should bestow manhood on women: therefore he does not now draw
it for the wives.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:13">4:4:2:13</span></span>13. He
(the Adhvaryu) then mixes it with the residue (of ghee) which is left in
the pra*k*ara*n*î spoon. Now other libations he completes by mixing, but
this one he diminishes; for ghee is a thunderbolt,

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

and by that thunderbolt, the ghee, the gods smote the wives and unmanned
them, and thus smitten and unmanned they neither owned any self nor did
they own any heritage. And in like manner does he now, by that
thunderbolt, the ghee, smite the wives and unman them; and thus smitten
and unmanned, they neither own <span id="fr_857"></span>[1](#fn_854) any
self nor do they own any heritage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:14">4:4:2:14</span></span>14. He
mixes it, with (Vâ*g*. S. VIII, 9), 'I am above, I am below; and what
space there is between, that was my father;--I saw the sun on both
sides: I am what is highest to the gods in secret.' In that he mixes
with 'I--I,' thereby he bestows manhood on men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:15">4:4:2:15</span></span>15. He
then says, 'Agnîdh, pronounce the offering prayer of the Pâtnîvata!' The
Agnîdh is male, and the wife is female: thus a productive union is
brought about. He offers with (Vâ*g*. S. VIII, 10), 'O Agni,
wife-leader <span id="fr_858"></span>[2](#fn_855)!'--Agni is male, and
the wife is female: thus a productive union is brought about.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:16">4:4:2:16</span></span>16.
'Together with the divine Tvash*tri*'--for Tvash*tri* transforms the
cast seed: thus he thereby transforms the cast seed;--'drink the Soma,
Hail!' therewith he offers on the north (left) part (of the fire); what
other offerings there are, they are the gods, and these are the wives:
thus alone it is a proper union, since the woman lies on the left
(north) side of the man. The Adhvaryu takes a draught of Soma to the
Agnîdh, and the latter says, 'Adhvaryu, invite me!' \[It might be said

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

that\] he should not invite him, since how can there be an invitation of
one smitten and unmanned? He should nevertheless invite him: they offer
in his fire, and utter the Vasha*t*,--therefore he should invite him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:17">4:4:2:17</span></span>17. He
then gives orders, 'Agnîdh, sit in the Nesh*tri*'s lap! Nesh*tri*, lead
up the lady, and make her exchange looks with the Udgât*ri*! Unnet*ri*,
fill up the Hot*ri*'s cup, and let no Soma-juice remain!' Thus, if it be
an Agnish*t*oma sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="4:4:2:18">4:4:2:18</span></span>18. But
if it be an Ukthya <span id="fr_859"></span>[1](#fn_856), let him say,
'Lengthen out the Soma!'--Holding the same vessel (from which the
Pâtnîvata libation was made, the Agnîdh) sits down in the Nesh*tri*'s
lap,--for he, the Agnîdh, is in reality Agni, and the Nesh*tri* is
female: the Agnîdh is male, and the Nesh*tri* female,--a productive
union is thus brought about. The Nesh*tri* leads up the lady and makes
her exchange looks with the Udgât*ri* <span
id="fr_860"></span>[2](#fn_857), with 'Thou art Pra*g*âpati, the

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

male, the bestower of seed: lay thou seed into me!' The Udgât*ri* is
Pra*g*âpati, and the lady is a woman: a productive union is thus brought
about.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_845"></span>[363:1](sbe2656.htm#fr_848) Probably, because
Soma is slain in being sacrificed (see [IV, 3, 4,
1](sbe2653.htm#4:3:4:1)), and therefore belongs to the Fathers or
Departed Spirits.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[363:2](sbe2656.htm#fr_849) And the All-gods
(or all he gods) mean everything. See [IV, 4, 1,
4](sbe2655.htm#4:4:1:4).

<span id="fn_847"></span>[364:1](sbe2656.htm#fr_850) The homa of ghee,
made-before the rice-pap oblation to Soma, belongs to Agni, and the one
made after the oblation, to Vish*n*u. If only one homa be made, it
belongs to Agni and Vish*n*u. The Kâ*n*va text reads, 'Tad vâ âhur
anyatarata eva pariya*g*et purastâd eveti,' now they say, 'He should
offer on one side only, and that in front (previously to the *k*aru).'
For the offering formulas, see Â*s*v. V, 19, 3; Ait. Br. III, 32. After
the completion of these offerings, the Adhvaryu pours ordinary ghee on
the rice-pap and presents it to the Hot*ri*, who looks at it while
pronouncing some formulas (Â*s*v. V, 19, 4, 5), and he smears his eyes
with the ghee on the pap, after which the latter is handed to the
chanters (udgât*ri*) to be eaten by them.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[364:2](sbe2656.htm#fr_851) See [III, 6, 2,
19](sbe2624.htm#3:6:2:19).

<span id="fn_849"></span>[365:1](sbe2656.htm#fr_852) Viz., Vâ*g*. S. V,
31, 32. The Âgnîdhra hearth is prepared first, and the Mâr*g*âlîya last
of the eight dhish*n*yas. See [p. 148](sbe2623.htm#page_148), note
[4](sbe2624.htm#fn_392).

<span id="fn_850"></span>[365:2](sbe2656.htm#fr_853) Or, uppermost
(uttamam; the Kâ*n*vas read 'antamâm').

<span id="fn_851"></span>[365:3](sbe2656.htm#fr_854) The meaning of the
term pâtnîvata is 'relating to the patnîvant (i.e. wived or mated one),'
the 'patnîvant' being probably Soma with the water mixed with it; or
Agni with the wives of the gods, (with special reference to the
sacrificer's wife); cf. Taitt. S. VI, 5, 8, I, 2. According to the
Kâ*n*va text, Agni associated with the goddess Speech (Vâ*k* patnî)
seems to be understood.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[366:1](sbe2656.htm#fr_855) See [p.
268](sbe2642.htm#page_268), note [1](sbe2642.htm#fn_643).

<span id="fn_853"></span>[366:2](sbe2656.htm#fr_856) In the St.
Petersburg Dictionary 'patnîvata*h*' seems to be taken as qualifying
'grahân;' but cp. Rig-veda VIII, 82, 22, 'United with their wives (i.e.
the water mixed with the Soma-juice?) these Soma-draughts (sutâ*h*) go
longing to the rejoicing.'

<span id="fn_854"></span>[367:1](sbe2656.htm#fr_857) 'î*s*,'
etymologically connected with 'own.'

<span id="fn_855"></span>[367:2](sbe2656.htm#fr_858) Or, wived, mated
one, 'patnîvan;' the Kâ*n*va text reads 'Agne Vâ*k* patni.' See
preceding page, note [2](#fn_853).

<span id="fn_856"></span>[368:1](sbe2656.htm#fr_859) But if it be an
Ukthya, or Shoda*s*in, or Atirâtra, or Vâ*g*apeya, Kâ*n*va text. See
towards the end of next note.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[368:2](sbe2656.htm#fr_860) Kâty. X, 7 and
schol. supply the following details. The Unnet*ri* puts down the
*k*amasa cups behind the high altar, and pours into them the entire
Soma-juice remaining in the Pûtabh*ri*t, putting but little into the
Hot*ri*'s cup, to leave room in it for the dhruva libation. Besides this
the Âgraya*n*a is the only Soma that remains. The Adhvaryu then, by
touching the Soma in the Hot*ri*'s cup with two stalks of grass, gives
the signal for the chanting of the Agnish*t*oma Sâman (viz. the
Ya*gñ*âya*gñ*îya, Sâmav. II, 53, 54), wrapping up his head, if he
chooses, in the same way as the Udgât*ri*s. Meanwhile the Nesh*tri*
leads up the lady through the back door into the Sadas, makes her sit
down north of the Udgât*ri* and exchange looks with the latter three
times (at the 'Hi*m*,' see [p. 308](sbe2649.htm#page_308), note
[2](sbe2649.htm#fn_745)). Three times also (at every Nidhana) she
uncovers her right leg and pours on it some of the pânne*g*anî water
fetched by her in the morning (see [III, 9, 3,
27](sbe2638.htm#3:9:3:27)), <span id="page_369">p. 369</span> whereupon
she returns to her own tent. Then follows the recitation of the
Âgnimâruta *s*astra, consisting of the following parts:--

Sûkta (hymn), Rig-veda III, 3, to Agni Vai*s*vânara, with Nivid ('May
Agni Vai*s*vânara feast on this Soma,' &c.) inserted before the last
verse.

Dhâyyâ, I, 43, 6; or (verse to Rudra) II, 33, 1.

Sûkta, I, 87, to Maruts, with Nivid ('May the Maruts feast on this
Soma,' &c.) before the last verse.

Stotriya pragâtha, VI, 48, 1-2 (identical with the text of the
Ya*gñ*âya*gñ*îya Sâman).  
Anurûpa pragâtha, VII, 16, II-12 (antistrophe).

Sûkta to Agni *G*âtavedas, I, 143, with Nivid before the last verse.

Tristich to Âpa*h* (waters), X, 9, 1-3, recited in breaks, the Hot*ri*
having previously uncovered his head (as do the other priests) and
touched water, and the others holding on to him from behind. This and
the following parts also have the Âhâva ('*s*o*m*sâvom') before each of
them.

Verse VI, 50, 14 to Agni Budhnya.

Verses V, 46, 7-8 to wives of gods.

Verses II, 32, 4-5 to Râkâ.

Verse VI, 49, 7 to Pâviravî (daughter of lightning).

Verse X, 14, 4 to Yama.

Verse X, 14, 3 to Kavyas (manes).

Verses X, 15, 1, 3, 2 to Pitara*h* (fathers), with the Âhâva before each
verse.

Anupânîya (or Svâdushkilîya) verses VI, 47, I-4 to Indra. After each of
the first three the Adhvaryu may respond to the Hot*ri*'s Âhâva, with
'madâmo daiva' (instead of '*s*a*m*sâmo daiva'). See note on [IV, 3, 2,
11](sbe2651.htm#4:3:2:11).

Verse to Vish*n*u and Varu*n*a (Atharva-veda VII, 25, 1). <span
id="page_370">p. 370</span>

Verse to Vish*n*u, Rig-veda I, 154, 1.

Verse to Pra*g*âpati, X, 53, 6.

Paridhânîyâ (concluding verse) IV, 17, 20, in reciting which the Hot*ri*
touches the ground; and during the recitation of the last pâda the
Dhruva graha is poured into the Hot*ri*'s cup.

Ukthavîrya, 'Praise has been sung to Indra, to the gods, for hearing (?)
thee!'

Yâ*g*yâ (offering prayer) V, 60, 8, at the conclusion of which libations
are made to Agni and the Maruts, both at the Vasha*t* and Anuvasha*t*.

Then follow the after-offerings of the animal sacrifice (see [III, 8, 4,
1](sbe2634.htm#3:8:4:1) seq.).

At the Ukthya (and other Soma-sacrifices) the Ukthya graha is drawn
immediately after the drawing of the Âgraya*n*a (see [IV, 3, 5,
24](sbe2654.htm#4:3:5:24), with note). Previous to the after-offerings
the Ukthya graha is divided, as at the morning and midday performances
(see [p. 293](sbe2647.htm#page_293), note [2](sbe2647.htm#fn_706)),
between the three Hotrakas, with a view to the recitation of their
*s*astras which form the distinctive feature of the Ukthya sacrifice,
bringing up the number of *s*astras (and stotras) from twelve (of the
Agnish*t*oma) to fifteen. Besides, the Ukthya requires the immolation of
at least two victims on the Soma-day, viz. a he-goat to Indra and Agni,
besides the one to Agni.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV, 4, 3. Third Brâhma*n*a](sbe2657)
