[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2602) 
[Next](sbe2604) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080127X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part II (SBE26)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:1">3:1:1</span></span>

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# *S*ATAPATHA-BRÂHMA*N*A.

## THIRD KÂ*ND*A.

#### THE AGNISH*T*OMA.

#### THE DÎKSHÂ, OR CONSECRATION.

### FIRST ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:1:1">3:1:1:1</span></span>1. They
choose a place of worship. Let them choose (the place) which lies
highest, and above which no other part of the ground rises <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23); for it was from thence that the gods
ascended to heaven, and he who is consecrated indeed ascends to the
gods. He thus sacrifices on a place of worship frequented by the gods;
but were any other part of the ground to rise above it, he would indeed
be lowered while sacrificing: let them therefore choose (the place)
which lies highest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:1:2">3:1:1:2</span></span>2. While
being high, that place should be even; and being even, it should be
firm; and being firm, it should incline towards the east, since the east
is the quarter of the gods; or else it should incline

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

towards the north, since the north is the quarter of men. It should rise
somewhat towards the south, that being the quarter of the Fathers. Were
it to incline towards the south, the sacrifice would quickly go to
yonder world; but in this way the sacrificer lives long: let it
therefore rise somewhat towards the south.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:1:3">3:1:1:3</span></span>3. Let
not the measure of the sacrificial ground be exceeded on the east side,
since such an excess would be in favour of his spiteful enemy. It may be
so in the south, and also in the north; but that place of worship alone
is thoroughly efficient where the measure of the sacrificial ground is
exceeded in the west; for to him (who possesses such a one) the
higher <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) worship of the gods readily
inclines. So much as to the place of worship.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:1:4">3:1:1:4</span></span>4. Now
Yâ*gñ*avalkya spake,--'We went to choose a place of worship for
Vârsh*n*ya <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25). Sâtyaya*gñ*a then said,
"Verily, this whole earth is divine: on whatever part thereof one may
sacrifice (for any

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

one), after enclosing (and consecrating) it with a sacrificial formula,
there is a place of worship."

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:1:5">3:1:1:5</span></span>5. 'It
is, however, the officiating priests that constitute the place (or
medium) of worship: wheresoever wise and learned Brâhmans, versed in
sacred lore, perform the sacrifice, there no failure takes place: that
(place of worship) we consider the nearest (to the gods) <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26).'

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:1:6">3:1:1:6</span></span>6. On
this (ground) they erect either a hall or a shed, with the top-beams
running from west to east <span id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_27); for the
east is the quarter of the gods, and from the east westwards the gods
approach men: that is why one offers to them while standing with his
face towards the east.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:1:7">3:1:1:7</span></span>7. For
this reason one mug not sleep with his

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

head towards the west, lest he should sleep stretching (his legs)
towards the gods. The southern quarter belongs to the Fathers; and the
western one to the snakes; and that faultless one is the one where the
gods ascended (to heaven); and the northern quarter belongs to men.
Hence in human (practice) a hall or shed is constructed with the
top-beams running from south to north, because the north is the quarter
of men. It is only for a consecrated, not for an unconsecrated person
that it is (constructed) with the top-beams running from west to east.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:1:8">3:1:1:8</span></span>8. They
enclose it on every side, lest it should rain upon (the sacrificer,
while being consecrated): this, at least, is (the reason for doing so
in) the rainy season <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28). He who is
consecrated, truly draws nigh to the gods, and becomes one of the
deities. Now the gods are secreted from men, and secret also is what is
enclosed on every side: this is why they enclose it on every side.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:1:9">3:1:1:9</span></span>9. Not
every one may enter it, but only a Brahman, or a Râ*g*anya, or a
Vai*s*ya, for these are able to sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:1:10">3:1:1:10</span></span>10. Let
him not commune with every one; for he who is consecrated draws nigh to
the gods, and becomes one of the deities. Now the gods do not commune
with every one, but only with a Brahman, or a. Râ*g*anya, or a Vai*s*ya;
for these are able to sacrifice. Should there be occasion for him to
converse with a *S*ûdra, let him say to one of those, 'Tell this one so
and so! tell this one so and so!'

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

This is the rule of conduct for the consecrated in such a case.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:1:11">3:1:1:11</span></span>11. In
the first place, having taken the two churning-sticks in his hand, he
approves of the hall. Taking hold of the chief post of the front (east)
side, he pronounces this sacrificial formula (Vâ*g*. S. IV, 1), 'We have
come to this place of worship on earth, wherein all the gods delighted.'
Thereby that (place of worship) of his becomes acceptable to all the
gods, as well as to the learned Brâhmans versed in sacred lore; and that
(place of worship) of his, which those Brâhmans versed in sacred lore
see with their eyes, becomes acceptable to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="3:1:1:12">3:1:1:12</span></span>12. And
when he says, 'Wherein all the gods delighted,' thereby it becomes
acceptable for him to all the gods. Crossing over by means of the *rik*
and sâman, and by the ya*g*us;' by means of the *rik* and sâman, and the
ya*g*us, indeed, they reach the end of the sacrifice: 'May I reach the
end of the sacrifice!' he thereby says. 'May we rejoice in increase of
substance and in sap!' Increase of substance doubtless means abundance,
and abundance means prosperity: he. thereby invokes a blessing. 'May we
rejoice in sap,' he says, because people say of one who enjoys
prosperity and attains to the highest distinction, that 'he rejoices in
sap;' therefore he says, 'May we rejoice in sap!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[1:1](sbe2603.htm#fr_23) Abhi-*s*î, 'to lie or
rise above,' with Sây. Dr. Lindner takes bhûme*h* as abl., and
translates 'whereon nothing but earth lies.' The Kâ*n*va rec. has
bhûme*h* (gen.) likewise in the preceding clause 'tad yad eva
varshish*th*am bhûmes tad eva devaya*g*ana*m* syâd yatrânyad bhûmer
nâbhi*s*ayîteto vai devâ, &c.' The gods evidently ascended to heaven
from the highest spot of the earth, and so is the sacrificer to choose
the highest available place. See Kâty. VII, 1, 11 scholl.; Lâ*t*y. S. I,
1, 17, 'na *k*âsya sthalataram (higher place) adûre syât.'

<span id="fn_24"></span>[2:1](sbe2603.htm#fr_24) Or 'subsequent;' a play
on the word 'uttara,' which has the meanings 'upper (superior), later,
and left (north).' Dr. Lindner takes it in the sense of 'from the
north.' Possibly uttara also refers to the Soma-altars (uttara vedi and
uttara-vedi) to be prepared later on (see [III, 5, 1,
1](sbe2619.htm#3:5:1:1) seq.) on the eastern part of the sacrificial
ground.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[2:2](sbe2603.htm#fr_25) The Kâ*n*va text
reads,--Accordingly Yâ*gñ*avalkya spake, 'Vârsh*n*a intended to
sacrifice (ayakshyata). Thus we went (ayama!) to look for a place of
worship.' He who is known as Sâtyaya*gñ*i said, Verily, this whole earth
is divine: a place of worship there is wheresoever one sacrifices on it,
after enclosing it with a ya*g*us.' And thus indeed he thought, but the
officiating priests doubtless constitute the (real) place (medium) of
worship: where wise (priests) perform the sacrifice in due form, there
alone no failure takes place. That (other definition) is not the
characteristic of the place of worship. (Without final iti.)

<span id="fn_26"></span>[3:1](sbe2603.htm#fr_26) That is to say, one who
employs such skilled Brâhmans for his officiating priests (*ri*tvi*g*)
may use sacrificial ground of any description. Kâty. VII, 1, 18.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[3:2](sbe2603.htm#fr_27) Prâ*k*îna-va*ms*a
(prâg-va*ms*a, K.). The 'va*ms*as' are the horizontal beams supported by
the four corner-posts. In the first place two cross-beams are fastened
on the corner-posts, to serve as the lintels of the eastern and western
doors. Across them tie-beams are then laid, running from west to east,
on which mats are spread by way of a roof or ceiling. The tern
'prâ*k*îna-va*ms*a' refers to these upper beams (upari-va*ms*a), and
especially to the central beam (p*ri*sh*th*a-va*ms*a or madhyavala) the
ends of which rest on the middle of the lintels of the eastern and
western doors; cf. Sâya*n*a on Taitt. S. I, 2, 1 (vol. i, pp. 279, 286);
Kâty. VII, I, 20 scholl. Inside the Prâ*k*îna-va*ms*a there is the
Âhavanîya fire immediately facing the east door; the Gârhapatya fire
facing the west door; between the two the altar; and south of the latter
the Dakshi*n*âgni. The shed (vimita) is to be erected on the back (west)
part of the sacrificial ground, after the roots have been dug up. It is
described as a square structure of ten (or twelve) cubits, somewhat
higher in front than at the back; with doors on each side (except,
optionally, on the north). The *s*âlâ, or hall, is to measure twenty
cubits by ten. Kâty. VII, 1, 19-24 comm.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[4:1](sbe2603.htm#fr_28) (?) Iti nv eva
varshâ*h*. The same particles occur [III, 2, 1,
11](sbe2607.htm#3:2:1:11). The Kâ*n*va text has,--'lest it should freeze
in winter, lest it should pour in the rainy season, and lest there
should be burning heat in summer.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 1, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe2604)
