[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2601) 
[Next](sbe2603) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080127X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part II (SBE26)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_x">p. x</span> <span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

### INTRODUCTION.

THE contents of the third and fourth books of the *S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a
form an important chapter of its dogmatic explanation of the sacrificial
ceremonial. This portion of the work treats of the ordinary forms of the
most sacred of Vedic sacrificial rites, the 'Soma-sacrifice.' The
exposition of the Soma-ritual also includes an account of the animal
offering which, though it may be performed as an independent sacrifice,
more usually constitutes an integral part of the Saumya-adhvara.

Since F. Windischmann, in his treatise 'Ueber den Somacultus der Arier'
(1846), pointed out the remarkable similarity of conceptions prevalent
among the ancient Indians and Iranians in regard to the Soma, both from
a sacrificial and a mythological point of view, this subject has
repeatedly engaged the attention of scholars. In A. Kuhn's masterly
essay, 'Die Herabkunft des Feuers and des Göttertranks' (1859), the
Soma-myth was thoroughly investigated, and its roots were traced far
back into the Indo-European antiquity. Within the last few years the
entire Rig-vedic conceptions regarding Soma have, for the first time,
been subjected to a searching examination in M. A. Bergaigne's 'La
Religion Védique.' This book forms an important contribution to the
interpretation of the Vedic hymns; and though the combinations and
theories put forth by the author may not always commend themselves to
scholars generally, there can be no doubt that his enquiries exhibit a
rare analytic faculty, and have yielded a mass of new and valuable
suggestions.

Among the numerous features which the Vedic Âryans had in common with
their Iranian kinsmen, and from which it is supposed that an intimate
connection must have subsisted

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

between these two easternmost branches of the Indo-European stock for
some time after they had become separated from their western brethren,
the Soma cult and myth are not the least striking. Both the Vedic soma
and the Zend haoma--derived from the root su (Zend hu), 'to press,
produce'--denote in the first place a spirituous liquor extracted from a
certain plant, described as growing on the mountains; the words being
then naturally applied to the plant itself. But the Rig-veda, not less
than the Avesta, distinguishes between an earthly and a celestial Soma;
and it is precisely the relation between these two, or the descent of
the heavenly Soma to the world of men, which forms the central element
of the Soma-myth. To the childlike intellect of the primitive Âryan
which knew not how to account for the manifold strange and awe-inspiring
phenomena of nature otherwise than by peopling the universe with a
thousand divine agents, the potent juice of the Soma-plant which endowed
the feeble mortal with godlike powers, and for a time freed him from
earthly cares and troubles, seemed a veritable god, not less worthy of
adoration than the wielder of the thunderbolt, the roaring wind, or the
vivifying orb of day. The same magic powers are, upon the whole,
ascribed to Soma by the Indian and Persian bards: to both of them he is
the wise friend and mighty protector of his votary, the inspirer of
heroic deeds of arms as well as of the flights of fancy and song, the
bestowcr of health, long life, and even immortality. The divine
personality of Soma, it is true, is, even for Vedic imagery, of an
extremely vague and shadowy character; but it is difficult to see what
plastic conception there could be of a deity whose chief activity
apparently consists in mingling his fiery male nature with the teeming
waters of the sky, and the swelling sap of plants. The principal cause,
however, of the vagueness of Soma's personality, and the source of
considerable difficulties in explaining many of the Vedic conceptions of
this deity, is his twofold nature as a fiery liquor, or liquid
fire,--that is to say, his fluid and his fiery or luminous nature.

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

The Soma, with whom the worshipper is chiefly concerned, is the
Soma-plant, and the juice extracted from it for the holy service. This
is the earthly Soma, or, so to speak, the Avatar of the divine Soma. The
latter, on the other hand, is a luminous deity, a source of light and
life. In the Brâhma*n*as, Soma, in this respect, has become completely
identified with the Moon, whose varying phases, and temporary
obscuration at the time of new-moon, favoured the mystic notions of his
serving as food <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) to the Gods and
Fathers (Manes); and of his periodical descents to the earth, with the
view of sexual union with the waters and plants, and his own
regeneration <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1). Though this
identification appears already clearly in several passages of the *Ri*k,
Vedic scholars seem mostly inclined to refer this conception to a
secondary stage of development <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2).
According to Professor Roth, indeed, this identification would have no
other mythological foundation than the coincidence of notions which
finds its expression in the term indu <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)
(commonly used for Soma, and in the later language for the moon), viz.
as 'a drop' and 'a spark (drop of light).' This is not unlikely, but it
does not of course help us to settle the point as to how that term came
ultimately to be applied exclusively to the moon among heavenly
luminaries. To the Vedic poet it is rather the sun that appears, if not
identical, at any rate closely connected, with the divine Soma. The fact
was first pointed out by Grassmann <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4),
who proposed to identify Pavamâna, the 'pure-streamed, sparkling' Soma,
with the, apparently solar, deity Puemuno of the

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Iguvian tablets.
M. Bergaigne has also carefully collected the passages of the *Ri*k in
which Soma appears either compared or identified with the sun. Although
a mere comparison of Indu-Soma with the sun can scarcely be considered
sufficient evidence on this point, since such a comparison might
naturally enough suggest itself even to one who had the identity of Soma
and the moon in his mind, there still remain not a few passages where no
such ambiguity seems possible. Somewhat peculiar are the relations
between Soma and Sûrya's daughter (probably the Dawn), alluded to
several times <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) in the *Ri*k. In one
passage (IX, I, 6) she is said to pass Sûrya through the perpetual
filter (*s*a*s*vat vâra); whilst in another (IX, 113, 8) 'Sûrya's
daughter brought the bull (Soma?), reared by Par*g*anya (the cloud); the
Gandharvas seized him and put him, as sap, into the Soma (plant?).' A
combination of this female bearer of Soma with the eagle (or falcon) who
carried off Soma (IV, 27, &c.) seems to have supplied the form of the
myth, current in the Brâhma*n*as, according to which Gâyatrî fetched
Soma from heaven. The hymn X, 85 <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6), on
the other hand, celebrates the marriage ceremony of Soma and Sûryâ, at
which the two A*s*vins act as bride’smen, and Agni as the leader of the
bridal procession to the bridegroom's home.

There are, however, other passages in the Rig-veda, in which Soma, so
far from being identified with the sun, seems to be regarded as some
sovereign power which originates or controls that luminary, as well as
the other lights of heaven. Thus in Rig-veda IX, 61, 16 Soma is
represented as producing (*g*anaya*n*) the bright light belonging to all
men; in IX, 97, 41 as producing the light in the sun (a*g*anayat sûrye
*g*yotir indu*h*); in IX, 28, 5; 37, 4 as causing the sun to shine
(ro*k*ayan); in IX, 86, 22; 107, 7 as making him rise (â-rohayan) in the
sky; in IX, 63, 6

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

as harnessing Svar's Eta*s*a; in IX, 36, 3; 49, 5 as causing the lights
to shine (gyotî*m*shi vi-ro*k*ayan; pratnavad ro*k*ayan ru*k*a*h*); in
IX, 42, 1 as producing the lights of the sky (and) the sun in the
(heavenly) waters; in IX, 41, 5 as filling the two wide worlds (rodasî),
even as the dawn, as the sun, with his rays. Nay, the poet of IX, 86,
29, 'Thou art the (heavenly) ocean (samudra) . . . thine are the lights
(*g*yotî*m*shi), O Pavamâna, thine the sun,' seems to conceive Soma as
the bright ether, the azure 'sea of light' generally; and a similar
conception is perhaps implied when, in IX, 107, 20, the bard sings,
'Thine I am, O Soma, both by night and by day, for friendship's sake, O
tawny one, in the bosom (of the sky <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7)):
like birds have we flown far beyond the sun scorching with heat.'

On the other hand, it must not be forgotten that similar functions to
those here referred to are ascribed to other deities besides Soma,
without there being any cogent reason for assuming an intentional
*rapprochement*, still less identification of these deities with Soma;
and, in point of fact, the allusions in the hymns are too vague to
enable us to determine the exact relations between Soma and the heavenly
light. Indeed, it may be questioned whether there was any very clear
apprehension of these relations; or whether, prior to the ultimate
identification of Soma with the moon, we have not to deal with a body of
floating ideas rather than with a settled mythological conception of the
divine Soma. During his brief term of existence on earth--from his
mountain birth to his final consummation as 'the supreme offering'
(uttama*m* havis)--the outward form of Soma passes through a succession
of changes from which the poet would draw many a feature wherewith to
endow the divine object of his fancy. He might thus represent Soma now
as a shining tree springing from the mountains of the sky; now as a
luminous drop or spark moving through the heavens, and shedding light
all around; or as innumerable drops of light scattered over the wide
aerial

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

expanse; now as a glittering stream, or again, as a vast sea of liquid
light.

The references of the Avesta to the divine Haoma are even less definite
and explicit than those of the Vedic hymns. His connection with the
heavenly light, though not perhaps so close as that of Mithra and other
deities, is unmistakable enough <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8); but
we look in vain for any clear. indication as to what the exact relations
are. It is certain, however, that nowhere in the Avesta is there any
passage which could warrant us to assume an identification of Haoma with
either the Sun or the Moon. In Ya*s*na IX, 81-82, we are told that Haoma
was the first to be invested by Ahura-Mazda with the zone, spangled with
stars, and made in heaven, in accordance with the good Mazda-ya*s*nic
law; and that girt therewith he dwells upon the heights of the mountain
to uphold the sacred ordinances. It is difficult to see what else the
star-spangled zone (the heavenly counterpart of the ordinary Kusti of
the orthodox Pârsî) could here refer to, except the milky way, or
perhaps the starry sky generally;--unless, indeed, as is scarcely
likely, some special constellation be implied;--but neither this nor any
other passage enables us in any way to define the divine personality of
Haoma.

Soma's descent to the earth, as pictured in the Vedic hymns, is attended
with violent disturbances in the regions of the sky, in which Indra
generally plays the principal part. It is admitted on all hands that we
have to look upon these supernal struggles as mythic impressions of
ordinary atmospheric phenomena, especially those of the Indian monsoon
and rainy season, and the violent thunderstorms by which they are
usually accompanied. According to the needs and anxieties by which he
was swayed at the moment, these atmospheric occurrences presented
themselves to the poet's mind chiefly in two different lights. Either,
the approaching masses of clouds brought with them the long-desired
rain, and the prospect of abundant food for man and beast: in that case
the gods were doing battle for the possession of

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

the celestial waters, or the heavenly cows, too long confined by
malicious demons in their mountain strongholds; or, after a time of
tempest and gloom, one longed to see again the bright sky and the golden
sunlight, to cheer life and ripen the crops: in which case it was a
struggle for the recovery of the heavenly light.

The relation in which Soma stands to Indra is mainly that of the fiery
beverage, the welcome draughts of which give the warrior god the
requisite strength and nerve for battling with the demons of drought and
darkness. Indra's favourite weapon is the thousand-spiked, iron or
golden thunderbolt, the lightning. But inasmuch as it is Soma that
enables Indra effectually to wield his weapon, the poet might, by a
bold, yet perfectly natural, metaphor, identify the potent drink with
the terrible bolt. This identification is indeed met with in several
passages of the *Ri*k <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9), notably in IX,
47, 3, 'When his song of praise is brought forth, then Soma, the
powerful (indriya) liquor, becomes the thousand-fold-winning
thunderbolt;' in IX, 72, 7, 'Indra's thunderbolt, the bountiful
(vibhûvasu) bull, the exhilarating Soma clarifies itself in a manner
pleasing to the heart;' and in IX, 77, 1, 'This sweet (Soma) has roared
in the tub, Indra's thunderbolt, more beautiful than the beautiful
one <span id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10).' Not less natural is the simile
implied in epithets, properly applying to Indra,--such as 'v*ri*trahan'
(slayer of V*ri*tra), and 'godâ' (cow-giver),--when applied to Soma, who
helps him to make good those titles of his; just as one can understand
their being occasionally applied to Agni, the sacrificial fire, as the
medium through which the libations reach Indra. A similar kind of poetic
figure is involved in passages representing Soma as exercising an
influence, not on Indra himself, but on the weapons wielded by him <span
id="fr_11"></span>[3](#fn_11);

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

such as VIII, 76, 9, 'O Indra, drink the pressed Soma, . . . sharpening
the thunderbolt with its strength;' or IX, 96, 12, where Soma is called
upon to join Indra, and produce weapons for him (*g*anayâyudhâni); or
VIII, 15, 7, where the Soma-cup (dhisha*n*â) is said to whet Indra's
power, his daring and intelligence, as well as the desirable
thunderbolt.

But, while most scholars will probably be content to apply this kind of
interpretation to cases of an apparent identification of Soma and the
Va*g*ra such as those referred to, M. Bergaigne is evidently in favour
of their identity pure and simple. Now, it cannot be denied that the
authors of some of those passages may really have intended to represent
Soma as virtually or actually the same as the thunderbolt; but even if
that were so, we should hardly be justified in assuming this identity to
have been anything like a settled and universally accepted conception in
the times of the hymns.. There surely is some danger in treating a
miscellaneous collection like the Rig-veda, as if it were a uniform and
homogeneous production, and in generalizing from one or two isolated
passages. In this respect I cannot help thinking that M. Bergaigne has
often gone farther than many scholars will be prepared to follow him.
Thus another of his favourite theories seems to be the ultimate identity
of Soma and Agni. But close as the relations of these two deities
undoubtedly are, and even admitting that they may occasionally have been
the object of those syncretist tendencies which we see so often at work
in the mythological speculations of the *Ri*shis, nevertheless I cannot
but think that to the generality of Vedic poets Agni and Soma were
perfectly distinct deities, as distinct from each other as the two
visible objects which represent them on earth. Indeed, M. Bergaigne
himself has to admit (I, 167) that, 'as the fire and beverage were in
reality distinct on earth, this distinction was inevitably extended
sometimes to their divine forms.' But if such is the case, and if they
are actually invoked together in one and the same hymn, should one not
think that even in those divine forms of theirs they must at least have

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

been regarded as two different manifestations of the same divinity?

Soma makes his descent to the earth in showers of rain, amid thunder and
lightning. Here a new problem presents itself: in this strife of
elements\] what is the exact phenomenon in which we are to recognise the
divine Soma as temporarily embodied? It used to be taken for granted
that the rain of the thunderstorm must be so regarded, being as it were
the atmospheric counterpart of the earthly Soma drops, expressed from
the juicy stalk and flowing into the vat. M. Bergaigne, however, has put
forward the theory that it is not the rain, but the lightning, that
really represents Soma; and has tried to show, with no little ingenuity,
that several passages of the *Ri*k can only, or at any rate most
naturally, be explained by the light of his theory. Now, according to an
old myth, frequently alluded to in the hymns, Soma was brought down to
the earth by an eagle or falcon (*s*yena). Thus we read in I, 93, 6,
'Mâtari*s*van has brought down the one (Agni) from the sky, and the
*S*yena has churned the other (Soma) from the (celestial) rock.' A. Kuhn
saw in this bird only another form of Indra who. in two passages (I, 32,
14; X, 99, 8), is indeed directly likened to a *S*yena. On the other
hand, this identification is rendered doubtful by two other passages (I,
80, 2; IV, 18, 13), in which the *S*yena is represented as bringing the
Soma to Indra himself. Here, then, is a veritable crux. M. Bergaigne
does not hesitate to cut the knot by identifying the Soma-bearing bird
with the lightning; and the lightning again being to him no other than
Soma, the myth thus resolves itself into the rather commonplace fact
that Soma takes himself down to the earth. He only needed to go a step
further by identifying Soma, not only with Agni and the lightning, but
also with Indra himself, and the phantasmagory would have been complete.
Indeed, one of M. Bergaigne's disciples, M. Koulikovski, has already
come very near supplying this deficiency, when he remarks (Revue de
Linguistique, XVIII, p. 3), that in the hymn IV, 26 'we have to do with
a twofold personage, composed of the attributes of Indra and Soma.'

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

Now, if this myth were a purely Indian one, one might be content to
relegate it to the category of Vedic 'paradoxes' to the vindication of
which M. Bergaigne declares himself ready to devote his life. But as
there can be no reasonable doubt that the myth goes back to
Indo-European times, and that its object is simply to account for the
mysterious effect of spirituous liquor or the 'fire-water,' so to speak,
I for one find it impossible to accept M. Bergaigne's explanation of
this myth, at least so far as the identification of Soma and the
lightning is concerned <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12). On the other
hand, his theory undoubtedly receives a considerable amount of support
from the fact that the Soma is frequently compared with the *S*yena. But
we saw that the same term is applied to Indra, as it also is to the
Maruts (X, 92, 6), to the A*s*vins (IV, 74, 9; VIII, 73, 4), and to
Sûrya (V, 45, 9); and there is in my opinion no evidence to show that
this comparison has any connection with the myth which makes the fiery
liquor to be brought down by a *S*yena. Moreover, wherever that
comparison occurs, it undoubtedly applies to the Pavamâna, or the drops
or streams of Soma flowing through the filter into the vat; and I can
see no reason why we should not consider the showers of rain as the
exact counterpart of the clarifying Soma. But, of course, the real
divine Soma is not the rain-drop itself, any more than he is the drop of
juice expressed from the Soma-plant; but he is the spark of celestial
fire enclosed in the drop. It would seem, then, that, as the masses of
cloud overspread the sky, Soma, the heavenly light, is conceived as
entering into union with the celestial cows or waters, released by the
thunderbolt from their mountain keep, and coming down with them to the
earth.

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

But while I find it impossible, as regards the myth of the Soma-bearing
bird, to identify with M. Bergaigne the winged bearer (probably the
lightning) with its burden, the Soma; the descent of the fiery god is
pictured in various other ways, and it might still be possible that one
or other poet had conceived of the bull-like Soma, as the lightning,
uniting with the heavenly cows in their earthward course, so that before
reaching the earth the rain-drops would be impregnated with Soma's
essence, and would, in fact, be of the same nature as the Soma-juice. I
am not prepared, therefore, entirely to reject the identification of
Soma with the lightning; only I do not think that any one of the crucial
passages adduced by M. Bergaigne in favour of that identity necessarily
requires the interpretation he proposes. Thus, in IX, 41, 3, 'The sound
of the mighty Pavamâna (the clarifying Soma) is heard like that of the
rain: the lightnings pass in the sky,' it surely seems rather farfetched
to take the lightning, instead of the rain, to be the object with which
Soma is compared, merely because in the same hymn Soma is also compared
with the sun and the heavenly river Rasa. The same may be said of IX,
108, 'That joy-pouring (mada-*k*yut) thousand-streamed bull they have
milked out from the sky,' and several other passages. The verse IX, 87,
8, divo na vidyut stanayanty abhrai*h*, somasya te pavata indra dhârâ,
'Thy stream of Soma, O Indra, clarifies itself, as (does) the thundering
lightning of the sky by means of the clouds,' is more favourable to

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> M. Bergaigne's
view, as may also be the doubtful passage, V, 84, 3, yat te abhrasya
vidyuto divo varshanti v*ri*sh*t*aya*h*, 'When the rains of the cloud
rain thee (O earth) lightnings from the sky (?).' As regards VII, 69, 6,
addressed to the A*s*vins, 'Come, ye two men, to our libations this day,
like two thirsty bulls to the lightning,' M. Bergaigne (I, 168) thinks
that the identification of Soma with the lightning can alone explain
this passage; since it would be impossible to imagine that the two bulls
could anticipate the falling of rain from the appearance of the
lightning. Though a poetic figure like this hardly bears such critical
handling, perhaps M. Bergaigne will allow me to ask whether, if the
passage had read, 'Come ye hither to our libations, like two bulls to
the thunder <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13),' he would have thought
it so very bold a figure for a Vedic poet to use?

The most important of all passages, however, undoubtedly is IX, 84, 3: â
yo gobhi*h* s*rig*yata oshadhîshu . . . . â vidyutâ pavate dhârayâ
suta*h*, indra*m* somo mâdayan daivya*m* *g*anam. M. Bergaigne
translates (I, 172) the first pâda by 'Lui qui est répandu avec les
vaches (i.e. the raindrops) dans les plantes,' which, of course, fits
either view equally well; the only question being, whether Soma is
already united with the rain-drops when they are poured forth by the
clouds, or whether, in the shape of lightning, he is still separate from
them. The third pâda, M. Bergaigne remarks (I, 170), may be boldly
(hardiment) translated by 'Il se clarifie, exprimé en un torrent qui est
l’éclair.' This rendering, if correct, would doubtless settle the point;
but to my mind it is not only a very doubtful, but a highly improbable
explanation. What I believe to be the true interpretation of the passage
had been given by Prof. Ludwig two years before the publication of M.
Bergaigne's volume, viz. 'Expressed in a stream, he clarifies himself by
the lightning--Soma who exhilarates (or inebriates) Indra and the divine
race.' It will be seen that this alters the case completely. The
lightning would be

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

compared with the filter of white sheep's wool, through which the
Soma-juice percolates into the vat. The same simile, in my opinion, is
implied wherever the formula pavate (â) v*ri*sh*t*im, 'he clarifies
himself into rain,' is used (IX, 49, I; 3; 65, 3; 24; 96, 14; 108, 10).
And, in truth, the simile seems to me a very striking one; but we must
not, of course, think of single flashes of lightning such as we are
accustomed to in our northern climes (and as are doubtless implied in
the Vedic conception of the Va*g*ra or thunderbolt), but of that
continuous and widespread electric illumination (vi-dyut) which forms a
characteristic feature of the monsoon, when the showers of rain seem to
flow through an immense space of light <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14).

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

The striking coincidences between the Vedic Agnish*t*oma and the Homa
ceremony of the Pârsîs, pointed out by Martin Haug (Ait. Br. I, p. 59
seq.), leave no doubt as to the complete development of the Soma-ritual
in its essential features before the separation of the Indo-Iranians.
The exact identity of the plant from which their sacred liquor was
prepared is still somewhat doubtful. An official inquiry which has been
set on foot in consequence of two papers published by Prof. Roth
(Journal of Germ. Or. Soc. 1881 and 1883), and translated by Mr. C. J.
Lyall, secretary to the Chief Commissioner of Assam, and which, it is
understood, is now carried on, on the part of the Government of India,
by Dr, Aitchison, botanist to the Afghan Boundary Commission, will
probably ere long settle the matter once for all. The appearance of the
first official blue-book on the subject has already led to a renewed
discussion of the matter, in. the columns of a weekly journal <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15), in which Profs. Max Müller and R. v.
Roth, as well as several distinguished botanists, especially Drs. J. G.
Baker and W. T. Thiselton Dyer, have taken part. Of especial interest in
this discussion is a letter <span id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16), by Mr.
A. Houttum-Schindler, dated Teheran, December 20, 1884, in which an
account is given of the plant from which the present Pârsîs of Kermân
and Yezd obtain their Hûm juice, and which they assert to be the very
same

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

as the Haoma of the Avesta. The Hûm shrub, according to this
description, grows to the height of four feet, and consists of circular
fleshy stalks (the thickest being about a finger thick) of whitish
colour, with light brown streaks. The juice was milky, of a greenish
white colour, and had a sweetish taste. Mr. Schindler was, however, told
that, after being kept for a few days, it turned sour and, like the
stalks, became yellowish brown. The stalks break easily at the joints,
and then form small cylindrical pieces. They had lost their leaves,
which are said to be small and formed like those of the jessamine. This
description, according to the above naturalists, would seem to agree
tolerably well with the *Sarcostemma* (akin to the common milk-weed), or
some other group of *Asclepiads*, such as the *Periploca aphylla* which,
as Mr. Baker states, has been traced by Dr. Haussknecht to 3000 feet in
the mountains of Persia, and, according to Dr. Aitchison, is common also
in Afghanistan. A quotation from a medical Sanskrit work, to which
attention was drawn by Prof. Max Müller many years ago, states that,
'the creeper, called Soma, is dark, sour, without leaves, milky, fleshy
on the surface; it destroys (or causes) phlegm, produces vomiting, and
is eaten by goats.' The foul, sour smell of the Sonia-juice is also
alluded to in our Brâhma*n*a (see the present volume, [p.
266](sbe2642.htm#page_266)). According to Prof. Spiegel <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17), the Pârsîs of Bombay obtain their Homa
from Kermân, whither they send their priests from time to time to get
it. The plant at present used by the Hindu priests of the Dekhan, on the
other hand, according to Haug, is not the Soma of the Vedas, but appears
to belong to the same order. 'It grows (he informs us, Ait. Br. II, 489)
on hills in the neighbourhood of Poona to the height of about four to
five feet, and forms a kind of bush, consisting of a certain number of
shoots, all coming from the same root; their stem is solid like wood;
the bark grayish; they are without leaves; the sap appears whitish, has
a very stringent taste, is bitter, but not sour: it is a very nasty
drink, and has some intoxicating effect. I tasted it several times, but

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

it was impossible for me to drink more than some teaspoonfuls.' In fact,
several varieties of Sarcostemma or Asclepiads <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18), somewhat different from those of Persia
and Afghanistan, which are not to be found so far south, seem to have
been, and indeed seem still to be, made use of for the Soma-sacrifice.
And notwithstanding the objections raised by Dr. G. Watt, in his useful
'Notes,' appended to the translation of Professor Roth's papers, every
probability seems to me to be in favour of the identity of the original
Soma-plant with the shrub, the stalks of which are used by the Pârsîs in
preparing their Hûm juice, or with some other plant of the same genus.
It certainly would seem to have been a plant with soft, succulent stems.
Dr. Watt remarks, 'We know of no instance of a succulent plant
retaining, for weeks or months, its sap within isolated twigs, and,
indeed, we can recall but few plants which could withstand, even for a
day or two, the dry climate of India, so as to retain the sap within
their isolated and cut twigs.' But, though at the time of the Vedic
hymns fresh and juicy plants were probably used for the preparation of
the sacred drink, in later times, when the plants had to be conveyed
some considerable distance into India, the withered and shrunk plants
were apparently found, with the admixture of water and other
ingredients, to serve the same purpose. For we know from the description
given in the Sûtras, that water was poured on the plants previously to
their being beaten with the pressing-stones. This moistening or steeping
is called âpyâyanam, or 'the making (the plants) swell.' After being
then well beaten and bruised, they were thrown into the vat, or rather
trough, partly filled with water, and were pressed out with the hand.
Dr. Watt thinks Professor Roth ought rather to have published briefly
the leading passages in the hymns descriptive of the plant, from which
naturalists might have drawn their own conclusions. One might as well
ask a Hebrew

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

scholar to give accurate descriptions of the 'lily of the valley' to
enable the botanist to identify and classify the lovely flower which
delighted the heart of king Solomon. It is exactly the want of an
accurate knowledge of the nature of the Soma-plant which prevents the
Vedic scholar from being able to understand some of the few material
allusions to it. Thus the term a*ms*u, commonly applied to the
Soma-plant, used to be taken to mean simply 'plant' or 'sprig, shoot;'
but Professor Roth seems now inclined, perhaps rightly, to take it as
referring to the internode, or cylindrical piece between two joints of
the stem. The substitutes approved of by the *S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a, in
case no genuine Soma-plants can be obtained, will be found enumerated at
pp. [421](sbe2668.htm#page_421)-[422](sbe2669.htm#page_422) of the
present volume. A description of these plants, so far as they have been
identified, is given in Professor Roth's paper.

I cannot conclude these remarks without expressing my hearty thanks to
those scholars who have done me the honour of reviewing the first volume
of this work. To Professor Whitney I feel especially indebted for his
most careful examination of my translation, and the searching, yet
appreciative, criticism he has been good enough to apply to it. I shall
feel content, if the present volume finds at least one reader as
conscientious and painstaking. While I agree with most of Prof.
Whitney's suggestions <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19), there are one
or two points raised by him, and these perhaps of the more important, on
which I have been unable to take his view; and as some of these points
involve renderings adhered to in the present volume, I take the
opportunity here briefly to advert to them.

The most important of these points probably is my rendering of the term
kapâla by 'potsherd,' instead of 'cup, dish,' as proposed by Prof.
Whitney. Instead of speaking of a sacrificial cake on eleven or twelve
potsherds, we are to call it a cake on so many cups or dishes. The term

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'potsherd' no
doubt is somewhat awkward, and, had it been possible, I should have
preferred to use the simple obsolete word 'shard' or 'sherd' for it; but
I decidedly object to either 'cup' or 'dish.' I gather from his
suggestion, that we take entirely different views of the purpose and
nature of the kapâla. I have to reject the proposed renderings for the
very reason for which they commend themselves to Prof. Whitney, namely,
because they imply so many vessels complete in themselves. He asks,
whether I suppose 'that the Brahmans made their offerings on fragments
of broken pottery?' Well, I certainly believe that the kapâlas are meant
to represent the fragments of a broken dish. The sacrificial cake is to
be baked on a dish, but for symbolic reasons this dish is supposed to be
Broken up into a number of pieces or kapâlas. The symbolic significance
of this seems to be a twofold one. On the one hand, the dish is to
resemble the human skull. Hence we read *S*at. Br. I, 2, I, 2, 'The cake
is the head of Ya*gñ*a (the sacrifice, and symbolically the sacrificer
himself);, for those potsherds (kapalâni) are what the skull-bones
(*s*îrsh*n*a*h* kapâlâni) are, and the ground rice is nothing else than
the brain.' On the other hand, the kapâlas are usually arranged (see
Part I, p. 34, note) in such a manner as to produce a fancied
resemblance to the (upper <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20)) shell of
the tortoise, which is a symbol of the sky, as the tortoise itself
represents the universe. Thus with cakes on a single kapâla, the latter
is indeed a complete dish. In the same way the term kapâla, in the
singular, is occasionally applied to the skull, as well as to the upper
and the lower case of the tortoise, e. g. *S*at. Br. VII, 5, I, 2: 'That
lower kapâla of it (the tortoise) is this world, for that (kapâla) is
firmly established, and firmly established is this world; and that upper
(kapâla) is yonder sky, for It has its ends turned down, and so has that
sky its ends turned down; and that which is between is that atmosphere:
verily that same (tortoise) represents these worlds.' More usually,
however, the term is applied to the single

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

bones of the skull (and the plates of the tortoise-case). Hence the
Medinî says (lânta 71), kapâlo ’strî *s*iro-’sthni syâd, gha*t*âde*h*
*s*akale, vra*g*e,--kapâla may be used in the sense of 'head-bone,' in
that of 'fragment of a pot,' &c., and in the sense of 'collection.'

Professor Whitney takes exception to my occasionally translating âtman
by 'body,'--an inaccuracy, he remarks, that might easily be avoided. I
do not quite understand on what grounds he objects to this rendering.
The original meaning of âtman doubtless is (breath) 'self, soul;' but
surely there can be no question that it also commonly means 'body,
trunk,' in contradistinction to the limbs, wings, &c. Thus we read
*S*at. Br. [IV, 1, 2, 25](sbe2641.htm#4:1:2:25), 'The sacrifice is
fashioned like a bird: the Upâ*ms*u and Antaryâma are its wings, and the
Upâ*ms*usavana is its body <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21).'

My rendering of 'videgho ha mâthava*h*' (I, 4, I, 10) by 'Mâthava the
(king of) Videgha,' instead of 'Videgha (the) Mâthava,' is rightly
objected to. Indeed, I had already taken occasion, in the introduction
to the same volume (I, p. xli, note 4), to make that correction.

Prof. Whitney's remarks on 'yûpena yopayitvâ' are adverted to at [p.
36](sbe2608.htm#page_36), note [1](sbe2608.htm#fn_100) of the present
volume; as are also those on 'ed' at [p. 265](sbe2641.htm#page_265),
note [2](sbe2642.htm#fn_636). In regard to the latter point he rather
does me wrong by supposing that I apparently regarded the particle (or
particles) 'ed' (for which the Kâ*n*va text seems to read 'â hi') as a
verb-form from the root 'i,' to go. The fact is that I followed Prof.
Weber (Ind. Stud. IX, p. 249) in taking it to be a popular expression,
with a verb of motion understood, somewhat in the sense of the German
'hin;' e. g. 'Shall we go there?'--'Hin denn!' i.e. 'Let us go then.'

My translation of II, 4, 2, 19 is not quite approved of by

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Prof. Whitney.
There offering is made severally to the sacrificer's grandfather and
great-grandfather with the formula 'N.N., this for thee!' to which some
authorities add 'and for those who come after thee.' This addition is
rejected by the author on the ground that 'svayam vai teshâ*m* saha
yeshâ*m* saha,' which I translated by 'since he himself is one of those
to whom \[it would be offered\] in common.' Prof. Whitney takes
exception to this, remarking that in that case, the phrase 'and those
who (come) after thee' might be added, without any reason to the
contrary. But he forgets one important point, namely, that it would be a
fatal thing for the sacrificer in this way to associate himself with the
departed ancestors, and even make offering to himself along with them:
it would simply mean that 'he would straightway go to yonder world,'
that he would not live his fulness of days. The clause under discussion
is elliptic, its literal translation being 'Himself surely (is) of those
withal of whom (he is) withal.' This may either be taken in the sense in
which I took it (see also St. Petersb. Dict. s. v. saha); or in a
general way, 'He surely is one of those with whom he associates
himself;' i.e. he would himself be a dead man.

In the legend of Manu and the Flood (I, 8, 1, 1 seq.) I find it
impossible to accept Prof. Delbrück's conjecture, which Prof. Whitney
thinks the best and only acceptable one, viz. that (in par. 4) the
sentence '*s*a*s*vad ha *gh*asha âsa, sa hi *g*yesh*th*am vardhate' is
an interpolated gloss. My reason for not accepting it is the fact that
the passage occurs likewise in the Kâ*n*va recension, and is thus
authenticated for so comparatively early a period that the difficulty of
accounting for the interpolation might be even greater than that of the
interpretation of the passage itself. Professor Ludwig, in his kindly
notice in 'Göttinger Gel. Anz.' 1883, proposes to take *s*a*s*vat in the
sense of πάντως: 'It quite so (i.e. in accordance with the prediction)
became a large fish.' Prof. Max Müller has again translated this legend
in his 'India, what can it teach us?' p. 134 seq., where he renders this
passage by 'He became soon a large fish

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (*gh*asha), for
such a fish grows largest.' I am still inclined to take *gh*asha as the
name of some kind of fish, real or mythic.

Professor Whitney once more discusses the vexed question as to the real
meaning of '*G*âtávedas,' and thinks the translation 'Wesen-kenner,'
'being-knower,' or 'he who knoweth \[all\] beings' to be unacceptable.
He remarks that 'The word may, indeed, fairly be regarded as an obscure
one: that is to say, it is very strange that an appellation so
frequently applied to Agni should not have its meanings distinctly
pointed out, either by its applicableness, or by parallel expressions
used in the descriptions of the same god or in ascriptions made to him;
but no such explanation has been found obtainable from the Vedic
writings.' It is no doubt a fact that at the time of Yâska--who (7, 19)
proposes five different derivations of the term, the first of which is
the one given above, viz. *g*âtâni veda, 'he knows (the things) that are
born'--the real meaning of the compound was unknown; and even at the
time of the hymns the epithet seems to have been understood in different
ways. That the meaning 'knower of beings' was, at any rate, one of those
commonly assigned to *G*âtavedas' by the Vedic poets, seems to me,
however, sufficiently manifest from a number of parallel expressions
used in reference to Agni, such as Rig-veda VI, 15, 13, vi*s*vâ veda
*g*animâ *g*âtavedâ*h* <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22), '*G*âtavedas
knows all races (or existences);' I, 70, 1, â daivyâni vratâ *k*ikitvân
â manushyasya *g*anasya *g*anma, 'he who minds the divine ordinances,
and the race of the human kind;' ib. 3, devânâm *g*anma martâ*ms* *k*a
vidvân, 'knowing the race of gods and the men;' I, 189, 1, vi*s*vâni
vayunâni vidvân, 'knowing all works;' ib. 7, tvam tân agna ubhayân v
vidvân veshi, &c. On the other hand, in *S*at. Br. IX, 5, I, 68, the
term is explained by *g*âta*m* *g*âta*m* vindate; he takes possession of
being after being, or of whatsoever is born. How easily terns such as
*G*âtavedas and Wesenkenner

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (knower of beings)
may assume different meanings, may be seen from Mr. Peile's remark
(Notes on the Nalopâkhyânam, p. 23), '*G*âtavedas, the Vedic epithet of
Agni, is described as the "knower of the essence" (*g*âta), Grassmann,
Dict. s. v.'

For the first chapter of the third book, treating of the ceremony of
consecration, I have had the advantage of availing myself of the German
translation, published by Dr. B. Lindner in his pamphlet, 'Die Dîkshâ,'
Leipzig, 1878.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xiii:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_0) Or, as the vessel
containing the divine Soma, the drink conferring immortality.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xiii:2](sbe2602.htm#fr_1) See, for instance,
*S*at. Br. I, 6, 4, 5 seq. Possibly also the shape of the 'horned moon'
may have facilitated the attribution. to that luminary of a hull-like
nature such as is ascribed to Soma; though a similar attribution, it is
true, is made in the case of other heavenly objects whose outward
appearance offers no such points of comparison.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xiii:3](sbe2602.htm#fr_2) M. A. Barth, The Vedic
Religions, p. 27, on the other hand, is of opinion that this
identification goes back to Indo-European times.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xiii:4](sbe2602.htm#fr_3) St. Petersburg Dict.
s. v. According to A. Kuhn, the two myths of the descent of Fire and of
the divine Liquor spring from one and the same conception, whence the
spark of fire is conceived as a drop. 'Herabkunft,' p. 161.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xiii:5](sbe2602.htm#fr_4) Kuhn's Zeitsch. f.
Vergl. Spr. XVI, p. 183 seq.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xiv:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_5) M. Bergaigne, II, p.
249, identifies with Sûrya's daughter the girl (? Apâlâ) who, going to
the water, found Soma, and took him home, saying, 'I'll press thee for
Indra!' On this hymn see Prof. Aufrecht, Ind. Stud. IV, 1 seq.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xiv:2](sbe2602.htm#fr_6) On this hymn see A.
Weber, Ind. Stud. V, 178 seq.; J. Ehni, Zeitsch. der D. M. G. XXXIII, p.
166 seq.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xv:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_7) Udhani, lit, in, or on,
the udder (whence Soma is milked, i.e. the sky).

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xvi:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_8) Cf. Spiegel, Eranische
Alterthumskunde, II, p. 114.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xvii:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_9) Cf. A. Bergaigne,
Religion Védique, II, 253. In the Brâhma*n*as it is not Soma, but the
pressing-stone, that is identified with the Va*g*ra.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xvii:2](sbe2602.htm#fr_10) Prof. Ludwig
proposes to read 'va'grât' instead of 'va*g*ro,' thus 'more beautiful
than Indra's beautiful thunderbolt.' But even if we retain the received
reading, 'vapusha*h*' might refer to the (real) thunderbolt; though, of
course, it may also be taken as referring either to the sun, or to Agni,
or to some other deity or heavenly object.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xvii:3](sbe2602.htm#fr_11) Cf. A. Bergaigne,
II, 251.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xx:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_12) For the same reason I
find it impossible to accept M. Bergaigne's interpretation of the hymn
IV, 27, put forward at the end of his work (vol. iii, p. 322 seq.).
According to that interpretation, Soma, in the first verse, declares
that he himself flew forth from his prison as an eagle; and then, in the
second verse--as it were reproving those who might imagine the eagle to
be a different being from himself--he adds, 'It was not he (the eagle)
that bore me away with ease, but I triumphed by my own cleverness and
bravery!' I am afraid this critical specimen of the feathered tribe will
not find many admirers among <span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span> prosaic
Sanskritists. I should prefer, with Prof. Roth, to read 'nir ádîyat'
instead of 'nir adîyam,' unless it were possible to read
'*s*yena*g*avásâ' instead of '*s*yenó *g*avásâ.' M. Koulikovski, in the
paper referred to, throws the hymns IV, 26 and 27 together, and takes
them as a sort of mytho-critical controversy between the god Soma and
some other person (perhaps the author himself), advocating two different
versions of the Soma-myth, viz. Soma contending that it was himself who
brought the divine plant, while his interlocutor ('who has the last word
in the hymn') maintains that it was brought by a falcon. Thus, according
to this scholar, the falcon was already (!) distinguished from Soma; and
these two hymns 'are, as it were, an echo of a religious, or rather
mythological dispute, which had divided the theologians of the Vedic
epoch.' Perhaps Prof. Oldenberg's theory of Âkhyâta-hymns, or detached
pieces of poetry connected by prose narratives, might have a chance with
these hymns.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xxii:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_13) Cp. IX, 100, 3:
'Send forth mind-yoked thought, as the thunder sends forth rain.'

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xxiii:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_14) For a description
of this phenomenon in the districts where we must imagine the Vedic
poets to have composed their hymns, see Elphinstone, Account of the
Kingdom of Cabool, p. 126 seq.

I cannot forbear here to quote a few extracts from a graphic description
of the setting in of the monsoon in India proper, given in the Rev. H.
Caunter's Oriental Annual (1834):--'There was a slight haze upon the
distant waters which seemed gradually to thicken, although not to a
density sufficient to refract the rays of the sun, which still flooded
the broad sea with one unvarying mass of glowing light . . . . Towards
the afternoon, the aspect of the sky began to change; the horizon
gathered blackness, and the sun, which had risen so brightly, had
evidently culminated in darkness, and to have his splendour veiled from
human sight by a long, gloomy period of storm and turbulence. Masses of
heavy clouds appeared to rise from the sea, black and portentous,
accompanied by sudden gusts of wind, that suddenly died away, being
succeeded by an intense, death-like stillness, as if the air were in a
state of utter stagnation, and its vital properties arrested. It seemed
no longer to circulate, until again agitated by the brief but mighty
gusts which swept fiercely along, like the giant heralds of the sky.
Meanwhile the lower circle of the heavens looked a deep brassy red, from
the partial reflection of the sunbeams upon the thick clouds, which had
now everywhere overspread it . . . From the house which we occupied we
could behold the setting in of the monsoon in all its grand and terrific
sublimity. The wind, with a force which nothing could resist, bent the
tufted heads of the tall, slim cocoa-nut trees almost to the earth,
flinging the light sand into the air in eddying vortices, until the rain
had either so increased its gravity, or beaten it into a mass, as to
prevent the wind from raising it. The pale lightning streamed from the
clouds in broad sheets of flame, which appeared to encircle the heavens
as if every element had been converted into fire, and the world was on
the eve of a general conflagration, whilst the peal, which instantly
followed, was like the explosion of a gunpowder-magazine, or the
discharge of artillery in the gorge of a mountain, where the
repercussion of surrounding hills multiplies with terrific energy its
deep and astounding echoes. The heavens seemed to be <span
id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span> one vast reservoir of flame, which was
propelled from its voluminous bed by some invisible but omnipotent
agency, and threatened to fling its fiery ruin upon everything around.
In some parts, however, of the pitchy vapour by which the skies were by
this time completely overspread, the lightning was seen only
occasionally to glimmer in faint streaks of light, as if struggling, but
unable, to escape from its prison, igniting, but too weak to burst, the
impervious bosoms of those capacious magazines in which it was at once
engendered and pent up. So heavy and continuous was the rain, that
scarcely anything, save those vivid bursts of light which nothing could
arrest or resist, was perceptible through it . . . . Day after day the
same scene was repeated with somewhat less violence, though at intervals
the might of the hurricane was truly appalling . . . . The breaking up
of the monsoon is frequently even more violent, if possible, than its
setting in, and this happened to be the case during the first season
after my arrival in India. It was truly stupendous, and I shall never
cease to remember it to the latest moment of my existence.'

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xxiv:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_15) The Academy, Oct.
25, 1884--Feb. 14, 1885.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xxiv:2](sbe2602.htm#fr_16) Ibid., Jan. 31,
1885.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xxv:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_17) Eranische
Alterthumskunde, III, p. 572.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xxvi:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_18) Especially
*Sarcostemma intermedium*, *S. brevistigma*, and *S. viminale* (or
Asclepias acida). See R. Roth, Zeitsch. der D. Morg. Ges. vol. xxxv, p.
681 seq.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xxvii:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_19) American Journal of
Philology, vol. iii, pp. 391-410; Proceedings of the American Oriental
Society, October 18S2, p. xiv seq.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xxviii:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_20) Or perhaps the
lower shell which represents the earth, being as it were a symbol of
firmness and safety.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xxix:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_21) Professor Max Müller
has been kind enough to send me a number of passages from Upanishads and
Âra*n*yakas, in which âtman has the sense of 'body, trunk,' and is
usually explained in the commentaries by *s*arîra (âtmâna*h* =
*s*arîrâvayavâ*h*, B*ri*hadâr. Up. I, 1, 2, 7). The adverb adhyâtmam, he
remarks, always means 'with reference to the body;' cf. Taitt. Up. I, 7;
*S*at. Br. [IV, 1, 3, 1](sbe2642.htm#4:1:3:1), the present volume, [p.
265](sbe2641.htm#page_265), note [1](sbe2642.htm#fn_635).

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xxxi:1](sbe2602.htm#fr_22) See Grassmann,
Wörterbuch s. v.; M. Bergaigne, III, 334, takes this passage to supply
the etymology of the word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 1, 1. First Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe2603)
