<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hkt01)  [Next](hkt03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002RHOUAK/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The History of the Knights Templar*, by Charles G. Addison, \[1842\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

# CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.

Origin of the Templars--The pilgrimages to Jerusalem--The dangers to
which pilgrims were exposed--The formation of the brotherhood of the
poor fellow-soldiers of Jesus Christ to protect them--Their location in
the Temple--A description of the Temple--Origin of the name
Templars--Hugh de Payens chosen Master of the Temple--Is sent to Europe
by King Baldwin--Is introduced to the Pope--The assembling of the
Council of Troyes--The formation of a rule for the government of the
Templars *Page* [1](hkt03.htm#page_1.md)

CHAPTER II.

Regula Pauperum Commilitonum Christi et Templi Salomonis.

The most curious parts of the rule displayed--The confirmation of the
rule by the Pope--The visit of Hugh de Payens, the Master of the Temple,
to England--His cordial reception--The foundation of the Order in this
country--Lands and money granted to the Templars--Their popularity in
Europe--The rapid increase of their fraternity--St. Bernard takes up the
pen in their behalf--He displays their valour and piety
[15](hkt04.htm#page_15.md)

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

CHAPTER III.

Hugh de Payens returns to Palestine--His death--Robert de Craon made
Master--Success of the Infidels--The second Crusade--The Templars assume
the Red Cross--Their gallant actions and high discipline--Lands, manors,
and churches granted them in England--Bernard de Tremelay made
Master--He is slain by the Infidels--Bertrand de Blanquefort made
Master--He is taken prisoner, and sent in chains to Aleppo--The Pope
writes letters in praise of the Templars--Their religious and military
enthusiasm--Their war banner called *Beauseant*--The rise of the rival
religio-military order of the Hospital of St. John
[36](hkt05.htm#page_36.md)

CHAPTER IV.

The contests between Saladin and the Templars--The vast privileges of
the Templars--The publication of the bull, *omne datum optimum*--The
Pope declares himself the immediate Bishop of the entire Order--The
different classes of Templars--The knights--Priests--Serving
brethren--The hired soldiers--The great officers of the
Temple--Punishment of cowardice--The Master of the Temple is taken
prisoner, and dies in a dungeon--Saladin's great successes--The
Christians purchase a truce--The Master of the Temple and the Patriarch
Heraclius proceed to England for succour--The consecration of the TEMPLE
CHURCH AT LONDON [60](hkt06.htm#page_60.md)

CHAPTER V.

The Temple at London--The vast possessions of the Templars in
England--The territorial divisions of the order--The different
preceptories in this country--The privileges conferred on the Templars
by the kings of England--The Masters of the Temple at London--Their
power and importance [81](hkt07.htm#page_81.md)

CHAPTER VI.

The Patriarch Heraclius quarrels with the king of England--He returns to
Palestine without succour--The disappointments and gloomy forebodings of
the Templars--They prepare to resist Saladin--Their defeat and
slaughter--

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The valiant deeds
of the Marshal of the Temple--The fatal battle of Tiberias--The
captivity of the Grand Master and the true Cross--The captive Templars
are offered the Koran or death--They choose the latter, and are
beheaded--The fall of Jerusalem--The Moslems take possession of the
Temple--They purify it with rose-water, say prayers, and hear a
sermon--The Templars retire to Antioch--Their letters to the king of
England and the Master of the Temple at London--Their exploits at the
siege of Acre [114](hkt08.htm#page_114.md)

CHAPTER VII.

Richard Cœur de Lion joins the Templars before Acre--The city
surrenders, and the Templars establish the chief house of their order
within it--Cœur de Lion takes up his abode with them--He sells to them
the island of Cyprus--The Templars form the van of his army--Their
foraging expeditions and great exploits--Cœur de Lion quits the Holy
Land in the disguise of a Knight Templar--The Templars build the
Pilgrim's Castle in Palestine--The state of the order in England--King
John resides in the Temple at London--The barons come to him at that
place, and demand MAGNA CHARTA--The exploits of the Templars in
Egypt--The letters of the Grand Master to the Master of the Temple at
London--The Templars reconquer Jerusalem [141](hkt09.htm#page_141.md)

CHAPTER VIII.

The conquest of Jerusalem by the Carizmians--The slaughter of the
Templars, and the death of the Grand Master--The exploits of the
Templars in Egypt--King Louis of France visits the Templars in
Palestine-He assists them in putting the country into a defensible
state--Henry IL, king of England, visits the Temple at Paris--The
magnificent hospitality of the Templars in England and France--Benocdar,
sultan of Egypt, invades Palestine--He defeats the Templars, takes their
strong fortresses, and decapitates six hundred of their brethren--The
Grand Master comes to England for succour--The renewal of the war--The
fall of Acre, and the final extinction of the Templars in Palestine
[165](hkt10.htm#page_165.md)

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

CHAPTER IX.

The downfall of the Templars--The cause thereof--The Grand Master comes
to Europe at the request of the Pope--He is imprisoned, with all the
Templars in France, by command of king Philip--They are put to the
torture, and confessions of the guilt of heresy and idolatry are
extracted from them--Edward II. king of England stands up in defence of
the Templars, but afterwards persecutes them at the instance of the
Pope--The imprisonment of the Master of the Temple and all his brethren
in England--Their examination upon eighty-seven horrible and ridiculous
articles of accusation before foreign inquisitors appointed by the
Pope--A council of the church assembles at London to pass sentence upon
them--The curious evidence adduced as to the mode of admission into the
order, and of the customs and observances of the fraternity.
[193](hkt11.htm#page_193.md)

CHAPTER X.

The Templars in France revoke their rack-extorted confessions--They are
tried as relapsed heretics, and burnt at the stake--The progress of the
inquiry in England--The curious evidence adduced as to the mode of
holding the chapters of the order--As to the penance enjoined therein,
and the absolution pronounced by the Master--The Templars draw up a
written defence, which they present to the ecclesiastical council--They
are placed in separate dungeons, and put to the torture--Two serving
brethren and a chaplain of the order then make confessions--Many other
Templars acknowledge themselves guilty of heresy in respect of their
belief in the religious authority of their Master--They make their
recantations, and are reconciled to the church before the south door of
Saint Paul's cathedral--The order of the Temple is abolished by the
Pope--The last of the Masters of the Temple in England dies in the
Tower--The disposal of the property of the order--Observations on the
downfall of the Templars. [239](hkt12.htm#page_239.md)

CHAPTER XI.

THE TEMPLE CHURCH.

The restoration of the Temple Church--The beauty and magnificence of the
venerable building--The various styles of architecture displayed in
it--The

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

discoveries made during the recent restoration--The sacrarium--The
marble piscina--The sacramental niches--The penitential cell--The
ancient Chapel of St. Anne--Historical matters connected with the Temple
Church--The holy relics anciently preserved therein--The interesting
monumental remains [289](hkt13.htm#page_289.md)

CHAPTER XII.

THE TEMPLE CHURCH.

THE MONUMENTS OF THE CRUSADERS--The tomb and effigy of Sir Geoffrey de
Magnaville, earl of Essex, and constable of the Tower--His life and
death, and famous exploits--Of William Marshall, earl of Pembroke,
Protector of England--Of the Lord de Ross--Of William and Gilbert
Marshall, earls of Pembroke--Of William Plantagenet, fifth son of Henry
the Third--The anxious desire manifested by king Henry the Third, queen
Eleanor, and various persons of rank, to be buried in the Temple Church
[309](hkt14.htm#page_309.md)

CHAPTER XIII.

THE TEMPLE.

Antiquities in the Temple--The history of the place subsequent to the
dissolution of the order of the Knights Templars--The establishment of a
society of lawyers in the Temple--The antiquity of this society--Its
connexion with the antient society of the Knights Templars--An order of
knights and serving brethren established in the law--The degree of
*frere serjen*, or *frater serviens*, borrowed from the antient
Templars--The modern Templars divide themselves into the two societies
of the Inner and Middle Temple [342](hkt15.htm#page_342.md)

CHAPTER XIV.

THE TEMPLE.

The Temple Garden--The erection of new buildings in the Temple--The
dissolution of the order of the Hospital of Saint John--The law
societies become lessees of the crown--The erection of the magnificent
Middle Temple Hall--The conversion of the old hall into chambers--The
grant of the inheritance

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

of the Temple to the two law societies--Their magnificent present to his
Majesty--Their antient orders and customs, and antient
hospitality--Their grand entertainments--Reader's feasts--Grand
Christmasses and Bevels--The fox-hunt in the hall--The dispute with the
Lord Mayor--The quarrel with the *custos* of the Temple Church
[373](hkt16.htm#page_373.md)

 

 

 

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="50%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655">ERRATA.
<p>In note, page <a href="hkt03.htm#page_6">6</a>, <em>for</em> infinitus, <em>read</em> infinitis.<br />
<a href="hkt04.htm#page_29">29</a>, <em>for</em> carrissime, <em>read</em> carissime.<br />
<a href="hkt05.htm#page_42">42</a>, <em>for</em> Angli, <em>read</em> Anglia.<br />
<a href="hkt06.htm#page_79">79</a>, <em>for</em> promptia, <em>read</em> promptior.<br />
<a href="hkt06.htm#page_79">79</a>, <em>for</em> principos, <em>read</em> principes.<br />
<a href="hkt06.htm#page_80">80</a>, <em>for</em> Patriarchs, <em>read</em> patriarcham.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](hkt03.md)

</div>
