<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hkt05)  [Next](hkt07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002RHOUAK/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The History of the Knights Templar*, by Charles G. Addison, \[1842\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

<span class="small">The contests between Saladin and the Templars--The
vast privileges of the Templars--The publication of the bull, omne datum
optimum--The Pope declares himself the immediate Bishop of the entire
Order--The different classes of Templars--The knights--Priests--Serving
brethren--The hired soldiers--The great officers of the
Temple--Punishment of cowardice--The Master of the Temple is taken
prisoner, and dies in a dungeon--Saladin's great successes--The
Christians purchase a truce--The Master of the Temple and the Patriarch
Heraclius proceed to England for succour--The consecration of the TEMPLE
CHURCH at LONDON.</span>

<span class="small">"The firmest bulwark of Jerusalem was founded on the
knights of the Hospital of St. John and of the Temple of Solomon; on the
strange association of a monastic and military life, which fanaticism
might suggest, but of which policy must approve. The flower of the
nobility of Europe aspired to wear the cross and profess the vows of
these respectable orders; their spirit and discipline were immortal; and
the speedy donation of twenty-eight thousand farms or manors enabled
them to support a regular force of cavalry and infantry for the defence
of Palestine."--*Gibbon*.</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1170.</span>THE Master, Philip of Naplous, resigned his authority
after a short government of three years, and was succeeded by Brother
Odo de St. Amand, a proud and fiery warrior, of undaunted courage and
resolution; having, according to William, Archbishop of Tyre, the fear
neither of God nor of man before his eyes. <span
id="fr_75"></span>[\*](#fn_75.md)

The Templars were now destined to meet with a more formidable

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1170.</span>opponent than any they had hitherto encountered in the
field, one who was again to cause the crescent to triumph over the
cross, and to plant the standard of the prophet upon the walls of the
holy city.

When the Fatimite caliph had received intelligence of Amalric's invasion
of Egypt, he sent the hair of his women, one of the greatest tokens of
distress known in the East, to the pious Noureddin, who immediately
despatched a body of troops to his assistance, headed by Sheerkoh, and
his nephew, *Youseef Ben-Acoub-Ben-Schadi*, the famous Saladin. Sheerkoh
died immediately after his arrival, and Youseef succeeded to his
command, and was appointed vizier of the caliph. Youseef had passed his
youth in pleasure and debauchery, sloth and indolence: he had quitted
with regret the delights of Damascus for the dusty plains of Egypt; and
but for the unjustifiable expedition of King Amalric and the
Hospitaliers against the infidels, the powerful talents and the latent
energies of the young Courdish chieftain, which altogether changed the
face of affairs in the East, would in all probability never have been
developed.

As soon as Saladin grasped the power of the sword, and obtained the
command of armies, he threw off the follies of his youth, and led a new
life. He renounced the pleasures of the world, and assumed the character
of a saint. His dress was a coarse woollen garment; water was his only
drink; and he carefully abstained from everything disapproved of by the
Mussulman religion. Five times each day he prostrated himself in public
prayer, surrounded by his friends and followers, and his demeanour
became grave, serious, and thoughtful. He fought vigorously with
spiritual weapons against the temptations of the world; his nights were
often spent in watching and meditation, and he was always diligent in
fasting and in the study of the Koran. With the same zeal he combated
with carnal weapons

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1170.</span>the foes of Islam, and his admiring brethren gave him
the name of *Salah-ed-deen*, "Integrity of Religion," vulgarly called
Saladin.

At the head of forty thousand horse and foot, he crossed the desert and
ravaged the borders of Palestine; the wild Bedouins and the enthusiastic
Arabians of the far south were gathered together under his standard, and
hastened with holy zeal to obtain the crown of martyrdom in defence of
the faith. The long remembered and greatly dreaded Arab shout of onset,
*Allah acbar*, GOD *is victorious*, again resounded through the plains
and the mountains of Palestine, and the grand religious struggle for the
possession of the holy city of Jerusalem, equally reverenced by
Mussulmen and by Christians, was once more vigorously commenced. Saladin
besieged the fortified city of Gaza, which belonged to the Knights
Templars, and was considered to be the key of Palestine towards Egypt.
The luxuriant gardens, the palm and olive groves of this city of the
wilderness, were destroyed by the wild cavalry of the desert, and the
innumerable tents of the Arab host were thickly clustered on the
neighbouring sand-hills. The warlike monks of the Temple fasted and
prayed, and invoked the aid of the God of battles; the gates of the city
were thrown open, and in an unexpected sally upon the enemy's camp they
performed such prodigies of valour, that Saladin, despairing of being
able to take the place, abandoned the siege, and retired into
Egypt. <span id="fr_76"></span>[\*](#fn_76.md)

The year following, Pope Alexander's famous bull, *omne datum optimum*,
confirming the previous privileges of the Templars, and conferring upon
them additional powers and immunities, was published in England. It
commences in the following terms:

"Alexander, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his beloved sons,
Odo, Master of the religious chivalry of the Temple,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1172.</span>which is situated at Jerusalem, and to his successors,
and to all the regularly professed brethren.

"Every good gift and every perfect reward <span
id="fr_77"></span>[\*](#fn_77.md) cometh from above, descending from the
Father of light, with whom there is no change nor shadow of variety.
Therefore, O beloved children in the Lord, we praise the Almighty God,
in respect of your holy fraternity, since your religion and venerated
institution are celebrated throughout the entire world. For although by
nature ye are children of wrath, and slaves to the pleasures of this
life, yet by a favouring grace ye have not remained deaf hearers of the
gospel, but, throwing aside all earthly pomps and enjoyments, and
rejecting the broad road which leadeth unto death, ye have humbly chosen
the arduous path to everlasting life. Faithfully fulfilling the
character of soldiery of the Lord, ye constantly carry upon your breasts
the sign of the life-giving cross. Moreover, like true Israelites, and
most instructed fighters of the divine battle, inflamed with true
charity, ye fulfil by your works the word of the gospel which saith,
'Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends;' so that, in obedience to the voice of the great Shepherd,
ye in nowise fear to lay down your lives for your brethren, and to
defend them from the inroad of the pagans; and ye may well be termed
holy warriors, since ye have been appointed by the Lord defenders of the
catholic church and combatants of the enemies of Christ."

After this preamble, the pope earnestly exhorts the Templars to pursue
with unceasing diligence their high vocation; to defend the eastern
church with their whole hearts and souls, and to strike down the enemies
of the cross of Christ. "By the authority of God, and the blessed Peter
prince of apostles," says the holy pontiff, "we have ordained and do
determine, that the Temple in

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1172.</span>which ye are gathered together to the praise and glory
of God, for the defence of the faithful, and the deliverance of the
church, shall remain for evermore under the safeguard and protection of
the holy apostolic see, together with all the goods and possessions
which ye now lawfully enjoy, and all that ye may hereafter rightfully
obtain, through the liberality of Christian kings and princes, and the
alms and oblations of the faithful.

"We moreover by these presents decree, that the regular discipline,
which, by divine favour, hath been instituted in your house, shall be
inviolably observed, and that the brethren who have there dedicated
themselves to the service of the omnipotent God, shall live together in
chastity and without property; and making good their profession both in
word and deed, they shall remain subject and obedient in all things to
the Master, or to him whom the Master shall have set in authority over
them.

"Moreover, as the chief house at Jerusalem hath been the source and
fountain of your sacred institution and order, the Master thereof shall
always be considered the head and chief of all the houses and places
appertaining thereunto. And we further decree, that at the decease of
Odo, our beloved son in the Lord, and of each one of his successors, no
man shall be set in authority over the brethren of the same house,
except he be of the religious and military order; and has regularly
professed your habit and fellowship; and has been chosen by all the
brethren unanimously, or, at all events, by the greater part of them.

"And from henceforth it shall not be permitted to any ecclesiastical or
secular person to infringe or diminish the customs and observances of
your religion and profession, as instituted by the Master and brethren
in common; and those rules which have been put into writing and observed
by you for some time past, shall not be changed or altered except by the
authority

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1172.</span>authority of the Master, with the consent of the
majority of the chapter.

". . . . No ecclesiastic or secular person shall dare to exact from the
Master and Brethren of the Temple, oaths, guarantees, or any such
securities as are ordinarily required from the laity.

"Since your sacred institution and religious chivalry have been
established by divine Providence, it is not fit that you should enter
into any other order with the view of leading a more religious life, for
God, who is immutable and eternal, approveth not the inconstant heart;
but wisheth rather the good purpose, when once begun, to be persevered
in to the end of life.

"How many and great persons have pleased the lord of an earthly empire,
under the military girdle and habit! How many and distinguished men,
gathered together in arms, have bravely fought, in these our times, in
the cause of the gospel of God, and in defence of the laws of our
Father; and, consecrating their hands in the blood of the unbelievers in
the Lord, have, after their pains and toil in this world's warfare,
obtained the reward of everlasting life! Do ye therefore, both knights
and serving brethren, assiduously pay attention to your profession, and
in accordance with the saying of the apostle, 'Let each one of you
stedfastly remain in the vocation to which you have been called.' We
therefore ordain, that when your brethren have once taken the vows, and
have been received in your sacred college, and have taken upon
themselves your warfare, and the habit of your religion, they shall no
longer have the power of returning again to the world; nor can any,
after they have once made profession, abjure the cross and habit of your
religion, with the view of entering another convent or monastery of
stricter or more lax discipline, without the consent of the brethren, or
Master, or of him whom the Master hath set in authority over them; nor
shall

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1172.</span>any ecclesiastic or secular person be permitted to
receive or retain them.

"And since those who are defenders of the church ought to be supported
and maintained out of the good things of the church, we prohibit all
manner of men from exacting tithes from you in respect of your moveables
or immoveables, or any of the goods and possessions appertaining unto
your venerable house.

"And that nothing may be wanting to the plenitude of your salvation, and
the care of your souls; and that ye may more commodiously hear divine
service, and receive the sacraments in your sacred college; we in like
manner ordain, that it shall be lawful for you to admit within your
fraternity, honest and godly clergymen and priests, as many as ye may
conscientiously require; and to receive them from whatever parts they
may come, as well in your chief house at Jerusalem, as in all the other
houses and places depending upon it, so that they do not belong to any
other religious profession or order, and so that ye ask them of the
bishop, if they come from the neighbourhood; but if peradventure the
bishop should refuse, yet nevertheless ye have permission to receive and
retain them by the authority of the holy apostolic see.

"If any of these, after they have been professed, should turn out to be
useless, or should become disturbers of your house and religion, it
shall be lawful for you, with the consent of the major part of the
chapter, to remove them, and give them leave to enter any other order
where they may wish to live in the service of God, and to substitute
others in their places who shall undergo a probation of one year in your
society; which term being completed, if their morals render them worthy
of your fellowship, and they shall be found fit and proper for your
service, then let them make the regular profession of life according to
your rule,

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1172.</span>and of obedience to their Master, so that they have
their food and clothing, and also their lodging, with the fraternity.

"But it shall not be lawful for them presumptuously to take part in the
consultations of your chapter, or in the government of your house; they
are permitted to do so, so far only as they are enjoined by yourselves.
And as regards the cure of souls, they are to occupy themselves with
that business so far only as they are required. Moreover, they shall be
subject to no person, power, or authority, excepting that of your own
chapter, but let them pay perfect obedience, in all matters and upon all
occasions, to thee our beloved son in the Lord, Odo, and to thy
successors, as their *Master* and *Bishop*.

"We moreover decree, that it shall be lawful for you to send your
clerks, when they are to be admitted to holy orders, for ordination to
whatever catholic bishop you may please, who, clothed with our
apostolical power, will grant them what they require; but we forbid them
to preach with a view of obtaining money, or for any temporal purpose
whatever, unless perchance the Master of the Temple for the time being
should cause it to be done for some special purpose. And whosoever of
these are received into your college, they must make the promise of
stedfastness of purpose, of reformation of morals, and that they will
fight for the Lord all the days of their lives, and render strict
obedience to the Master of the Temple; the book in which these things
are contained being placed upon the altar.

"We moreover, without detracting from the rights of the bishops in
respect of tithes, oblations, and buryings, concede to you the power of
constructing oratories in the places bestowed upon the sacred house of
the Temple, where you and your retainers and servants may dwell; so that
both ye and they may be able to assist at the divine offices, and
receive there the rite of sepulture; for it would be unbecoming and very
dangerous to the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1172.</span>souls of the religious brethren, if they were to be
mixed up with a crowd of secular persons, and be brought into the
company of women on the occasion of their going to church. But as to the
tithes, which, by the advice and with the consent of the bishops, ye may
be able by your zeal to draw out of the hands of the clergy or laity,
and those which with the consent of the bishops ye may acquire from
their own clergy, we confirm to you by our apostolical authority."

The above bull further provides, in various ways, for the temporal and
spiritual advantage of the Templars, and expressly extends the favours
and indulgences, and the apostolical blessings, to all the serving
brethren, as well as to the knights. It also confers upon the fraternity
the important privilege of causing the churches of towns and villages
lying under sentence of interdict to be opened once a year, and divine
service to be celebrated within them. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[\*](#fn_78.md)

A bull exactly similar to the above appears to have been issued by Pope
Alexander, on the seventh id. Jan. A.D. 1162, addressed to the Master
Bertrand de Blanquefort. <span id="fr_79"></span>[†](#fn_79.md) Both the
above instruments are to a great extent merely confirmatory of the
privileges previously conceded to the Templars.

The exercise or the abuse of these powers and immunities speedily
brought the Templars into collision with the ecclesiastics. At the
general council of the church, held at Rome, (A.D. 1179,) called the
third of Lateran, a grave reprimand was addressed to them by the holy
Fathers. "We find," say they, "by the frequent complaints of the bishops
our colleagues, that the Templars and Hospitaliers abuse the privileges
granted them by the Holy See; that the chaplains and priests of their
rule have caused parochial churches to be conveyed over to themselves
without the ordinaries’

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1172.</span>consent; that they administer the sacraments to
excommunicated persons, and bury them with all the usual ceremonies of
the church; that they likewise abuse the permission granted the brethren
of having divine service said once a year in places under interdict, and
that they admit seculars into their fraternity, pretending thereby to
give them the same right to their privileges as if they were really
professed." To provide a remedy for these irregularities, the council
forbad the military orders to receive for the future any conveyances of
churches and tithes without the ordinaries’ consent; that with regard to
churches not founded by themselves, nor served by the chaplains of the
order, they should present the priests they designed for the cure of
them to the bishop of the diocese, and reserve nothing to themselves but
the cognizance of the temporals which belonged to them; that they should
not cause service to be said, in churches under interdict, above once a
year, nor give burial there to any person whatever; and that none of
their fraternity or *associates* should be allowed to partake of their
privileges, if not actually professed. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[\*](#fn_80.md)

Several bishops from Palestine were present at this council, together
with the archbishop of Cæsarea, and William archbishop of Tyre, the
great historian of the Latin kingdom.

The order of the Temple was at this period divided into the three great
classes of knights, priests, and serving brethren, all bound together by
their vow of obedience to the Master of the Temple at Jerusalem, the
chief of the entire fraternity. Every candidate for admission into the
first class must have received the honour of knighthood in due form,
according to the laws of chivalry, before he could be admitted to the
vows; and as no person of low degree could be advanced to the honours of
knighthood, the brethren of the first class, i. e. the *Knights*
Templars, were all men of noble birth and of high courage.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1172.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Previous to the council of Troyes, the order consisted of knights only,
but the rule framed by the holy fathers enjoins the admission of
esquires and retainers to the vows, in the following terms.

"LXI. We have known many out of divers provinces, as well retainers as
esquires, fervently desiring for the salvation of their souls to be
admitted for life into our house. It is expedient, therefore, that you
admit them to the vows, lest perchance the old enemy should suggest
something to them whilst in God's service by stealth or unbecomingly,
and should suddenly drive them from the right path." Hence arose the
great class of serving brethren, (*fratres servientes*,) who attended
the knights into the field both on foot and on horseback, and added
vastly to the power and military reputation of the order. The serving
brethren were armed with bows, bills, and swords; it was their duty to
be always near the person of the knight, to supply him with fresh
weapons or a fresh horse in case of need, and to render him every
succour in the affray. The esquires of the knights were generally
serving brethren of the order, but the services of secular persons might
be accepted.

The order of the Temple always had in its pay a large number of
retainers, and of mercenary troops, both cavalry and infantry, I which
were officered by the knights. These were clothed in black or brown
garments, that they might, in obedience to the rule, <span
id="fr_81"></span>[\*](#fn_81.md) be plainly distinguished from the
professed soldiers of Christ, who were habited in white. The black or
brown garment was directed to be worn by all connected with the Templars
who had not been admitted to the vows, that the holy soldiers might not
suffer, in character or reputation, from the irregularities of secular
men their dependents. <span id="fr_82"></span>[†](#fn_82.md)

The white mantle of the Templars was a regular monastic

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1172.</span>habit, having the red cross on the left breast; it was
worn over armour of chain mail, and could be looped up so as to leave
the sword-arm at full liberty. On his head the Templar wore a white
linen coif, and over that a small round cap made of red cloth. When in
the field, an iron scull-cap was probably added. We must now take a
glance at the military organization of the order of the Temple, and of
the chief officers of the society.

Next in power and authority to the Master stood the Marshal, who was
charged with the execution of the military arrangements on the field of
battle. He was second in command, and in case of the death of the
Master, the government of the order devolved upon him until the new
superior was elected. It was his duty to provide arms, tents, horses,
and mules, and all the necessary appendages of war.

The Prior or Preceptor of the kingdom of Jerusalem, also styled "Grand
Preceptor of the Temple," had the immediate superintendence over the
chief house of the order in the holy city. He was the treasurer general
of the society, and had charge of all the receipts and expenditure.
During the absence of the Master from Jerusalem, the entire government
of the Temple devolved upon him.

The Draper was charged with the clothing department, and had to
distribute garments "free from the suspicion of arrogance and
superfluity" to all the brethren. He is directed to take especial care
that the habits be "neither too long nor too short, but properly
measured for the wearer, with equal measure, and with brotherly regard,
that the eye of the whisperer or the accuser may not presume to notice
anything." <span id="fr_83"></span>[\*](#fn_83.md)

The Standard Bearer (*Balcanifer*) bore the glorious *Beauseant*, or
war-banner, to the field; he was supported by a certain number

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1172.</span>of knights and esquires, who were sworn to protect the
colours of the order, and never to let them fall into the hands of the
enemy.

The Turcopilar was the commander of a body of light horse called
Turcopoles (*Turcopuli*.) These were natives of Syria and Palestine, the
offspring frequently of Turkish mothers and christian fathers, brought
up in the religion of Christ, and retained in the pay of the order of
the Temple. They were lightly armed, were clothed in the Asiatic style,
and being inured to the climate, and well acquainted with the country,
and with the Mussulman mode of warfare, they were found extremely
serviceable as light cavalry and skirmishers, and were always attached
to the war-battalions of the Templars.

The Guardian of the Chapel (*Custos Capellæ*) had charge of the portable
chapel and the ornaments of the altar, which were always carried by the
Templars into the field. This portable chapel was a round tent, which
was pitched in the centre of the camp; the quarters of the brethren were
disposed around it, so that they might, in the readiest and most
convenient manner, participate in the divine offices, and fulfil the
religious duties of their profession.

Besides the Grand Preceptor of the kingdom of Jerusalem, there were the
Grand Preceptors of Antioch and Tripoli, and the Priors or Preceptors of
the different houses of the Temple in Syria and in Palestine, all of
whom commanded in the field, and had various military duties to perform
under the eye of the Master.

The Templars and the Hospitallers were the constituted guardians of the
true cross when it was brought forth from its sacred repository in the
church of the Resurrection to be placed at the head of the christian
army. The Templars marched on the right

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1172.</span>of the sacred emblem, and the Hospitaliers on the left;
and the same position was taken up by the two orders in the line of
battle. <span id="fr_84"></span>[\*](#fn_84.md)

An eye-witness of the conduct of the Templars in the field tells us that
they were always foremost in the fight and the last in the retreat; that
they proceeded to battle with the greatest order, silence, and
circumspection, and carefully attended to the commands of their Master.
When the signal to engage had been given by their chief, and the
trumpets of the order sounded to the charge, then," says he, "they
humbly sing the psalm of David, *Non nobis, non nobis, Domine, sed
nomini tuo da gloriam*, 'Not unto us, not unto us, O Lord, but unto thy
name give the praise;' and placing their lances in rest, they either
break the enemy's line or die. If any one of them should by chance turn
back, or bear himself less manfully than he ought, the white mantle, the
emblem of their order, is ignominiously stripped off his shoulders, the
cross worn by the fraternity is taken away from him, and he is cast out
from the fellowship of the brethren; he is compelled to eat on the
ground without a napkin or a table-cloth for the space of one year; and
the dogs who gather around him and torment him he is not permitted to
drive away. At the expiration of the year, if he be truly penitent, the
Master and the brethren restore to him the military girdle and his
pristine habit and cross, and receive him again into the fellowship and
community of the brethren. The Templars do indeed practise the
observance of a stern religion, living in humble obedience to their
Master, without property, and spending nearly all the days of their
lives under tents in the open fields." <span
id="fr_85"></span>[†](#fn_85.md) Such is the picture

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1172.</span>of the Templars drawn by one of the leading dignitaries
of the Latin kingdom.

We must now resume our narrative of the principal events connected with
the order.

In the year 1172, the Knight Templar Walter du Mesnil was guilty of a
foul murder, which created a great sensation in the East. An odious
religious sect, supposed to be descended from the Ismaelians of Persia,
were settled in the fastnesses of the mountains above Tripoli. They
devoted their souls and bodies in blind obedience to a chief who is
called by the writers of the crusades "the old man of the mountain," and
were employed by him in the most extensive system of murder and
assassination known in the history of the world. Both Christian and
Moslem writers enumerate with horror the many illustrious victims that
fell beneath their daggers. They assumed all shapes and disguises for
the furtherance of their deadly designs, and carried, in general, no
arms except a small poniard concealed in the folds of their dress,
called in the Persian tongue *hassissin*, whence these wretches were
called assassins, their chief the prince of the assassins; and the word
itself, in all its odious import, has passed into most European
languages. <span id="fr_86"></span>[\*](#fn_86.md)

Raimond, son of the count of Tripoli, was slain by these fanatics whilst
kneeling at the foot of the altar in the church of the Blessed Virgin at
Carchusa or Tortosa; the Templars flew to arms to avenge his death; they
penetrated into the fastnesses and strongholds of "the mountain chief,"
and at last compelled him to purchase peace by the payment of an annual
tribute of two thousand crowns into the treasury of the order. In the
ninth year of Amalric's reign, *Sinan Ben Suleiman*, imaun of the
assassins, sent a trusty counsellor to Jerusalem, offering, in

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1172.</span>the name of himself and his people, to embrace the
christian religion, provided the Templars would release them from the
tribute money. The proposition was favourably received; the envoy was
honourably entertained for some days, and on his departure he was
furnished by the king with a guide and an escort to conduct him in
safety to the frontier. The Ismaelite had reached the borders of the
Latin kingdom, and was almost in sight of the castles of his brethren,
when he was cruelly murdered by the Knight Templar Walter du Mesnil, who
attacked the escort with a body of armed followers. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[\*](#fn_87.md)

The king of Jerusalem, justly incensed at this perfidious action,
assembled the barons of the kingdom at Sidon to determine on the best
means of obtaining satisfaction for the injury; and it was determined
that two .of their number should proceed to Odo de St. Amand to demand
the surrender of the criminal. The haughty Master of the Temple bade
them inform his majesty the king, that the members of the order of the
Temple were not subject to his jurisdiction, nor to that of his
officers; that the Templars acknowledged no earthly superior except the
Pope; and that to the holy pontiff alone belonged the cognizance of the
offence. He declared, however, that the crime should meet with due
punishment; that he had caused the criminal to be arrested and put in
irons, and would forthwith send him to Rome, but till judgment was given
in his case, he forbade all persons of whatsoever degree to meddle with
him. <span id="fr_88"></span>[†](#fn_88.md)

Shortly afterwards, however, the Master found it expedient to alter his
determination, and insist less strongly upon the privileges of his
fraternity. Brother Walter du Mesnil was delivered

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1177.</span>up to the king, and confined in one of the royal
prisons, but his ultimate fate has not been recorded.

On the death of Noureddin, sultan of Damascus, (A.D. 1175,) Saladin
raised himself to the sovereignty both of Egypt and of Syria. He levied
an immense army, and crossing the desert from Cairo, he again planted
the standard of Mahomet upon the sacred territory of Palestine. His
forces were composed of twenty-six thousand light infantry, eight
thousand horsemen, a host of archers and spearmen mounted on
dromedaries, and eighteen thousand common soldiers. The person of
Saladin was surrounded by a body-guard of a thousand Mamlook emirs,
clothed in yellow cloaks worn over their shirts of mail.

In the great battle fought near Ascalon, (Nov. 1, A.D. 1177,) Odo de St.
Amand, the Master of the Temple, at the head of eighty of his knights,
broke through the guard of Mamlooks, slew their commander, and
penetrated to the imperial tent, from whence the sultan escaped with
great difficulty, almost naked, upon a fleet dromedary; the infidels,
thrown into confusion, were slaughtered or driven into the desert, where
they perished from hunger, fatigue, or the inclemency of the
weather. <span id="fr_89"></span>[\*](#fn_89.md) The year following,
Saladin collected a vast army at Damascus; and the Templars, in order to
protect and cover the road leading from that city to Jerusalem,
commenced the erection of a strong fortress on the northern frontier of
the Latin kingdom, close to Jacob's ford on the river Jordan, at the
spot where now stands *Djiss’r Beni Yakoob*, "the bridge of the sons of
Jacob." Saladin advanced at the head of his forces to oppose the
progress of the work, and the king of Jerusalem and all the chivalry of
the Latin kingdom were gathered together in the plain to protect the
Templars and their workmen. The fortress was erected notwithstanding

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="margnote">ODO DE  
ST. AMAND.  
A.D. 1179.</span>all the exertions of the infidels, and the Templars
threw into it a strong garrison. Redoubled efforts were then made by
Saladin to destroy the place.

At a given signal from the Mussulman trumpets, "the defenders of Islam"
fled before "the avengers of Christ;" the christian forces became
disordered in the pursuit, and the swift cavalry of the desert, wheeling
upon both wings, defeated with immense slaughter the entire army of the
cross. The Templars and the Hospitallers, with the count of Tripoli,
stood firm on the summit of a small hillock, and for a long time
presented a bold and undaunted front to the victorious enemy. The count
of Tripoli at last cut his way through the infidels, and fled to Tyre;
the Master of the Hospital, after seeing most of his brethren slain,
swam across the Jordan, and fled, covered with wounds, to the castle of
Beaufort; and the Templars, after fighting with their customary zeal and
fanaticism around the red-cross banner, which waved to the last over the
field of blood, were all killed or taken prisoners, and the Master, Odo
de St. Amand, fell alive into the hands of the enemy. <span
id="fr_90"></span>[\*](#fn_90.md) Saladin then laid siege to the
newly-erected fortress, which was of some strength, being defended by
thick walls, flanked with large towers furnished with military engines.
After a gallant resistance on the part of the garrison, it was set on
fire, and then stormed. "The Templars," says Abulpharadge, "flung
themselves some into the fire, where they were burned, some cast
themselves into the Jordan, some jumped down from the walls on to the
rocks, and were dashed to pieces: thus were slain the enemy." The
fortress was reduced to a heap of ruins, and the enraged sultan, it is
said,

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="margnote">ARNOLD DE  
TORROGE.  
A.D. 1180.</span>ordered all the Templars taken in the place to be sawn
in two, excepting the most distinguished of the knights, who were
reserved for a ransom, and were sent in chains to Aleppo. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[\*](#fn_91.md)

Saladin offered Odo de St. Amand his liberty in exchange for the freedom
of his own nephew, who was a prisoner in the hands of the Templars; but
the Master of the Temple haughtily replied, that he would never, by his
example, encourage any of his knights to be mean enough to surrender,
that a Templar ought either to vanquish or die, and that be had nothing
to give for his ransom but his girdle and his knife. <span
id="fr_92"></span>[†](#fn_92.md) The proud spirit of Odo de St. Amand could
but ill brook confinement; he languished and died in the dungeons of
Damascus, and was succeeded by Brother Arnold de Torroge, who had filled
some of the chief situations of the order in Europe. <span
id="fr_93"></span>[‡](#fn_93.md)

The affairs of the Latin Christians were at this period in a deplorable
situation. Saladin encamped near Tiberias, and extended his ravages into
almost every part of Palestine. His light cavalry swept the valley of
the Jordan to within a day's march of Jerusalem, and the whole country
as far as Panias on the one side, and Beisan, D’Jenneen, and Sebaste, on
the other, was destroyed by fire and the sword. The houses of the
Templars were pillaged and burnt; various castles belonging to the order
were taken by assault; <span id="fr_94"></span>[§](#fn_94.md) but the
immediate destruction of the Latin power was arrested by some partial
successes obtained by the christian warriors, and by the skilful
generalship of their

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

<span class="margnote">ARNOLD DE  
TORROGE.  
A.D. 1184.</span>leaders. Saladin was compelled to retreat to Damascus,
after he had burnt Naplous, and depopulated the whole country around
Tiberias. A truce was proposed, (A.D. 1184,) and as the attention of the
sultan was then distracted by the intrigues of the Turcoman chieftains
in the north of Syria, and he was again engaged in hostilities in
Mesopotamia, he agreed to a suspension of the war for four years, in
consideration of the payment by the Christians of a large sum of money.

Immediate advantage was taken of this truce to secure the safety of the
Latin kingdom. A grand council was called together at Jerusalem, and it
was determined that Heraclius, the patriarch of the Holy City, and the
Masters of the Temple and Hospital, should forthwith proceed to Europe,
to obtain succour from the western princes. The sovereign mostly
depended upon for assistance was Henry the Second, king of
England, <span id="fr_95"></span>[\*](#fn_95.md) grandson of Fulk, the late
king of Jerusalem, and cousin-german to Baldwin, the then reigning
sovereign. Henry had received absolution for the murder of Saint Thomas
a Becket, on condition that he should proceed in person at the head of a
powerful army to the succour of Palestine, and should, at his own
expense, maintain two hundred Templars for the defence. of the holy
territory. <span id="fr_96"></span>[†](#fn_96.md)

The Patriarch and the two Masters landed in Italy, and after furnishing
themselves with the letters of the pope, threatening the English monarch
with the judgments of heaven if he did not forthwith perform the penance
prescribed him, they set out for England. At Verona, the Master of the
Temple fell sick and

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="margnote">ARNOLD DE  
TORROGE.  
A.D. 1185.</span>died, <span id="fr_97"></span>[\*](#fn_97.md) but his
companions proceeding on their journey, landed in safety in England at
the commencement of the year 1185. They were received by the king at
Reading, and throwing themselves at the feet of the English monarch,
they with much weeping and sobbing saluted him in behalf of the king,
the princes, and the people of the kingdom of Jerusalem. They explained
the object of their visit, and presented him with the pope's letters,
with the keys of the holy sepulchre, of the tower of David, and of the
city of Jerusalem, together with the royal banner of the Latin
kingdom. <span id="fr_98"></span>[†](#fn_98.md) Their eloquent and pathetic
narrative of the fierce inroads of Saladin, and of the miserable
condition of Palestine, drew tears from king Henry and all his
court. <span id="fr_99"></span>[‡](#fn_99.md) The English sovereign gave
encouraging assurances to the patriarch and his companions, and promised
to bring the whole matter before the parliament, which was to meet the
first Sunday in Lent.

The patriarch, in the mean time, proceeded to London, and was received
by the Knights Templars at the Temple in that city, the chief house of
the order in Britain, where, in the month of February, he consecrated
the beautiful Temple church, dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary, which
had just then been erected. <span id="fr_100"></span>[§](#fn_100.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[60:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_75.md) *Will. Tyr.* lib. xxi.
cap. 29.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[62:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_76.md) *Will. Tyr.* lib. xx.
xxi. xxii.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[63:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_77.md) *Omne datum optimum* et
omne donum perfectum desursum est, descendens a Patre luminum, apud quem
non est transmutatio, nec vicissitudinis obumbratio.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[68:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_78.md) Acta Rymeri, tom. i. ad
ann. 1172, p. 30, 31, 32.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[68:†](hkt06.htm#fr_79.md) *Wilcke*, Geschichte des
Tempelherrenordens, vol. ii. p. 230.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[69:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_80.md) 3 Concil. Lat. cap. 9.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[70:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_81.md) Regula, cap. 20.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[70:†](hkt06.htm#fr_82.md) Cap. 21, 22.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[71:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_83.md) Cap. 20, 27, of the
rule.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[73:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_84.md) *Jac. de Vitr.* Hist.
Orient. apud *Martene* thesaur. nov. anecdot. tom. iii. col. 276, 277.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[73:†](hkt06.htm#fr_85.md) Narratio Patriarchæ
Hierosolymitani coram summo Pontifice de statu Terræ Sanctæ. ex M. S.
Cod. Bigotiano, apud *Martene* thesaur. nov. anecdot. tom. iii. col.
276, 277.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[74:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_86.md) Dissertation sur les
Assassins, Académie des Inscriptions, tom. xvii. p. 127, 170. *De
Guignes*. Hist. des Huns.--*Will. Tyr.* lib. xx. cap. 31.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[75:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_87.md) *Jac. de Vitr.* Hist.
Orient. lib. iii. p.1142. *Will. Tyr.* lib. xx. cap. 32.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[75:†](hkt06.htm#fr_88.md)Adjecit etiam et alia *a
spiritu superbiæ*, quo ipso plurimum abundabat, dictata, quæ præsenti
narrationi [non](errata.htm#1.md) multum necessarium est
interserere.--*Will. Tyr.* lib. xx. cap. 32.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[76:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_89.md) *Will. Tyr.* lib. xxi.
cap. 20, 22, 23. Abulfeda Abulpharadge, Chron, Syr. p. 379.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[77:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_90.md) Capti sunt ibi de
nostris, Otto de Sancto Amando militiæ Templi Magister, homo nequaquam
superbus et arrogans, spiritum furoris habens in naribus, nec Deum
timens, nec ad homines habens reverentiam.--*Will. Tyr.* lib. xxi. cap.
29. Abulpharadge, Chron. Syr. p. 380, 381.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[78:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_91.md) *Abulpharadge*, Chron.
Syr. ut sup. Menologium Cisterciente, p. 194. *Bernardus Thesaurarius*
de acq. *Terr. Sanc.* cap. 139.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[78:†](hkt06.htm#fr_92.md) Dicens non esse
consuetudiuis militum Templi ut aliqua redemptio daretur pro eis præter
cingulum et cultellum. Chron. *Trivet* apud *Hall*, vol. i. p. 77.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[78:‡](hkt06.htm#fr_93.md) Eodem anno quo captus
est in vinculis et squalore carceris, nulli lugendus, dicitur
obiisse.--*Will. Tyr.* lib. xxi. cap. 29. Ib. lib. xxii. cap. 7. Gallia
christiana nova, tom. i. col. 258; ibid p. 172, instrumentorum.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[78:§](hkt06.htm#fr_94.md) *Abulfeda*, ad ann.
1182, 3. *Will. Tyr.* lib. xxii. cap. 16-20.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[79:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_95.md) Unde propter causas
prædictas generali providentia statutum est, ut Jerosolymitanus
Patriarcha, petendi contra immanissimum hostem Saladinum auxilii gratia,
ad christianos principos in Europam mitteretur; sed maxime ad illustrem
Anglorum regem, cujus efficacior et promptia opera
sperabatur.--*Hemingford*, cap. 33; *Radulph de Diceto*, inter; *Hist.
Angl*. X. script. p. 622.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[79:†](hkt06.htm#fr_96.md) Concil. Magn. Brit. tom.
iv. p. 788, 789.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[80:\*](hkt06.htm#fr_97.md) *Arnauld* of Troy.
*Radulph de Diceto*, ut sup. p. 625.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[80:†](hkt06.htm#fr_98) Eodem anno (1185,.md)
Baldewinus rex Jerusalem, et Templares et Hospitalares, miserunt ad
regem Angliæ Heraclium, sanctæ civitatis Jerusalem Patriarcha, et summos
Hospitalis et Templi Magistros una cum vexillo regio, et clavibus
sepulchri Domini, et turris David, et civitatis Jerusalem; postulantes
ab eo celerem succursum. . . . qui statim ad pedes regis provoluti cum
fletu magno et singultu, verba salutationis ex parte regis et principum
et universæ plebis terræ Jerosolymitanæ proferebant. . . . . tradiderunt
ei vexillum regium, etc. etc. *Hoveden*, ad ann. 1185; *Radulph de
Diceto*, p. 626.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[80:‡](hkt06.htm#fr_99.md) *Matt. Westin*. ad ann.
1185; *Guill. Neubr*. tom. i. lib iii. cap. 12, 13. *Chron. Dunst*.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[80:§](hkt06.htm#fr_100.md) *Speed*. Hist.
Britain, p. 50G. A.D. 1185.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](hkt07.md)

</div>
