<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hkt09)  [Next](hkt11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002RHOUAK/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The History of the Knights Templar*, by Charles G. Addison, \[1842\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

<span class="small">The conquest of Jerusalem by the Carizmians--The
slaughter of the Templars, and the death of the Grand Master--The
exploits of the Templars in Egypt--King Louis of France visits the
Templars in Palestine--He assists them in putting the country into a
defensible state--Henry II., king of England, visits the Temple at
Paris--The magnificent hospitality of the Templars in England and
France--Benocdar, sultan of Egypt, invades Palestine--He defeats the
Templars, takes their strong fortresses, and decapitates six hundred of
their brethren--The Grand Master comes to England for succour--The
renewal of the war The fall of Acre, and the final extinction of the
Templars in Palestine.</span>

<span class="small">"The Knights of the TEMPLE ever maintained their
fearless and fanatic character; if they neglected to *live* they were
prepared to *die* in the service of Christ."--Gibbon.</span>

<span class="margnote">HERMANN DE  
PERIGORD  
A.D. 1242.</span>SHORTLY after the recovery of the holy city,
Djemal’eddeen, the Mussulman, paid a visit to Jerusalem. "I saw," says
he, the monks and the priests masters of the Temple of the Lord. I saw
the vials of wine prepared for the sacrifice. I entered into the Mosque
al Acsa, (the Temple of Solomon,) and I saw a bell suspended from the
dome. The rites and ceremonies of the Mussulmen were abolished; the call
to prayer was no longer heard. The infidels publicly exercised their
idolatrous practices in the sanctuaries of the Mussulmen." <span
id="fr_276"></span>[\*](#fn_276.md)

By the advice of Benedict, bishop of Marseilles, who came to the holy
city on a pilgrimage, the Templars rebuilt their ancient

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

<span class="margnote">HERMANN DE  
PERIGORD  
A.D. 1243.</span>and formidable castle of Saphet. Eight hundred and
fifty workmen, and four hundred slaves were employed in the task. The
walls were sixty French feet in width, one hundred and seventy in
height, and the circuit of them was two thousand two hundred and fifty
feet. They were flanked by seven large round towers,. sixty feet in
diameter, and seventy-two feet higher than the walls. The fosse
surrounding the fortress was thirty-six feet wide, and was pierced in
the solid rock to a depth of forty-three feet. The garrison, in time of
peace, amounted to one thousand seven hundred men, and to two thousand
two hundred in time of war. <span id="fr_277"></span>[\*](#fn_277.md) The
ruins of this famous castle crowning the summit of a lofty mountain,
torn and shattered by earthquakes, still present a stupendous
appearance. In Pococke's time "two particularly fine large round towers"
were entire, and Van Egmont and Heyman describe the remains of two moats
lined with freestone, several fragments of walls, bulwarks, and turrets,
together with corridors, winding staircases, and internal apartments.
Ere this fortress was completed, the Templars again lost the holy city,
and were well-nigh exterminated in a bloody battle fought with the
Carizmians. These were a fierce, pastoral tribe of Tartars, who,
descending from the north of Asia, and quitting their abodes in the
neighbourhood of the Caspian, rushed headlong upon the nations of the
south. They overthrew with frightful rapidity, and the most terrific
slaughter, all who had ventured to oppose their progress; and, at the
instigation of Saleh Ayoub, sultan of Egypt, with whom they had formed
an alliance, they turned their arms against the Holy Land. In a great
battle fought near Gaza, which lasted two days, the Grand Masters of the
Temple and the Hospital were both slain, together with three hundred and
twelve Knights Templars, and three hundred and twenty-four serving
brethren, besides hired soldiers in the pay of the

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

<span class="margnote">HERMANN DE  
PERIGORD  
A.D. 1244.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Order. <span id="fr_278"></span>[\*](#fn_278.md) The following account of
these disasters was forwarded to Europe by the Vice-Master of the
Temple, and the bishops and abbots of Palestine.

"To the reverend Fathers in Christ, and to all our friends, archbishops,
bishops, abbots, and other prelates of the church in the kingdoms of
France and England, to whom these letters shall come;--Robert, by the
grace of God, patriarch of the holy church of Jerusalem; Henry,
archbishop of Nazareth; J. elect of Cæsarea; R. bishop of Acre; *William
de Rochefort, Vice-Master of the house of the soldiery of the* TEMPLE,
*and of the convent of the same house;* H. prior of the sepulchre of the
Lord; B. of the Mount of Olives, &c. &c. Health and prosperity."

"The cruel barbarian, issuing forth from the confines of the East, hath
turned his footsteps towards the kingdom of Jerusalem, that holy land,
which, though it hath at different periods been grievously harassed by
the Saracen tribes, hath yet in these latter days enjoyed ease and
tranquillity, and been at peace with the neighbouring nations. But,
alas! the sins of our christian people have just now raised up for its
destruction an unknown people, and an avenging sword from afar . . . ."
They proceed to describe the destructive progress of the Carizmians from
Tartary, the devastation of Persia, the fierce extermination by those
savage hordes of all races and nations, without distinction of religion,
and their sudden entry into the Holy Land by the side of Saphet and
Tiberias, "when," say they, "*by the common advice, and at the unanimous
desire of the Masters of the religious houses of the chivalry of the
Temple and the Hospital*, we called in the assistance of the sultans of
Damascus and Carac, who were bound to us by treaty, and who bore
especial hatred to the Carizmians; they promised and solemnly swore to
give us their entire aid, but the succour came slow and tardy; the
Christian forces were

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

<span class="margnote">HERMANN DE  
PERIGORD  
A.D. 1244.</span>few in number, and were obliged to abandon the defence
of Jerusalem . . . ."

After detailing the barbarous and horrible slaughter of five thousand
three hundred Christians, of both sexes--men, women, children, monks,
priests, and nuns,--they thus continue their simple and affecting
narrative:

"At length, the before-mentioned perfidious savages having penetrated
within the gates of the holy city of Israel, the small remnant of the
faithful left therein, consisting of children, women, and old men, took
refuge in the church of the sepulchre of our Lord. The Carizmians rushed
to that holy sanctuary; they butchered them all before the very
sepulchre itself, and cutting off the heads of the priests who were
kneeling with uplifted hands before the altars, they said one to
another, 'Let us here shed the blood of the Christians *on the very
place where they offer up wine to their God, who they say was hanged
here*.' Moreover, in sorrow be it spoken, and with sighs we inform you,
that laying their sacrilegious hands on the very sepulchre itself, they
sadly disturbed it, utterly battering to pieces the marble shrine which
was built around that holy sanctuary. They have defiled, with every
abomination of which they were capable, Mount Calvary, where Christ was
crucified, and the whole church of the resurrection. They have taken
away, indeed, the sculptured columns which were placed as a decoration
before the sepulchre of the Lord, and as a mark of victory, and as a
taunt to the Christians, they have sent them to the sepulchre of the
wicked Mahomet. They have violated the tombs of the happy kings of
Jerusalem in the same church, and they have scattered, to the hurt of
Christendom, the ashes of those holy men to the winds, irreverently
profaning the revered Mount Sion. The Temple of the Lord, the church of
the Valley of Jehoshaphat, where the Virgin lies buried, the church of
Bethlehem, and the place of

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

<span class="margnote">HERMANN DE  
PERIGORD  
A.D. 1244.</span>the nativity of our Lord, they have polluted with
enormities too horrible to be related, far exceeding the iniquity of all
the Saracens, who, though they frequently occupied the land of the
Christians, yet always reverenced and preserved the holy places . . . .
. ."

They then describe the subsequent military operations, the march of the
Templars and Hospitaliers, on the 4th of October, A.D. 1244, from Acre
to Cæsarea; the junction of their forces with those of the Moslem
sultans; the retreat of the Carizmians to Gaza, where they received
succour from the sultan of Egypt; and the preparation of the
Hospitallers and Templars for the attack before that place.

"Those holy warriors," say they, "boldly rushed in upon the enemy, but
the Saracens who had joined us, having lost many of their men, fled, and
the warriors of the cross were left alone to withstand the united attack
of the Egyptians and Carizmians. Like stout champions of the Lord, and
true defenders of catholicity, whom the same faith and the same cross
and passion make true brothers, they bravely resisted; but as they were
few in number in comparison with the enemy, they at last succumbed, so
that of the convents of the house of the chivalry of the Temple, and of
the house of the Hospital of Saint John at Jerusalem, only thirty-three
Templars and twenty-six Hospitallers escaped; the archbishop of Tyre,
the bishop of Saint George, the abbot of Saint Mary of Jehoshaphat, and
the Master of the Temple, with many other clerks and holy men, being
slain in that sanguinary fight. We ourselves, having by our sins
provoked this dire calamity, fled half dead to Ascalon; from thence we
proceeded by sea to Acre, and found that city and the adjoining province
filled with sorrow and mourning, misery and death. There was not a house
or a family that had not lost an inmate or a relation. . . . . ."

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

<span class="margnote">HERMANN DE  
PERIGORD  
A.D. 1244.</span>"The Carizmians have now pitched their tents in the
plain of Acre, about. two miles from the city. The whole country, as far
as Nazareth and Saphet, is overrun by them, so that the churches of
Jerusalem and the christian kingdom have now no territory, except a few
fortifications, which are defended with great difficulty and labour by
the Templars and Hospitaliers

"To you, dearest Fathers, upon whom the burthen of the defence of the
cause of Christ justly resteth, we have caused these sad tidings to be
communicated, earnestly beseeching you to address your prayers to the
throne of grace, imploring mercy from the Most High; that he who
consecrated the Holy Land with his own blood in redemption of all
mankind, may compassionately turn towards it and defend it, and send it
succour. Do ye yourselves, dearest Fathers, as far as ye are able, take
sage counsel and speedily assist us, that ye may receive a heavenly
reward. But know, assuredly, that unless, through the interposition of
the Most High, or by the aid of the faithful, the Holy Land is succoured
in the next spring passage from Europe, its doom is sealed, and utter
ruin is inevitable.

"Since it would be tedious to explain by letter all our necessities, we
have sent to you the venerable father bishop of Beirout, and the holy
man Arnulph, of the Order of Friars Preachers, who will faithfully and
truly unfold the particulars to your venerable fraternity. We humbly
entreat you liberally to receive and patiently to hear the aforesaid
messengers, who have exposed themselves to great dangers for the church
of God, by navigating the seas in the depth of winter. Given at Acre,
this fifth day of November, in the year of our Lord one thousand twelve
hundred and forty-four." <span id="fr_279"></span>[\*](#fn_279.md)

The above letter was read before a general council of the

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

<span class="margnote">HERMANN DE  
PERIGORD  
A.D. 1244.</span>church, which had been assembled at Lyons by Pope
Innocent IV., and it was resolved that a new crusade should be preached.
It was provided that those who assumed the cross should assemble at
particular places to receive the Pope's blessing; that there should be a
truce for four years between all christian princes; that during all that
time there should be no tournaments, feasts, nor public rejoicings; that
all the faithful in Christ should be exhorted to contribute, out of
their fortunes and estates, to the defence of the .Holy Land; and that
ecclesiastics should pay towards it the tenth, and cardinals the
twentieth, of all their revenues, for the term of three years
successively. The ancient enthusiasm, however, in favour of distant
expeditions to the East had died away; the addresses and exhortations of
the clergy now fell on unwilling ears, and the Templars and Hospitaliers
received only some small assistance in men and money.

The temporary alliance between the Templars and the Mussulman sultans of
Syria, for the purpose of insuring their common safety, did not escape
animadversion. The emperor Frederick the Second, the nominal king of
Jerusalem, in a letter to Richard earl of Cornwall, the brother of Henry
the Third, king of England, accuses the Templars of making war upon the
sultan of Egypt, in defiance of a treaty entered into with that monarch,
of compelling him to call in the Carizmians to his assistance; and he
compares the union of the Templars with the infidel sultans, for
purposes of defence, to an attempt to extinguish a fire by pouring upon
it a quantity of oil. "The proud religion of the Temple," says he, in
continuation, "nurtured amid the luxuries of the barons of the land,
waxeth wanton. It hath been made manifest to us, by certain religious
persons lately arrived from parts beyond sea, that the aforesaid sultans
and their trains were received with pompous alacrity within the gates of
the houses of the Temple, and that the Templars suffered them to perform

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

<span class="margnote">HERMANN DE  
PERIGORD  
A.D. 1244.</span>within them their superstitious rites and ceremonies,
with invocation of Mahomet, and to indulge in secular delights." <span
id="fr_280"></span>[\*](#fn_280.md) The Templars, notwithstanding their
disasters, successfully defended all their strong fortresses in
Palestine against the efforts of the Carizmians, and gradually recovered
their footing in the Holy Land. The galleys of the Order kept the
command of the sea, and succour speedily arrived to them from their
western brethren. A general chapter of knights was assembled in the
Pilgrim's Castle, and the veteran warrior, brother WILLIAM DE SONNAC,
was chosen Grand Master of the Order. <span
id="fr_281"></span>[†](#fn_281.md) <span class="margnote">WILLIAM DE  
SONNAC  
A.D. 1245.</span> Circular mandates were, at the same time, sent to the
western preceptories, summoning all the brethren to Palestine, and
directing the immediate transmission of all the money in the different
treasuries to the head-quarters of the Order at Acre. These calls appear
to have been promptly attended to, and the Pope praises both the
Templars and Hospitaliers for the zeal and energy displayed by them in
sending out the newly-admitted knights and novices with armed bands and
a large amount of treasure to the succour of the holy territory. <span
id="fr_282"></span>[‡](#fn_282.md) The aged knights, and those whose duties
rendered them unable to leave the western preceptories, implored the
blessings of heaven upon the exertions of their brethren; they observed
extraordinary fasts and mortification, and directed continual prayers to
be offered up throughout the Order. <span
id="fr_283"></span>[§](#fn_283.md) Whilst the proposed crusade was slowly
progressing, the holy pontiff wrote to the sultan of Egypt, the ally of
the Carizmians, proposing a peace or a truce, and received the following
grand and magnificent reply to his communication:

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

<span class="margnote">WILLIAM DE  
SONNAC  
A.D. 1246.</span>"To the Pope, the noble, the great, the spiritual, the
affectionate, the holy, the thirteenth of the apostles, the leader of
the sons of baptism, the high priest of the Christians, (may God
strengthen him, and establish him, and give him happiness!) from the
most powerful sultan ruling over the necks of nations; wielding the two
great weapons, the sword and the pen; possessing two pre-eminent
excellencies--that is to say, learning and judgment; king of two seas;
ruler of the South and North; king of the region of Egypt and Syria,
Mesopotamia, Media, Idumea, and Ophir; King Saloph Beelpbeth, Jacob, son
of Sultan Camel, Hemevafar Mehameth, son of Sultan Hadel, Robethre, son
of Jacob, whose kingdom may the Lord God make happy.

"IN THE NAME OF GOD THE MOST MERCIFUL AND COMPASSIONATE.

"The letters of the Pope, the noble, the great, &c. &c. . . . . have
been presented to us. May God favour him who earnestly seeketh after
righteousness and doeth good, and wisheth peace and walketh in the ways
of the Lord. May God assist him who worshippeth him in truth. We have
considered the aforesaid letters, and have understood the matters
treated of therein, which have pleased and delighted us; and the
messenger sent by the holy Pope came to us, and we caused him to be
brought before us with honour, and love, and reverence; and we brought
him to see us face to face, and inclining our ears towards him, we
listened to his speech, and we have put faith in the words he hath
spoken unto us concerning Christ, upon whom be salvation and praise. But
we know more concerning that same Christ than ye know, and we magnify
him more than ye magnify him. And as to what you say concerning your
desire for peace, tranquillity, and quiet, and that you wish to put down
war, so also do we; we desire and wish nothing to the contrary. But let
the Pope know,

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

<span class="margnote">WILLIAM DE  
SONNAC  
A.D. 1247.</span>that between ourselves and the Emperor (Frederick)
there hath been mutual love, and alliance, and perfect concord, from the
time of the sultan, my father, (whom may God preserve and place in the
glory of his brightness;) and between you and the Emperor there is, as
ye know, strife and warfare; whence it is not fit that we should enter
into any treaty with the Christians until we have previously had his
advice and assent. We have therefore written to our envoy at the
imperial court upon the propositions made to us by the Pope's messenger,
&c. . . .

"This letter was written on the seventh of the month *Maharan*. Praise
be to the one only God, and may his blessing rest upon our master
Mahomet." <span id="fr_284"></span>[\*](#fn_284.md)

The year following, (A.D. 1247,) the Carizmians were annihilated; they
were cut up in detail by the Templars and Hospitallers, and were at last
slain to a man. Their very name perished from the face of the earth, but
the traces of their existence were long preserved in the ruin and
desolation they had spread around them. <span
id="fr_285"></span>[†](#fn_285.md) The Holy Land, although happily freed
from the destructive presence of these barbarians, had yet everything to
fear from the powerful sultan of Egypt, with whom hostilities still
continued; and Brother William de Sonnac, the Grand Master of the
Temple, for the purpose of stimulating the languid energies of the
English nation, and reviving their holy zeal and enthusiasm in the cause
of the Cross, despatched a distinguished Knight Templar to England,
charged with the duty of presenting to king Henry the Third a
magnificent crystal vase, containing a portion of the blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which had been poured forth upon the sacred soil of
Palestine for the remission of the sins of all the faithful.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="margnote">WILLIAM DE  
SONNAC  
A.D. 1249.</span>A solemn attestation of the genuineness of this
precious relic, signed by the patriarch of Jerusalem, and the bishops,
the abbots, and the barons of the Holy Land, was forwarded to London for
the satisfaction of the king and his subjects, and was deposited,
together with the vase and its inestimable contents, in the cathedral
church of Saint Paul. <span id="fr_286"></span>[\*](#fn_286.md)

In the month of June, A.D. 1249, the galleys of the Templars left Acre
with a strong body of forces on board, and joined the expedition
undertaken by the French king, Louis IX., against Egypt. The following
account of the capture of Damietta was forwarded to the Master of the
Temple at London.

"Brother William de Sonnac, by the grace of God Master of the poor
chivalry of the Temple, to his beloved brother in Christ, Robert de
Sanford, Preceptor of England, salvation in the Lord.

"We hasten to unfold to you by these presents agreeable and happy
intelligence . . . (He details the landing of the French, the defeat of
the infidels with the loss of one christian soldier, and the subsequent
capture of the city.) " Damietta, therefore, has been taken, not by our
deserts, nor by the might of our armed bands, but through the divine
power and assistance. Moreover, be it known to you that king Louis, with
God's favour, proposes to march upon Alexandria or Cairo for the purpose
of delivering our brethren there detained in captivity, and of reducing,
with God's help, the whole land to the christian worship. Farewell."
 <span id="fr_287"></span>[†](#fn_287.md)

The Lord de Joinville, the friend of king Louis, and one of the bravest
of the French captains, gives a lively and most interesting account of
the campaign, and of the famous exploits of the Templars. During the
march towards Cairo, they led the van of the christian army, and on one
occasion, when the king of France had given strict orders that no attack
should be made upon the infidels, and that an engagement should be
avoided, a

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

<span class="margnote">WILLIAM DE  
SONNAC  
A.D. 1249.</span>body of Turkish cavalry advanced against them. "One of
these Turks," says Joinville, "gave a Knight Templar in the first rank
so heavy a blow with his battle-axe, that it felled him under the feet
of the Lord Reginald de Vichier's horse, who was Marshall of the Temple;
the Marshall, seeing his man fall, cried out to his brethren, 'At them
in the name of God, for I cannot longer stand this.' He instantly stuck
spurs into his horse, followed by all his brethren, and as their horses
were fresh, not a Saracen escaped." On another occasion, the Templars
marched forth at the head of the christian army, to make trial of a ford
across the Tanitic branch of the Nile. "Before we set out," says
Joinville, "the king had ordered that the Templars should form the van,
and the Count d’Artois, his brother, should command the second division
after the Templars; but the moment the Compte d’Artois had passed the
ford, he and all his people fell on the Saracens, and putting them to
flight, galloped after them. The Templars sent to call the Compte
d’Artois back, and to tell him that it was his duty to march behind and
not before them; but it happened that the Count d’Artois could not make
any answer by reason of my Lord Foucquault du Melle, who held the bridle
of his horse, and my Lord Foucquault, who was a right good knight, being
deaf, heard nothing the Templars were saying to the Count d’Artois, but
kept bawling out, '*Forward! forward!*' ("Or a eulz! or a eulz!") When
the Templars perceived this, they thought they should be dishonoured if
they allowed the Count d’Artois thus to take the lead; so they spurred
their horses more and more, and faster and faster, and chased the Turks,
who fled before them, through the town of Massoura, as far as the plains
towards Babylon; but on their return, the Turks shot at them plenty of
arrows, and attacked them in the narrow streets of the town. The Count
d’Artois and the Earl of Leicester were there slain, and as many as
three hundred other knights. The Templars

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

<span class="margnote">WILLIAM DE  
SONNAC  
A.D. 1250.</span>lost, as their chief informed me, full fourteen score
men-at-arms, and all his horsemen." <span
id="fr_288"></span>[\*](#fn_288.md)

The Grand Master of the Temple also lost an eye, [and](errata.htm#5.md) cut
his way through the infidels to the main body of the christian army,
accompanied only by two Knights Templars. <span
id="fr_289"></span>[†](#fn_289.md) There he again mixed in the affray, took
the command of a vanguard, and is to be found fighting by the side of
the Lord de Joinville at sunset. In his account of the great battle
fought on the first Friday in Lent, Joinville thus commemorates the
gallant bearing of the Templars:--

"The next battalion was under the command of Brother William de Sonnac,
Master of the Temple, who had with him the small remnant of the brethren
of the order who survived the battle of Shrove Tuesday. The Master of
the Temple made of the engines which we had taken from the Saracens a
sort of rampart in his front, but when the Saracens marched up to the
assault, they threw Greek fire upon it, and as the Templars had piled up
many planks of fir-wood amongst these engines, they caught fire
immediately; and the Saracens, perceiving that the brethren of the
Temple were few in number, dashed through the burning timbers, and
vigorously attacked them. In the preceding battle of Shrove Tuesday,
Brother William, the Master of the Temple, lost one of his eyes, and in
this battle the said lord lost his other eye, and was slain. God have
mercy on his soul! And know that immediately behind the place where the
battalion of the Templars stood, there was a good acre of ground, so
covered with darts, arrows, and missiles, that you could not see the
earth

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

beneath them, such showers of these had been discharged against the
Templars by the Saracens!" <span id="fr_290"></span>[\*](#fn_290.md)

<span class="margnote">REGINALD DE  
VICHIER  
A.D. 1252.</span>The Grand Master, William de Sonnac, was succeeded by
the Marshall of the Temple, Brother Reginald de Vichier. <span
id="fr_291"></span>[†](#fn_291.md) King Louis, after his release from
captivity, proceeded to Palestine, where he remained two years. He
repaired the fortifications of Jaffa and Cæsarea, and assisted the
Templars in putting the country into a defensible state. The Lord de
Joinville remained with him the whole time, and relates some curious
events that took place during his stay. It appears that the scheik of
the assassins still continued to pay tribute to the Templars; and during
the king's residence at Acre, the chief sent ambassadors to him to
obtain a remission of the tribute. He gave them an audience, and
declared that he would consider of their proposal. "When they came again
before the king," says Joinville, "it was about vespers, and they found
the Master of the Temple on one side of him, and the Master of the
Hospital on the other. The ambassadors refused to repeat what they had
said in the morning, but the Masters of the Temple and the Hospital
commanded them so to do. Then the Masters of the Temple and Hospital
told them that their lord had very foolishly and impudently sent such a
message to the king of France, and had they not been invested with the
character of ambassadors, they would have thrown them into the filthy
sea of Acre, and have drowned them in despite of their master. 'And we
command you,' continued the masters, 'to return to your lord, and to
come back

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

<span class="margnote">REGINALD DE  
VICHIER  
A.D. 1254.</span>within fifteen days with such letters from your prince,
that the king shall be contented with him and with you.'"

The ambassadors accordingly did as they were bid, and brought back from
their scheik a shirt, the symbol of friendship, and a great variety of
rich presents, "crystal elephants, pieces of amber, with borders of pure
gold," &c. &c. <span id="fr_292"></span>[\*](#fn_292.md)" You must know
that when the ambassadors opened the case containing all these fine
things, the whole apartment was instantly embalmed with the odour of
their sweet perfumes."

The Lord de Joinville accompanied the Templars in several marches and
expeditions against the infidel tribes on the frontiers of Palestine,
and was present at the storming of the famous castle of Panias, situate
near the source of the Jordan.

At the period of the return of the king of France to Europe, (A.D.
1254,) Henry the Third, king of England, was in Gascony with Brother
Robert de Sanford, Master of the Temple at London, who had been
previously sent by the English monarch into that province to appease the
troubles which had there broken out. <span
id="fr_293"></span>[†](#fn_293.md) King Henry proceeded to the French
capital, and was magnificently entertained by the Knights Templars at
the Temple in Paris, which Matthew Paris tells us was of such immense
extent that it could contain within its precincts a numerous army. The
day after his arrival, king Henry ordered an innumerable quantity of
poor people to be regaled at the Temple with meat, fish, bread, and
wine; and at a later hour the king of France and all his nobles came to
dine with the English monarch. "Never," says Matthew Paris, "was there
at any period in bygone times so noble and so celebrated an
entertainment. They feasted in the great hall of the Temple, where hang
the shields on every side, as many as they can place along the

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<span class="margnote">REGINALD DE  
VICHIER  
A.D. 1255.</span>four walls, according to the custom of the order beyond
sea. . ." <span id="fr_294"></span>[\*](#fn_294.md) The Knights Templars in
this country likewise exercised a magnificent hospitality, and
constantly entertained kings, princes, nobles, prelates, and foreign
ambassadors, at the Temple. Immediately after the return of king Henry
to England, some illustrious ambassadors from Castile came on a visit to
the Temple at London; and as the king "greatly delighted to honour
them," he commanded three pipes of wine to be placed in the cellars of
the Temple for their use, <span id="fr_295"></span>[†](#fn_295.md) and ten
fat bucks to be brought them at the same place from the royal forest in
Essex. <span id="fr_296"></span>[‡](#fn_296.md) He, moreover, commanded the
mayor and sheriffs of London, and the commonalty of the same city, to
take with them a respectable assemblage of the citizens, and to go forth
and meet the said ambassadors without the city, and courteously receive
them, and honour them, and conduct them to the Temple. <span
id="fr_297"></span>[§](#fn_297.md)

<span class="margnote">THOMAS  
BERARD  
A.D. 1256.</span>The Grand Master, Reginald de Vichier, was succeeded by
Brother Thomas Berard, <span id="fr_298"></span>[¦¦](#fn_298.md) who wrote
several letters to the king of England, displaying the miserable
condition of the Holy Land, and earnestly imploring succour and
assistance. <span id="fr_299"></span>[¶](#fn_299.md) The English monarch,
however, was too poor to assist him, being obliged to borrow money upon
his crown jewels, which he sent to the Temple at Paris. The queen of
France, in a letter "to her very

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

<span class="margnote">THOMAS  
BERARD  
A.D. 1261.</span>dear brother Henry, the illustrious king of England,"
gives a long list of golden wands, golden combs, diamond buckles,
chaplets, and circlets, golden crowns, imperial beavers, rich girdles,
golden peacocks, and rings innumerable, adorned with sapphires, rubies,
emeralds, topazes, and carbuncles, which she says she had inspected in
the presence of the treasurer of the Temple at Paris, and that the same
were safely deposited in the coffers of the Templars. <span
id="fr_300"></span>[\*](#fn_300.md)

The military power of the orders of the Temple and the Hospital in
Palestine was at last completely broken by Bibars, or Benocdar, the
fourth Mamlook sultan of Egypt, who, from the humble station of a Tartar
slave, had raised himself to the sovereignty of that country, and
through his valour and military talents had acquired the title of "the
Conqueror." He invaded Palestine (A.D. 1262) at the head of thirty
thousand cavalry, and defeated the Templars and Hospitaliers with
immense slaughter. <span id="fr_301"></span>[†](#fn_301.md) After several
years of continuous warfare, during which the most horrible excesses
were committed by both parties, all the strongholds of the Christians,
with the solitary exception of the Pilgrim's Castle and the city of
Acre, fell into the hands of the infidels.

On the last day of April, (A.D. 1265,) Benocdar stormed Arsuf, one of
the strongest of the castles of the Hospitallers; he slew ninety of the
garrison, and led away a thousand into captivity, The year following he
stormed Castel Blanco, a fortress of the Knights Templars, and
immediately after laid siege to their famous and important castle of
Saphet. After an obstinate defence, the Preceptor, finding himself
destitute of provisions, agreed to capitulate, on condition that the
surviving brethren and

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

<span class="margnote">THOMAS  
BERARD  
A.D. 1266.</span>their retainers, amounting to six hundred men, should
be conducted in safety to the nearest fortress of the Christians. The
terms were acceded to, but as soon as Benocdar had obtained possession
of the castle, he imposed upon the whole garrison the severe alternative
of the Koran or death. They chose the latter, and, according to the
christian writers, were all slain. <span
id="fr_302"></span>[\*](#fn_302.md) The Arabian historian Schafi Ib’n Ali
Abbas, however, in his life of Bibars, or Benocdar, states that one of
the garrison named *Effreez Lyoub*, embraced the Mahommetan faith, and
was circumcised, and that another was sent to Acre to announce the fall
of the place to his brethren. This writer attempts to excuse the
slaughter of the remainder, on the ground that they had themselves first
broken the terms of the capitulation, by attempting to carry away arms
and treasure. <span id="fr_303"></span>[†](#fn_303.md) "By the death of so
many knights of both orders," says Pope Clement IV., in one of his
epistles, "the noble college of the Hospitaliers, and the illustrious
chivalry of the Temple, are almost destroyed, and I know not how we
shall be able, after this, to find gentlemen and persons of quality
sufficient to supply the places of such as have perished. <span
id="fr_304"></span>[‡](#fn_304.md) The year after the fall of Saphet, (A.D.
1267,) Benocdar captured the cities of Homs, Belfort, Bagras, and Sidon,
which belonged to the order of the Temple; the maritime towns of
Laodicea, Gabala, Tripoli, Beirout, and Jaffa, successively fell into
his hands, and the fall of the princely city of Antioch was signalized
by the slaughter of seventeen and the captivity of one hundred

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

<span class="margnote">THOMAS  
BERARD  
A.D. 1268.</span>thousand of her inhabitants. <span
id="fr_305"></span>[\*](#fn_305.md) The utter ruin of the Latin kingdom,
however, was averted by the timely assistance brought by Edward Prince
of Wales, son of Henry the Second, king of England, who appeared at Acre
with a fleet and an army. The infidels were once more defeated and
driven back into Egypt, and a truce for ten years between the sultan and
the Christians was agreed upon. <span id="fr_306"></span>[†](#fn_306.md)
Prince Edward then prepared for his departure, but, before encountering
the perils of the sea on his return home, he made his will; it is dated
at Acre, June 18th, A.D. 1272, and Brother Thomas Berard, Grand Master
of the Temple, appears as an attesting witness. <span
id="fr_307"></span>[‡](#fn_307.md) Whilst the prince was pursuing his
voyage to England, his father, the king of England, died, and the
council of the realm, composed of the archbishops of Canterbury and
York, and the bishops and barons of the kingdom, assembled in the Temple
at London, and swore allegiance to the prince. They there caused him to
be proclaimed king of .England, and, with the consent of the
queen-mother, they appointed Walter Giffard, archbishop of York, and the
earls of Cornwall and Gloucester, guardians of the realm. Letters were
written from the Temple to acquaint the young sovereign with the death
of his father, and many of the acts of the new government emanated from
the same place. <span id="fr_308"></span>[§](#fn_308.md)

King Henry the Third was a great benefactor to the Templars.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He granted them
the manors of Lilleston, Hechewayton, Saunford, Sutton, Dartfeld, and
Halgel, in Kent; several lands, and churches and annual fairs at Baldok,
Walnesford, Wetherby, and other places, and various weekly
markets. <span id="fr_309"></span>[\*](#fn_309.md)

<span class="margnote">WILLIAM  
DE BEAUJEU  
A.D. 1273.</span>The Grand Master, Thomas Berard, was succeeded by
Brother William de Beaujeu, <span id="fr_310"></span>[†](#fn_310.md) who
came to England for the purpose of obtaining succour, and called
together a general chapter of the order at London. Whilst resident at
the Temple in that city, he received payment of a large sum of money
which Edward, the young king, had borrowed of the Templars during his
residence in Palestine. <span id="fr_311"></span>[‡](#fn_311.md) The Grand
Master of the Hospital also came to Europe, and every exertion was made
to stimulate the languid energies of the western Christians, and revive
their holy zeal in the cause of the Cross. A general council of the
church was opened at Lyons by the Pope in person; the two Grand Masters
were present, and took precedence of all the ambassadors and peers at
that famous assembly. It was determined that a new crusade should be
preached, that all ecclesiastical dignities and benefices should be
taxed to support an armament, and that the sovereigns of Europe should
be compelled by ecclesiastical censures to suspend their private
quarrels, and afford succour to the desolate city of Jerusalem. The
Pope, who had been himself resident in Palestine, took a strong personal
interest in the promotion of the crusade, and induced many nobles,
princes, and

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

<span class="margnote">WILLIAM  
DE BEAUJEU  
A.D. 1275.</span>knights to assume the Cross; but the holy pontiff died
in the midst of his exertions, and with him expired all hope of
effectual assistance from Europe. A vast change had come over the spirit
of the age; the fiery enthusiasm of the holy war had expended itself,
and the Grand Masters of the Temple and Hospital returned without
succour, in sorrow and disappointment, to the East.

William de Beaujeu arrived at the Temple of Acre on Saint Michael's Day,
A.D. 1275, and immediately assumed the government of Palestine. <span
id="fr_312"></span>[\*](#fn_312.md) As there was now no hope of recovering
the lost city of Jerusalem, he bent all his energies to the preservation
of the few remaining possessions of the Christians in the Holy Land. At
the expiration of the ten years' truce he entered into a further treaty
with the infidels, called "the peace of Tortosa." It is expressed to be
made between sultan Malek-Mansour and his son Malek-Saleh Ali, "honour
of the world and of religion," of the one part, and Afryz Dybadjouk
(William de Beaujeu) Grand Master of the order of the Templars, of the
other part. The truce is further prolonged for ten years and ten months
from the date of the execution of the treaty, (A.D. 1282;) and the
contracting parties strictly bind themselves to make no irruptions into
each other's territories during the period. To prevent mistakes, the
towns, villages, and territory belonging to the Christians in Palestine
are specified and defined, together with the contiguous possessions of
the Moslems. <span id="fr_313"></span>[†](#fn_313.md) This treaty, however,
was speedily broken, the war was renewed with various success, and
another treaty was concluded, which was again violated by an
unpardonable outrage. Some European adventurers, who had arrived at
Acre, plundered and hung nineteen Egyptian merchants, and the sultan of
Egypt immediately resumed

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

<span class="margnote">WILLIAM  
DE BEAUJEU  
A.D. 1291.</span>hostilities, with the avowed determination of crushing
for ever the christian power in the East. The fortress of Margat was
besieged and taken; the city of Tripoli shared the same fate; and in the
third year from the re-commencement of the war, the christian dominions
in Palestine were reduced within the narrow confines of the strong city
of Acre and the Pilgrim's Castle. In the spring of the year 1291, the
sultan Khalil marched against Acre at the head of sixty thousand horse
and a hundred and forty thousand foot.

"An innumerable people of all nations and every tongue," says a
chronicle of the times, "thirsting for christian blood, were assembled
together from the deserts of the East and the South; the earth trembled
beneath their footsteps, and the air was rent with the sound of their
trumpets and cymbals. The sun's rays, reflected from their shields,
gleamed on the distant mountains, and the points of their spears shone
like the innumerable stars of heaven. When on the march, their lances
presented the appearance of a vast forest rising from the earth, and
covering all the landscape." . . . "They wandered round about the walls,
spying out their weaknesses and defects; some barked like dogs, some
roared like lions, some lowed and bellowed like oxen, some struck drums
with twisted sticks after their fashion, some threw darts, some cast
stones, some shot arrows and bolts from cross-bows." <span
id="fr_314"></span>[\*](#fn_314.md) On the 5th of April, the place was
regularly invested. No rational hope of saving it could be entertained;
the sea was open; the harbour was filled with christian vessels, and
with the galleys of the Temple and the Hospital; yet the two great
monastic and military orders scorned to retire to the neighbouring and
friendly island of Cyprus; they refused to desert, even in its last
extremity, that cause which they had sworn to maintain with the last
drop of their blood. For a hundred and seventy years

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

<span class="margnote">WILLIAM  
DE BEAUJEU  
A.D. 1291.</span>their swords had been constantly employed in defending
the Holy Land from the profane tread of the unbelieving Moslem; the
sacred territory of Palestine had been everywhere moistened with the
blood of the best and bravest of their knights, and, faithful to their
vows and their chivalrous engagements, they now prepared to bury
themselves in the ruins of the last stronghold of the christian faith.

William de Beaujeu, the Grand Master of the Temple, a veteran warrior of
a hundred fights, took the command of the garrison, which amounted to
about twelve thousand men, exclusive of the forces of the Temple and the
Hospital, and a body of five hundred foot and two hundred horse, under
the command of the king of Cyprus. These forces were distributed along
the walls in four divisions, the first of which was commanded by Hugh de
Grandison, an English knight. The old and the feeble, women and
children, were sent away by sea to the christian island of Cyprus, and
none remained in the devoted city but those who were prepared to fight
in its defence, or to suffer martyrdom at the hands of the infidels. The
siege lasted six weeks, during the whole of which period the sallies and
the attacks were incessant. Neither by night nor by day did the shouts
of the assailants and the noise of the military engines cease; the walls
were battered from without, and the foundations were sapped by miners,
who were incessantly labouring to advance their works. More than six
hundred catapults, balistæ, and other instruments of destruction, were
directed against the fortifications; and the battering machines were of
such immense size and weight, that a hundred wagons were required to
transport the separate timbers of one of them. <span
id="fr_315"></span>[\*](#fn_315.md) Moveable towers were erected

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

<span class="margnote">WILLIAM  
DE BEAUJEU  
A.D. 1291.</span>by the Moslems, so as to overtop the walls; their
workmen and advanced parties were protected by hurdles covered with raw
hides, and all the military contrivances which the art and the skill of
the age could produce, were used to facilitate the assault. For a long
time their utmost efforts were foiled by the valour of the besieged, who
made constant sallies upon their works, burnt their towers and machines,
and destroyed their miners. Day by day, however, the numbers of the
garrison were thinned by the sword, whilst in the enemy's camp the
places of the dead were constantly supplied by fresh warriors from the
deserts of Arabia, animated with the same wild fanaticism in the cause
of *their* religion as that which so eminently distinguished the
military monks of the Temple. On the fourth of May, after thirty-three
days of constant fighting, the great tower, considered the key of the
fortifications, and called by the Moslems *the cursed tower*, was thrown
down by the military engines. To increase the terror and distraction of
the besieged, sultan Khalil mounted three hundred drummers, with their
drums, upon as many dromedaries, and commanded them to make as much
noise as possible whenever a general assault was ordered. From the 4th
to the 14th of May, the attacks were incessant. On the 15th, the double
wall was forced, and the king of Cyprus, panic-stricken, fled in the
night to his ships, and made sail for the island of Cyprus, with all his
followers, and with near three thousand of the best men of the garrison.
On the morrow the Saracens attacked the post he had deserted; they
filled up the ditch with the bodies of dead men and horses, piles of
wood, stones, and earth, and their trumpets then sounded to the assault.
Ranged under the yellow banner of Mahomet, the Mamlooks forced the
breach, and penetrated sword in hand to the very centre of the city; but
their victorious career and insulting shouts were there stopped by the
wail-clad Knights of the Temple and the hospital,

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

<span class="margnote">WILLIAM  
DE BEAUJEU  
A.D. 1291.</span>who charged on horseback through the narrow streets,
drove them back with immense carnage, and precipitated them headlong
from the walls.

At sunrise the following morning the air resounded with the deafening
noise of drums and trumpets, and the breach was carried and recovered
several times, the military friars at last closing up the passage with
their bodies, and presenting a wall of steel to the advance of the
enemy. Loud appeals to God and to Mahomet, to heaven and the saints,
were to be heard on all sides; and after an obstinate engagement from
sunrise to sunset, darkness put an end to the slaughter. On the third
day, (the 18th,) the infidels made the final assault on the side next
the gate of St. Anthony. The Grand Masters of the Temple and the
Hospital fought side by side at the head of their knights, and for a
time successfully resisted all the efforts of the enemy. They engaged
hand to hand with the Mamlooks, and pressed like the meanest of the
soldiers into the thick of the battle. But as each knight fell beneath
the keen scimitars of the Moslems, there were none in reserve to supply
his place, whilst the vast hordes of the infidels pressed on with
untiring energy and perseverance. The Marshall of the Hospital fell
covered with wounds, and William de Beaujeu, as a last resort, requested
the Grand Master of that order to sally out of an adjoining gateway at
the head of five hundred horse, and attack the enemy's rear. Immediately
after the Grand Master of the Temple had given these orders, he was
himself struck down by the darts and the arrows of the enemy; the
panic-stricken garrison fled to the port, and the infidels rushed on
with tremendous shouts of *Allah acbar! Allah acbar!* "GOD is
victorious." Three hundred Templars, the sole survivors of their
illustrious order in Acre, were now left alone to withstand the shock of
the victorious Mamlooks. In a close and compact column they fought their
way, accompanied by several

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

hundred christian fugitives, to the Temple, and shutting their gates,
they again bade defiance to the advancing foe.

<span class="margnote">GAUDINI  
A.D. 1291.</span>The surviving knights now assembled together in solemn
chapter, and appointed the Knight Templar Brother Gaudini Grand
Master. <span id="fr_316"></span>[\*](#fn_316.md) The Temple at Acre was a
place of great strength, and surrounded by walls and towers of immense
extent. It was divided into three quarters, the first and principal of
which contained the palace of the Grand Master, the church, and the
habitation of the knights; the second, called the Bourg of the Temple,
contained the cells of the serving brethren; and the third, called the
Cattle Market, was devoted to the officers charged with the duty of
procuring the necessary supplies for the order and its forces.

The following morning very favourable terms were offered to the Templars
by the victorious sultan, and they agreed to evacuate the Temple on
condition that a galley should be placed at their disposal, and that
they should be allowed to retire in safety with the christian fugitives
under their protection, and to carry away as much of their effects as
each person could load himself with. The Mussulman conqueror pledged
himself to the fulfilment of these conditions, and sent a standard to
the Templars, which was mounted on one of the towers of the Temple. A
guard of three hundred Moslem soldiers, charged to see the articles of
capitulation properly carried into effect, was afterwards admitted
within the walls of the convent. Some christian women of Acre, who had
refused to quit their fathers, brothers, and husbands, the brave
defenders of the place, were amongst the fugitives, and the Moslem
soldiers, attracted by their beauty, broke through all restraint, and
violated the terms of the surrender. The enraged Templars closed and
barricadoed the gates

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

<span class="margnote">GAUDINI  
A.D. 1291.</span>of the Temple; they set upon the treacherous infidels,
and put every one of them, "from the greatest to the smallest," to
death. <span id="fr_317"></span>[\*](#fn_317.md) Immediately after this
massacre the Moslem trumpets sounded to the assault, but the Templars
successfully defended themselves until the next day (the 20th.) The
Marshall of the order and several of the brethren were then deputed by
Gaudini with a flag of truce to the sultan, to explain the cause of the
massacre of his guard. The enraged monarch, however, had no sooner got
them into his power than he ordered every one of them to be decapitated,
and pressed the siege with renewed vigour. In the night, Gaudini, with a
chosen band of his companions, collected together the treasure of the
order and the ornaments of the church, and sallying out of a secret
postern of the Temple which communicated with the harbour, they got on
board a small vessel, and escaped in safety to the island of
Cyprus. <span id="fr_318"></span>[†](#fn_318.md) The residue of the
Templars retired into the large tower of the Temple, called "The Tower
of the Master," which they defended with desperate energy. The bravest
of the Mamlooks were driven back in repeated assaults, and the little
fortress was everywhere surrounded with heaps of the slain. The sultan,
at last, despairing of taking the place by assault, ordered it to be
undermined. As the workmen advanced, they propped the foundations with
beams

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

of wood, and when the excavation was completed, these wooden supports
were consumed by fire; the huge tower then fell with a tremendous crash,
and buried the brave Templars in its ruins. The sultan set fire to the
town in four places, and the last stronghold of the christian power in
Palestine was speedily reduced to a smoking solitude. <span
id="fr_319"></span>[\*](#fn_319.md) A few years back the ruins of the
christian city of Acre were well worthy of the attention of the curious.
You might still trace the remains of several churches; and the quarter
occupied by the Knights Templars continued to present many interesting
memorials of that proud and powerful order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_276"></span>[165:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_276.md) Michaud Extraits
Arabes, p. 549.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[166:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_277.md) *Steph. Baluz*
Miscell., lib. vi. p. 357.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[167:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_278.md) *Marin Sanut*, p.
217.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[170:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_279.md) *Matt. Par.* p. 631
to 633, ad ann. 1244. "Huic scripto originali, quod erat hujus exemplum,
appensa fuerunt duodecim sigilla."

<span id="fn_280"></span>[172:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_280.md) *Matt. Par.* p.
618-620.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[172:†](hkt10.htm#fr_281.md) Cotton MS. Nero E.
VI. p. 60, fol. 466, vir discretus et circumspectus; in negotiis quoque
bellicis peritus.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[172:‡](hkt10.htm#fr_282.md) Hospitalarii et
Templarii milites neophitos et manum armatam cum thesauro non modico
illuc ad consolationem et auxilium ibi commorantium festinanter
transmiserunt. Epist. Pap. Innocent IV.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[172:§](hkt10.htm#fr_283.md) *Matt. Par.* p. 697,
698.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[174:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_284.md) Literæ Soldani
Babyloniæ ad Papam missæ, a quodam Cardinali ex Arabico
translatæ.--*Matt. Par.* p. 711.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[174:†](hkt10.htm#fr_285.md) Ibid. p. 733.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[175:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_286.md) *Matt. Par.* p. 735.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[175:†](hkt10.htm#fr_287.md) Ib. in additamentis,
p. 168, 169.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[177:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_288.md) Quant les Templiers
virent-ce, it se penserent que it seroient honniz se it lessoient le
Compte d’Artois aler devant eulz; si ferirent des esperons qui
plus plus, et qui miex miex, et chasserent les Turcs. Hist. de San Louis
par *Jehan Sire de Joinville*, p. 47.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[177:†](hkt10.htm#fr_289.md) Nec evasit de totâ
illâ gloriosâ militiâ nisi duo Templarii.--*Matt. Par.* ad ann. 1250.
Chron. *Nangis*, p. 790.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[178:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_290.md) Et à celle bataille
frere Guillaume le Mestre du Temple perdi l’un des yex, et l’autre avoit
il perdu le jour de quaresm pernant, et en fu mort ledit seigneur, que
Dieux absoille.--*Joinville*, p. 58.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[178:†](hkt10.htm#fr_291.md) Et sachez que il
avoit bien un journel de terre dariere les Templiers, qui estoit si
chargé de pyles que les Sarrazins leur avoient lanciées, que il n’i
paroit point de terre pour la grant foison de pyles.--Ib.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[179:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_292.md) *Joinville*, p. 95,
96.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[179:†](hkt10.htm#fr_293.md) *Acta Rymeri*, tom.
i. p. 474, ad ann. 1252.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[180:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_294.md) *Matt. Par.* ad ann.
1254, p. 899, 900.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[180:†](hkt10.htm#fr_295.md) . . . Mandatum est
Johanni de Eynfort, camerario regis London, quod sine dilatione capiat
quatuor dolia boni vini, et ea liberet Johanni de Suwerk, ponenda in
cellaria Novi Templi London. ad opus nuntiorum ipsorum.--Acta Rymeri,
tom i. p. 557, ad ann. 1255.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[180:‡](hkt10.htm#fr_296.md) Et mandatum est
Ricardo de Muntfichet, custodi forestæ Regis Essex, quod eadem forestâ
sine dilatione capiat X. damos, et eos usque ad Novum Templum London
cariari faciat, liberandos prædicto Johanni, ad opus prædictorum
nuntiorum.--*Ib*.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[180:§](hkt10.htm#fr_297.md) Acta *Rymeri*, p.
557, 558.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[180:¦¦](hkt10.htm#fr_298.md) MCCLVI. morut frère
Renaut de Vichieres Maístre du Temple. Apres lui fu fait Maistre frère
Thomas Berard.--Contin. hist. apud *Martene*, tom. v. col. 736.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[180:¶](hkt10.htm#fr_299.md) *Acta Rymeri*, tom.
i. p. 698, 699, 700.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[181:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_300.md) Acta Rymeri, tom. i.
p. 730, 878, 879, ad ann. 1261.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[181:†](hkt10.htm#fr_301.md) Furent mors et pris,
et perdirent les Templiers tot lor hernois, et le commandeor du Temple
frère Matthieu le Sauvage.--Contin. hist. bell. sacr. ut sup. col. 737.
*Marin Sanut*, cap. 6.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[182:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_302.md) *Marin Sanut
Torsell*, lib. iii. pars 12, cap. 6, 7, 8. Contin. hist. bell. sacr.
apud *Martene*, tom. v. col. 74.2. See also Abulfed. Hist. Arab. apud
Wilkens, p. 223. *De Guignes*, Hist. des Huns, tom. iv. p. 141.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[182:†](hkt10.htm#fr_303.md) *Michaud*, Extraites
Arabes, p. 668.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[182:‡](hkt10.htm#fr_304.md) *De Vertot*, liv.
iii. Preuve. xiii. See also epist. ccccii. apud *Martene* thesaur. anec.
tom. ii. col. 422.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[183:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_305.md) Facta est civitas
tam famosa quasi solitudo deserti.--*Marin Sanut*, lib. iii. pars. 12,
cap. 9. *De Guignes*, Hist. des Huns, tom. iv. p. 143. Contin. Hist.
apud Martene, tom. v. col. 743. *Abulpharag*. Chron. Syr. p. 546.
*Michaud*, Extraits Arabes, p. 681.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[183:†](hkt10.htm#fr_306.md) *Marin Sanu*t ut sup.
cap. 11, 12. Contin. Hist. apud *Martene*, col. 745, 746.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[183:‡](hkt10.htm#fr_307.md) En testimoniaunce de
la queu chose, a ceo testament avons fet mettre nostre sel, et avoms
pries les honurables Bers frere Hue, Mestre de l’Hospital, et frere
Thomas Berard, Mestre du Temple, ke a cent escrit meisent ausi lur seul,
etc. Acta *Rymeri*, tom. i. p. 885, 886, ad ann. 1272.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[183:§](hkt10.htm#fr_308.md) Trivet ad ann. 1272.
Walsingham, p. 43. Acta *Rymeri*, tom, i. p. 889, ad ann. 1272, tom. ii.
p. 2.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[184:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_309.md) Monast. Angl., vol.
vi. part 2, p. 800-844.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[184:†](hkt10.htm#fr_310.md) MCCLXXIII. a viii.
jors d’Avri morut frere Thomas Berart, Maistre du Temple le jor de la
notre dame de Mars, et fa fait Maistre a xiii. jors de May, frere
Guillaume de Bieaujeu qui estoit outre *Commendeor* du Temple en
Pouille, et alerent por lui querire frere Guillaume de Poucon, qui avait
tenu lieu de Maistre, et frere Bertrand de Fox; et frere Gonfiere fu
fait *Commandeor* gran tenant lieu de Maistre.--Contin. Hist. apud
Martene, tom. v. col. 746, 747. This is the earliest instance I have met
with of the application of the term COMMANDER to the high officers of
the Temple.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[184:‡](hkt10.htm#fr_311.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
ii. p. 34, ad ann. 1274.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[185:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_312.md) Contin. hist. bell.
sacr. apud *Martene*, tom. v. col. 748.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[185:†](hkt10.htm#fr_313.md) Life of Malek Mansour
Kelaoun. *Michaud*, Extraits Arabes, p. 685, 686, 687.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[186:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_314.md) De excidio urbis
Aconis apud *Martene* vet. script. tom. v. col. 767.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[187:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_315.md) The famous
Abul-feda, prince of Hamah, surnamed Amod-ed-deen, (Pillar of Religion,)
the great historian and astronomer, superintended the transportation of
the military engines from Hasn-el-Akrah to St. Jean d’Acre.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[190:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_316.md) Ex ipsis fratrem
monachum Gaudini elegerunt ministrum generalem. De excidio urbis Acconis
apud *Martene*, tom. v. col 782.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[191:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_317.md) Videntes pulchros
Francorum filios ac filias, manus his injecerunt.--*Abulfarag*, Citron.
Syr. p. 595. Maledicti Saracen mulieres et pueros ad loca domus
secretiora ex eisdem abusuri distrahere conabantur, turpibus ecclesiam
obscœnitatibus cum nihil possent aliud maculantes. Quod videntes
christiani, clausis portis, in perfidos viriliter irruerunt, et omnes a
minimo usque ad maximum occiderunt, muros, turres, atque portas Templi
munientes ad defensam.--De excid. Acconis ut sup. col. 782. *Marin
Sanut* ut sup. cap. xxii. p. 231.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[191:†](hkt10.htm#fr_318.md) Per totem noctem
illam, dum fideles vigilarent contra perfidorum astutiam, domum contra
eos defensuri, fratrum adjutorio de thesauris quod potuit cum
sacrosanctis reliquiis ecclesiæ Templi, ad mare salubriter deportavit.
Inde quidem cum fratribus paucis auspicato remigio, in Cyprum cum
cautelâ transfretavit.--De excid. Acconis, col. 782.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[192:\*](hkt10.htm#fr_319.md) De excidio urbis
Acconis apud *Martene*, tom. v. col. 757. *De Guignes*, Hist. des Huns,
tom. iv. p. 162. *Michaud*, Extraits Arabes, p. 762, 808. Abulfarag.
Chron. Syr. p. 595. Wilkens, Comment. Abulfed. Hist. p. 231-234. *Marin.
Sanut Torsell*, lib. iii. pars 12, cap. 21.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](hkt11.md)

</div>
