<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hkt10)  [Next](hkt12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002RHOUAK/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The History of the Knights Templar*, by Charles G. Addison, \[1842\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

<span class="small">The downfall of the Templars--The cause thereof--The
Grand Master comes to Europe at the request of the Pope--He is
imprisoned, with all the Templars in France, by command of king
Philip--They are put to the torture, and confessions of the guilt of
heresy and idolatry are extracted from them--Edward H. king of England
stands up in defence of the Templars, but afterwards persecutes them at
the instance of the Pope--The imprisonment of the Master of the Temple
and all his brethren in England--Their examination upon eighty-seven
horrible and ridiculous articles of accusation before foreign
inquisitors appointed by the Pope--A council of the church assembles at
London to pass sentence upon them--The curious evidence adduced as to
the mode of admission into the order, and of the customs and observances
of the fraternity.</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">En cel an qu’ai dist or endroit,  
Et ne sait a tort ou a droit,  
Furent li Templiers, sans doutance,  
Tous pris par le royaume de France.  
Au mois d’Octobre, au point du jor,  
Et un vendredi fa le jor.  
                                          *Chron*. MS.</span>

</div>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1297.</span>IT now only remains for us to describe the miserable
fate of the surviving brethren of the order of the Temple, and to tell
of the ingratitude they encountered from their fellow Christians in the
West. Shortly after the fall of Acre, a general chapter of the
fraternity was called together, and James de Molay, the Preceptor

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1302.</span>of England, was chosen Grand Master. <span
id="fr_320"></span>[\*](#fn_320) He attempted once more (A.D. 1302.md) to
plant the banners of the Temple upon the sacred soil of Palestine, but
was defeated by the sultan of Egypt with the loss of a hundred and
twenty of his brethren. <span id="fr_321"></span>[†](#fn_321.md) This
disastrous expedition was speedily followed by the downfall of the
fraternity. Many circumstances contributed to this memorable event.

With the loss of all the christian territory in Palestine had expired in
Christendom every serious hope and expectation of recovering and
retaining the Holy City. The services of the Templars were consequently
no longer required, and men began to regard with an eye of envy and of
covetousness their vast wealth and immense possessions. The privileges
conceded to the fraternity by the popes made the church their enemy. The
great body of the clergy regarded with jealousy and indignation their
exemption from the ordinary ecclesiastical jurisdiction. The bull *omne
datum optimum* was considered a great inroad upon the rights of the
church, and broke the union which had originally subsisted between the
Templars and the ecclesiastics. Their exemption from tithe was a source
of considerable loss to the parsons, and the privilege they possessed of
celebrating divine service during interdict brought abundance of
offerings and alms to the priests and chaplains of the order, which the
clergy looked upon as so many robberies committed upon themselves.
Disputes arose between the fraternity and the bishops and priests, and
the hostility of the latter to the order was manifested in repeated acts
of injustice, which drew forth many severe bulls and indignant
animadversions from the Roman pontiffs. Pope Alexander, in a bull
fulminated against the clergy, tells

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1302.</span>them that if they would carefully reflect upon the
contests which his beloved sons, the brethren of the chivalry of the
Temple, continually maintained in Palestine for the defence of
Christianity, and their kindness to the poor, they would not only cease
from annoying and injuring them, but would strictly restrain others from
so doing. He expresses himself to be grieved and astonished to hear that
many ecclesiastics had vexed them with grievous injuries, had treated
his apostolic letters with contempt, and had refused to read them in
their churches; that they had subtracted the customary alms and
oblations from the fraternity, and had admitted aggressors against the
property of the brethren to their familiar friendship, insufferably
endeavouring to press down and discourage those whom they ought
assiduously to uphold. From other bulls it appears that the clergy
interfered with the right enjoyed by the fraternity of collecting alms;
that they refused to bury the brethren of the order when deceased
without being paid for it, and arrogantly claimed a right to be
entertained with sumptuous hospitality in the houses of the Temple. For
these delinquencies, the bishops, archdeacons, priests, and the whole
body of the clergy, are threatened with severe measures by the Roman
pontiff. <span id="fr_322"></span>[\*](#fn_322.md)

The Templars, moreover, towards the close of their career, became
unpopular with the European sovereigns and their nobles. The revenues of
the former were somewhat diminished through the immunities conceded to
the Templars by their predecessors, and the paternal estates of the
latter had been diminished by the grant of many thousand manors,
lordships, and fair estates to the order by their pious and enthusiastic
ancestors. Considerable dislike also began to be manifested to the
annual transmission of large sums of money, the revenues of the order,
from the

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1302.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
European states to be expended in a distant warfare in which Christendom
now took comparatively no interest. Shortly after the fall of Acre, and
the total loss of Palestine, Edward the First, king of England, seized
and sequestered to his own use the monies which had been accumulated by
the Templars, to forward to their brethren in Cyprus, alleging that the
property of the order of the Temple had been granted to it by the kings
of England, his predecessors, and their subjects, for the defence of the
Holy Land, and that since the loss thereof, no better use could be made
of the money than by appropriating it to the maintenance of the poor. At
the earnest request of the pope, however, the king afterwards permitted
their revenues to be transmitted for them in the island of Cyprus in the
usual manner. <span id="fr_323"></span>[\*](#fn_323.md) King Edward had
previously manifested a strong desire to lay hands on the property of
the Templars. On his return from his victorious campaign in Wales,
finding himself unable to disburse the arrears of pay due to his
soldiers, he went with Sir Robert Waleran and some armed followers to
the Temple, and calling for the treasurer, he pretended that he wanted
to see his mother's jewels, which were there kept. Having been admitted
into the house, he deliberately broke open the coffers of the Templars,
and carried away ten thousand pounds with him to Windsor Castle. <span
id="fr_324"></span>[†](#fn_324.md) His son, Edward the Second, on his
accession to the throne, committed a similar act of injustice. He went
with his favourite, Piers Gavaston, to the Temple, and took away with
him fifty thousand pounds of silver, with a quantity of gold, jewels,
and precious stones, belonging to the bishop of Chester. <span
id="fr_325"></span>[‡](#fn_325.md)

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1302.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
The impunity with which these acts of violence were committed, manifests
that the Templars then no longer enjoyed the power and respect which
they possessed in ancient times.

As the enthusiasm, too, in favour of the holy war diminished, large
numbers of the Templars remained at home in their western preceptories,
and took an active part in the politics of Europe. They interfered in
the quarrels of christian princes, and even drew their swords against
their fellow-Christians. Thus we find the members of the order taking
part in the war between the houses of Anjou and Aragon, and aiding the
king of England in his warfare against the king of Scotland. In the
battle of Falkirk, fought on the 22nd of July, A.D. 1298, seven years
after the fall of Acre, perished both the Master of the Temple at
London, and his vicegerent the Preceptor of Scotland. <span
id="fr_326"></span>[\*](#fn_326.md) All these circumstances, together with
the loss of the Holy Land, and the extinction of the enthusiasm of the
crusades, diminished the popularity of the Templars in Europe.

At the period of the fall of Acre, Philip the Fair, son of St. Louis,
occupied the throne of France. He was a needy and avaricious
monarch, <span id="fr_327"></span>[†](#fn_327.md) and had at different
periods resorted to the most violent expedients to replenish his
exhausted exchequer. On the death of Pope Benedict XI., (A.D. 1304,) he
succeeded, through the intrigues of the French Cardinal Dupré, in
raising the archbishop of Bourdeaux, a creature of his own, to the
pontifical chair. The new pope removed the Holy See from Rome to France;
he summoned all the cardinals to Lyons, and was there consecrated, (A.D.
1305,) by the name of Clement V., in the presence of king Philip and his
nobles. Of the ten new cardinals then created *nine* were Frenchmen, and
in all his acts the new pope manifested himself the obedient slave of
the French monarch.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1306.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
The character of this pontiff has been painted by the Romish
ecclesiastical historians in the darkest colours: they represent him as
wedded to pleasure, eaten up with ambition, and greedy for money; they
accuse him of indulging in a criminal intrigue with the beautiful
countess of Perigord, and of trafficking in holy things. <span
id="fr_328"></span>[\*](#fn_328.md)

On the 6th of June, A.D. 1306, a few months after his coronation, this
new French pontiff addressed letters from Bourdeaux to the Grand Masters
of the Temple and Hospital, expressing his earnest desire to consult
them with regard to the measures necessary to be taken for the recovery
of the Holy Land. He tells them that they are the persons best qualified
to give advice upon the subject, and to conduct and manage the
enterprize, both from their great military experience and the interest
they had in the success of the expedition. "We order you," says he, "to
come hither without delay, with as much secrecy as possible, and with a
*very little retinue*, since you will find on this side the sea a
sufficient number of your knights to attend upon you." <span
id="fr_329"></span>[†](#fn_329.md) The Grand Master of the Hospital
declined obeying this summons; but the Grand Master of the Temple
forthwith accepted it, and unhesitatingly placed himself in the power of
the pope and the king of France. He landed in France, attended by sixty
of his knights, at the commencement of the year 1307, and deposited the
treasure of the order which he had brought with him from Cyprus, in the
Temple at Paris. He was received with distinction by the king, and then
took his departure for Poictiers to

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1307.</span>have an interview with the pope. He was there detained
with various conferences and negotiations relative to a pretended
expedition for the recovery of the Holy Land.

Among other things, the pope proposed an union between the Templars and
Hospitallers, and the Grand Master handed in his objections to the
proposition. He says, that after the fall of Acre, the people of Italy
and of other christian nations clamoured loudly against Pope Nicholas,
for having afforded no succour to the besieged, and that he, by way of
screening himself, had laid all the blame of the loss of the place on
pretended dissensions between the Templars and Hospitaliers, and
projected an union between them. The Grand Master declares that there
had been no dissensions between the orders prejudicial to the christian
cause; that there was nothing more than a spirit of rivalry and
emulation, the destruction of which would be highly injurious to the
Christians, and advantageous to the Saracens; for if the Hospitaliers at
any time performed a brilliant feat of arms against the infidels, the
Templars would never rest quiet until they had done the same or better,
and *e converso*. So also if the Templars made a great shipment of
brethren, horses, and other beasts across sea to Palestine, the
Hospitaliers would always do the like or more. He at the same time
positively declares, that a member of one order had never been known to
raise his hand against a member of the other. <span
id="fr_330"></span>[\*](#fn_330.md) The Grand Master complains that the
reverence and respect of the christian nations for both orders had
undeservedly diminished, that everything was changed, and that most
persons were then more ready to take from them than to give to them, and
that many powerful men, both clergy and laity, brought continual
mischiefs upon the fraternities.

In the mean time, the secret agents of the French king industriously
circulated various dark rumours and odious reports concerning

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1307.</span>the Templars, and it was said that they would never
have lost the Holy Land if they had been good Christians. These rumours
and accusations were soon put into a tangible shape.

According to some writers, Squin de Florian, a citizen of Bezieres, who
had been condemned to death or perpetual imprisonment in one of the
royal castles for his iniquities, was brought before Philip, and
received a free pardon, and was well rewarded in return, for an
accusation on oath, charging the Templars with heresy, and with the
commission of the most horrible crimes. According to others, Nosso de
Florentin, an apostate Templar, who had been condemned by the Grand
Preceptor and chapter of France to perpetual imprisonment for impiety
and crime, made in his dungeon a voluntary confession of the sins and
abominations charged against the order. <span
id="fr_331"></span>[\*](#fn_331.md) Be this as it may, upon the strength of
an information sworn to by a condemned criminal, king Philip, on the
14th of September, despatched secret orders to all the baillis of the
different provinces in France, couched in the following extravagant and
absurd terms:

"Philip, by the grace of God king of the French, to his beloved and
faithful knights. . . . &c. &c.

"A deplorable and most lamentable matter, full of bitterness and grief,
a monstrous business, a thing that one cannot think on without affright,
cannot hear without horror, transgressions unheard of, enormities and
atrocities contrary to every sentiment of humanity, &c. &c., have
reached our ears." After a long and most extraordinary tirade of this
kind, Philip accuses the Templars of insulting Jesus Christ, and making
him suffer more in those days than he had suffered formerly upon the
cross; of renouncing the christian religion; of mocking the sacred image

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1307.</span>of the Saviour; of sacrificing to idols; and of
abandoning themselves to impure practices and unnatural crimes. He
characterises them as ravishing wolves in sheep's clothing; a
perfidious, ungrateful, idolatrous society, whose words and deeds were
enough to pollute the earth and infect the air; to dry up the sources of
the celestial dews, and to put the whole church of Christ into
confusion.

"We being charged," says he, "with the maintenance of the faith; after
having conferred with the pope, the prelates, and the barons of the
kingdom, at the instance of the inquisitor, from the informations
already laid, from violent suspicions, from probable conjectures, from
legitimate presumptions, conceived against the enemies of heaven and
earth; and because the matter is important, and it is expedient to prove
the just like gold in the furnace by a rigorous examination, have
decreed that the members of the order who are our subjects shall be
arrested and detained to be judged by the church, and that all their
real and personal property shall be seized into our hands, and be
faithfully preserved," &c. To these orders are attached instructions
requiring the baillis and seneschals accurately to inform themselves,
with great secrecy, and without exciting suspicion, of the number of the
houses of the Temple within their respective jurisdictions; they are
then to provide an armed force sufficient to overcome all resistance,
and on the 13th of October are to surprise the Templars in their
preceptories, and make them prisoners. The inquisition is then directed
to assemble to examine the guilty, and to employ *torture* if it be
necessary. "Before proceeding with the inquiry," says Philip, "you are
to inform them (the Templars) that the pope and ourselves have been
convinced, by irreproachable testimony, of the errors and abominations
which accompany their vows and profession; you are to promise them
pardon and favour if they

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1307.</span>*confess* the truth, but if not, you are to acquaint
them that they will be condemned to death." <span
id="fr_332"></span>[\*](#fn_332.md)

As soon as Philip had issued these orders, he wrote to the principal
sovereigns of Europe, urging them to follow his example, <span
id="fr_333"></span>[†](#fn_333.md) and sent a confidential agent, named
Bernard Peletin, with a letter to the young king, Edward the Second, who
had just then ascended the throne of England, representing in frightful
colours the pretended sins of the Templars. On the 22nd of September,
king Edward replied to this letter, observing that he had considered of
the matters mentioned therein, and had listened to the statements of
that discreet man, Master Bernard Peletin; that he had caused the latter
to unfold the charges before himself, and many prelates, earls, and
barons of his kingdom, and others of his council; but that they appeared
so astonishing as to be beyond belief; that such abominable and
execrable deeds had never before been heard of by the king and the
aforesaid prelates, earls, and barons, and it was therefore hardly to be
expected that an easy credence could be given to them. The English
monarch, however, informs king Philip that by the advice of his council
be had ordered the seneschal of Agen, from whose lips the rumours were
said to have proceeded, to be summoned to his presence, that through him
he might be further informed concerning the premises; and he states that
at the fitting time, after due inquiry, he will take such steps as will
redound to the praise of God, and the honour and preservation of the
catholic faith. <span id="fr_334"></span>[‡](#fn_334.md)

On the night of the 13th of October, all the Templars in the French
dominions were simultaneously arrested. Monks were appointed to preach
against them in the public places of Paris,

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1307.</span>and in the gardens of the Palais Royale; and advantage
was taken of the folly, the superstition, and the credulity of the age,
to propagate the most horrible and extravagant charges against the
order. They were accused of worshipping an idol covered with an old
skin, embalmed, having the appearance of a piece of polished oil-cloth.
"In this idol," we are assured, "there were two carbuncles for eyes,
bright as the brightness of heaven, and it is certain that all the hope
of the Templars was placed in it; it was their sovereign god, and they
trusted in it with all their heart." They are accused of burning the
bodies of the deceased brethren, and making the ashes into a powder,
which they administered to the younger brethren in their food and drink,
to make them hold fast their faith and idolatry; of cooking and roasting
infants, and anointing their idols with the fat; of celebrating hidden
rites and mysteries, to which young and tender virgins were introduced,
and of a variety of abominations too absurd and horrible to be
named. <span id="fr_335"></span>[\*](#fn_335.md) Guillaume Paradin, in his
history of Savoy, seriously repeats these monstrous accusations, and
declares that the Templars had "un lieu creux ou cave en terre, fort
obscur, en laquelle ils avoient un image en forme d’un homme, sur lequel
ils avoient appliqué la peau d’un corps humain, et mis deux clairs et
lui sans escarboucles au lieu des deux yeux. A cette horrible statue
etoient contraints de sacrifier ceux qui vouloient etre de leur damnable
religion, lesquels avant toutes ceremonies ils contragnoient de renier
Jesus Christ, et fouler la croix avec les pieds, et apres ce maudit
sacre auquel assistoient femmes et filles (seduites pour etre de ce
secte) ils estegnoient les lampes et lumieres qu’ils avoient en cett
cave. . . . . Et s’il advenoit que d’un Templier et d’un pucelle
nasquit, un fils, ils se rangoit tous en un rond, et se jettoient cet
enfant de main en main,

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1307.</span>et ne cessoient de le jetter jusqu’a ce qu’il fu mort
entre leurs mains: etant mort ils se rotissoient (chose execrable) et de
la graisse ils en ognoient leur grand statue!" <span
id="fr_336"></span>[\*](#fn_336.md) The character of the charges preferred
against the Templars proves that their enemies had no serious crimes to
allege against the order. Their very virtues indeed were turned against
them, for we are told that "*to conceal the iniquity of their lives*
they made much almsgiving, constantly frequented church, comported
themselves with edification, frequently partook of the holy sacrament,
and manifested always much modesty and gentleness of deportment in the
house, as well as in public." <span id="fr_337"></span>[†](#fn_337.md)

During twelve days of severe imprisonment, the Templars remained
constant in the denial of the horrible crimes imputed to the fraternity.
The king's promises of pardon extracted from them no confession of
guilt, and they were therefore handed over to the tender mercies of the
brethren of St. Dominic, who were the most refined and expert torturers
of the day.

On the 19th of October, the grand inquisitor proceeded with his
myrmidons to the Temple at Paris, and a hundred and forty Templars were
one after another put to the torture. Days and weeks were consumed in
the examination, and thirty-six Templars perished in the hands of their
tormentors, maintaining with unshaken constancy to the very last the
entire innocence of their order. Many of them lost the use of their feet
from the application of the torture of fire, which was inflicted in the
following manner: their legs were fastened in an iron frame, and the
soles of their feet were greased over with fat or butter; they were then
placed before the fire, and a screen was drawn backwards and forwards,
so as to moderate and regulate the heat. Such was the agony produced by
this roasting operation, that the victims often went raving mad. Brother
Bernarde de Vado,

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1307.</span>on subsequently revoking a confession of guilt, wrung
from him by this description of torment, says to the commissary of
police, before whom he was brought to be examined, "They held me so long
before a fierce fire that the flesh was burnt off my heels, two pieces
of bone came away, which I present to you." <span
id="fr_338"></span>[\*](#fn_338.md) Another Templar, on publicly revoking
his confession, declared that four of his teeth were drawn out, and that
he confessed himself guilty to save the remainder. <span
id="fr_339"></span>[†](#fn_339.md) Others of the fraternity deposed to the
infliction on them of the most revolting and indecent torments; <span
id="fr_340"></span>[‡](#fn_340.md) and, in addition to all this, it appears
that forged letters from the Grand Master were shown to the prisoners,
exhorting them to confess themselves guilty. Many of the Templars were
accordingly compelled to acknowledge whatever was required of them, and
to plead guilty to the commission of crimes which in the previous
interrogatories they had positively denied. <span
id="fr_341"></span>[§](#fn_341.md)

These violent proceedings excited the astonishment and amazement of
Europe.

On the 20th of November, the king of England summoned the seneschal of
Agen to his presence, and examined him concerning the truth of the
horrible charges preferred against the Templars; and on the 4th of
December the English monarch wrote letters to the kings of Portugal,
Castile, Aragon, and Sicily, to the following effect:

"To the magnificent prince the Lord Dionysius, by the grace of God the
illustrious king of Portugal, his very dear friend Edward, by the same
grace king of England, &c. Health and prosperity.

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1307.</span>"It is fit and proper, inasmuch as it conduceth to the
honour of God and the exaltation of the faith, that we should prosecute
with benevolence those who come recommended to us by strenuous labours
and incessant exertions in defence of the Catholic faith, and for the
destruction of the enemies of the cross of Christ. Verily, a certain
clerk, (Bernard Peletin,) drawing nigh unto our presence, applied
himself, with all his might, to the destruction of the order of the
brethren of the Temple of Jerusalem. He dared to publish before us and
our council certain horrible and detestable enormities repugnant to the
Catholic faith, to the prejudice of the aforesaid brothers, endeavouring
to persuade us, through his own allegations, as well as through certain
letters which he had caused to be addressed to us for that purpose, that
by reason of the premises, and without a due examination of the matter,
we ought to imprison all the brethren of the aforesaid order abiding in
our dominions. But, considering that the order, which hath been renowned
for its religion and its honour, and in times long since passed away was
instituted, as we have learned, by the Catholic Fathers, exhibits, and
hath from the period of its first foundation exhibited, a becoming
devotion to God and his holy church, and also, up to this time, hath
afforded succour and protection to the Catholic faith in parts beyond
sea, it appeared to us that a ready belief in an accusation of this
kind, hitherto altogether unheard of against the fraternity, was
scarcely to be expected. We affectionately ask, and require of your
royal majesty, that ye, with due diligence, consider of the premises,
and turn a deaf ear to the slanders of ill-natured men, who are
animated, as we believe, not with the zeal of rectitude, but with a
spirit of *cupidity* and envy, permitting no injury unadvisedly to be
done to the persons or property of the brethren of the aforesaid order,
dwelling within your kingdom, until they have been legally convicted of
the crimes laid to their charge, or

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1307.</span>it shall happen to be otherwise ordered concerning them
in these parts." <span id="fr_342"></span>[\*](#fn_342.md)

A few days after the transmission of this letter, king Edward wrote to
the pope, expressing his disbelief of the horrible and detestable
rumours spread abroad concerning the Templars. He represents them to his
holiness as universally respected by all men in his dominions for the
purity of their faith and morals. He expresses great sympathy for the
affliction and distress suffered by the master and brethren, by reason
of the scandal circulated concerning them; and he strongly urges the
holy pontiff to clear, by some fair course of inquiry, the character of
the order from the unjust and infamous aspersions cast against it. <span
id="fr_343"></span>[†](#fn_343.md) On the 22nd of November, however, a
fortnight previously, the Pope had issued the following bull to king
Edward.

"Clement, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his very dear son
in Christ, Edward, the illustrious king of England, health and
apostolical blessing

"Presiding, though unworthy, on the throne of pastoral preeminence, by
the disposition of him who disposeth all things, we fervently seek after
this one thing above all others; we with ardent wishes aspire to this,
that shaking off the sleep of negligence, whilst watching over the
Lord's flock, by removing that which is hurtful, and taking care of such
things as are profitable, we may be able, by the divine assistance, to
bring souls to God."

"In truth, a long time ago, about the period of our first promotion to
the summit of the apostolical dignity, there came to our ears a light
rumour, to the effect that the Templars, though fighting

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1307.</span>ostensibly under the guise of religion, have hitherto
been secretly living in perfidious apostasy, and in detestable heretical
depravity. But, considering that their order, in times long since passed
away, shone forth with the grace of much nobility and honour, and that
they were for a length of time held in vast reverence by the faithful,
and that we had then heard of no suspicion concerning the premises, or
of evil report against them; and also, that from the beginning of their
religion, they have publicly borne the cross of Christ, exposing their
bodies and goods against the enemies of the faith, for the acquisition,
retention, and defence of the Holy Land, consecrated by the precious
blood of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, we were unwilling to yield a
ready belief to the accusation. . . . ."

The holy pontiff then states, that afterwards, however, the same
dreadful intelligence was conveyed to the king of France, who, animated
by a lively zeal in the cause of religion, took immediate steps to
ascertain its truth. He describes the various confessions of the guilt
of idolatry and heresy made by the Templars in France, and requires the
king forthwith to cause all the Templars in his dominions to be taken
into custody on the same day. He directs him to hold them, in the name
of the pope, at the disposition of the Holy See, and to commit all their
real and personal property to the hands of certain trustworthy persons,
to be faithfully preserved until the holy pontiff shall give further
directions concerning it. <span id="fr_344"></span>[\*](#fn_344.md) King
Edward received this bull immediately after he had despatched his letter
to the pope, exhorting his holiness not to give ear to the accusation
against the order. The young king was now either convinced of the guilt
of the Templars, on the high authority of the sovereign pontiff, or
hoped to turn the proceedings against them to a profitable account, as
be yielded a ready and prompt compliance with the pontifical commands.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1307.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
An order in council was made for the arrest of the Templars, and the
seizure of their property. Inventories were directed to be taken of
their goods and chattels, and provision was made for the sowing and
tilling of their lands during the period of their imprisonment. <span
id="fr_345"></span>[\*](#fn_345.md) This order in council was carried into
effect in the following manner:

On the 20th of December, the king's writs were directed to each of the
sheriffs throughout England, commanding them to make sure of certain
trustworthy men of their bailiwicks, to the number of ten or twelve in
each county, such as the king could best confide in, and have them at a
certain place in the county, on pain of forfeiture of everything that
could be forfeited to the king; and commanding the sheriffs, on pain of
the like forfeiture, to be in person at the same place, on the Sunday
before the feast of Epiphany, to do certain things touching the king's
peace, which the sheriff would find contained in the king's writ about
to be directed to him. And afterwards the king sent sworn clergymen with
his writs, containing the said order in council to the sheriffs, who,
before they opened them, were to take an oath that they would not
disclose the contents of such writs until they proceeded to execute
them. <span id="fr_346"></span>[†](#fn_346.md) The same orders, to be acted
upon in a similar manner in Ireland, were sent to the justiciary of that
country, and to the treasurer of the Exchequer at Dublin; also, to John
de Richemund, guardian of Scotland; and to Walter de Pederton,
justiciary of West Wales; Hugh de Aldithelegh, justiciary of North
Wales; and to Robert de Holland, justiciary of Chester, who were
strictly commanded to carry the orders into execution before the king's
proceedings against the Templars in England were noised abroad. All the
king's faithful subjects were commanded to aid and assist the officers
in the fulfilment of their duty. <span id="fr_347"></span>[‡](#fn_347.md)

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1308.</span>On the 26th of December the king wrote to the Pope,
informing his holiness that he would carry his commands into execution
in the best and speediest way that he could; and on the 8th of January,
A.D. 1308, the Templars were suddenly arrested in all parts of England,
and their property was seized into the king's hands. <span
id="fr_348"></span>[\*](#fn_348.md) Brother William de la More was at this
period Master of the Temple, or Preceptor of England. He succeeded the
Master Brian le Jay, who was slain, as before mentioned, in the battle
of Falkirk, and was taken prisoner, together with all his brethren of
the Temple at London, and committed to close custody in Canterbury
Castle. He was afterwards liberated on bail at the instance of the
bishop of Durham. <span id="fr_349"></span>[†](#fn_349.md)

On the 12th of August, the Pope addressed the bull *faciens
misericordiam* to the English bishops as follows:--"Clement, bishop,
servant of the servants of God, to the venerable brethren the archbishop
of Canterbury and his suffragans, health and apostolical benediction.
The Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ, *using mercy* with his servant,
would have us taken up into the eminent mirror of the apostleship, to
this end, that being, though unworthy, his vicar upon earth, we may, as
far as human frailty will permit in all our actions and proceedings,
follow his footsteps." He describes the rumours which had been spread
abroad in France against the Templars, and his unwillingness to believe
them, "because it was not likely, nor did seem credible, that such
religious men, who particularly often shed their blood for the name of
Christ, and were thought very frequently to expose their persons to
danger of death for his sake; and who often showed many and great signs
of devotion, as well in the divine offices as in fasting and other
observances, should be so unmindful of their salvation as to perpetrate
such things; we were unwilling

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1308.</span>to give ear to the insinuations and impeachments
against them, being taught so to do by the example of the same Lord of
ours, and the writings of canonical doctrine. But afterwards, our most
dear son in Christ, Philip, the illustrious king of the French, to whom
the same crimes had been made known, *not from motives of avarice*,
(since he does not design to apply or to appropriate to himself any
portion of the estates of the Templars, nay, has washed his hands of
them!) but inflamed with zeal for the orthodox faith, following the
renowned footsteps of his ancestors, getting what information he
properly could upon the premises, gave us much instruction in the matter
by his messengers and letters." The holy pontiff then gives a long
account of the various confessions made in France, and of the absolution
granted to such of the Templars as were truly contrite and penitent; he
expresses his conviction of the guilt of the order, and makes provision
for the trial of the fraternity in England. <span
id="fr_350"></span>[\*](#fn_350.md) King Edward, in the mean time, had
begun to make free with their property, and the Pope, on the 4th of
October, wrote to him to the following effect:

"Your conduct begins again to afford us no slight cause of affliction,
inasmuch as it hath been brought to our knowledge from the report of
several barons, that in contempt of the Holy See, and without fear of
offending the divine Majesty, you have, of your own sole authority,
distributed to different persons the property which belonged formerly to
the order of the Temple in your dominions, which you had got into your
hands at our command, and which ought to have remained at our
disposition. . . . We have therefore ordained that certain fit and
proper persons shall be sent into your kingdom, and to all parts of the
world where the Templars are known to have had property, to take
possession of the same conjointly with certain prelates specially

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1308.</span>deputed to that end, and to make an inquisition
concerning the execrable excesses which the members of the order are
said to have committed." <span id="fr_351"></span>[\*](#fn_351.md)

To this letter of the supreme pontiff, king Edward sent the following
short and pithy reply:

"As to the goods of the Templars, we have done nothing with them up to
the present time, nor do we intend to do with them aught but what we
have a right to do, and what we know will be acceptable to the Most
High." <span id="fr_352"></span>[†](#fn_352.md)

On the 13th of September, A.D. 1309, the king granted letters of safe
conduct "to those discreet men, the abbot of Lagny, in the diocese of
Paris, and Master Sicard de Vaur, canon of Narbonne," the inquisitors
appointed by the Pope to examine the Grand Preceptor and brethren of the
Temple in England; <span id="fr_353"></span>[‡](#fn_353.md) and the same
day be wrote to the archbishop of Canterbury, and the bishops of London
and Lincoln, enjoining them to be personally present with the papal
inquisitors, at their respective sees, as often as such inquisitors, or
any one of them, should proceed with their inquiries against the
Templars. <span id="fr_354"></span>[§](#fn_354.md)

On the 14th of September writs were sent, in pursuance of an order in
council, to the sheriffs of Kent and seventeen other counties,
commanding them to bring all their prisoners of the order of the Temple
to London, and deliver them to the constable of the Tower; also to the
sheriffs of Northumberland and eight other counties, enjoining them to
convey their prisoners to York Castle; and to the sheriffs of Warwick
and seven other counties, requiring them, in like manner, to conduct
their prisoners to the Castle of Lincoln. <span
id="fr_355"></span>[¦¦](#fn_355.md) Writs were also sent to John de
Cumberland, constable of the Tower, and to the constables of

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>the castles of York and Lincoln, commanding them to
receive the Templars, to keep them in safe custody, and hold them at the
disposition of the inquisitors. <span id="fr_356"></span>[\*](#fn_356.md)
The total number of Templars in custody was two hundred and twenty-nine.
Many, however, were still at large, having successfully evaded capture
by obliterating all marks of their previous profession, and some had
escaped in disguise to the wild and mountainous parts of Wales,
Scotland, and Ireland. Among the prisoners confined in the Tower were
brother William de la More, Knight, Grand Preceptor of England,
otherwise Master of the Temple; Brother Himbert Blanke, Knight, Grand
Preceptor of Auvergne, one of the veteran warriors who had fought to the
last in defence of Palestine, had escaped the slaughter at Acre, and had
accompanied the Grand Master from Cyprus to France, from whence he
crossed over to England, and was rewarded for his meritorious and
memorable services, in defence of the christian faith, with a dungeon in
the Tower. <span id="fr_357"></span>[†](#fn_357.md) Brother *Radulph de
Barton*, priest of the order of the Temple, custos or guardian of the
Temple church, and prior of London; Brother *Michael de Baskeville*,
Knight, Preceptor of London; Brother *John de Stoke*, Knight, Treasurer
of the Temple at London; together with many other knights and serving
brethren of the same house. There were also in custody in the Tower the
knights preceptors of the preceptories of Ewell in Kent, of Daney and
Dokesworth in Cambridgeshire, of Getinges in Gloucestershire, of Cumbe
in Somersetshire, of Schepeley in Surrey, of Samford and Bistelesham in
Oxfordshire, of Garwy in Herefordshire, of Cressing in Essex, of
Pafflet, Hippleden, and other preceptories, together with several
priests and chaplains of the order. <span
id="fr_358"></span>[‡](#fn_358.md) A general scramble appears to have taken
place for possession of

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>the goods and chattels of the imprisoned Templars; and
the king, to check the robberies that were committed, appointed Alan de
Goldyngham and John de Medefeld to inquire into the value of the
property that had been carried off, and to inform him of the names of
the parties who had obtained possession of it. The sheriffs of the
different counties were also directed to summon juries, through whom the
truth might be better obtained. <span id="fr_359"></span>[\*](#fn_359.md)

On the 22nd of September, the archbishop of Canterbury transmitted
letters apostolic to all his suffragans, enclosing copies of the bull
*faciens misericordiam*, and also the articles of accusation to be
exhibited against the Templars, which they are directed to copy and
deliver again, under their seals, to the bearer, taking especial care
not to reveal the contents thereof. <span
id="fr_360"></span>[†](#fn_360.md) At the same time the archbishop, acting
in obedience to the papal commands, before a single witness had been
examined in England, caused to be published in all churches and chapels
a papal bull, wherein the Pope declares himself perfectly convinced of
the guilt of the order, and solemnly denounces the penalty of
excommunication against all persons, of whatever rank, station, or
condition in life, whether clergy or laity, who should knowingly afford,
either publicly or privately, assistance, counsel, or kindness to the
Templars, or should dare to shelter them, or give them countenance or
protection, and also laying under interdict all cities, castles, lands,
and places, which should harbour any of the members of the proscribed
order. <span id="fr_361"></span>[‡](#fn_361.md) At the commencement of the
month of October, the inquisitors arrived in England, and immediately
published the bull appointing the commission, enjoining the citation of
the criminals, and of witnesses, and denouncing the

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>heaviest ecclesiastical censures against the
disobedient, and against every person who should dare to impede the
inquisitors in the exercise of their functions. Citations were made in
St. Paul's Cathedral, and in all the churches of the ecclesiastical
province of Canterbury, at the end of high mass, requiring the Templars
to appear before the inquisitors at a certain time and place, and the
articles of accusation were transmitted to the constable of the Tower,
in Latin, French, and English, to be read to all the Templars imprisoned
in that fortress. On Monday, the 20th of October, after the Templars had
been languishing in the English prisons for more than a year and eight
months, the tribunal constituted by the Pope to take the inquisition in
the province of Canterbury assembled in the episcopal hall of London. It
was composed of the bishop of London, Dieudonné, abbot of the monastery
of Lagny, in the diocese of Paris, and Sicard de Vaur, canon of
Narbonne, the Pope's chaplain, and hearer of causes in the pontifical
palace. They were assisted by several foreign notaries. After the
reading of the papal bulls, and some preliminary proceedings, the
monstrous and ridiculous articles of accusation, a monument of human
folly, superstition, and credulity, were solemnly exhibited as follows:

"*Item*. At the place, day, and hour aforesaid, in the presence of the
aforesaid lords, and before us the above-mentioned notaries, the
articles inclosed in the apostolic bull were exhibited and opened before
us, the contents whereof are as underwritten.

"These are the articles upon which inquisition shall be made against the
brethren of the military order of the Temple, &c.

"1. That at their first reception into the order, or at some time
afterwards, or as soon as an opportunity occurred, they were induced or
admonished by those who had received them within the bosom of the
fraternity, to deny Christ or Jesus, or the crucifixion,

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>or at one time God, and at another time the blessed
virgin, and sometimes all the saints.

"2. That the brothers jointly did this.

"3. That the greater part of them did it.

"4. That they did it sometimes after their reception.

5\. That the receivers told and instructed those that were received,
that Christ was not the true God, or sometimes Jesus, or sometimes the
person crucified.

"6. That they told those they received that he was a false prophet.

"7. That they said he had not suffered for the redemption of mankind,
nor been crucified but for his own sins.

"8. That neither the receiver nor the person received had any hope of
obtaining salvation through him, and this they said to those they
received, or something equivalent, or like it.

"9. That they made those they received into the order spit upon the
cross, or upon the sign or figure of the cross, or the image of Christ,
though they that were received did sometimes spit aside.

"10. That they caused the cross itself to be trampled under foot.

"11. That the brethren themselves did sometimes trample on the same
cross.

"12. Item quod mingebant interdum, et alios mingere faciebant, super
ipsam crucem, et hoc fecerunt aliquotiens in die veneris sanctâ!!

"13. Item quod nonnulli eorum ipsâ die, vel alia septimanæ sanctæ pro
conculcatione et minctione prædictis consueverunt convenire!

"14. That they worshipped a cat which was placed in the midst of the
congregation.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>"15. That they did these things in contempt of Christ
and the orthodox faith.

"16. That they did not believe the sacrament of the altar.

"17. That some of them did not.

"18. That the greater part did not.

"19. That they believed not the other sacraments of the church.

"20. That the priests of the order did not utter the words by which the
body of Christ is consecrated in the canon of the mass.

"21. That some of them did not.

"22. That the greater part did not.

"23. That those who received them enjoined the same.

"24. That they believed, and so it was told them, that the Grand Master
of the order could absolve them from their sins.

"25. That the visitor could do so.

"26. That the preceptors, of whom many were laymen, could do it.

"27. That they in fact did do so.

"28. That some of them did.

"29. That the Grand Master confessed these things of himself, even
before he was taken, in the presence of great persons.

"30. That in receiving brothers into the order, or when about to receive
them, or some time after having received them, the receivers and the
persons received kissed one another on the mouth, the navel. . . . . . .
!!

.       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .

"36. That the receptions of the brethren were made clandestinely.

"37. That none were present but the brothers of the said order.

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>"38. That for this reason there has for a long time
been a vehement suspicion against them."

The succeeding articles proceed to charge the Templars with crimes and
abominations too horrible and disgusting to be named.

"46. That the brothers themselves had idols in every province, viz.
heads; some of which had three faces, and some one, and some a man's
skull.

"47. That they adored that idol, or those idols, especially in their
great chapters and assemblies.

"48. That they worshipped it.

"49. As their God.

"50. As their Saviour.

"51. That some of them did so.

"52. That the greater part did.

"53. That they said that that head could save them.

"54. That it could produce riches.

"56. That it had given to the order all its wealth.

"56. That it caused the earth to bring forth seed.

"57. That it made the trees to flourish.

"58. That they bound or touched the head of the said idols with cords,
wherewith they bound themselves about their shirts, or next their skins.

"59. That at their reception the aforesaid little cords, or others of
the same length, were delivered to each of the brothers.

"60. That they did this in worship of their idol.

"61. That it was enjoined them to gird themselves with the said little
cords, as before mentioned, and continually to wear them.

"62. That the brethren of the order were generally received in that
manner.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>"63. That they did these things out of devotion.

"64. That they did them everywhere.

"65. That the greater part did.

"66. That those who refused the things above mentioned at their
reception, or to observe them afterwards, were killed or cast into
prison." <span id="fr_362"></span>[\*](#fn_362.md)

.       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .

The remaining articles, twenty-one in number, are directed principally
to the mode of confession practised amongst the fraternity, and to
matters of heretical depravity. Such an accusation as this, justly
remarks Voltaire, *destroys itself*.

Brother William de la More, and thirty more of his brethren, being
interrogated before the inquisitors, positively denied the guilt of the
order, and affirmed that the Templars who had made the confessions
alluded to in France *had lied*. They were ordered to be brought up
separately to be examined.

On the 23rd of October, brother William Raven, being interrogated as to
the mode of his reception into the order, states that he was admitted by
brother William de la More, the Master of the Temple at Temple Coumbe,
in the diocese of Bath; that he petitioned the brethren of the Temple
that they would be pleased to receive him into the order to serve God
and the blessed Virgin Mary, and to end his life in their service; that
he was asked if he had a firm wish so to do; and replied that he had;
that two brothers then expounded to him the strictness and severity of
the order, and told him that he would not be allowed to act after

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>his own will, but must follow the will of the
preceptor; that if he wished to do one thing, he would be ordered to do
another; and that if he wished to be at one place, he would be sent to
another; that having promised so to act, he swore upon the holy gospels
of God to obey the Master, to hold no property, to preserve chastity,
never to consent that any man should be unjustly despoiled of his
heritage, and never to lay violent hands on any man, except in
self-defence, or upon the Saracens. He states that the oath was
administered to him in the chapel of the preceptory of Temple Coumbe, in
the presence only of the brethren of the order; that the rule was read
over to him by one of the brothers, and that a learned serving brother,
named John de Walpole, instructed him, for the space of one month, upon
the matters contained in it. The prisoner was then taken back to the
Tower, and was directed to be strictly separated from his brethren, and
not to be suffered to speak to any one of them.

The two next days (Oct. 24 and 25) were taken up with a similar
examination of Brothers Hugh de Tadecastre and Thomas le Chamberleyn,
who gave precisely the same account of their reception as the previous
witness. Brother Hugh de Tadecastre added, that he swore to succour the
Holy Land with all his might, and defend it against the enemies of the
christian faith; and that after he had taken the customary oaths and the
three vows of chastity, poverty, and obedience, the mantle of the order
and the cross with the coif on the head were delivered to him in the
church, in the presence of the Master, the knights, and the brothers,
all seculars being excluded. Brother Thomas le Chamberleyn added, that
there was the same mode of reception in England as beyond sea, and the
same mode of taking the vows; that all seculars are excluded, and that
when he himself entered the Temple church to be professed, the door by
which he entered was closed after him; that there was another door
looking into the

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>cemetery, but that no stranger could enter that way. On
being asked why none but the brethren of the order were permitted to be
present at the reception and profession of brothers, he said he knew of
no reason, but that it was so written in their book of rules.

Between the 25th of October and the 17th of November, thirty-three
knights, chaplains, and serving brothers, were examined, all of whom
positively denied every article imputing crime or infidelity to their
order. When Brother Himbert Blanke was asked why they had made the
reception and profession of brethren *secret*, he replied, *Through
their own unaccountable folly*. They avowed that they wore little cords
round their shirts, but for no bad end; they declared that they never
touched idols with them, but that they were worn by way of penance, or
according to a knight of forty-three years’ standing, by the instruction
of the holy father St. Bernard. Brother Richard de Goldyngham says that
he knows nothing further about them than that they were called *girdles
of chastity*. They state that the receivers and the party received
kissed one another on the face, but everything else regarding the
kissing was false, abominable, and had never been done.

Brother Radulph de Barton, priest of the order of the Temple, and custos
or guardian of the Temple church at London, stated, with regard to
Article 24, that the Grand Master in chapter could absolve the brothers
from offences committed against the rules and observances of the order,
but not from private sin, as he was not a priest; that it was perfectly
true that those who were received into the order swore not to reveal the
secrets of the chapter, and that when any one was punished in the
chapter, those who were present at it durst not reveal it to such as
were absent; but if any brother revealed the mode of his reception, he
would be deprived of his chamber, or else stripped of his habit. He

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>declares that the brethren were not prohibited from
confessing to priests not belonging to the order of the Temple; and that
he had never heard of the crimes and iniquities mentioned in the
articles of inquiry previous to his arrest, except as regarded the
charges made against the order by Bernard Peletin, when he came to
England from king Philip of France. He states that he had been guardian
of the Temple church for ten years, and for the last two years had
enjoyed the dignity of preceptor at the same place. He was asked about
the death of Brother Walter le Bachelor, knight, formerly Preceptor of
Ireland, who died at the Temple at London, but be declares that he knows
nothing about it, except that the said Walter was fettered and placed in
prison, and there died; that he certainly had heard that great severity
had been practised towards him, but that he had not meddled with the
affair on account of the danger of so doing; he admitted also that the
aforesaid Walter was not buried in the cemetery of the Temple, as he was
considered excommunicated on account of his disobedience of his
superior, and of the rule of the order.

Many of the brethren thus examined had been from twenty to thirty,
forty, forty-two, and forty-three years in the order, and some were old
veteran warriors who had fought for many a long year in the East, and
richly merited a better fate. Brother Himbert Blanke, knight, Preceptor
of Auvergne, had been in the order thirty-eight years. He was received
at the city of Tyre in Palestine, had been engaged in constant warfare
against the infidels, and had fought to the last in defence of Acre. He
makes in substance the same statements as the other witnesses; declares
that no religious order believes the sacrament of the altar better than
the Templars; that they truly believed all that the church taught, and
had always done so, and that if the Grand Master had confessed the
contrary, he had lied.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>Brother Robert le Scott, knight, a brother of
twenty-six years' standing, had been received at the Pilgrim's Castle,
the famous fortress of the Knights Templars in Palestine, by the Grand
Master, Brother William de Beaujeu, the hero who died so gloriously at
the head of his knights at the last siege and storming of Acre. He
states that from levity of disposition he quitted the order after it had
been driven out of Palestine, and absented himself for two years, during
which period he came to Rome, and confessed to the Pope's penitentiary,
who imposed on him a heavy penance, and enjoined him to return to his
brethren in the East, and that he went back and resumed his habit at
Nicosia in the island of Cyprus, and was re-admitted to the order by
command of the Grand Master, James de Molay, who was then at the head of
the convent. He adds, also, that Brother Himbert Blanke (the previous
witness) was present at his first reception at the Pilgrim's Castle. He
fully corroborates all the foregoing testimony.

Brother Richard de Peitevyn, a member of forty-two years’ standing,
deposes that, in addition to the previous oaths, he swore that he would
never bear arms against Christians except in his own defence, or in
defence of the rights of the order; he declares that the enormities
mentioned in the articles were never heard of before Bernard Peletin
brought letters to his lord, the king of England, against the Templars.

On the 22nd day of the inquiry, the following entry was made on the
record of the proceedings:--

"Memorandum. Brothers Philip de Mewes, Thomas de Burton, and Thomas de
Staundon, were advised and earnestly exhorted to abandon their religious
profession, who severally replied that *they would rather die* than do
so." <span id="fr_363"></span>[\*](#fn_363.md)

On the 19th and 20th of November, seven lay witnesses, unconnected

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>with the order, were examined before the inquisitors in
the chapel of the monastery of the Holy Trinity, but could prove nothing
against the Templars that was criminal or tainted with heresy.

Master William le Dorturer, notary public, declared that the Templars
rose at midnight, and held their chapters before dawn, and he thought
that the mystery and secrecy of the receptions were owing to a bad
rather than a good motive, but declared that he had never observed that
they had acquired, or had attempted to acquire, anything unjustly.
Master Gilbert de Bruere, clerk, said that he had never suspected them
of anything worse than an *excessive correction* of the brethren.
William Lambert, formerly a "messenger of the Temple," (nuntius Templi,)
knew nothing bad of the Templars, and thought them perfectly innocent of
all the matters alluded to. And Richard de Barton, priest, and Radulph
de Rayndon, an old man, both declared that they knew nothing of the
order, or of the members of it, but what was good and honourable.

On the 25th of November, a provincial council of the church, summoned by
the archbishop of Canterbury, in obedience to a papal bull, assembled in
the cathedral church of St. Paul. It was composed of the bishops,
abbots, priors, heads of colleges, and all the principal clergy, who
were called together to treat of the reformation of the English church,
of the recovery and preservation of the Holy Land, and to pronounce
sentence of absolution or of condemnation against singular persons of
the order of the chivalry of the Temple in the province of Canterbury,
according to the tenor of the apostolical mandate. The council was
opened by the archbishop of Canterbury, who rode to St. Paul's on
horseback. The bishop of Norwich celebrated the mass of the Holy Ghost
at the great altar, and the archbishop preached a sermon in Latin upon
the 20th chapter of the Acts of the Apostles; after which a papal bull
was read, in which the holy pontiff

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>dwells most pathetically upon the awful sins of the
Templars, and their great and tremendous fall from their previous high
estate. Hitherto, says he, they have been renowned throughout the world
as the special champions of the faith, and the chief defenders of the
Holy Land, whose affairs have been mainly regulated by those brothers.
The church, following them and their order with the plenitude of its
especial favour and regard, armed them with the emblem of the cross
against the enemies of Christ, exalted them with much honour, enriched
them with wealth, and fortified them with various liberties and
privileges. The holy pontiff displays the sad report of their sins and
iniquities which reached his ears, filled him with bitterness and grief,
disturbed his repose, smote him with horror, injured his health, and
caused his body to waste away! He gives a long account of the crimes
imputed to the order, of the confessions and depositions that had been
made in France, and then bursts out into a paroxysm of grief, declares
that the melancholy affair deeply moved all the faithful, that all
Christianity was shedding bitter tears, was overwhelmed with grief, and
clothed with mourning. He concludes by decreeing the assembly of a
general council of the church at Vienne to pronounce the abolition of
the order, and to determine on the disposal of its property, to which
council the English clergy are required to send representatives. <span
id="fr_364"></span>[\*](#fn_364.md)

After the reading of the bulls and the closing of the preliminary
proceedings, the council occupied themselves for six days with
ecclesiastical matters; and on the seventh day, being Tuesday, Dec. 2nd,
all the bishops and members assembled in the chamber of the archbishop
of Canterbury in Lambeth palace, in company with the papal inquisitors,
who displayed before them the depositions and replies of the forty-three
Templars, and of the seven witnesses previously examined. It was decreed
that a copy

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>of these depositions and replies should be furnished to
each of the bishops, and that the council should stand adjourned until
the next day, to give time for deliberation upon the premises.

On the following day, accordingly, (Wednesday, December the 3rd,) the
council met, and decided that the inquisitors and three bishops should
seek an audience of the king, and beseech him to permit them to proceed
against the Templars in the way that should seem to them the best and
most expedient for the purpose of eliciting the truth. On Sunday, the
7th, the bishops petitioned his majesty in writing, and on the following
Tuesday they went before him with the inquisitors, and besought him that
they might proceed against the Templars according to the ecclesiastical
constitutions, and that he would instruct his sheriffs and officers to
that effect. The king gave a written answer complying with their
request, which was read before the council, <span
id="fr_365"></span>[\*](#fn_365.md) and, on the 16th of December, orders
were sent to the gaolers, commanding them to permit the prelates and
inquisitors to do with the bodies of the Templars that which should seem
expedient to them according to ecclesiastical law. Many Templars were at
this period wandering about the country disguised as secular persons,
successfully evading pursuit, and the sheriffs were strictly commanded
to use every exertion to capture them. <span
id="fr_366"></span>[†](#fn_366.md) On Wednesday, the ecclesiastical council
again met, and adjourned for the purpose of enabling the inquisitors to
examine the prisoners confined in the castles of Lincoln and of York.

In Scotland, in the mean time, similar proceedings had been instituted
against the order. <span id="fr_367"></span>[‡](#fn_367.md) On the 17th of
November, Brother Walter de Clifton being examined in the parish church
of the Holy Cross at Edinburgh, before the bishop of St. Andrews and
John de Solerio, the pope's chaplain, states that the brethren

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>of the order of the Temple in the kingdom of Scotland
received their orders, rules, and observances from the Master of the
Temple in England, and that the Master in England received the rules and
observances of the order from the Grand Master and the chief convent in
the East; that the Grand Master or his deputy was in the habit of
visiting the order in England and elsewhere; of summoning chapters, and
making regulations for the conduct of the brethren and the
administration of their property. Being asked as to the mode of his
reception, he states that when William de la More, the Master, held his
chapter at the preceptory of Temple Bruere in the county of Lincoln, he
sought of the assembled brethren the habit and the fellowship of the
order; that they told him that he little knew what it was he asked, in
seeking to be admitted to their fellowship; that it would be a very hard
matter for him, who was then his own master, to become the servant of
another, and to have no will of his own; but notwithstanding their
representations of the rigour of their rules and observances, he still
continued earnestly to seek their habit and fellowship. He states that
they then led him to the chamber of the Master, where they held their
chapter, and that there, on his bended knees, and with his hands
clasped, he again prayed for the habit and the fellowship of the Temple;
that the Master and the brethren then required him to answer questions
to the following effect:--Whether he had a dispute with any man, or owed
any debts? whether he was betrothed to any woman? and whether he had any
secret infirmity of body? or knew of anything to prevent him from
remaining within the bosom of the fraternity? And having answered all
those questions satisfactorily, the Master then asked of the surrounding
brethren, "Do ye give your consent to the reception of brother Walter?"
who unanimously answered that they did; and the Master and the brethren
then standing up, received him the said Walter in this

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span>manner. On his bended knees, and with his hands joined,
he solemnly promised that he would be the perpetual servant of the
Master, and of the order, and of the brethren, for the purpose of
defending the Holy Land. Having done this, the Master took out of the
hands of a brother chaplain of the order the book of the holy gospels,
upon which was depicted a cross, and laying his hands upon the book and
upon the cross, he swore to God and the blessed Virgin Mary to be for
ever thereafter chaste, obedient, and to live without property. And then
the Master gave to him the white mantle, and placed the coif on his
head, and admitted him to the kiss on the mouth, after which he made him
sit down on the ground, and admonished him to the following effect: that
from thenceforth he was to sleep in his shirt, drawers, and stockings,
girded with a small cord over his shirt; that he was never to tarry in a
house where there was a woman in the family way; never to be present at
a marriage, nor at the purification of women; and likewise instructed
and informed him upon several other particulars. Being asked where he
had passed his time since his reception, he replied that he had dwelt
three years at the preceptory of Blancradok in Scotland; three years at
Temple Newsom in England; one year at the Temple at London, and three
years at Aslakeby. Being asked concerning the other brothers in
Scotland, he stated that John de Hueflete was Preceptor of Blancradok,
the chief house of the order in that country, and that he and the other
brethren, having heard of the arrest of the Templars, threw off their
habits and fled, and that he had not since heard aught concerning them.

*Brother William de Middleton*, being examined, gave the same account of
his reception, and added that he remembered that brother William de la
More, the Master in England, went, in obedience to a summons, to the
Grand Master beyond sea, as the superior of the whole order, and that in
his absence Brother

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1309.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Hugh de Peraut, the visitor, removed several preceptors from their
preceptories in England, and put others in their places. He further
states, that he swore he would never receive any service at the hands of
a woman, not even water to wash his hands with.

After the examination of the above two Templars, forty-one witnesses,
chiefly abbots, priors, monks, priests, and serving men, and retainers
of the order in Scotland, were examined upon various interrogatories,
but nothing of a criminatory nature was elicited. The monks observed
that the receptions of other orders were public, and were celebrated as
great religious solemnities, and the friends, parents, and neighbours of
the party about to take the vows were invited to attend; that the
Templars, on the other hand, shrouded their proceedings in mystery and
secrecy, and therefore they *suspected* the worst. The priests thought
there guilty, because they were always *against the church!* Others
condemned them because (as they say) the Templars closed their doors
against the poor and the humble, and extended hospitality only to the
rich and the powerful. The abbot of the monastery of the Holy Cross at
Edinburgh declared that they appropriated to themselves the property of
their neighbours, right or wrong. The abbot of Dumferlyn knew nothing of
his own knowledge against them, but had *heard* much, and *suspected*
more. The serving men and the tillers of the lands of the order stated
that the chapters were held sometimes by night and sometimes by day,
with extraordinary secrecy; and some of the witnesses had heard old men
say that the Templars would *never have lost the Holy Land, if they had
been good Christians!* <span id="fr_368"></span>[\*](#fn_368.md)

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1310.</span>On the 9th of January, A.D. 1310, the examination of
witnesses was resumed at London, in the parish church of St. Dunstan's
West, near the Temple. The rector of the church of St. Mary de la Strode
declared that he had strong suspicions of the guilt of the Templars; he
had, however, often been at the Temple church, and had observed that the
priests performed divine service there just the same as elsewhere.
William de Cumbrook, of St. Clement's church, near the Temple, the vicar
of St. Martin's-in-the-Fields, and many other priests and clergymen of
different churches in London, all declared that they had nothing to
allege against the order. <span id="fr_369"></span>[\*](#fn_369.md)

On the 27th of January, Brother John de Stoke, a serving brother of the
order of the Temple, of seventeen years' standing, being examined by the
inquisitors in the chapel of the Blessed Mary of Berkyngecherche at
London, states, amongst other things, that secular persons were allowed
to be present at the burial of Templars; that the brethren of the order
all received the sacraments of the church at their last hour, and were
attended to the grave by a chaplain of the Temple. Being interrogated
concerning the death and burial of the Knight Templar Brother Walter le
Bachelor, he deposes that the said knight was buried like any other
Christian, except that he was not buried in the burying-ground, but in
the court, of the house of the Temple at London; that he confessed to
Brother Richard de Grafton, a priest of the order, then in the island of
Cyprus, and partook, as he believed, of the sacrament. He states that he
himself and Brother Radulph de Barton carried him to his grave at the
dawn of day, and that

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1310.</span>the deceased knight was in prison, as he believes, for
the space of eight weeks; that he was not buried in the habit of his
order, and was interred without the cemetery of the brethren, because he
was considered to be excommunicated, in pursuance, as he believed, of a
rule or statute among the Templars, to the effect that every one who
privily made away with the property of the order, and did not
acknowledge his fault, was deemed excommunicated. Being asked in what
respect he considered that his order required reformation, he replied,
"By the establishment of a probation of one year, and by making the
receptions public."

Two other Templars were examined on the same 27th day of January, from
whose depositions it appears that there were at that time many brethren
of the order, natives of England, in the island of Cyprus.

On the 29th of January, the inquisitors exhibited twenty-four fresh
articles against the prisoners, drawn up in an artful manner. They were
asked if they knew anything of the crimes mentioned in the papal bulls,
and *confessed* by the Grand Master, the heads of the order, and many
knights in France; and whether they knew of anything sinful or
dishonourable against the Master of the Temple in England, or the
preceptors, or any of the brethren. They were then required to say
whether the same rules, customs, and observances did not prevail
throughout the entire order; whether the Grand Preceptors, and
especially the Grand Preceptor of England, did not receive all the
observances and regulations from the Grand Master; and whether the Grand
Preceptors and all the brethren of the order in England did not observe
them in the same mode as the Grand Master, and visitors, and the
brethren in Cyprus and in Italy, and in the other kingdoms, provinces,
and preceptories of the order; whether the observances and regulations
were not commonly delivered by the visitors to the Grand Preceptor of
England; and

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1310.</span>whether the brothers received in England or elsewhere
had not of their own free will confessed what these observances were.
They were, moreover, required to state whether a bell was rung, or other
signal given, to notify the time of the assembling of the chapter;
whether all the brethren, without exception, were summoned and in the
habit of attending; whether the Grand Master could relax penances
imposed by the regular clergy; whether they believed that the Grand
Preceptor or visitor could absolve a layman who had been excommunicated
for laying hands on a brother or lay servant of the order; and whether
they believed that any brother of the order could absolve from the sin
of perjury a lay servant, when he came to receive the discipline in the
Temple-hall, and the serving brother scourged him in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, &c. &c.

Between the 29th of January and the 6th of February, thirty-four
Templars, many of whom appeared for the first time before the
inquisitors, were examined upon these articles in the churches of St.
Botolph without Aldgate, St. Alphage near Cripplegate, and St. Martin de
Ludgate, London. They deny everything of a criminatory nature, and
declare that the abominations mentioned in the confessions and
depositions made in France were not observances of the order; that the
Grand Master, Preceptors, visitors, and brethren in France had never
observed such things, and if they said they had, *they lied*. They
declare that the Grand Preceptor and brethren in England were all good
men, worthy of faith, and would not deviate from the truth by reason of
hatred of any man, for favour, reward, or any other cause; that there
had been no suspicion in England against them, and no evil reports
current against the order before the publication of the papal bull, and
they did not think that any *good man* would believe the contents of the
articles to be true. From the statements of the prisoners, it appears
that the bell of the Temple was

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1310.</span>rung to notify the assembling of the chapter, that the
discipline was administered in the hall, in the presence of the
assembled brethren, by the Master, who punished the delinquent on the
bare back with a scourge made of leathern thongs, after which he himself
absolved the offender from the guilt of a transgression against the rule
of the order; but if he had been guilty of immoral conduct, he was sent
to the priest for absolution. It appears also, that Brother James de
Molay, before his elevation to the office of Grand Master, was visitor
of the order in England, and had held chapters or assemblies of the
brethren, at which he had enforced certain rules and regulations; that
all the orders came from the Grand Master and chief convent in the East
to the Grand Preceptor of England, who caused them to be published at
the different preceptories. <span id="fr_370"></span>[\*](#fn_370.md)

On the 1st of March, the king sent orders to the constable of the Tower,
and to the sheriffs of Lincoln and of York, to obey the directions of
the inquisitors, or of one bishop and of one inquisitor, with regard to
the confinement of the Templars in separate cells, and he assigns
William de Diene to assist the inquisitors in their arrangements.
Similar orders were shortly afterwards sent to all the gaolers of the
Templars in the English dominions. <span id="fr_371"></span>[†](#fn_371.md)

On the 3rd of March five fresh interrogatories were exhibited by the
inquisitors, upon which thirty-one Templars were examined at the palace
of the bishop of London, the chapel of St. Alphage, and the
chapter-house of the Holy Trinity. They were chiefly concerning the
reception and profession of the brethren, the number that each examinant
had seen received, their names, and as to whether the burials of the
order were conducted in a clandestine manner. From the replies it
appears that many

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1310.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Templars had died during their imprisonment in the Tower. The
twenty-sixth prisoner examined was the Master of the Temple, Brother
William de la More, who gives an account of the number of persons he had
admitted into the order during the period of his mastership, specifying
their names. It is stated that many of the parishioners of the parish
adjoining the New Temple had been present at the interment of the
brethren of the fraternity, and that the burials were not conducted in a
clandestine manner.

In Ireland, in the mean time, similar proceedings against the order had
been carried on. Between the 11th of February and the 23rd of May,
thirty Templars were examined in Saint Patrick's Church, Dublin, by
Master John de Mareshall, the pope's commissary, but no evidence of
their guilt was obtained. Forty-one witnesses were then heard, nearly
all of whom were monks. They spoke merely from hearsay and suspicion,
and the gravest charges brought by them against the fraternity appear to
be, that the Templars had been observed to be inattentive to the reading
of the holy Gospels at church, and to have cast their eyes on the ground
at the period of the elevation of the host. <span
id="fr_372"></span>[\*](#fn_372.md)

On the 30th of March the papal inquisitors opened their commission at
Lincoln, and between that day and the 10th of April twenty Templars were
examined in the chapter-house of the cathedral, amongst whom were some
of the veteran warriors of Palestine, men who had moistened with their
blood the distant plains of the far East in defence of that faith which
they were now so infamously accused of having repudiated. Brother
William de Winchester, a member of twenty-six years’ standing, had been
received into the order at the castle *de la Roca Guille* in the
province of Armenia, bordering on Palestine, by the valiant

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1310.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Grand Master William de Beaujeu. He states that the same mode of
reception existed there as in England, and everywhere throughout the
order. Brother Robert de Hamilton declares that the girdles were worn
from an honourable motive, that they were called the girdles of
Nazareth, because they had been pressed against the column of the Virgin
at that place, and were worn in remembrance of the blessed Mary; but he
says that the brethren were not compelled to wear them, but might make
use of any girdle that they liked. With regard to the confessions made
in France, they all say that if their brethren in that country confessed
such things, *they lied!* <span id="fr_373"></span>[\*](#fn_373.md)

At York the examination commenced on the 28th of April, and lasted until
the 4th of May, during which period twenty-three Templars, prisoners in
York Castle, were examined in the chapter-house of the cathedral, and
followed the example of their brethren in maintaining their innocence.
Brother Thomas de Stanford, a member of thirty years’ standing, had been
received in the East by the Grand Master William de Beaujeu, and Brother
Radulph de Rostona, a priest of the order, of twenty-three years’
standing, had been received at the preceptory of Lentini in Sicily by
Brother William de Canello, the Grand Preceptor of Sicily. Brother
Stephen de Radenhall refused to reveal the mode of reception, because it
formed part of the secrets of the chapter, and if he discovered them he
would lose his chamber, be stripped of his mantle, or be committed to
prison. <span id="fr_374"></span>[†](#fn_374.md)

On the 20th of May, in obedience to the mandate of the archbishop of
York, an ecclesiastical council of the bishops and clergy assembled in
the cathedral. The mass of the Holy Ghost was

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1310.</span>solemnly celebrated, after which the archbishop
preached a sermon, and then caused to be read to the assembled clergy
the papal bulls fulminated against the order of the Temple. <span
id="fr_375"></span>[\*](#fn_375.md) He exhibited to them the articles upon
which the Templars had been directed to be examined; but as the inquiry
was still pending, the council was adjourned until the 23rd of June of
the following year, when they were to meet to pass sentence of
condemnation, or of absolution, against all the members of the order in
the province of York, in conformity with ecclesiastical law. <span
id="fr_376"></span>[†](#fn_376.md)

On the 1st of June the examination was resumed before the papal
inquisitors at Lincoln. Sixteen Templars were examined upon points
connected with the secret proceedings in the general and particular
chapters of the order, the imposition of penances therein, and the
nature of the absolution granted by the Master. From the replies it
appears that the penitents were scourged three times with leathern
thongs, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, after which they were absolved either by the Master or by a
priest of the order, according to the particular circumstances of each
case. It appears, also, that none but preceptors were present at the
general chapters of the order, which were called together principally
for the purpose of obtaining money to send to the Grand Master and the
chief convent in Palestine. <span id="fr_377"></span>[‡](#fn_377.md)

After closing the examinations at Lincoln, the abbot of Lagny

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1310.</span>and the canon of Narbonne returned to London, and
immediately resumed the inquiry in that city. On the 8th and 9th days of
June, Brother William de la More, the Master of the Temple, and
thirty-eight of his knights, chaplains, and sergeants, were examined by
the inquisitors in the presence of the bishops of London and Chichester,
and the before-mentioned public notaries, in the priory of the Holy
Trinity. They were interrogated for the most part concerning the
penances imposed, and the absolution pronounced in the chapters. The
Master of the Temple was required to state what were the precise words
uttered by him, as the president of the chapter, when a penitent
brother, having bared his back and acknowledged his fault, came into his
presence and received the discipline of the leathern thongs. He states
that he was in the habit of saying, "Brother, pray to God that he may
forgive you;" and to the bystanders he said, "And do ye, brothers,
beseech the Lord to forgive him his sins, and say a *pater-noster;*" and
that he said nothing further, except to warn the offender against
sinning again. He declares that he did not pronounce absolution in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost! and relates,
that in a general chapter, and as often as he held a particular chapter,
he was accustomed to say, after prayers had been offered up, that all
those who did not acknowledge their sins, or who appropriated to their
own use the alms of the house, could not be partakers in the spiritual
blessings of the order; but that which through shamefacedness, or
through fear of the justice of the order, they dared not confess, he,
out of the power conceded to him by God and the pope, forgave him as far
as he was able. Brother William de Sautre, however, declares that the
president of the chapter, after he had finished the flagellation of a
penitent brother, said, "I forgive you, in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost," and then sent him to a priest of the
order for

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span class="margnote">JAMES DE  
MOLAY  
A.D. 1310.</span>absolution; and the other witnesses vary in their
account of the exact words uttered, either because they were determined,
in obedience to their oaths, not to reveal what actually did take place,
or else (which is very probable) because the same form of proceeding was
not always rigidly adhered to.

When the examination was closed, the inquisitors drew up a memorandum,
showing that, from the apostolical letters, and the depositions and
attestations of the witnesses, it was to be collected that certain
practices had crept into the order of the Temple, which were not
consistent with the orthodox faith. <span
id="fr_378"></span>[\*](#fn_378.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_320"></span>[194:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_320.md) *Raynald*, tom. xiv.
ad ann. 1298. Cotton MS. Nero E. vi. p. 60. fol. 466.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[194:†](hkt11.htm#fr_321.md) *Marin Santa
Torsell*. lib. iii. pars. 13, cap. x. p. 242. *De Guignes*, Hist. des
Huns, tom. iv. p. 184.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[195:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_322.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
i. p. 575, 576-579, 582, tom. ii. p. 250. *Martene*, vet. script. tom.
vii. col. 156.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[196:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_323.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
ii. p. 683. ad ann. 1295.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[196:†](hkt11.htm#fr_324.md) Chron. *Dunmow*.
Annals of *St. Augustin*. *Rapin*.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[196:‡](hkt11.htm#fr_325.md) Ipse vero Rex et
Petrus thesaurum ipsius episcopi, apud Novum Templum Londoniis
reconditum, ceperunt, ad summam quinquaginta millia librarum argenti,
præter aurum multum, jocalia et lapides preciosos. . . . Erant enim ambo
præsentes, cum cistæ frangerentur, et adhuc non erat sepultum corpus
patris sui--*Hemingford*, p. 244.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[197:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_326.md) Chron. *Triveti*, ad
ann. 1298. *Hemingford*, vol. i. p. 159.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[197:†](hkt11.htm#fr_327.md) *Dante* styles him
*il mal di Francia*, Del. Purgat. cant. 20, 91.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[198:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_328.md) Questo Papa fue
huomo molto cupido di moneta, e fue lusurioso, si dices the tenea per
amica la contessa di Paragordo, bellissima donna!! *Villani*, lib. ix.
cap. 58. Fuit nimis cupiditatibus deditus. . . Sanct. Ant. Flor. de
Concil. Vien. tit. 21. sec. 3. Circa thesauros colligendos insudavit,
says *Knighton* apud X script. col. 2494. *Fleuri*, l. 92. p. 239.
*Chron. de Namgis*, ad ann. 1305.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[198:†](hkt11.htm#fr_329.md) *Rainald*. tom. xv.
ad ann. 1306, n. 12. *Fleuri*, Hist. Eccles. tom. xix. p. 111.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[199:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_330.md) *Bal. Pap. Aven*,
tom. ii. p. 176.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[200:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_331.md) *Bal. Pap. Aven*.
tom. i. p. 99. Sexta Vita, Clem. V. apud *Baluz*, tom. i. col. 100.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[202:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_332.md) Hist. de la
Condemnation des Templiers.--*Dupuy*, tom. ii. p. 309.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[202:†](hkt11.htm#fr_333.md) Mariana Hispan.
Illustr. tom. iii. p. 152. *Le Gendre* Hist. de France, tom. ii. p. 499.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[202:‡](hkt11.htm#fr_334.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
iii. p. 18. ad ann. 1307.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[203:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_335.md) Les forfaits
pourquoi les Templiers furent ars et condamnez, pris et contre eux
approuvez. *Chron. S. Denis*. Sexta vita, Clem. V. *Dupuy*, p. 24.
edition de 1713.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[204:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_336.md) Liv. ii. chap. 106,
chez *Dupuy*.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[204:†](hkt11.htm#fr_337.md) Sexta vita, Clem. V.
col. 102.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[205:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_338.md) Ostendens duo ossa
quod dicebat ilia esse quæ ceciderunt de hills suis. *Processus contra
Templarios*. *Raynouard* Monumens Historiques, p. 73, ed. 1813.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[205:†](hkt11.htm#fr_339.md) In quibus tormentis
dicebat se quatuor dentes perdidisse. Ib. p. 35.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[205:‡](hkt11.htm#fr_340.md) Fuit quæstionibus
ponderibus appensis in genitalibus, et in alibi membris usque ad
exanimationem. Ib.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[205:§](hkt11.htm#fr_341.md) Tres des Chart.
TEMPLIERS, cart. 3, *n*. 20.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[207:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_342.md) Dat. apud Redyng, 4
die Decembris. Consimiles litteræ diriguntur Ferando regi Castillæ et
Ligionia, consanguineo regis, domino Karolo, regi Siciliæ, et Jacobo
regi Aragoniæ, amico Regis. Acta *Rymeri*, tom. iii. ad ann. 1307,p. 35,
36.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[207:†](hkt11.htm#fr_343.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
iii. p. 37, ad ann. 1307.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[208:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_344.md) Dat. Pictavis 10,
kal. Dec. Acta *Rymeri*, tom. iii. ad ann. 1307, p. 30-32.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[209:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_345.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
iii. p. 34, 35, ad ann. 1307.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[209:†](hkt11.htm#fr_346.md) Ibid. p. 34, 35.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[209:‡](hkt11.htm#fr_347.md) Ibid. p. 4.5.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[210:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_348.md) *Knyghton*, apud X.
script. col. 2494, 2531.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[210:†](hkt11.htm#fr_349.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
iii. p. 83.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[211:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_350.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
iii. p. 101, 2, 3.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[212:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_351.md) *Acta Rymeri*, tom.
iii. p. 110, 111. *Vitæ paparum Avenion*, tom. ii. p. 107.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[212:†](hkt11.htm#fr_352.md) Ibid., tom. iii. p.
121, 122.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[212:‡](hkt11.htm#fr_353.md) Ibid. p. 168.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[212:§](hkt11.htm#fr_354.md) Ibid. p. 168, 169.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[212:¦¦](hkt11.htm#fr_355.md) Ibid. p. 174.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[213:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_356.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
iii. p. 173, 175.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[213:†](hkt11.htm#fr_357.md) *Rainald*, tom. xv.
ad ann. 1306.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[213:‡](hkt11.htm#fr_358.md) *Concil. Mag. Brit.*
tom. ii. p. 346, 347.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[214:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_359.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
iii. p. 178, 179.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[214:†](hkt11.htm#fr_360.md) *Concil. Mag. Brit.*
tom. ii. p. 304-311.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[214:‡](hkt11.htm#fr_361.md) *Processus contra
Templarios*, *Dugd*. Monast. Angl. vol. vi. part 2, p. 844-846 ed. 1830.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[219:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_362.md) The original draft
of these articles of accusation, with the corrections and alterations,
is preserved in the Tresor des Chartres *Raynouard*, Monumens
Historiques, p. 50, 51. The proceedings against the Templars in England
are preserved in MS. in the British Museum, Harl. No. 252, 62, f. p.
113; No. 247, 68, f. p. 144. Bib. Cotton Julius, b. xii. p. 70; and in
the Bodleian Library and Ashmolean Museum. The principal part of them
has been published by *Wilkins* in the Concilia Magnæ Britanniæ, tom.
ii. p. 329-401, and by *Dugdale*, in the Monast. Angl. vol. vi. part 2.
p. 844-848.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[223:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_363.md) Actum in Capella
infirmariæ prioratus Sanctæ Trinitatis præsentibus, etc. Concilia Magnæ
Britanniæ, tom. iii. p. 344. Ibid. p. 334-343.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[225:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_364.md) *Concil. Mag.
Brit.*, tom. ii. p. 305-308.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[226:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_365.md) *Concil. Mag.
Brit.*, tom. ii. p. 312-314.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[226:†](hkt11.htm#fr_366.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
iii. p. 194, 195.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[226:‡](hkt11.htm#fr_367.md) Ibid., p. 182.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[229:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_368.md) Et ad evidentius
præmissorum testimonium reverendus in Christo pater dominus Willielmus,
providentiâ divinâ S. Andrew episcopus, et magister Johannes de Solerio
prædicti sigilla sua præsenti inquisition appenderunt, et eisdem
sigillis post subscriptionem meam eandem inquisitionem clauserunt. In
quorum etiam firmius testimonium ego <span id="page_230">p. 230</span>
Willielmus de Spottiswod auctoritate imperiali notarius qui prædictæ
inquisitioni interfui die, anno, et loco prædictis, testibus præsentibus
supra dictis, signum meum solitum eidem apposui requisitus, et propriâ
manu scripsi rogatus.--*Acta contra Templarios*. *Concil. Mag. Brit.*,
tom. ii. p. 380, 383.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[230:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_369.md) Act. in ecclesiâ
parochiali S. Dunstani prope Novum Templum.--Ib., p. 349.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[233:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_370.md) *Acta contra
Templarios*. *Concil. Mag. Brit.*, tom, ii. p. 350, 351, 352.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[233:†](hkt11.htm#fr_371.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
iii. ad ann. 1310. p. 202, 203.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[234:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_372.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
iii. p. 179, 180. *Concil. Mag. Brit.*, tom. ii. p. 373 to 380.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[235:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_373.md) Terrore tormentorum
confessi sunt et *mentiti*.--*Concil. Mag. Brit.*, tom. ii. p. 365, 366,
367.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[235:†](hkt11.htm#fr_374.md) Depositiones
Templariorum in Provinciâ Eboracenai.--*Concil. Mag. Brit.*, tom. ii. p.
371-373.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[236:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_375) Eodem anno (1310.md)
XIX. die Maii apud Eborum in ecclesiâ cathedrali, ex mandato speciali
Domini Papæ, tenuit dominos Archiepiscopus concilium provinciale.
Prædicavitque et erat suum thema; *omnes isti congregati venerunt tibi*,
factoque sermone, recitavit et legi fecit *sequentem bullam horribilem
contra Templarios*, &c. &c. *Hemingford* apud *Hearne*, vol. i. p. 249.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[236:†](hkt11.htm#fr_376.md) Processus observatus
in concilio provincials Eboracensi in ecclesiâ beati Petri Ebor. contra
Templarios celebrato A.D. 1310, ex. reg. Will. Grenefeld Archiepiscopi
Eborum, fol. 179, p. 1.--*Concil. Mag. Brit.*, tom. ii. p. 393.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[236:‡](hkt11.htm#fr_377.md) *Concil. Mag. Brit.*,
tom. ii. p. 367.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[238:\*](hkt11.htm#fr_378.md) *Acta contra
Templarios*. *Concil. Mag. Brit.*, tom. ii. p. 358.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](hkt12.md)

</div>
