<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hkt13)  [Next](hkt15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002RHOUAK/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The History of the Knights Templar*, by Charles G. Addison, \[1842\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

### CHAPTER XII.

### THE TEMPLE CHURCH.

<span class="small">THE MONUMENTS OF THE CRUSADERS--The tomb and effigy
of Sir Geoffrey de Magnaville, earl of Essex, and constable of the
Tower--His life and death, and famous exploits--Of William Marshall,
earl of Pembroke, Protector of England--Of the Lord de Ross--Of William
and Gilbert Marshall, earls of Pembroke--Of William Plantagenet, fifth
eon of Henry the Third--The anxious desire manifested by king Henry the
Third, queen Eleanor, and various persons of rank, to be buried in the
Temple Church.</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The knights are dust,  
And their good swords are rust,  
Their souls are with the saints, we trust."</span>

</div>

THE mail-clad monumental effigies reposing side by side on the pavement
of "the Round" of the Temple Church, have been supposed to be monuments
of Knights Templars, but this is not the case. The Templars were always
buried in the habit of their order, and are represented in it on their
tombs. This habit was a long white mantle, as before mentioned, with a
red cross over the left breast; it had a short cape and a hood behind,
and fell down to the feet unconfined by any girdle. In a long mantle of
this description, with the cross of the order carved upon it, is
represented the Knight Templar Brother Jean de Dreux, in the church of
St. Yvod de Braine in France, with this inscription, in

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

letters of gold, carved upon the monument--F. JEAN LI TEMPLIER FUIS AU
COMTE JEAN DE DREUX. <span id="fr_476"></span>[\*](#fn_476.md)

Although not monuments of Knight Templars, yet these interesting
cross-legged effigies have strong claims to our attention upon other
grounds. They appear to have been placed in the Temple Church, to the
memory of a class of men termed "Associates of the Temple," who, though
not actually admitted to the holy vows and habit of the order, were yet
received into a species of spiritual connexion with the Templars,
curiously illustrative of the superstition and credulity of the times.

Many piously-inclined persons of rank and fortune, bred up amid the
pleasures and the luxuries of the world, were anxiously desirous of
participating in the spiritual advantages and blessings believed to be
enjoyed by the holy warriors of the Temple, in respect of the good works
done by the fraternity, but could not bring themselves to submit to the
severe discipline and gloomy life of the regularly-professed brethren.
For the purpose of turning the tendencies and peculiar feelings of such
persons to a good account, the Master and Chapter of the Temple assumed
the power of admitting them into a spiritual association and connexion
with the order, so that, without renouncing their pleasures and giving
up their secular mode of life, they might share in the merit of the good
works performed by the brethren. The mode in which this was frequently
done is displayed to us by the following public authentic document,
extracted by Ducange from the Royal Registry of Provence.

"Be it known to all persons present and to come, that in the year of the
incarnation 1209, in the month of December, I, William D. G., count of
Forcalquier, and son of the deceased Gerald, ° being inspired with the
love of God, of my own free will, and

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

with hearty desire, dedicate my body and soul to the Lord, to the most
blessed Virgin Mary, and to the house of the chivalry of the Temple, in
manner following. If at any time I determine on taking the vows of a
religious order, I will choose the religion of the Temple, and none
other; but I will not embrace it except in sincerity, of my own free
will, and without constraint. Should I happen to end my days amid the
pleasures of the world, I will be buried in the cemetery of the house of
the Temple. I promise, through love of God, for the repose of my soul,
and the souls of my parents, and of all the dead faithful in Christ, to
give to the aforesaid house of the Temple and to the brethren, at my
decease, my own horse, with two other saddle-horses, all my equipage and
armour complete, as well iron as wood, fit for a knight, and a hundred
marks of silver. Moreover, in acknowledgment of this donation, I promise
to give to the aforesaid house of the Temple and to the brethren, as
long as I lead a secular life, a hundred pennies a year at the feast of
the nativity of our Lord; and all the property of the aforesaid house,
wheresoever situate, I take under my safeguard and protection, and will
defend it in accordance with right and justice against all men.

"This donation I have made in the presence of Brother Peter de Montaigu,
Preceptor of Spain; Brother Peter Cadelli, Preceptor of Provence; and
many other brothers of the order.

And we, Brother Peter de Montaigu, Master, with the advice and consent
of the other brothers, receive you, the aforesaid Lord William, count of
Fourcalquier, as a benefactor and brother (*in donatum et confratrem*)
of our house, and grant you a bountiful participation in all the good
works that are done in the house of the Temple, both here and beyond
sea. Of this our grant are witnesses, of the brethren of the Temple,
Brother William Cadelli, Preceptor of Provence; Brother Bermond,
Preceptor

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

of Rue; the reverend Brother Chosoardi, Preceptor of Barles; Brother
Jordan de Mison, Preceptor of Embrun; Brother G. de la Tour, Preceptor
of the house of Limaise. Of laymen are witnesses, the lady countess, the
mother of the aforesaid count; Gerald, his brother, &c. &c." <span
id="fr_477"></span>[\*](#fn_477.md)

William of Asheby in Lincolnshire was admitted into this species of
spiritual confraternity with the Templars, as appears from the following
grant to the order:

"William of Asheby, to all the barons and vavasors of Lincolnshire, and
to all his friends and neighbours, both French and English, Salvation.
Be it known to all present and to come, that since the knights of the
Temple have received me into confraternity with them, and have taken me
under their care and protection, I the said William have, with the
consent of my Brothers Ingram, Gerard, and Jordan, given and granted to
God and the blessed Mary, and to the aforesaid knights of the Temple,
all the residue of my waste and heath land, over and above what I have
confirmed to them by my previous grant . . . &c. &c." <span
id="fr_478"></span>[†](#fn_478.md)

By these curious arrangements with secular persons, the Templars
succeeded in attaching men of rank and influence to their interests, and
in obtaining bountiful alms and donations, both of land and money. It is
probable that the cross-legged monuments in the Temple Church were
erected to the memory of secular warriors who had been admitted amongst
the class of associated brethren of the Temple, and had bequeathed their
bodies to be buried in the Temple cemetery.

During the recent repairs it became necessary to make an extensive
excavation in the Round, and beneath these monumental effigies were
found two enormous stone coffins, together with five

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

leaden coffins curiously and beautifully ornamented with a device
resembling the one observable on the old tesselated pavement of the
church; and an arched vault, which had been formed in the inner circular
foundation, supporting the clustered columns and the round tower. The
leaden coffins had been inclosed in small vaults, the walls of which had
perished. The skeletons within them were entire and undisturbed; they
were enveloped in coarse sackcloth, which crumbled to dust on being
touched. One of these skeletons measured six feet four inches in length,
and another six feet two inches! The large stone coffins were of immense
thickness and weight; they had long previously been broken open and
turned into charnel-houses. In the one nearest the south window were
found three skulls, and a variety of bones, amongst which were those of
some young person. Upon the lid, which was composed of Purbeck marble,
was a large and elegantly-shaped cross, beautifully sculptured, and in
an excellent state of preservation. The vault constructed in the solid
foundations of the pillars of the round tower, on the north side of the
church, contained the remains of a skeleton wrapped in sackcloth; the
skull and the upper part of it were in a good state of preservation, but
the lower extremities had crumbled to dust.

Neither the number nor the position of the coffins below corresponded
with the figures above, and it is quite clear that these last have been
removed from their original position.

In Camden's Britannia, the first edition of which was published in the
38th of Eliz., A.D. 1586, we are informed that many noblemen lie buried
in the Temple Church, whose effigies are to be seen cross-legged, among
whom were William the father, and William and Gilbert his sons, earls of
Pembroke and marshals of England. <span id="fr_479"></span>[\*](#fn_479.md)

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Stow, in his
Survey of London, the first edition of which was published A.D. 1598,
speaks of them as follows:

"In the round walk (which is the west part without the quire) there
remain monuments of noblemen there buried, to the number of eleven.
*Eight* of them are images of armed knights; *five* lying cross-legged,
as men vowed to the Holy Land against the infidels and unbelieving Jews,
the other three straight-legged. The rest are coped stones, all of gray
marble." <span id="fr_480"></span>[\*](#fn_480.md) A manuscript history of
the Temple in the Inner Temple library, written at the commencement of
the reign of Charles the First, tells us that "the crossed-legged images
or portraitures remain in carved stone in the *middle of the round
walke, environed with barres of iron*." <span
id="fr_481"></span>[†](#fn_481.md) And Dugdale, in his Origines
Juridiciales, published 1666, thus describes them: "Within a spacious
*grate of iron in the midst of the round walk* under the steeple, do lye
*eight* statues in military habits, each of them having large and deep
shields on their left armes, of which *five* are cross-legged. There are
also three other gravestones lying about five inches above the level of
the ground, on one of which is a large escocheon, with a lion rampant
graven thereon." <span id="fr_482"></span>[‡](#fn_482.md) Such is the
ancient account of these monuments; now, however, *six* instead of five
cross-legged statues are to be seen, making *nine* armed knights, whilst
only *one* coped gravestone remains. The effigies are no longer inclosed
"within a spacious grate of iron," but are divided into two groups
environed by iron railings, and are placed on either side of the
entrance to the oblong portion of the church.

Whatever change was made in their original position appears

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

to have been effected at the time that the church was so shamefully
disfigured by the Protestant lawyers, either in the year 1682, when it
was "thoroughly repaired," or in 1695, when "the ornamental screen was
set up in it;" inasmuch, as we are informed by a newspaper, called the
Flying Post, of the date of the 2nd of January, 1696, that Roger
Gillingham, Esq., treasurer of the Middle Temple, who died on the 29th
of December, 1695, æt. seventy, had the credit of facing the Temple
Church with New Portland stone, and of "*marshalling the Knights
Templars in uniform order*." <span id="fr_483"></span>[\*](#fn_483.md) Stow
tells us that "the first of the crossed-legged was William Marshall, the
elder, earl of Pembroke," but the effigy of that nobleman now stands the
second; the additional figure appears to have been placed the first, and
seems to have been brought from the western doorway and laid by the side
of the others.

During the recent restoration of the church, it was necessary to
excavate the earth in every part of the Round, and just beneath the
pavement of the external circular aisle or portico environing the tower,
was found a broken sarcophagus of Purbeck marble, containing a skull and
some bones apparently of very great antiquity; the upper surface of the
sarcophagus was on a level with the ancient pavement; it had no mark or
inscription upon it, and seemed originally to have been decorated with a
monumental effigy.

From two ancient manuscript accounts of the foundation of Walden Abbey,
written by the monks of that great religious house, we learn that
Geoffrey de Magnaville, earl of Essex, the founder of it, being slain by
an arrow, in the year 1144, was taken by the Knights Templars to the Old
Temple, that he was afterwards removed to the cemetery of the New
Temple, and that his body was buried in the portico before the western
door of the

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

church. <span id="fr_484"></span>[\*](#fn_484.md) The sarcophagus lately
found in that position is of Purbeck marble; so also is the first figure
on the south side of the Round, whilst nearly all the others are of
common stone. The tablet whereon it rests had been grooved round the
edges and polished; three sides were perfect, but the fourth had decayed
away to the extent of six or seven inches. The sides of the marble
sarcophagus had also been carefully smoothed and polished. The same
thing was not observable amongst the other sarcophagi and figures. It
must, moreover, be mentioned, that the first figure on the south side
had no coffin of any description under it. We may, therefore, reasonably
conclude, that this figure is the monumental effigy of Geoffrey de
Magnaville, earl of Essex. It represents an armed knight with his legs
crossed, <span id="fr_485"></span>[†](#fn_485.md) in token that he had
assumed the cross, and taken a vow to fight in defence of the christian
faith. His body is cased in chain mail, over which is worn a loose
flowing garment confined to the waist by a girdle, his right arm is
placed on his breast, and his left supports a long shield charged with
rays on a diamond ground. On his right side hangs a ponderous sword of
immense length, and his head, which rests on a stone cushion, is covered
with an elegantly-shaped helmet.

Geoffrey de Magnaville, earl of Essex, to whose memory the above
monument appears to have been erected, was one of the most violent of
those "barons bold" who desolated England so fearfully during the reign
of king Stephen. He was the son of that famous soldier, Geoffrey de
Magnaville, who fought so valiantly at

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

the battle of Hastings, and was endowed by the conqueror with one
hundred and eighteen lordships in England. From his father William de
Magnaville, and his mother Magaret, daughter and heiress of the great
Eudo Dapifer, Sir Geoffrey inherited an immense estate in England and in
Normandy. On the accession of king Stephen to the throne, he was made
constable of the Tower, and created earl of Essex, and was sent by the
king to the Isle of Ely to put down a rebellion which had been excited
there by Baldwin de Rivers, and Nigel bishop of Ely. <span
id="fr_486"></span>[\*](#fn_486.md)

In A.D. 1136, he founded the great abbey of Walden in Essex, which was
consecrated by the bishops of London, Ely, and Norwich, in the presence
of Sir Geoffrey, the lady Roisia his wife, and all his principal
tenants. <span id="fr_487"></span>[†](#fn_487.md) For some time after the
commencment of the war between Stephen and the empress Matilda for the
succession to the throne, he remained faithful to the former, but after
the fatal result of the bloody battle of Lincoln, in which king Stephen
was taken prisoner, he, in common with most of the other barons, adhered
to the party of Matilda; and that princess, fully sensible of his great
power and commanding influence, left no means untried to attach him
permanently to her interests. She confirmed him in his post of constable
of the Tower; granted him the hereditary shrievalties of several
counties, together with large estates and possessions both in England
and in Normandy, and invested him with numerous and important
privileges. <span id="fr_488"></span>[‡](#fn_488.md) On the flight of the
empress, however, and the discomfiture of her party, king Stephen was
released from prison, and an apparent reconciliation took place between
him and his powerful vassal the earl of Essex, but

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

shortly afterward the king ventured upon the bold step of seizing and
imprisoning the earl and his father-in-law, Aubrey de Vere, whilst they
were unsuspectingly attending the court at Saint Alban's.

The earl of Essex was compelled to surrender the Tower of London, and
several of his strong castles, as the price of his freedom; <span
id="fr_489"></span>[\*](#fn_489.md) but he was no sooner at liberty, than
he collected together his vassals and adherents, and raised the standard
of rebellion. He was joined by crowds of freebooters and needy
adventurers, and soon found himself at the head of a powerful army. He
laid waste the royal domains, pillaged the king's servants, and
subsisted his followers upon plunder. He took and sacked the town of
Cambridge, laid waste the surrounding country, and stormed several royal
castles. He was afterwards compelled to retreat for a brief period into
the fens before a superior force led against him by king Stephen in
person.

The most frightful excesses are said to have been committed by this
potent earl. He sent spies, we are told, to beg from door to door, and
discover where rich men dwelt, that he might seize them at night in
their beds, throw them into dungeons, and compel the payment of a heavy
ransom for their liberty. <span id="fr_490"></span>[†](#fn_490.md) He got
by water to Ramsey, and entering the abbey of St. Benedict at morning's
dawn, surprised the monks asleep in their beds after the fatigue of
nocturnal offices; he turned them out of their

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

cells, filled the abbey with his soldiers, and made a fort of the
church; he took away all the gold and silver vessels of the altar, the
copes and vestments of the priests and singers ornamented with precious
stones, and all the decorations of the church, and sold them for money
to reward his soldiers. <span id="fr_491"></span>[\*](#fn_491.md) The
monkish historians of the period speak with horror of these sacrilegious
excesses.

"He dared," says William, the monk of Newburgh, who lived in the reign
of king Stephen, "to make that celebrated and holy place a robber's
cave, and to turn the sanctuary of the Lord into an abode of the devil.
He infested all the neighbouring provinces with frequent incursions, and
at length, emboldened by constant success, he alarmed and harassed king
Stephen himself by his daring attacks. He thus, indeed, raged madly, and
it seemed as if the Lord slept and cared no longer for human affairs, or
rather his own, that is to say, ecclesiastical affairs, so that the
pious labourers in Christ's vineyard exclaimed, 'Arise, O God, maintain
thine own cause . . . . how long shall the adversary do this dishonour,
how long shall the enemy blaspheme thy name?' But God, willing to make
his power known, as the apostle saith, endured with much 'long-suffering
the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction,' and at last smote his
enemies in their hinder parts. It was discovered indeed, a short time
before the destruction of this impious man, as we have learned from the
true relation of many witnesses, that the walls of the church sweated
pure blood,--a terrible manifestation, as it afterwards appeared, of the
enormity of the crime, and of the speedy judgement of God upon the
sinners." <span id="fr_492"></span>[†](#fn_492.md)

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

For this sacrilege and impiety Sir Geoffrey was excommunicated, but,
deriding the spiritual thunders, he went and laid siege to the royal
castle at Burwell. After a successful attack which brought him to the
foot of the rampart, he took off his helmet, it being summer-time and
the weather hot, that he might breathe more freely, when a foot soldier
belonging to the garrison shot an arrow from a loophole in the castle
wall, and gave him a slight wound on the head; "which slight wound,"
says our worthy monk of Newburgh, "although at first treated with
derision, after a few days destroyed him, so that that most ferocious
man, never having been absolved from the bond of the ecclesiastical
curse, went to hell." <span id="fr_493"></span>[\*](#fn_493.md)

Peter de Langtoft thus speaks of these evil doings of the earl of Essex,
in his curious poetic chronicle.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The abbey of Rameseie bi nyght he robbed it  
The tresore bare aweie with hand thei myght on hit.  
Abbot, and prior, and monk, thei did outchace,  
Of holy kirke a toure to theft thei mad it place.  
Roberd the Marmion, the same wayes did he,  
He robbed thorgh treson the kirk of Couentre.  
Here now of their scheme, what chance befelle,  
The story sais the same soth as the gospelle: <span id="page_321">p.
321</span>  
Geffrey of Maundeuile to fele wrouh he wouh, <span
id="fr_494"></span>[\*](#fn_494.md)  
The deuelle gald him his while with an arrowe him slouh.  
The gode bishop of Chestre cursed this ilk Geffrey,  
The lif out of his entre in cursing went away.  
Arnulf his sonne was taken ale thefe, and brouht in bond,  
Before the kyng forsaken, and exiled out of his lond." <span
id="fr_495"></span>[†](#fn_495.md)</span>

</div>

The monks of Walden tell us, that as the earl lay wounded on his sick
couch, and felt the hand of death pressing heavy upon him, he bitterly
repented of his evil deeds, and sought, but in vain, for ecclesiastical
assistance. At last some Knights Templars came to him, and finding him
humble and contrite, praying earnestly to God, and making what
satisfaction he could for his past offences, they put on him the habit
of their religion marked with the red cross. After he had expired, they
carried the dead body with them to the Old Temple at London; but as the
earl had died excommunicated, they durst not give him christian burial
in consecrated ground, and they accordingly soldered him up in lead, and
hung him on a crooked tree in their orchard. <span
id="fr_496"></span>[‡](#fn_496.md) Some years afterwards, through the
exertions and at the expense of William, whom the earl had made prior of
Walden Abbey, his absolution was obtained from pope Alexander the Third,
so that his body was permitted to be received amongst Christians, and
the divine offices to be celebrated for him. The prior accordingly
endeavoured to take down the corpse and carry it to Walden; but the
Templars, being informed of his design, buried

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

it in their own cemetery at the New Temple, <span
id="fr_497"></span>[\*](#fn_497.md) in the portico before the western door
of the church. <span id="fr_498"></span>[†](#fn_498.md)

Pope Alexander, from whom the absolution was obtained, was elected to
the pontifical chair in September, 1159, and died in 1181. It was this
pontiff who, who by the bull *omne datum optimum*, promulgated in the
year 1162, conceded to the Templars the privilege of having their own
cemeteries free from the interference of the regular clergy. The land
whereon the convent of the New Temple was erected, was purchased soon
after the publication of the above bull, and a cemetery was doubtless
consecrated there for the brethren long before the completion of the
church. To this cemetery the body of the earl was removed after the
absolution had been obtained, and when the church was consecrated by the
patriarch, (A.D. 1185,) it was finally buried in the portico before the
west door.

The monks of Walden tell us that the above earl of Essex was a religious
man, endowed with many virtues. <span id="fr_499"></span>[‡](#fn_499.md) He
was married to the famous Roisia de Vere, of the family of the earls of
Oxford, who in her old age led an ascetic life, and constructed for
herself an extraordinary subterranean cell or oratory, which was
curiously discovered towards the close of the last century. <span
id="fr_500"></span>[§](#fn_500.md) He had issue by

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

this illustrious lady four sons, Ernulph, Geoffrey, William, and Robert.
Ernulph was exiled as the accomplice of the father in his evil deeds,
and Geoffrey succeded to the title and the estates.

The second of the cross-legged figures on the south side, in the Round
of the Temple Church, is the monumental effigy of

WILLIAM MARSHALL, EARL OF PEMBROKE,

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Earl Marshall, and
Protector of England, during the minority of king Henry the Third, and
one of the greatest of the warriors and statesmen who shine in English
history. Matthew Paris describes his burial in the Temple Church in the
year 1119, and in Camden's time, (A.D. 1586,) the inscription upon his
monument was legible. "In altero horum tumulo," says Camden, "literis
fugientibus legi, *Comes Pembrochiæ*, et in latere, *Miles eram Martis,
Mars multos vicerat armis*." <span id="fr_501"></span>[\*](#fn_501.md)
Although no longer, ("the first of the cross-legged,") as described by
Stow, A.D. 1598, yet tradition has always, since the days of Roger
Gillingham, who moved these figures, pointed it out as "the monument of
the protector," and the lion rampant, still plainly risible upon the
shield, was the armorial bearing of the Marshalls.

This interesting monumental effigy is carved in a common kind of stone,
called by the masons fire-stone. It represents an armed warrior clothed
from head to foot in chain mail; he is in the act of sheathing a sword
which hangs on his left side; his legs are crossed, and his feet, which
are armed with spurs, rest on a *lion couchant*. Over his armour is worn
a loose garment, confined to the waist by a girdle, and from his left
arm hangs suspended a

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

shield, having a lion rampant engraved thereon. The greater part of the
sword has been broken away and lost, which has given rise to the
supposition that he is sheathing a dagger. The head is defended by a
round helmet, and rests on a stone pillow.

The family of the Marshalls derived their name from the hereditary
office of earl marshall, which they held under the crown.

The above William Marshall was the son and heir of John Marshall, earl
of Strigul, and was the faithful and constant supporter of the royal
house of Plantagenet. When the young prince Henry, eldest son of king
Henry the Second, was on his deathbed at the castle of Martel near
Turenne, he gave to him, as his best friend, his cross to carry to
Jerusalem. <span id="fr_502"></span>[\*](#fn_502.md) On the return of
William Marshall from the holy city, he was present at the coronation of
Richard Cœur de Lion, and bore on that occasion the royal sceptre of
gold surmounted by a cross. <span id="fr_503"></span>[†](#fn_503.md) King
Richard the same year gave him in marriage Isabel de Clare, the only
child and heiress of Richard de Clare, earl of Pembroke, surnamed
Strongbow, and granted him with this illustrious lady the earldom of
Pembroke. <span id="fr_504"></span>[‡](#fn_504.md) The year following (A.D.
1190) he became one of the sureties for the performance by king Richard
of his part of the treaty entered into with the king of France for the
accomplishment of the crusade to the Holy Land, and on the departure of
king Richard for the far East he was appointed by that monarch one of
the council for the government of the kingdom during his absence. <span
id="fr_505"></span>[§](#fn_505.md)

From the year 1189 to 1205 he was sheriff of Lincolnshire, and was after
that sheriff of Sussex, and held that office during

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

the whole of king Richard's reign. He attended Cœur de Lion in his
expedition to Normandy, and on the death of that monarch by the hand of
Bertram, the cross-bow-man, before the walls of Castle Chaluz, he was
sent over to England to keep the peace of the kingdom until the arrival
of king John. In conjunction with Hubert, archbishop of Canterbury, he
caused the freemen of England, both of the cities and boroughs, and most
of the earls, barons, and free tenants, to swear fealty to John. <span
id="fr_506"></span>[\*](#fn_506.md)

On the arrival of the latter in England he was constituted sheriff of
Gloucestershire and of Sussex, and was shortly afterwards sent into
Normandy at the head of a large body of forces. He commanded in the
famous battle fought A.D. 1202 before the fortress of Mirabel, in which
the unfortunate prince Arthur and his lovely sister Eleanor, "the pearl
of Brittany," were taken prisoners, together with the earl of March,
most of the nobility of Poictou and Anjou, and two hundred French
knights, who were ignominiously put into fetters, and sent away in carts
to Normandy. This battle was followed, as is well known, by the
mysterious death of prince Arthur, who is said to have been murdered by
king John himself, whilst the beautiful Eleanor, nicknamed *La Bret*,
who, after the death of her brother, was the next heiress to the crown
of England, was confined in close custody in Bristol Castle, where she
remained a prisoner for life. At the head of four thousand infantry and
three thousand cavalry, the earl Marshall attempted to relieve the
fortress of Chateau Gaillard, which was besieged by Philip king of
France, but failed in consequence of the non-arrival of seventy
flat-bottomed vessels, whose progress up the river Seine had been
retarded by a strong contrary wind. <span
id="fr_507"></span>[†](#fn_507.md) For his fidelity and services to the
crown he was rewarded with numerous manors, lands, and castles, both in
England and in

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Normandy, with the
whole province of Leinster in Ireland, and he was made governor of the
castles of Caermerden, Cardigan, and Coher.

In the year 1204 he was sent ambassador to Paris, and on his return he
continued to be the constant and faithful attendant of the English
monarch. He was one of the witnesses to the surrender by king John at
Temple Ewell of his crown and kingdom to the pope, <span
id="fr_508"></span>[\*](#fn_508.md) and when the barons’ war broke out he
was the constant mediator and negotiator between the king and his
rebellious subjects, enjoying the confidence and respect of both
parties. When the armed barons came to the Temple, where king John
resided, to demand the liberties and laws of king Edward, he became
surety for the performance of the king's promise to satisfy their
demands. He was afterwards deputed to inquire what these laws and
liberties were, and after having received at Stamford the written
demands of the barons, he urged the king to satisfy them. Failing in
this, he returned to Stamford to explain the king's denial, and the
barons’ war then broke out. He afterwards accompanied king John to the
Tower, and when the barons entered London he was sent to announce the
submission of the king to their desires. Shortly afterwards he attended
king John to Runnymede, in company with Brother Americ, the Master of
the Temple, and at the earnest request of these two exalted personages,
king John was at last induced to sign MAGNA CHARTA. <span
id="fr_509"></span>[†](#fn_509.md)

On the death of that monarch, in the midst of a civil war and a foreign
invasion, he assembled the loyal bishops and barons of the land at
Gloucester, and by his eloquence, talents, and address, secured the
throne for king John's son, the young prince Henry. <span
id="fr_510"></span>[‡](#fn_510.md)

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The greater part
of England was at that time in the possession of prince Louis, the
dauphin of France, who had landed with a French army at Sandwich, and
was supported by the late king's rebellious barons in a claim to the
throne. Pembroke was chosen guardian and protector of the young king and
of the kingdom, and exerted himself with great zeal and success in
driving out the French, and in bringing back the English to their
antient allegiance. <span id="fr_511"></span>[\*](#fn_511.md) He offered
pardon in the king's name to the disaffected barons for their past
offences. He confirmed, in the name of the youthful sovereign, MAGNA
CHARTA and the CHARTA FORESTÆ; and as the great seal had been lost by
king John, together with all his treasure, in the washes of
Lincolnshire, the deeds of confirmation were sealed with the seal of the
earl marshall. <span id="fr_512"></span>[†](#fn_512.md) He also extended
the benefit of Magna Charta to Ireland, and commanded all the sheriffs
to read it publicly at the county courts, and enforce its observance in
every particular. Having thus exerted himself to remove the just
complaints of the disaffected, he levied a considerable army, and having
left the young king at Bristol, he proceeded to lay siege to the castle
of Mountsorel in Leicestershire, which was in the possession of the
French.

Prince Louis had, in the mean time, despatched an army of twenty
thousand men, officered by six hundred knights, from London against the
northern counties. These mercenaries

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

stormed various strong castles, despoiled the towns, villages, and
religious houses, and laid waste the open country. The protector
concentrated all his forces at Newarke, and on Whit-monday, A.D. 1217,
he marched at their head, accompanied by his eldest son and the young
king, to raise the siege of Lincoln Castle. On arriving at Stow he
halted his army, and leaving the youthful monarch and the royal family
at that place under the protection of a strong guard, he proceeded with
the remainder of his forces to Lincoln. On Saturday in Whitsun week
(A.D. 1217) he gained a complete victory over the disaffected English
and their French allies, and gave a deathblow to the hopes and prospects
of the dauphin. Four earls, eleven barons, and four hundred knights,
were taken prisoners, besides common soldiers innumerable. The earl of
Perch, a Frenchman, was slain whilst manfully defending himself in a
churchyard, having previously had his horse killed under him. The rebel
force lost all their baggage, provisions, treasure, and the spoil which
they had accumulated from the plunder of the northern provinces, among
which were many valuable gold and silver vessels torn from the churches
and the monasteries.

As soon as the fate of the day was decided, the protector rode back to
the young king at Stow, and was the first to communicate the happy
intelligence of his victory. <span id="fr_513"></span>[\*](#fn_513.md) He
then marched upon London, where prince Louis and his adherents had
fortified themselves, and leaving a corps of observation in the
neighbourhood of the metropolis, he proceeded to take possession of all
the eastern counties. Having received intelligence of the concentration
of a French fleet at Calais to make a descent upon the English coast, he
armed the ships of the Cinque Ports, and, intercepting the French
vessels, he gained a brilliant victory over a

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

much superior naval force of the enemy. <span
id="fr_514"></span>[\*](#fn_514.md) By his valour and military talents he
speedily reduced the French prince to the necessity of suing for
peace. <span id="fr_515"></span>[†](#fn_515.md) On the 11th of September a
personal interview took place between the latter and the protector at
Staines near London, and it was agreed that the prince and all the
French forces should immediately evacuate the country.

Having thus rescued England from the danger of a foreign yoke, and
having established tranquillity throughout the country, and secured the
young king Henry in the peaceable and undisputed possession of the
throne, he died (A.D. 1219) at Caversham, leaving behind him, says
Matthew Paris, such a reputation as few could compare with. His dead
body was, in the first instance, conveyed to the abbey at Reading, where
it was received by the monks in solemn procession. It was placed in the
choir of the church, and high mass was celebrated with vast pomp. On the
following day it was brought to Westminster Abbey, where high mass was
again performed; and from thence it was borne in state to the Temple
Church, where it was solemnly interred on Ascension-day, A.D.
1219. <span id="fr_516"></span>[‡](#fn_516.md) Matthew Paris tells us that
the following epitaph was composed to the memory of the above
distinguished nobleman:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Sum quem Saturnum sibi sensit Hibernia, solem  
Anglia, Mercurium Normannia, Gallia Martem."</span>

</div>

For he was, says he, always the tamer of the mischievous Irish, the
honour and glory of the English, the negotiator of Normandy,

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

in which he transacted many affairs, and a warlike and invincible
soldier in France.

The inscription upon his tomb was, in Camden's time, almost illegible,
as before mentioned, and the only verse that could be read was,

"Miles eram Martis Mars multos vicerat armis."

All the historians of the period speak in the highest terms of the earl
of Pembroke as a warrior <span id="fr_517"></span>[\*](#fn_517.md) and a
statesman, and concur in giving him a noble character. Shakspeare,
consequently, in his play of King John, represents him as the eloquent
intercessor in behalf of the unfortunate prince Arthur.

Surrounded by the nobles, he thus addresses the king on his throne--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"PEMBROKE. I (as one that am the tongue of these,  
To sound the purposes of all their hearts,)  
Both for myself and them, (but, chief of all,  
Your safety, for the which myself and them  
Bend their best studies,) heartily request  
The enfranchisement of Arthur; whose restraint  
Doth move the murmuring lips of discontent  
To break into this dangerous argument,--  
If, what in rest you have, in right you hold,  
Why then your fears, (which, as they say, attend  
The steps of wrong,) should move you to mew up  
Your tender kinsman, and to choke his days  
With barbarous ignorance, and deny his youth  
The rich advantage of good exercise?  
That the time's enemies may not have this  
To grace occasions, let it be our suit  
That you have bid us ask his liberty;  
Which for our goods we do no further ask,  
Than whereupon our weal, on you depending.  
Counts it your weal, he have his liberty."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

Afterwards, when he is shown the dead body of the unhappy prince, he
exclaims--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"O death, made proud with pure and princely
beauty!  
The earth had not a hole to hide this deed.  
.          .          .          .          .          .  
All murders past do stand excused in this;  
And this, so sole, and so unmatchable,  
Shall give a holiness, a purity,  
To the yet unbegotten sin of times,  
And prove a deadly bloodshed but a jest,  
Exampled by this heinous spectacle."</span>

</div>

This illustrious nobleman was a great benefactor to the Templars. He
granted them the advowsons of the churches of Spenes, Castelan-Embyan,
together with eighty acres of land in Eschirmanhir. <span
id="fr_518"></span>[\*](#fn_518.md)

By the side of the earl of Pembroke, towards the northern windows of the
Round of the Temple Church, reposes a youthful warrior, clothed in
armour of chain mail; he has a long buckler on his left arm, and his
hands are pressed together in supplication upon his breast. This is the
monumental effigy of ROBERT LORD DE ROS, and is the most elegant and
interesting in appearance of all the cross-legged figures in the Temple
Church. The head is uncovered, and the countenance, which is youthful,
has a remarkably pleasing expression, and is graced with long and
flowing locks of curling hair. On the left side of the figure is a
ponderous sword, and the armour of the legs has a ridge or seam up the
front, which is continued over the knee, and forms a kind of garter
below the knee. The feet are trampling on a lion, and the legs are
crossed in token that the warrior was one of those military enthusiasts
who so strangely mingled religion and romance,

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "whose exploits
form the connecting link between fact and fiction, between history and
the fairy tale." It has generally been thought that this interesting
figure is intended to represent a genuine Knight Templar clothed in the
habit of his order, and the loose garment or surcoat thrown over the
ring-armour, and confined to the waist by a girdle, has been described
as " a flowing mantle with a kind of *cowl*." This supposed cowl is
nothing more than a fold of the chain mail, which has been covered with
a thick coating of paint. The mantle is the common surcoat worn by the
secular warriors of the day, and is not the habit of the Temple.
Moreover, the long curling hair manifests that the warrior whom it
represents could not have been a Templar, as the brethren of the Temple
were required to cut their hair close, and they wore long beards.

In an antient genealogical account of the Ros family, <span
id="fr_519"></span>[\*](#fn_519.md) written at the commencement of the
reign of Henry the Eighth, A.D. 1513, two centuries after the abolition
of the order of the Temple, it is stated that Robert Lord de Ros became
a Templar, and was buried at London. The writer must have been
mistakened, as that nobleman remained in possession of his estates up to
the day of his death, and his eldest son, after his decease, had livery
of his lands, and paid his fine to the king in the usual way, which
would not have been the case if the Lord de Ros had entered into the
order of the Temple. He was doubtless an associate or honorary member of
the fraternity, and the circumstance of his being buried in the Temple
Church probably gave rise to the mistake. The shield of his monumental
effigy is charged with three water bougets, the armorial ensigns of his
family, similar to those observable in the north aisle of Westminster
Abbey.

Robert Lord de Ros, in consequence of the death of his father

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

in the prime of life, succeeded to his estates at the early age of
thirteen, and in the second year of the reign of Richard Cœur de Lion,
(A.. D. 1190,) he paid a fine of one thousand marks, (£666, 13*s*.
4*d*.,) to the king for livery of his lands. In the eighth year of the
same king, he was charged with the custody of *Hugh de Chaumont*, an
illustrious French prisoner of war, and was commanded to keep him *safe
as his own life*. He, however, devolved the duty upon his servant,
William de Spiney, who, being bribed, suffered the Frenchman to escape
from the Castle of Bonville, in consequence whereof the Lord de Ros was
compelled by king Richard to pay eight hundred pounds, the ransom of the
prisoner, and William de Spiney was executed. <span
id="fr_520"></span>[\*](#fn_520.md)

On the accession of king John to the throne, the Lord de Ros was in high
favour at court, and received by grant from that monarch the barony of
his ancestor, Walter l’Espec. He was sent into Scotland with letters of
safe conduct to the king of Scots, to enable that monarch to proceed to
England to do homage, and during his stay in Scotland he fell in love
with Isabella, the beautiful daughter of the Scottish king, and demanded
and obtained her hand in marriage. He attended her royal father on his
journey into England to do homage to king John, and was present at the
interview between the two monarchs on the bill near Lincoln, when the
king of Scotland swore fealty on the cross of Hubert archbishop of
Canterbury, in the presence of the nobility of both kingdoms, and a vast
concourse of spectators. <span id="fr_521"></span>[†](#fn_521.md) From his
sovereign the Lord de Ros obtained various privileges and immunities,
and in the year 1213 he was made sheriff of Cumberland. He was at first
faithful to king John, but, in common with the best and bravest of the
nobles of the land, he afterwards shook off his allegiance, raised the
standard

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

of rebellion, and was amongst the foremost of those bold patriots who
obtained MAGNA CHARTA. He was chosen one of the twenty-five conservators
of the public liberties, and engaged to compel John to observe the great
charter. <span id="fr_522"></span>[\*](#fn_522.md) Upon the death of that
monarch he was induced to adhere to the infant prince Henry, through the
influence and persuasions of the earl of Pembroke, the Protector, <span
id="fr_523"></span>[†](#fn_523.md) and he received from the youthful
monarch various marks of the royal favour. He died in the eleventh year
of the reign of the young king Henry the Third, (A.D. 1227,) and was
buried in the Temple Church. <span id="fr_524"></span>[‡](#fn_524.md)

The above Lord de Ros was a great benefactor to the Templars. He granted
them the manor of Ribstane, and the advowson of the church; the ville of
Walesford, and all his windmills at that place; the ville of Hulsyngore,
with the wood and windmill there; also all his land at Cattail, and
various tenements in Conyngstreate, York. <span
id="fr_525"></span>[§](#fn_525.md)

Weever has evidently misapplied the inscription seen on the antient
monument of Brother Constance Hover, the visitor-general of the order of
the Temple, to the above nobleman.

As regards the remaining monumental effigies in the Temple Church, it
appears utterly impossible at this distance of time to identify them, as
there are no armorial bearings on their shields, or aught that can give
us a clue to their history. There can be no doubt but that two of the
figures are intended to represent William Marshall, junior, and Gilbert
Marshall, both earls of Pembroke, and sons of the Protector. Matthew
Paris tells us that these noblemen were buried by the side of their
father in the Temple Church, and their identification would consequently

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

have been easy but for the unfortunate removal of the figures from their
original situations by the immortal *Roger Gillingham*.

Next to the Lord de Ros reposes a stern warrior, with both his arms
crossed on his breast. He has a plain wreath around his head, and his
shield, which has no armorial bearings, is slung on his left arm. By the
side of this figure is a coaped stone, which formed the lid of an
antient sarcophagus. The ridges upon it represent a cross, the top of
which terminates in a trefoil, whilst the foot rests on the head of a
lamb. From the middle of the shaft of the cross issue two fleurets or
leaves. As the lamb was the emblem of the order of the Temple, it is
probable that the sarcophagus to which this coaped stone belonged,
contained the dead body either of one of the Masters, or of one of the
visitors-general of the Templars.

Of the figures in the northernmost group of monumental effigies in the
Temple Church, only two are cross-legged. The first figure on the south
side of the row, which is straight-legged, holds a drawn sword in its
right hand pointed towards the ground; the feet are supported by a
leopard, and the cushion under the head is adorned with sculptured
foliage and flowers. The third figure has the sword suspended on the
right side, and the hands are joined in a devotional attitude upon the
breast. The fourth has a spirited appearance. It represents a
cross-legged warrior in the act of drawing a sword, whilst he is at the
same time trampling a dragon under his feet, It is emblematical of the
religious soldier conquering the enemies of the christian church. The
next and last monumental effigy, which likewise has its legs crossed, is
similar in dress and appearance to the others; the right arm reposes on
the breast, and the left hand rests on the sword. These two last
figures, which correspond in character, costume, and appearance, may
perhaps be the monumental

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

effigies of William and Gilbert Marshall, the two sons of the Protector.

WILLIAM MARSHALL, commonly called THE YOUNGER, was one of the bold and
patriotic barons who compelled king John to sign MAGNA CHARTA. He was
appointed one of the twenty-five conservators of the public liberties,
and was one of the chief leaders and promoters of the barons’ war, being
a party to the covenant for holding the city and Tower of London. <span
id="fr_526"></span>[\*](#fn_526.md) On the death of king John, his father
the Protector brought him over to the cause of the young king Henry, the
rightful heir to the throne, whom he served with zeal and fidelity. He
was a gallant soldier, and greatly distinguished himself in a campaign
in Wales. He overthrew Prince Llewellyn in battle with the loss of eight
thousand men, and laid waste the dominions of that prince with fire and
sword. <span id="fr_527"></span>[†](#fn_527.md) For these services he had
scutage of all his tenants in *twenty counties in England!* He was made
governor of the castles of Cardigan and Carmarthen, and received various
marks of royal favour. In the fourteenth year of the reign of king Henry
the Third, he was made captain-general of the king's forces in Brittany,
and, whilst absent in that country, a war broke out in Ireland,
whereupon he was sent to that kingdom with a considerable army to
restore tranquillity. He married Eleanor, the daughter of king John by
the beautiful Isabella of Angoulême, and he was consequently the
brother-in-law of the young king Henry the Third. <span
id="fr_528"></span>[‡](#fn_528.md) He died without issue, A.D. 1231, (15
Hen. III.,) and on the 14th of April he was buried in the Temple Church
at London, by the side of his father the Protector. He was greatly
beloved by king Henry the Third,

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

who attended his funeral, and Matthew Paris tells us, that when the king
saw the dead body covered with the mournful pall, he heaved a deep sigh,
and was greatly affected. <span id="fr_529"></span>[\*](#fn_529.md)

The manors, castles, estates, and possessions of this powerful nobleman
in England, Wales, Ireland, and Normandy, were immense. He gave
extensive forest lands to the monks of Tinterne in Wales; he founded the
monastery of Friars preachers in Dublin, and to the Templars he gave the
church of Westone with all its appurtenances, and granted and confirmed
to them the borough of Baudac, the estate of Langenache, with various
lands, windmills, and *villeins* of the soil. <span
id="fr_530"></span>[†](#fn_530.md)

GILBERT MARSHALL, EARL OF PEMBROKE, brother to the above, and third son
of the Protector, succeeded to the earldom and the vast estates of his
ancestors on the melancholy murder in Ireland of his gallant brother
Richard, "the flower of the chivalry of that time," (A.D. 1234.) The
year after his accession to the title he married Margaret, the daughter
of the king of Scotland, who is [described](errata.htm#7.md) by Matthew
Paris as "a most elegant girl," <span id="fr_531"></span>[‡](#fn_531.md),
and received with her a splendid dowry. In the year 1236 he assumed the
cross, and joined the king's brother, the earl of Cornwall, in the
promotion of a Crusade to the Holy Land.

Matthew Paris gives a long account of an absurd quarrel which broke out
between this earl of Pembroke and king Henry

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

the Third, when the latter was eating his Christmas dinner at
Winchester, in the year 1239. <span id="fr_532"></span>[\*](#fn_532.md)

At a great meeting of Crusaders at Northampton, he took a solemn oath
upon the high altar of the church of All Saints to proceed without delay
to Palestine to fight against the enemies of the cross; <span
id="fr_533"></span>[†](#fn_533.md) but his intentions were frustrated by
the hand of death. At a tournament held at Ware, A.D. 1241, he was
thrown from his horse, and died a few hours afterwards at the monastery
at Hertford. His entrails were buried in the church of the Virgin at
that place, but his body was brought up to London, accompanied by all
his family, and was interred in the Temple Church by the side of his
father and eldest brother. <span id="fr_534"></span>[‡](#fn_534.md)

The above Gilbert Marshall granted to the Templars the church of Weston,
the borough of Baldok, lands and houses at Roydon, and the wood of
Langnoke. <span id="fr_535"></span>[§](#fn_535.md)

All the five sons of the elder Marshall, the Protector, died without
issue in the reign of Henry the Third, and the family became extinct.
They followed one another to the grave in regular succession, so that
each attained for a brief period to the dignity of the earldom, and to
the hereditary office of EARL MARSHALL.

Matthew Paris accounts for the melancholy extinction of this noble and
illustrious family in the following manner.

He tells us that the elder Marshall, the Protector, during a campaign in
Ireland, seized the lands of the reverend bishop of

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fernes, and kept
possession of them in spite of a sentence of excommunication which was
pronounced against him. After the Protector had gone the way of all
flesh, and had been buried in the Temple Church, the reverend bishop
came to London, and mentioned the circumstance to the king, telling him
that the earl of Pembroke had certainly died excommunicated. The king
was much troubled and alarmed at this intelligence, and besought the
bishop to go to the earl's tomb and absolve him from the bond of
excommunication, promising the bishop that he would endeavour to procure
him ample satisfaction. So anxious, indeed, was king Henry for the
safety of the soul of his quondam guardian, that he accompanied the
bishop in person to the Temple Church; and Matthew Paris declares that
the bishop, standing by the tomb in the presence of the king, and in the
hearing of many bystanders, pronounced these words: O William, who lyest
here interred, and held fast by the chain of excommunication, if those
lands which thou hast unjustly taken away from my church be rendered
back to me by the king, or by your heir, or by any of your family, and
if due satisfaction be made for the loss and injury I have sustained, I
grant you absolution; but if not, I confirm my previous sentence, so
that, enveloped in your sins, you stand for evermore condemned to hell!"

The restitution was never made, and the indignant bishop pronounced this
further curse, in the words of the Psalmist: "His name shall be rooted
out in one generation, and his sons shall be deprived of the blessing,
INCREASE AND MULTIPLY; some of them shall die a miserable death; their
inheritance shall be scattered; and this thou, O king, shall behold in
thy lifetime, yea, in the days of thy flourishing youth." Matthew Paris
dwells with great solemnity on the remarkable fulfilment of this
dreadful prophecy, and declares that when the oblong portion of the
Temple Church was consecrated, the body of the Protector

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

was found entire, sewed up in a bull's hide, but in a state of
putridity, and disgusting in appearance. <span
id="fr_536"></span>[\*](#fn_536.md)

It will be observed that the dates of the burial of the above nobleman,
as mentioned by Matthew Paris and other authorities, are as
follow:--William Marshall the elder, A.D. 1219; Lord de Ros, A.D. 1227;
William Marshall the younger, A.D. 1231; all before the consecration of
the oblong portion of the church. Gilbert Marshall, on the other hand,
was buried A.D. 1241, the year after that ceremony had taken place.
Those, therefore, who suppose that the monumental effigies of the
Marshall originally stood in the eastern part of the building, are
mistaken.

Amongst the many distinguished persons interred in the Temple Church is
WILLIAM PLANTAGENET, the fifth son of Henry the Third, who died A.D.
1256, under age. <span id="fr_537"></span>[†](#fn_537.md) The greatest
desire was manifested by all classes of persons to be buried in the
cemetery of the Templars.

King Henry the Third provided for his own interment in the Temple by a
formal instrument couched in the following pious and reverential
terms:--

"To all faithful Christians to whom these presents shall come, Henry by
the grace of God king of England, lord of Ireland, duke of Normandy and
Aquitaine, and count of Anjou, salvation. Be it known to all of you,
that we, being of sound mind and free judgment, and desiring with pious
forethought to extend our regards beyond the passing events of this
life, and to

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

determine the place of our sepulture, have, on account of the love we
bear to the order and to the brethren of the chivalry of the Temple,
given and granted, after this life's journey has drawn to a close, and
we have gone the way of all flesh, our body to God and the blessed
Virgin Mary, and to the house of the chivalry of the Temple at London,
to be there buried, expecting and hoping that through our Lord and
Saviour it will greatly contribute to the salvation of our soul . . . .
. . We desire that our body, when we have departed this life, may be
carried to the aforesaid house of the chivalry of the Temple, and be
there decently buried as above mentioned. . . . . As witness the
venerable father R., bishop of Hereford, &c. Given by the hand of the
venerable father Edmund, bishop of Chichester, our chancellor, at
Gloucester, the 27th of July, in the nineteenth year of our
reign." <span id="fr_538"></span>[\*](#fn_538.md)

Queen Eleanor also provided in a similar manner for her interment in the
Temple Church, the formal instrument being expressed to be made with the
consent and approbation of her lord, Henry the illustrious king of
England, who had lent a willing ear to her prayers upon the
subject. <span id="fr_539"></span>[†](#fn_539.md) These sepulchral
arrangements, however, were afterwards altered, and the king by his will
directed his body to be buried as follows:--"I will that my body be
buried in the church of the blessed Edward at Westminster, there being
no impediment, having formerly appointed my body to be buried in the New
Temple." <span id="fr_540"></span>[‡](#fn_540.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_476"></span>[310:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_476.md) Monumens de la
monarchie Françoise, par *Montfaucon*, tom. ii. p. \]84, plate p. 185.
Hist. de la Maison de Dreux, p. 86, 276.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[312:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_477.md) *Ducange*. Gloss.
tom. iii. p. 16, 17; ed. 1678, verb. *Oblati*.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[312:†](hkt14.htm#fr_478.md) *Peck*. MS. vol. iv.
p. 67.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[313:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_479.md) Plurimique nobiles
apud eos humati fuerunt, quorum imagines visuntur in hoc Templo, tibiis
in crucem transversis (sic enim sepulti fuerunt quotquot illo sæculo
nomina bello sacro dedissent, vel qui ut tunc temporis sunt locuti
crucem suscepissent.) <span id="page_314">p. 314</span> E quibus fuerunt
Guilielmus Pater, Guilielmus et Gilbertus ejus filii, omnes marescalli
Angliæ, comitesque Pembrochiæ.--*Camden's* Britannia, p. 375.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[314:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_480.md) *Stow's* Survey.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[314:†](hkt14.htm#fr_481.md) MS. Inner Temple
Library, No. 17. fol. 402.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[314:‡](hkt14.htm#fr_482.md) Origines
Juridiciales, p. 173.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[315:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_483.md) *Nicholls’*
Leicestershire, vol. iii. p. 960.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[316:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_484.md) "In *porticu* ante
ostium ecclesiæ occidentale." The word porticus, which means "a walking
place environed with pillars," exactly corresponds with the external
circular walk surrounding the round tower of the church.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[316:†](hkt14.htm#fr_485.md) Some surprise has
been expressed that the effigies of women should be found in this
curious position. It must be recollected, that women frequently fought
in the field during the Crusades, and were highly applauded for so
doing.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[317:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_486.md) *Hoveden* apud rer.
Anglican script. post Bedam, p. 488. *Dugdale's* Baronage, vol. i. p.
201. Lel. Coll. vol. i. 864.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[317:†](hkt14.htm#fr_487.md) *Monast. Angl.*, vol.
i. p. 444 to 464.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[317:‡](hkt14.htm#fr_488.md) *Dugd.* Bar., vol. i.
p. 202. *Selden*, tit. hon. p. 647.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[318:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_489.md) *Triveti* annales
apud Hall, p. 12, 13, ad ann. 1143. *Guill. Neubr.* lib. i. cap. ii.
p.44. ad ann. 1143. *Hoveden*, p. 488, Hist. Minor. Matt. Par. in bib.
reg. apud S. Jacobum.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[318:†](hkt14.htm#fr_490.md) *Henry Huntingdon*,
lib. viii. Rer. Anglicar. script. post Bedam, p. 393. *Chron. Gervasii*,
apud script. R. col. 1360. *Radulph de Diceto*, ib. col. 508. Vir autem
late magnanimus, velut equus validus et infrænus, maneria, villas,
cætereque, proprietatem regiam contingentes, invasit, igni combussit,
&c. &c. MS. in Bibl. Arund., A.D. 1647, a. 43. cap. ix., now in the
Library of the Royal Society. *Annales Dunstaple* apud Hearne, tom, i.
p. 25.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[319:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_491.md) Vasa autem altaris
aurea et argentes Deo sacrata, capas etiam cantorum lapidibus preciosis
ac opere mirifico contextas, casulas cum albis et cæteris ecclesiastici
decoris ornamentis rapuit, &c. MS. ut sup. Gest. reg. Steph. p. 693,
964.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[319:†](hkt14.htm#fr_492.md) De vitâ sceleratâ et
condigno interitu Gaufridi de Magnavilla.--*Guill. Neubr.* lib. i. <span
id="page_320">p. 320</span> cap. xi. p. 44 to 46. Henry of Huntingdon,
who lived in king Stephen's reign, \[and kept up a correspondence with
the abbot of Ramsay, thus speaks of this wonderful phenomenon, of which
he declares himself an eye-witness. Dum autem ecclesia illa pro castello
teneretur, ebullivit sanguis a parietibus ecclesiæ et claustri
adjacentis, indignationem divinam manifestans; sceleratorum
exterminationem denuntians, quod quidem multi viderant, *et ego ipse
quidem meis oculis inspexi!* *Script. post Bedam.* lib. viii. p. 393,
ed. 1601, Francfort. Hoveden, who wrote shortly after, has copied this
account. Annales, ib. p. 488.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[320:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_493.md) *Guill. Neubr*, ut
supr. p. 45, 46. Chron. *Gervasii*, apud X. script. col. 1360. *Annal.
S. Augustin*. *Trivet* ad ann. 1144, p. 14. *Chron. Brampton*, col.
1033. *Hoveden*, ut supr. p. 488.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[321:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_494.md) Grew mad with much
anger.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[321:†](hkt14.htm#fr_495.md) Peter Langtoft's
Chronicle, vol. i. 123, by Robert of Brunne, translated from a MS. in
the Inner Temple Library, Oxon. 1725.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[321:‡](hkt14.htm#fr_496.md) In pomœrio suo
veteris, scilicet Templi apud London, canali inclusum plumbeo, in arbore
torvâ suspenderant. *Antient MS. de fundatione cænobii Sancti Jacobi de
Waldena*, fol. 43, a. cap. ix. no. 51, in the Library of the Royal
Society.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[322:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_497.md) Cumque Prior ille,
corpus defunctum deponere, et secum Waldenam transferre satageret,
Templarii caute premeditati, statim illud tollentes, in cimiterio Novi
Templi ignobili satis tradiderunt sepulturæ.--Ib.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[322:†](hkt14.htm#fr_498.md) A.D. MCLXIIII, sexto
kal. Octobris, obiit Galfridus de Mandeuil, comes Essexiæ, fundator
primus hujus monasterii de Walden, cujus corpus jacet Londoniis humatum,
apud Temple-bar *in porticu ante ostium ecclesiæ occidentale*. MS. in
the library of the Royal Society, marked No. 29, entitled *Liber de
fundatione Sancti Jacobi Apostoli de Waldenâ*. *Cotton*, MS. Vesp. E.
vi. fol. 25.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[322:‡](hkt14.htm#fr_499.md) Hoveden speaks of him
as a man of the highest probity, but irreligious. Erat autem summæ
probitatis, sed summæ in Deum obstinationis, magnæ in mundanis
diligentiæ, magnæ in Deum negligentiæ. *Hoveden* ut supra.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[322:§](hkt14.htm#fr_500.md) It was a recess, hewn
out of the chalk, of a bell shape and exactly circular, thirty feet high
and seventy feet in diameter. The sides of this curious retreat were
adorned <span id="page_323">p. 323</span> with imagery in basso relievo
of crucifixes, saints, martyrs, and historical pieces, which the pious
and eccentric lady is supposed to have cut for her entertainment.--See
the extraordinary account of the discovery, in 1742, of the Lady
Roisia's Cave at Royston, published by *Dr. Stukeley*. Cambridge, 1795.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[323:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_501.md) *Camden's*
Britannia, ed. 1600, p. 375.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[324:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_502.md) Tradidit Willielmo
Marescallo, familiari suo, crucem seam Jerosolymam deferendam. *Hoveden*
ad ann. 1183, apud rer. Anglic. script. post Bedam, p. 620.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[324:†](hkt14.htm#fr_503.md) *Chron. Joan
Brompton*, apud X. script. col. 1158. *Hoveden*, p. 655, 666.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[324:‡](hkt14.htm#fr_504.md) Selden's Tit. of
Honour, p. 677.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[324:§](hkt14.htm#fr_505.md) *Hoveden*, p. 659,
660. *Radulf de Diceto*, apud X. script. p. 659.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[325:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_506.md) *Matt. Par.*, p.
196. *Hoveden*, p. 792. *Dugdale* Baronage, tom. i. p. 601.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[325:†](hkt14.htm#fr_507.md) *Trivet*, p. 144.
*Gul. Britt*, lib. vii. *Ann. Waverley*, p. 168.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[326:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_508.md) *Matt. Par.*, p.
237.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[326:†](hkt14.htm#fr_509.md) *Matt. Par.*, p.
253-256, ad ann. 1215.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[326:‡](hkt14.htm#fr_510.md) See his eloquent
address to the bishops and barons in behalf of the young
king.--*Hemingford*, lib. iii. cap. 1. p. 562, apud *Gale* XV, script.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[327:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_511.md) *Matt. Par.*, p.
289, ad ann. 1216. Acta *Rymeri*, tom. i. p. 216.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[327:†](hkt14.htm#fr_512.md) *Hemingford*, p. 565,
568. "These liberties, distinctly reduced to writing, we send to you our
faithful subjects, sealed with the seal of our faithful William
Marshall, earl of Pembroke, the guardian of us and our kingdom, because
we have not as yet any seal." Acta *Rymeri*, tom. i. part 1. p. 146, ed.
1816. *Thomson*, on Magna Charta, p. 117, 130. All the charters and
letters patent were sealed with the seal of the earl marshall, "Rectoris
nostri et regni, eo quod *nondum sigillum habuimus*. Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
i. p. 224, ed. 1704.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[328:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_513.md) *Matt. Par.*, p.
292-296.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[329:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_514.md) Matthew Paris bears
witness to the great superiority of the English sailors over the French
even in those days.--Ibid., p. 298. *Trivet*, p. 167-169.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[329:†](hkt14.htm#fr_515.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
i. p. 219, 221, 223.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[329:‡](hkt14.htm#fr_516.md) *Dugd*. Baronage,
tom. i. p. 602, A.D. 1219. Willielmus senior, mareschallus regis et
rector regni, diem clausit extremum, et Londini apud Novum Templum
honorifice tumulatur, scilicet in ecclesiâ, in Ascensionis die videlicet
xvii. calendas Aprilis.--*Matt. Par*. p. 304. *Ann. Dunstaple*, ad ann.
1319. *Ann. Waverley*.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[330:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_517.md) Miles strenuissimus
et per universum orbem nominatissimus.--*Chron. T. Wikes* apud *Gale*,
script. XV. p. 39.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[331:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_518.md) *Monast. Angl.*, p.
833, 834, 837, 843.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[332:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_519.md) MS. Bib. Cotton.
*Vitellius*, F. 4. *Monast. Angl.*, tom. i. p. 728, ed. 1655.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[333:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_520.md) *Matt. Par.*, p.
182. ad ann. 1196.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[333:†](hkt14.htm#fr_521.md) *Hoveden* apud rer.
Anglicar. script. post Bedam, p. 811.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[334:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_522.md) *Matt. Par.* p. 254,
262. *Lel*. col. vol. i. p. 362.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[334:†](hkt14.htm#fr_523.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
i. p. 224, ad ann. 1217.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[334:‡](hkt14.htm#fr_524.md) *Dugd*. Baronage,
vol. i. p. 545, 546.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[334:§](hkt14.htm#fr_525.md) *Monast. Angl.,* vol.
vi. part ii. p. 838, 842.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[336:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_526.md) *Matt. Par.* p. 254,
256. *Lel*. col. vol. i. p. 841.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[336:†](hkt14.htm#fr_527.md) *Matt. Par.* p. 317,
ad ann. 1223.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[336:‡](hkt14.htm#fr_528.md) *Matt. Par.* p. 366.
*Ann. Dunst.* p. 99. 134, 150.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[337:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_529.md) Eodem tempore, A.D.
1237, mense Aprili, Willielmus, Marescallus comes Pembrochiæ, in militiâ
vir strenuus, in dolorem multorum, diem clausit extremum, et Londoniis
apud Novum Templum sepultus est, juxta patrem suum, XVII calend. Maii.
Rex autem qui eum indissolubiliter dilexit, cum hæc audivit, et cum
vidisset, corpus defuncti pallâ coopertum, ex alto trahens suspiria,
ait, Heu, heu, mihi! nonne adhuc penitus vindicatus est sanguis beati
Thomæ Martyris.--*Matt. Par.* p. 368.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[337:†](hkt14.htm#fr_530.md) *Dugd*. Monast Angl.
ut sup. p. 820.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[337:‡](hkt14.htm#fr_531.md) Margaretam *puellam
elegantissimam* matrimonio sibi copulaverat.--*Matt. Par.*, p. 432, 404.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[338:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_532.md) *Matt. Par.* p. 483.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[338:†](hkt14.htm#fr_533.md) Ib. p. 431, 483, 516,
524.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[338:‡](hkt14.htm#fr_534.md) In crastino autem
delatum est corpus Londinum, fratre ipsius prævio, cum tota sua familia
comitante, juxta patrem suum et fratrem tumulandum.--Ib. p. 565. ad ann.
1241.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[338:§](hkt14.htm#fr_535.md) *Dugd*. Monast.
Angl., p. 833.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[340:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_536.md) Paucis ante evolutis
annis, post mortem omnium suorum filiorum, videlicet, quando dedicata
est ecclesia Novi Templi, inventum est corpus sæpedicti comitis quod
erat insutum corio taurino, integrum, putridum tamen et prout videri
potuit detestabile."--*Matt. Par.* p. 688. Surely this must be an
interpolation by some wag. The last of the Pembroke; died A.D. 1245,
whilst, according to Matthew Paris's own showing, the eastern part of
the church was consecrated A.D. 1240, p. 526.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[340:†](hkt14.htm#fr_537.md) *Mill's* Catalogues,
p. 145. *Speed*, p. 551. *Sandford's* Genealogies, p. 92, 93, 2nd
edition.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[341:\*](hkt14.htm#fr_538.md) Ex Registr. Hosp. S.
Joh. Jerus. in Angliâ, in *Bib. Cotton.* fol. 25 a.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[341:†](hkt14.htm#fr_539.md) Ib.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[341:‡](hkt14.htm#fr_540.md) *Nicolas*, Testamenta
Vetusta, p. 6.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](hkt15.md)

</div>
