<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hkt14)  [Next](hkt16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002RHOUAK/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The History of the Knights Templar*, by Charles G. Addison, \[1842\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

### CHAPTER XIII.

### THE TEMPLE.

<span class="small">Antiquities in the Temple--The history of the place
subsequent to the dissolution of the order of the Knights Templars--The
establishment of a society of lawyers in the Temple--The antiquity of
this society--Its connexion with the antient society of the Knights
Templars--An order of knights and serving brethren established in the
law--The degree of *frere serjen*, or *frater serviens*, borrowed from
the antient Templars The modem Templars divide themselves into the two
societies of the Inner and Middle Temple.</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                     "Those bricky towers,  
The which on Themme's brode aged back do ride.  
Where now the studious lawyers have their bowers;  
There whilom wont the Templer Knights to bide,  
Till they decayed thro’ pride."</span>

</div>

THERE are but few remains of the antient Knights Templars now existing
in the Temple beyond the church. The present Inner Temple Hall was their
antient hall, but it has at different periods been so altered and
repaired as to have lost every trace and vestige of antiquity. In the
year 1816 it was almost entirely rebuilt, and the following extract from
"The Report and Observations of the Treasurer on the late Repairs of the
Inner Temple

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hall" may prove
interesting, as showing the state of the edifice previous to that period

"From the proportions, the state of decay, the materials of the eastern
and southern walls, the buttresses of the southern front, the pointed
form of the roof and arches, and the rude sculpture on the two doors of
public entrance, the hall is evidently of very great antiquity . . . . .
The northern wall appears to have been rebuilt, except at its two
extremities, in modern times, but on the old foundations. . . . The roof
was found to be in a very decayed and precarious state; many timbers
were totally rotten. It appeared to have undergone reparation at three
separate periods of time, at each of which timber had been unnecessarily
added, so as finally to accumulate a weight which had protruded the
northern and southern walls. It became, therefore, indispensable to
remove all the timber of the roof, and to replace it in a lighter form.
On removing the old wainscoting of the western wall, a perpendicular
crack of considerable height and width was discovered, which threatened
at any moment the fall of that extremity of the building with its
superincumbent roof. . . . . . The turret of the clock and the southern
front of the hall are only cased with stone; this was done in the year
1741, and very ill executed. The structure of the turret, composed of
chalk, rag-stone, and rubble, (the same material as the walls of the
church,) seems to be very antient . . . . The wooden cupola of the bell
was so decayed as to let in the rain, and was obliged to be renewed in a
form to agree with the other parts of the southern front."

"Notwithstanding the Gothic character of the building, in the year 1680,
during the treasurership of Sir Thomas Robinson, prothonotary of C.B., a
Grecian screen of the Doric order was erected, surmounted by lions'
heads, cones, and other incongruous devices."

"In the year 1741, during the treasurership of John Blencowe,

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

esq., low windows of Roman architecture were formed in the southern
front."

"The dates of such innovations appear from inscriptions with the
respective treasurers’ names."

This antient hall formed the far-famed refectory of the Knights
Templars, and was the scene of their proud and sumptuous hospitality.
Within its venerable walls they at different periods entertained king
John, king Henry the Third, the haughty legates of Roman pontiffs, and
the ambassadors of foreign powers. The old custom, alluded to by Matthew
Paris, <span id="fr_541"></span>[\*](#fn_541.md) of hanging around the wall
the shields and armorial devices of the antient knights, is still
preserved, and each succeeding treasurer of the Temple still continues
to hoist his coat of arms on the wall, as in the high and palmy days of
the warlike monks of old.

At the west end of the hall are considerable remains of the antient
convent of the Knights Templars. A groined Gothic arch of the same style
of architecture as the oldest part of the Temple Church forms the
ceiling of the present buttery, and in the apartment beyond is a groined
vaulted ceiling of great beauty. The ribs of the arches in both rooms
are elegantly moulded, but are sadly disfigured with a thick coating of
plaster and barbarous whitewash. In the cellars underneath these rooms
are some old walls of immense thickness, the remains of an antient
window, a curious fireplace, and some elegant pointed Gothic arches
corresponding with the ceilings above; but they are now, alas! shrouded
in darkness, choked with modern brick partitions and staircases, and
soiled with the damp and dust of many centuries. These interesting
remains form an upper and an under story, the floor of the upper story
being on a level with the floor of the hall, and the floor of the under
story on a level with the terrace on the south side thereof. They were
formerly connected with the church

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

by means of a covered way or cloister, which ran at right angles with
them over the site of the present cloister-chambers, and
[communicated](errata.htm#8.md) with the upper and under story of the
chapel of St. Anne, which formerly stood on the south side of the
church. By means of this corridor and chapel the brethren of the Temple
had private access to the church for the performance of their strict
religious duties, and of their secret ceremonies of admitting novices to
the vows of the order. In 9 Jac. I. A.D. 1612, some brick buildings
three stories high were erected over this antient cloister by Francis
Tate, esq., and being burnt down a few years afterwards, the interesting
covered way which connected the church with the antient convent was
involved in the general destruction, as appears from the following
inscription upon the present buildings:

"VETUSTISSIMA TEMPLARIORUM PORTICU IGNE CONSUMTA, ANNO 1678, NOVA HÆC,
SUMPTIBUS MEDII TEMPLI EXTRUCTA ANNO 1681 GULIELMO WHITELOCKE ARMIGERO,
THESAURARIO.

"The very antient portico of the Templars being consumed by fire in the
year 1678, these new buildings were erected at the expense of the Middle
Temple in the year 1681, William Whitlock, esq., being treasurer."

The cloisters of the Templars formed the medium of communication between
the hall, the church, and the cells of the serving brethren of the
order. <span id="fr_542"></span>[\*](#fn_542.md)

During the formation of the present new entrance into the Temple by the
church, at the bottom of the Inner Temple-lane, a considerable portion
of the brickwork of the old houses was pulled down, and an antient wall
of great thickness was disclosed. It was composed of chalk, rag-stone,
and rubble, exactly resembling the walls of the church. It ran in a
direction east and west, and

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

appeared to have formed the extreme northern boundary of the old
convent.

The site of the remaining buildings of the antient Temple cannot now be
determined with certainty.

The mansion-house, (*Mansum Novi Templi*,) the residence of the Master
and knights, who were lodged separately from the serving brethren and
ate at a separate table, appears to have stood at the east end of the
hall, on the site of the present library and apartments of the masters
of the bench.

The proud and powerful Knights Templars were succeeded in the occupation
of the TEMPLE by a body of learned lawyers, who took possession of the
old hall and the gloomy cells of the military monks, and converted the
chief house of their order into the great and most antient Common Law
University of England.

For more than five centuries the retreats of the religious warriors have
been devoted to "the studious and eloquent pleaders of causes," a new
kind of Templars, who, as Fuller quaintly observes, now "defend one
Christian from another as the old ones did Christians from Pagans." The
modern Templars have been termed *milites justitiæ*, or "*soldiers of
justice*," for, as John of Salisbury, a writer of the twelfth century,
saith, "neque reipublicæ militant soli illi, qui galeis thoracisque
muniti in hostes exercent tela quælibet, sed et patroni causarum, qui
lapsa erigunt, fatigata reparant, nec minus provident humano generi,
quam si laborantium vitam, spem, posterosque, armorum præsidio, ab
hostibus tuerentur." "They do not alone fight for the state who,
panoplied in helmets and breastplates, wield the sword and the dart
against the enemy, for the pleaders of causes, who redress wrongs, who
raise up the oppressed, do protect and provide for the human race as
much as if they were to defend the

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

lives, fortunes, and families of industrious citizens with the sword."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Besides encounters at the bar  
Are braver now than those in war,  
In which the law does execution  
With less disorder and confusion;  
Has more of honour in’t, some bold,  
Not like the new way, but the old,  
When those the pen had drawn together  
Decided quarrels with the feather,  
And winged arrows killed as dead,  
And more than bullets now of lead:  
So all their combats now, as then,  
Are managed chiefly by the pen;  
That does the feat, with braver vigours,  
In words at length, as well as figures."</span>

</div>

The settlement of the lawyers in the Temple was brought about in the
following manner.

On the imprisonment of the Knights Templars, the chief house of the
order in London, in common with the other property of the military
monks, was seized into the king's hands, and was committed to the care
of James le Botiller and William de Basing, who, on the 9th of December,
A.D. 1311, were commanded to hand it over to the sheriffs of London, to
be taken charge of by them. <span id="fr_543"></span>[\*](#fn_543.md) Two
years afterwards the Temple was granted to that powerful nobleman, Aymer
de Valence, earl of Pembroke, who had been one of the leaders of the
baronial conspiracy against Piers Gavaston. <span
id="fr_544"></span>[†](#fn_544) <span id="fr_545"></span>[‡](#fn_545.md) As
Thomas earl of Lancaster, however, claimed the Temple by escheat as the
immediate lord of the fee, the earl of Pembroke, on the 3rd of Oct.,
A.D. 1316, at

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

the request of the king, and in consideration of other lands being
granted to him by his sovereign, remised and released all his right and
title therein to Lancaster. <span id="fr_546"></span>[\*](#fn_546.md) This
earl of Lancaster was cousin-german to the English monarch, and first
prince of A the blood; he was the most powerful and opulent subject of
the kingdom, being possessed of no less than six earldoms, with a
proportionable estate in land, and at the time that the Temple was added
to his numerous other possessions he was at the head of the government,
and ruled both the king and country as president of the council. In an
antient MS. account of the Temple, formerly belonging to lord Somers and
afterwards to Nicholls, the celebrated antiquary, apparently written by
a member of the Inner Temple, it is stated that the lawyers "made
composition with the earl of Lancaster for a lodging in the Temple, and
so came hither, and have continued here ever since." That this was the
case appears highly probable from various circumstances presently
noticed.

The earl of Lancaster held the Temple rather more than six years and a
half.

When the king's attachment for Hugh le Despenser, another favourite, was
declared, he raised the standard of rebellion. He marched with his
forces against London, gave law to the king and parliament, and procured
a sentence of attainder and perpetual exile against Hugh le Despenser.
The fortune of war, however, soon turned against him. He was defeated,
and conducted a prisoner to his own castle of Pontefract, where king
Edward sat in judgment upon him, and sentenced him to be hung, drawn,
and quartered, as a rebel and a traitor. The same day he was clothed in
mean attire, was placed on a lean jade without a bridle, a hood was put
on his head, and in this miserable

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

condition he was led through the town of Pontefract to the place of
execution, in front of his own castle. <span
id="fr_547"></span>[\*](#fn_547.md)

A few days afterwards, the king, whilst he yet tarried at Ponfract,
granted the Temple to Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke, by a royal
charter couched in the following terms:--

"Edward by the grace of God, king, &c., to the archbishops, bishops,
abbots, priors, earls, barons, justiciaries, &c. &c., health. Know that
on account of the good and laudable service which our beloved kinsman
and faithful servant Aymer de Valence hath rendered and will continue to
render to us, we have given and granted, and by our royal charter have
confirmed to the said earl, the mansion-house and messuage called the
New Temple in the suburb of London, with the houses, rents, and all
other things to the same mansion-house and messuage belonging, formerly
the property of the Templars, and afterwards of Thomas earl of
Lancaster, our enemy and rebel, and which, by the forfeiture of the same
Thomas, have come into our hands by way of escheat, to be had and holden
by the same Aymer and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, of us and
our heirs, and the other chief lords of the fee, by the same services as
those formerly rendered; but if the said Aymer shall die without heirs
of his body lawfully begotten, then the said mansion-house, messuage,
&c. &c., shall revert to us and our heirs." <span
id="fr_548"></span>[†](#fn_548.md)

Rather more than a year after the date of this grant, Aymer de Valence
was murdered. He had accompanied queen Isabella to the court of her
father, the king of France, and was there slain (June 23rd, A.D. 1323)
by one of the English fugitives of the Lancastrian faction, in revenge
for the death of the earl of Lancaster, whose destruction he was
believed to have compassed.

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> His dead body was
brought over to England, and buried in Westminster Abbey at the head of
Edmund Crouchback, earl of Lancaster. He left no issue, and the Temple,
consequently, once more reverted to the crown. <span
id="fr_549"></span>[\*](#fn_549.md)

It was now granted to Hugh le Despenser the younger, the king's
favourite, at the very time that the act of parliament (17 Edward II.)
was passed, conferring all the lands of the Templars upon the
Hospitaliers of St. John. <span id="fr_550"></span>[†](#fn_550.md) Hugh le
Despenser, in common with the other barons, paid no attention to the
parliament, and held the Temple till the day of his death, which
happened soon after, for on the 24th of September, A.D. 1326, Queen
Isabella landed in England with the remains of the Lancastrian faction;
and after driving her own husband, Edward the Second, from the throne,
she seized the favourite, and caused him instantly to be condemned to
death. On St. Andrew's Eve he was led out to execution; they put on him
his surcoat of arms reversed, a crown of nettles was placed on his head,
and on his vestment they wrote six verses of the psalm, beginning, *Quid
gloriaris in malitiâ*. <span id="fr_551"></span>[‡](#fn_551.md) After which
be was hanged on a gallows eighty feet high, and was then beheaded,
drawn, and quartered. His head was sent to London, and stuck upon the
bridge; and of the four quarters of his body, one was sent to York,
another to Bristol, another to Carlisle, and the fourth to Dover. <span
id="fr_552"></span>[§](#fn_552.md)

Thus perished the last private possessor of the Temple at London.

The young prince, Edward the Third, now ascended the throne, leaving his
parent, the dethroned Edward the Second, to the tender mercies of the
gaolers of Berkeley Castle. He seized the

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Temple, as
forfeited to him by the attainder of Hugh le Despenser, and committed it
to the keeping of the mayor of London, his escheator in the city. The
mayor, as guardian of the Temple, took it into his head to close the
gate leading to the waterside, which stood at the bottom of the present
Middle Temple Lane, whereby the lawyers were much incommoded in their
progress backwards and forwards from the Temple to Westminster.
Complaints were made to the king on the subject, who, on the 2nd day of
November, in the third year of his reign, wrote as follows to the mayor:

"The king to the mayor of London, his escheator <span
id="fr_553"></span>[\*](#fn_553.md) in the same city.

"Since we have been given to understand that there ought to be a free
passage through the court of the New Temple at London to the river
Thames, for our justices, clerks, and others, who may wish to pass by
water to Westminster to transact their business, and that you keep the
gate of the Temple shut by day, and so prevent those same justices,
clerks of ours, and other persons, from passing through the midst of the
said court to the waterside, whereby as well our own affairs as those of
our people in general are oftentimes greatly hindered, we command you,
that you keep the gates of the said Temple open by day, so that our
justices and clerks, and other persons who wish to go by water to
Westminster, may be able so to do by the way to which they have hitherto
been accustomed.

"Witness ourself at Kenilworth, the 2nd day of November, and third year
of our reign." <span id="fr_554"></span>[†](#fn_554.md)

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

The following year the king again wrote to the mayor, his escheator in
the city of London, informing him that he had been given to understand
that the bridge in the said court of the Temple, leading to the river,
was so broken and decayed, that his clerks and law officers, and others,
could no longer get across it, and were consequently prevented from
passing by water to Westminster. "We therefore," he proceeds, "being
desirous of providing such a remedy as we ought for this evil, command
you to do whatever repairs are necessary to the said bridge, and to
defray the cost thereof out of the proceeds of the lands and rents
appertaining to the said Temple now in your custody; and when we shall
have been informed of the things done in the matter, the expense shall
be allowed you in your account of the same proceeds.

"Witness ourself at Westminster, the 15th day of January, and fourth
year of our reign." <span id="fr_555"></span>[\*](#fn_555.md)

Two years afterwards (6 E. III, A.D. 1333) the king committed the
custody of the Temple to "his beloved clerk," William de Langford, "and
farmed out the rents and proceeds thereof to him for the term of ten
years, at a rent of 24*l*. per annum, the said William undertaking to
keep all the houses and tenements in good order and repair, and so
deliver them up at the end of the term." <span
id="fr_556"></span>[†](#fn_556.md)

In the mean time, however, the pope, the bishops, and the Hospitaliers
had been vigorously exerting themselves to obtain a transfer of the
property, late belonging to the Templars, to the order of the Hospital
of Saint John. The Hospitaliers petitioned the king, setting forth that
the church, the cloisters, and other places within the Temple, were
consecrated and dedicated to the service of God, that they had been
unjustly occupied and detained

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

from them by Hugh le Despenser the younger, and, through his attainder,
had lately come into the king's hands, and they besought the king to
deliver up to them possession thereof. King Edward accordingly commanded
the mayor of London, his escheator in that city, to take inquisition
concerning the premises.

From this inquisition, and the return thereof, it appears that many of
the founders of the Temple Church, and many of the brethren of the order
of Knights Templars, then lay buried in the church and cemetery of the
Temple; that the bishop of Ely had his lodging in the Temple, known by
the name of the bishop of Ely's chamber; that there was a chapel
dedicated to St. Thomas-à-Becket, which extended from the door of the
TEMPLE HALL as far as the ancient gate of the Temple; also a cloister
which began at the bishop of Ely's chamber, and ran in an easterly
direction; and that there was a wall which ran in a northerly direction
as far as the said king's highway; that in the front part of the
cemetery towards the north, bordering on the king's highway, were
thirteen houses formerly erected, with the assent and permission of the
Master and brethren of the Temple, by Roger Blom, a messenger of the
Temple, for the purpose of holding the lights and ornaments of the
church; that the land whereon these houses were built, the cemetery, the
church, and all the space inclosed between St. Thomas's chapel, the
church, the cloisters, and the wall running in a northerly direction,
and all the buildings erected thereon, together with the hall,
cloisters, and St. Thomas's chapel, were sanctified places dedicated to
God; that Hugh le Despenser occupied and detained them unjustly, and
that through his attainder and forfeiture, and not otherwise, they came
into the king's hands. <span id="fr_557"></span>[\*](#fn_557.md)

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

After the return of this inquisition, the said sanctified places were
assigned to the prior and brethren of the Hospital of Saint John; and
the king, on the 11th of January, in the tenth year of his reign, A.D.
1337, directed his writ to the barons of the Exchequer, commanding them
to take inquisition of the value of the said sanctified places, so given
up to the Hospitaliers, and of the residue of the Temple, and certify
the same under their seals to the king, in order that a reasonable
abatement might be made in William de Langford's rent. From the inquiry
made in pursuance of this writ before John de Shorditch, a baron of the
Exchequer, it further appears that on the said residue of the Temple
upon the land then remaining in the custody of William de Langford, and
withinside the great gate of the Temple, were another HALL <span
id="fr_558"></span>[\*](#fn_558.md) and four chambers connected therewith,
a kitchen, a garden, a stable, and a chamber beyond the great gate; also
eight shops, seven of which stood in Fleet Street, and the eighth in the
suburb of London, without the bar of the New Temple; that the annual
value of these shops varied from ten to thirteen, fifteen, and sixteen
shillings; that the fruit out of the garden of the Temple sold for sixty
shillings per annum in the gross; that seven out of the thirteen houses
erected by Roger Blom were each of the annual value of eleven shillings;
and that the eighth, situated beyond the gate of entrance to the church,
was worth four marks per annum. It appears, moreover, that the total
annual revenue of the Temple then amounted to 73*l*. 6*s*. 11*d*.,

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

equal to about 1,000*l*. of our present money, and that William de
Langford was abated 12*l*. 4*s*. 2*d*. of his said rent. <span
id="fr_559"></span>[\*](#fn_559.md)

Three years after the taking of this inquisition, and in the thirteenth
year of his reign, A.D. 1340, king Edward the Third in consideration of
the sum of one hundred pounds, which the prior of the Hospital promised
to pay him towards the expense of his expedition into France, granted to
the said prior all the residue of the Temple then remaining in the
king's hands, to hold, together with the cemetery, cloisters, and the
other sanctified places, to the said prior and his brethren, and their
successors, of the king and his heirs, for charitable purposes, for
ever. <span id="fr_560"></span>[†](#fn_560.md) From the above grant it
appears that the porter of the Temple received sixty shillings and
tenpence per annum, and twopence a day wages, which were to be paid him
by the Hospitaliers.

At this period Philip Thane was prior of the Hospital; and he appears to
have exerted himself to impart to the celebration of divine service in
the Temple Church, the dignity and the splendour it possessed in the
time of the Templars. He, with the unanimous consent and approbation of
the whole chapter of the Hospital, granted to Brother Hugh de Lichefeld,
priest, and to his successors, guardians of the Temple Church, towards
the improvement of the lights and the celebration of divine service
therein, all the land called Ficketzfeld, and the garden called
Cotterell Garden; <span id="fr_561"></span>[‡](#fn_561.md) a and two years
afterwards he made a further grant, to the said Hugh and his successors,
of a thousand-fagots a year to be cut of the wood of Lilleston, and
carried to the New Temple to keep up the fire in the said church. <span
id="fr_562"></span>[§](#fn_562.md)

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

King Edward the Third, in the thirty-fifth year of his reign, A.D. 1362,
notwithstanding the grant of the Temple to the Hospitallers, exercised
the right of appointing to the porter's office, and by his letters
patent he promoted Roger Small to that post for the term of his life, in
return for the good service rendered him by the said Roger Small. <span
id="fr_563"></span>[\*](#fn_563.md)

It is at this period that the first distinct mention of a society of
lawyers in the Temple occurs.

The poet Chaucer, who was born at the close of the reign of Edward the
Second, A.D. 1327, and was in high favour at court in the reign of
Edward the Third, thus speaks of the MANCIPLE, or the purveyor of
provisions of the lawyers in the Temple:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"A gentil Manciple was there of the TEMPLE,  
Of whom achatours mighten take ensemple,  
For to ben wise in hying of vitaille.  
For whether that he paid or toke by taille,  
Algate he waited so in his achate,  
That he was aye before in good estate.  
Now is not that of God a full fayre grace,  
That swiche a lewed mannes wit shal pace,  
The wisdome of an hepe of lerned men?"  
"Of maisters had he mo than thries ten,  
THAT WERE OP LAWE EXPERT AND CURIOUS:  
Of which there was a dosein in that hous  
Worthy to ben stewardes of rent and lond  
Of any lord that is in Englelond,  
To waken him live by his propre good,  
In honour detteles, but if he were wood, <span id="page_357">p.
357</span>  
Or live as scarsly, as him list desire;  
And able for to helpen all a shire,  
In any cas that mighte fallen or happe;  
And yet this manciple cette hir aller cappe." <span
id="fr_564"></span>[\*](#fn_564.md)</span>

</div>

It appears, therefore, that the lawyers in the Temple, in the reign of
Edward the Third, had their purveyor of provisions as at this day, and
were consequently then keeping commons, or dining together in hall.

In the fourth year of the reign of Richard the Second, A.D. 1381, a
still more distinct notice occurs of the Temple, as the residence of the
*learners* and the *learned* in the law.

We are told in an antient chronicle, written in Norman French, formerly
belonging to the abbey of St. Mary's at York, that the rebels under Wat
Tyler went to the Temple and pulled down the houses, and entered the
church and took all the books and the rolls of remembrances which were
in the chests of the LEARNERS OF THE LAW in the Temple, and placed them
under the large chimney and burnt them. (Les rebels alleront a le TEMPLE
et jetteront les measons a la terre et avegheront tighles, issint que
ils fairont coverture en mal array; et alleront en l’esglise, et
pristeront touts les liveres et rolles de remembrances, que furont en
leur huches deins LE TEMPLE DE APPRENTICES DE LA LEY; et porteront en le
haut chimene et les arderont." <span id="fr_565"></span>[†](#fn_565).md)
And Walsingham, who wrote in the reign of Henry the Sixth, about fifty
years after the occurrence of these events, tells us that after the
rebels, under Wat Tyler and Jack Straw, had burnt the Savoy, the noble
palace of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, they pulled down the place
called Temple Barr, where the apprentices or learners of the highest
branch of the profession of the law dwelt, on account of

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

the spite they bore to Robert Hales, Master of the Hospital of Saint
John of Jerusalem, and burnt many deeds which the lawyers there had in
their custody. ("Quibus perpetratis, satis malitiose etiam locum qui
vocatur Temple Barre, in quo *apprenticii juris* morabantur
*nobiliores*, diruerunt, ob iram quam conceperant contra Robertum de
Hales Magistrum Hospitalis Sancti Johannis Jerusalem, ubi plura
munimenta, quæ Juridici in custodiâ habuerunt, igne consumpta
sunt." <span id="fr_566"></span>[\*](#fn_566.md)

In a subsequent passage, however, he gives us a better clue to the
attack upon the Temple, and the burning of the deeds and writings, for
he tells us that it was the intention of the rebels to decapitate all
the lawyers, for they thought that by destroying them they could put an
end to the law, and so be enabled to order matters according to their
own will and pleasure. ("Ad decollandum omnes juridicos, escaetores, et
universos qui vel in lege docti fuere, vel cum jure ratione officii
communicavere. Mente nempe conceperant, doctis in lege necatis, universa
juxta communis plebis scitum de cætero ordinare, et nullam omnino legem
fore futuram, vel si futura foret, esse pro suorum arbitrio statuenda."

It is evident that the lawyers were the immediate successors of the
Knights Templars in the occupation of the Temple, as the *lessees* of
the earl of Lancaster.

Whilst the Templars were pining in captivity in the dungeons of London
and of York, king Edward the Second paid to their servants and retainers
the pensions they had previously received from the treasury of the
Temple, on condition that they continued to perform the services and
duties they had rendered to their antient masters. On the 26th of
November, A.D. 1311, he granted to Robert Styfford, clerk, for his
maintenance in the house of the Temple at London, two deniers a day, and
five

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

shillings a year for necessaries, provided he did service in the church;
and when unable to do so, he was to receive only his food and lodging.
Geoffrey Talaver was to receive, in the same house of the Temple, three
deniers a day for his sustenance, and twenty shillings a year for
necessaries, during the remainder of his life; also one denier a day for
the support of his boy, and five shillings a year for his wages.
Geoffrey de Cave, clerk, and John de Shelton, were also, each of them,
to receive from the same house, for their good services, an annual
pension of forty shillings for the term of their lives. <span
id="fr_567"></span>[\*](#fn_567.md) Some of these retainers, in addition to
their various stipends, were to have a gown of the class of free-serving
brethren of the order of the Temple <span
id="fr_568"></span>[†](#fn_568.md) each year; one old garment out of the
stock of old garments belonging to the brethren; <span
id="fr_569"></span>[‡](#fn_569.md) one mark a year for their shoes, &c.;
their sons also received so much *per diem*, on condition that they did
the daily work of the house. These retainers were of the class of free
servants of office; they held their posts for life, and not being
members of the order of the Temple, they were not included in the
general proscription of the fraternity. In return for the provision made
them by the king, they were to continue to do their customary work as
long as they were able.

Now it is worthy of remark, that many of the rules, customs, and usages
of the society of Knights Templars are to this day observed in the
Temple, naturally leading us to conclude that these domestics and
retainers of the antient brotherhood became connected with the legal
society formed therein, and transferred their services to that learned
body.

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

From the time of Chaucer to the present day, the lawyers have dined
together in the antient hall, as the military monks did before them; and
the rule of their order requiring "two and two to eat together," and
"all the fragments to be given in brotherly charity to the domestics,"
is observed to this day, and has been in force from time immemorial. The
attendants at table, moreover, are still called *paniers*, as in the
days of the Knights Templars. <span id="fr_570"></span>[\*](#fn_570.md) The
leading punishments of the Temple, too, remain the same as in the olden
time. The antient Templar, for example, for a light fault, was
"withdrawn from the companionship of his fellows," and not allowed "to
eat with them at the same table," <span id="fr_571"></span>[†](#fn_571.md)
and the modern Templar, for impropriety of conduct, is "expelled the
hall" and "put out of commons." The brethren of the antient fraternity
were, for grave offences, in addition to the above punishment, deprived
of their lodgings, <span id="fr_572"></span>[‡](#fn_572.md) and were
compelled to sleep with the beasts in the open court; and the members of
the modern fellowship have in bygone times, as a mode of punishment,
been temporarily deprived of their chambers in the Temple for
misconduct, and padlocks have been put upon the doors. The Master and
Chapter of the Temple, in the time of the Knights Templars, exercised
the power of imprisonment and expulsion from the fellowship, and the
same punishments have been freely used down to a recent period by the
Masters of the Bench of the modern societies. Until of late years, too,
the modern Templars have had their

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

readers, officers of great dignity, whose duty it has been to read and
expound LAW in the hall, at and after meals, in the same way as the
readers of the Knights Templars read and expounded RELIGION.

There has also been, in connexion with the modern fellowship, a class of
*associates* similar to the associates of the antient Templars. <span
id="fr_573"></span>[\*](#fn_573.md) These were illustrious persons who paid
large sums of money, and made presents of plate, to be admitted to the
fellowship of the Masters of the Bench; they were allowed to dine at the
Bench table, to be as it were honorary members of the society, but were
freed from the ordinary exercises and regulations of the house, and had
at the same time no voice in the government thereof.

The conversion of the chief house of the most holy order of the Temple
of Solomon in England into a law university, was brought about in the
following manner.

Both before, and for a very considerable period after, the Norman
conquest, the study of the law was confined to the ecclesiastics, who
engrossed all the learning and knowledge of the age. <span
id="fr_574"></span>[†](#fn_574.md) In the reign of king Stephen, the
foreign clergy who had flocked over after the conquest, attempted to
introduce the ancient civil law of Rome into this country, as calculated
to promote the power and advantage of their order, but were resolutely
resisted by the king and the barons, who clung to their old customs and
usages. The new law, however, was introduced into all the ecclesiastical
courts, and the clergy began to abandon the municipal tribunals, and
discontinue the study of the common law. Early in the reign of Henry the
Third, episcopal constitutions

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

were published by the bishop of Salisbury, forbidding clerks and priests
to practise as advocates in the common law courts. (*Nec advocati sint
clerici vel sacerdotes in foro sæculari, nisi vel proprias causas vel
miserabilium personarum prosequantur*. <span
id="fr_575"></span>[\*](#fn_575).md) Towards the close of the same reign,
(A.D. 1254,) Pope Innocent IV. forbade the reading of the common law by
the clergy in the English universities and seminaries of learning,
because its decrees were not founded on the *imperial constitutions*,
but merely on the *customs of the laity*. <span
id="fr_576"></span>[†](#fn_576.md)

As the common law consequently gradually ceased to be studied and taught
by the clergy, who were the great depositaries of legal learning, as of
all other knowledge in those days, it became necessary to educate and
train up a body of laymen to transact the judicial business of the
country; and Edward the First, who, from his many legal reforms and
improvements, has been styled "the English Justinian," made the practice
of the common law a distinct profession.

In antient times the Court of *Common Pleas* had the exclusive
administration of the *common law*, and settled and decided all the
disputes which arose between *subject* and *subject;* and in the
twentieth year of the reign of Edward the First, (A.D. 1232,) the
privilege of pleading causes in this court was confined to a certain
number of learned persons appointed by authority. By an order in
council, the king commanded John de Metingham, chief justice of the
Court of Common Pleas, and the rest of his fellow justices, that they,
according to their discretions, should provide

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

and ordain from every county a certain number of attorneys and
apprentices of the law, of the best and most apt for their learning and
skill, to do service to his court and people, and those so chosen should
follow his court and transact the affairs therein, and no others; the
king and his council deeming the number of fourscore to be sufficient
for that employment; but it was left to the discretion of the said
justices to add to that number, or to diminish it, as they should think
fit. <span id="fr_577"></span>[\*](#fn_577.md)

At this period the Court of Common Pleas had been fixed at Westminster,
which brought together the professors of the common law at London; and
about the period of the dissolution of the order of the Temple, a
society appears to have been in progress of formation, under the
sanction of the judges, for the education of a body of learned secular
lawyers to attend upon that court. The deserted convent of the Knights
Templars, seated in the suburb of London, away from the noise and bustle
of the city, and presenting a ready and easy access by water to
Westminster, was a desirable retreat for the learned members of this
infant legal society; and we accordingly find, that very soon after the
dissolution of the religio-military order of Knights Templars, the
professors of the common law of England mustered in considerable
strength in the Temple.

In the sixth year of the reign of Edward the Third, (A.D. 1333,) when
the lawyers had just established themselves in the convent of the
Temple, and had engrafted upon the old stock of Knights Templars their
infant society for the study of the practice of the common law, the
judges of the Court of Common Pleas were made KNIGHTS, <span
id="fr_578"></span>[†](#fn_578.md) being the earliest instance on record

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

of the grant of the honour of knighthood for services purely civil, and
the professors of the common law, who had the exclusive privilege of
practising in that court, assumed the title or degree of FRERES SERJENS
or FRATRES SERVIENTES, so that knights and serving-brethren, similar to
those of the antient order of the Temple, were most curiously revived
and introduced into the profession of the law.

It is true that the word *serviens*, *serjen*, or serjeant, was applied
to the professors of the law long before the reign of Edward the Third,
but not to denote a *privileged brotherhood*. It was applied to lawyers
in common with all persons who did any description of work for another,
from the *serviens domini regis [ad](errata.htm#11.md) legem*, who
prosecuted the pleas of the crown in the county court, to the *serviens*
or *serjen* who walked with his cane before the concubine of the
Patriarch in the streets of Jerusalem. <span
id="fr_579"></span>[\*](#fn_579.md) The priest who worked for the Lord was
called *serjens de Dieu*, and the lover who served the lady of his
affections *serjens d’amour*. <span id="fr_580"></span>[\*](#fn_579.md) It
was in the order of the Temple that the word *freres* serjens or
*fratres* servientes signified an honorary title or degree, and denoted
a powerful privileged class of men. The *fratres servientes armigeri* or
*freres serjens des armes*, of the chivalry of the Temple, were of the
rank of gentlemen. They united in their own persons the monastic and the
military character, they were allotted one horse each, they wore the red
cross of the order of the Temple on their breasts, <span
id="fr_581"></span>[†](#fn_580.md) they participated in all the privileges
of the brotherhood, and were eligible to the dignity of Preceptor. Large
sums of money were frequently given by [seculars](errata.htm#12.md) who had
not been advanced to the honour of knighthood,

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

to be admitted amongst this highly-esteemed order of men.

The *freres serjens* of the Temple wore linen *coifs*, and red caps
close over them. <span id="fr_582"></span>[\*](#fn_581.md) At the ceremony
of their admission into the fraternity, the Master of the Temple placed
the coif upon their heads, and threw over their shoulders the white
mantle of the Temple; he then caused them to sit down on the ground, and
gave them a solemn admonition concerning the duties and responsibilities
of their profession. <span id="fr_583"></span>[†](#fn_582.md) They were
warned that they must enter upon a new life, that they must keep
themselves fair and free from stain, like the white garment that had
been thrown around them, which was the emblem of purity and innocence;
that they must render complete and perfect obedience to their superiors;
that they must protect the weak, succour the needy, reverence old men,
and do good to the poor.

The knights and serjeants of the common law, on the other hand, have
ever constituted a privileged *fraternity*, and always address one
another by the endearing term *brother*. The religious character of the
antient ceremony of admission into this legal brotherhood, which took
place in church, and its striking similarity to the antient mode of
reception into the fraternity of the Temple, are curious and remarkable.

"Capitalis Justitiarius," says an antient MS. account of the creation of
serjeants-at-law in the reign of Henry the Seventh, "monstrabat eis
plura bona exempla de eorum prædecessoribus, et tunc posuit les
*coyfes* <span id="fr_584"></span>[‡](#fn_583.md) super eorum capitibus, et
induebat eos

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

singulariter de capital de skarletto, et sic creati fuerunt *servientes
ad legem*." In his admonitory exhortation, the chief justice displays to
them the moral and religious duties of their profession. "Ambulate in
vocatione in quâ vocati estis. . . . Disce cultum Dei, *reverentiam
superioris* (!), *misericordiam pauperi*." He tells them the coif is
sicut vestis *candida* et immaculata, the emblem of purity and virtue,
and he commences a portion of his discourse in the scriptural language
used by the popes in the famous bull conceding to the Templars their
vast spiritual and temporal privileges, "*Omne datum optimum et omne
donum perfectum desursum est descendens a patre luminum, &c. &c.!* <span
id="fr_585"></span>[\*](#fn_584.md)

The *freres serjens* of the Temple were strictly enjoined to "eat their
bread in silence," and "place a watch upon their mouths," and the
*freres serjens* of the law, we are told, after their admission, did
"dyne together with sober countenance and lytel communycacion."

The common-law lawyers, after their location in the Temple, continued
rapidly to increase, and between the reigns of Richard the Second and
Henry the Sixth, they divided themselves into two bodies. "In the raigne
of king Henry the Sixth," says the MS. account of the Temple, written
"Charles the First," they were soe multiplied and grown into soe great a
bulke as could not conveniently be regulated into one society, nor
indeed was the

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

old hall capable of containing so great a number, whereupon they were
forced to divide themselves. A new hall was then erected which is now
the Junior Temple Hall, whereunto divers of those who before took their
repast and diet in the old hall resorted, and in process of time became
a distinct and divided society."

From the inquisition taken 10. E. III. A.D. 1337, it appears that in the
time of the Knights Templars there were *two halls* in the Temple, so
that it is not likely that a fresh one was built. One of these halls,
the present Inner Temple Hall, had been assigned, the year previous to
the taking of that inquisition, to the prior and brethren of the
Hospital of Saint John, together with the church, cloisters, &c., as
before mentioned, whilst the other hall remained in the hands of the
crown, and was not granted to the Hospitallers until 13 E. III. A.D.
1340. It was probably soon after this period that the Hospitaliers
conceded the use of *both halls* to the professors of the law, and these
last, from dining apart and being attached to different halls, at last
separated into two societies, as at present.

"Although there be two several societies, yet in sundry places they are
promiscuously lodged together without any metes or bounds to distinguish
them, and the ground rooms in some places belong to the new house, and
the upper rooms to the old one, a manifest argument that both made at
first but one house, nor did they either before or after this division
claim by several leases, but by one entire grant. And as they took their
diet apart, so likewise were they stationed apart in the church, viz.
those of the Middle Temple on the left hand side as you go therein, and
those of the old house on the right hand side, and so it remains between
them at this day." <span id="fr_586"></span>[\*](#fn_585.md)

Burton, the antiquary, who wrote in the reign of queen Elizabeth, speaks
of this "old house" (the Inner Temple) as "the

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

mother and most antient of all the other houses of courts, to which,"
says he, "I must acknowledge all due respect, being a fellow thereof,
admitted into the same society on the 20th of May, 1593." <span
id="fr_587"></span>[\*](#fn_586.md) The two societies of the Temple are of
*equal antiquity;* the members in the first instance dined together in
one or other of the antient halls of the Templars as it suited their
convenience and inclination; and to this day, in memory of the old
custom, the benchers or antients of the one society dine once every year
in the hall of the other society. The period of the division has been
generally referred to the commencement of the reign of Henry the Sixth,
as at the close of that long reign the present four Inns of Court were
all in [existence](errata.htm#13.md), and then contained about two thousand
students. The Court of King's Bench, the Court of Exchequer, and the
Court of Chancery, had then encroached upon the jurisdiction of the
Common Pleas, and had taken cognizance of civil causes between subject
and subject, which were formerly decided in that court alone. <span
id="fr_588"></span>[†](#fn_587.md) The legal business of the country had
consequently greatly increased, the profession of the law became highly
honourable, and the gentry and the nobility considered the study of it a
necessary part of education.

Sir John Fortescue, who was chief justice of the King's Bench during
half the reign of Henry the Sixth, in his famous discourse *de laudibus
legum Angliæ*, tells us that in his time the annual expenses of each
law-student amounted to more than 28*l*., (equal to

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

about 450*l*. of our present money.) that all the students of the law
were gentlemen by birth and fortune, and had great regard for their
character and honour; that in each Inn of Court there was an academy or
*gymnasium*, where singing, music, and dancing, and a variety of
accomplishments, were taught. Law was studied at stated periods, and on
festival days: after the offices of the church were over, the students
employed themselves in the study of history, and in reading the Holy
Scriptures. Everything good and virtuous was there taught, vice was
discouraged and banished, so that knights, barons, and the greatest of
the nobility of the kingdom, placed their sons in the Temple and the
other Inns of Court; and not so much, he tells us, to make the law their
study, or to enable them to live by the profession, as to form their
manners and to preserve them from the contagion of vice. "Quarrelling,
insubordination, and murmuring, are unheard of; if a student dishonours
himself, he is expelled the society; a punishment which is dreaded more
than imprisonment and irons, for he who has been driven from one society
is never admitted into any of the others; whence it happens, that there
is a constant harmony amongst them, the greatest friendship, and a
general freedom of conversation."

The two societies of the Temple are now distinguished by the several
denominations of the Inner and the Middle Temple, names that appear to
have been adopted with reference to a part of the antient Temple, which,
in common with other property of the Knights Templars, never came into
the hands of the Hospitallers. After the lawyers of the Temple had
separated into two bodies and occupied distinct portions of ground, this
part came to be known by the name of the outward Temple, as being the
farthest away from the city, and is thus referred to in a manuscript in
the British Museum, written in the reign of James the First.--"A third
part, called *outward Temple*, was procured by

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

one Dr. Stapleton, bishop of Exeter, in the days of king Edward the
Second, for a residing mansion-house for him and his successors, bishops
of that see. It was called Exeter Inn until the reign of the late queen
Mary, when the lord Paget, her principal secretary of state, obtained
the said third part, called Exeter-house, to him and his heirs, and did
re-edify the same. After whom the said third part of the Templar's house
came to Thomas late duke of Norfolk, and was by him conveyed to Sir
Robert Dudley, knight, earl of Leicester, who bequeathed the same to Sir
Robert Dudley, knight, his son, and lastly, by purchase, came to Robert
late earl of Essex, who died in the reign of the late queen Elizabeth,
and is still called Essex-house." <span id="fr_589"></span>[\*](#fn_588.md)

When the lawyers came into the Temple, they found engraved upon the
antient buildings the armorial bearings of the Knights Templars, which
were, on a shield argent, a plain cross gules, and (*brochant sur le
tout*) the holy lamb bearing the banner of the order, surmounted by a
red cross. These arms remained the emblem of the Temple until the fifth
year of the reign of queen Elizabeth, when unfortunately the society of
the Inner Temple, yielding to the advice and persuasion of Master Gerard
Leigh, a member of the College of Heralds, abandoned the antient and
honourable device of the Knights Templars, and assumed in its place a
galloping winged horse called a Pegasus, or, as it has been explained to
us, "a horse striking the earth with its hoof, or *Pegasus luna on a
field argent!*" Master Gerard Leigh, we are told, "emblazoned them with
precious stones and planets, and by these strange arms he intended to
signify that the knowledge acquired at the learned seminary of the Inner
Temple would raise the professors of the law to the highest honours,
adding, by way of motto, *volat ad æthera virtus*, and he intended to
allude to what are esteemed the more liberal sciences, by giving them
Pegasus

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

forming the fountain of Hippocrene, by striking his hoof against the
rock, as a proper emblem of lawyers becoming poets, as Chaucer and
Gower, who were both of the Temple!"

The society of the Middle Temple, with better taste, still preserves, in
that part of the Temple over which its sway extends, the widely-renowned
and time-honoured badge of the antient order of the Temple.

The assumption of the prancing winged horse by the one society, and the
retention of the lamb by the other, have given rise to the following
witty lines--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"As thro’ the Templars' courts you go,  
  The lamb and horse displayed,  
The emblematic figures show  
  The merits of their trade.

That clients may infer from hence  
  How just is their profession;  
The lamb denotes their INNOCENCE,  
  The horse their EXPEDITION.

Oh, happy Britain! happy isle!  
  Let foreign nations say,  
Here you get justice without guile,  
  And law without delay."

            ANSWER.

"Unhappy man! those courts forego,  
  Nor trust such cunning elves,  
The artful emblems only show  
  Their *clients*, not *themselves*.

These all are tricks,  
These all are shams,  
  With which they mean to cheat ye,  
But have a care, for you're the LAMBS,  
  And they the wolves that eat ye. <span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

Nor let the plea of no delay  
  To these their courts misguide ye,  
For you're the PRANCING HORSE; and they  
  The jockeys that would ride you!"

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_541"></span>[344:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_541.md) P. 899, 900.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[345:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_542.md) ante, p. 255.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[347:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_543.md) *Joan
Sariaburiensis*. Polycrat. lib. vi. cap. 1.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[347:†](hkt15.htm#fr_544.md) Acta *Rymeri*, tom.
iii. p. 296, 297.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[347:‡](hkt15.htm#fr_545.md) (NOTE: *There is no
footnote reference for ‡ on this page--JBH*) Cart. vi. E. 2. n. 41.
*Trivet*. cont., p. 4. *T. de la More*, p. 593.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[348:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_546.md) Pat. 8. E. 2. in.
17. The Temple is described therein as "de feodo Thom æ Comitis
Lancastriæ, et de honore Leicestric."

<span id="fn_547"></span>[349:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_547.md) Processus contra
comitem Lancastriæ. Acta *Rymeri*, tom. iii. p. 936. *Lel*. coll. vol.
i. p. 668. *La More, Walsingham*.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[349:†](hkt15.htm#fr_548.md) Cart. 15. E. II. m.
21. Acta *Rymeri*, tom. iii. p. 940.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[350:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_549.md) Dugd. Baron., vol.
i. p. 777, 778.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[350:†](hkt15.htm#fr_550.md) Rot. Escaet. 1. E.
III.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[350:‡](hkt15.htm#fr_551.md) H. Knyghton, apud [X
script](errata.htm#9.md) col. 2546.7. *Lel*. Itin. vol. vi. p 86.
*Walsingham*, 106.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[350:§](hkt15.htm#fr_552.md) Claus. 4. E. III. m.
9. Acta *Rymeri*, tom. iv. p. 461.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[351:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_553.md) There was in those
days an *escheator* in each county, and in various large towns: it was
the duty of this officer to seize into the king's hands all lands held
*in capite* of the crown, on receiving a writ *De diem clausit
extremum*, commanding him to assemble a jury to take inquisition of the
value of the lands, as to who was the next heir of the deceased, the
rents and services by which they were holden, &c. &c.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[351:†](hkt15.htm#fr_554.md) Claus 3. E. III. in.
6. d. Acta *Rymeri*, tom. iv. p. 406.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[352:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_555.md) Claus. 4. E. III. m.
7. Acta *Rymeri*, tom. iv. p. 464.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[352:†](hkt15.htm#fr_556.md) Pat. 6. E. III. p. 2.
m. 22. in original, apud Rolls Garden ex parte Remembr. Thesaur.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[353:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_557.md) Rot. Escaet. 10. E.
3. 66. Claus 11 E. 3. p. 1. m. 10.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[354:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_558.md) Sunt etiam ibidem
claustrum, capella Sancti Thomæ, et quædam platea terræ eidem capellæ
annexata, cum *una aula* et camera supra edificata, quæ sunt loca
sancta, et Deo dedicata, et dictæ ecclesiæ annexata, et eidem Priori per
idem breve liberata . . . . Item dicunt, quod præter ista, sunt ibidem
in custodia Wilielmi de Langford infra Magnam Portam dicti Novi Templi,
*extra metas et disjunctions prædictas*, una *aula* et quatuor cameræ,
una coquina, unum gardinum, unum stabulum, et una camera ultra Magnam
Portam prædictam, &c.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[355:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_559.md) In memorandis Scacc.
inter recorda de Termino Sancti Hilarii, 11. E. 3. in officio
Remembratoris Thesaurarii.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[355:†](hkt15.htm#fr_560.md) Pat. 12. E. 3. p. 2.
m. 22. *Dugd*. Monasticon, vol. vii. p. 810, 811.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[355:‡](hkt15.htm#fr_561.md) Ex registr. Sancti
Johannis Jerus. fol. 141. a. *Dugd. Monast.*, tom. vi. part 2, p. 832.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[355:§](hkt15.htm#fr_562.md) Ibid. ad ann. 1341.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[356:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_563.md) Rex omnibus ad quota
&c. salutem. Sciatis quod de gratiâ nostrâ speciali, et pro bono
servitio quod Rogerus Small nobis impendit et impendat in futuro,
concessimus ei officium *Janitoris Novi Templi* London Habend. &c. pro
vitâ suâ &c. pertinend. &c. omnia vada et feoda &c. eodem modo qualia
Robertus Petyt defunct. Qui officium illud ex concessione domini Edwardi
nuper regis Angliæ patris nostri habuit . . . . Teste meipso apud
Westin. 5 die Aprilis, anno regni nostri 35. Pat. 35. E. 3. p. 2. m. 33.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[357:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_564.md) Prologue to the
Canterbury Tales. The wages of the Manciples of the Temple, temp. Hen.
VIII. were xxxvis. viiid. per annum. Bib. *Cotton*. Vitellius, c. 9. f.
320, a.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[357:†](hkt15.htm#fr_565.md) Annal. Olim-Sanctæ
Mariæ Ebor.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[358:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_566.md) *Walsing*. 4 Ric. 2.
ad ann. 1381. Hist. p. 249, ed. 1603.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[359:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_567.md) Rot. claus b. E. 2.
m. 19. Acta *Rymeri*, tom. iii. p. 292, 293, 294.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[359:†](hkt15.htm#fr_568.md) Unam robam per annum
de secta liberorum servientium, et quinque solidos per annum, et
deserviat quamdiu poterit loco liberi servientis in domo prædictâ. Ib.
m. 2. Acta *Rymeri*, tom. iii. p. 331, 332.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[359:‡](hkt15.htm#fr_569.md) Quolibet anno ad
Natale Domini unum vetus indumentum de veteribus indumentis fratrum, et
quolibet die 2 denarios pro victu garcionis sui, et 5 solidos per annum
per stipendiis ejusdem garcionis, sed idem garcio deserviet in domo
illâ. Ib.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[360:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_570.md) Thomas of Wothrope,
at the trial of the Templars in England, was unable to give an account
of the reception of some brethren into the order, quia erat *panetarius*
et vacabat circa suum officium. *Concil. Mag. Brit.*, tom. ii. p. 355.
Tunc panetarius mittat comiti duos panes atque vini sextarium . . . Ita
appellabant officialem domesticum, qui mensæ panem, mappas et manutergia
subministrabat. *Ducange*, Gloss. verb. panetarius.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[360:†](hkt15.htm#fr_571.md) *Regula
Templariorum*, cap. lxvii. ante p. 25.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[360:‡](hkt15.htm#fr_572.md) *Concil. Mag. Brit.*,
tom. ii. p. 371 to 373, ante, p. 235.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[361:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_573.md) *Dugd*. Orig.
Jurid., p. 212.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[361:†](hkt15.htm#fr_574.md) Nullus clericus nisi
causidicus. Will. Malm., lib. iv. f. 69. *Radulph de Diceto*, apud Hist.
Angl. Script. Antiq., lib. vii. col. 606, from whom it appears that the
chief justitiary and justices itinerant were all *priests*.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[362:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_575.md) *Spelm*. Concil.,
tom. ii. ad ann. 1217.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[362:†](hkt15.htm#fr_576.md) INNOCENTIUS, &c. . .
. Præterea cum in Angliæ, Scotiæ, Walliæ regnis, causæ laicorum non
imperatoriis legibus, sed laicorum consuetudinibus decidantur, fratrum
nostrorum, et aliorum religiosorum consilio et rogatu, statuimus quod in
prædictis regnis *leges* [*sæculares*](errata.htm#10.md) de cætero non
legantur. *Matt. Par.*, p. 883, ad ann. 1254, et in additamentis, p.
191.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[363:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_577.md) Et quod ipsi quos ad
hoc elegerint, curiam sequantur, et se de negotiis in eadem curia
intromittant, et *alii non*. Et videtur regi et ejus concilio, quod
septies vigenti sufficere poterint, &c.--*Rolls of Parl.* 20. E. 1. vol.
i. p. 84, No. 22.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[363:†](hkt15.htm#fr_578.md) *Dugd*. Orig. Jurid.,
cap. xxxix. p. 102.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[364:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_580.md) Ante, [p.
118](hkt08.htm#page_118.md). Mace-bearers, bell-ringers, thief-takers,
gaolers, bailiffs, public executioners, and all persons who performed a
specific task for another, were called servientes, serjens, or
serjeants.--Ducange Gloss. *Pasquier's* Researches, liv. viii. cap. 19.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[364:†](hkt15.htm#fr_581.md) *Will. Tyr.*, lib. i.
p. 50, lib. xii. p. 814.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[365:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_582.md) *Dugd*. Hist.
Warwickshire, p. 704.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[365:†](hkt15.htm#fr_583.md) Et tunc Magister
Templi dedit sibi mantellum, et imposuit pileum capiti suo, et tunc
fecit eum sedere ad terram, injungens sibi, &c.--*Acta contra
Templarios*. *Concil. Mag. Brit.*, tom. ii. p. 380. See also p. 335.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[365:‡](hkt15.htm#fr_584.md) It has been supposed
that the coif was first introduced by the clerical practitioners of the
common law to hide the *tonsure* of those priests who practised in the
Court of Common Pleas, notwithstanding the ecclesiastical prohibition.
This was not the case. <span id="page_366">p. 366</span> The early
portraits of our judges exhibit them with a coif of very much larger
dimensions than the coifs now worn by the serjeants-at-law, very much
larger than would be necessary to hide the *mere clerical tonsure*. A
covering for that purpose indeed would be absurd. The antient coifs of
the serjeants-at-law were small linen or silk cape fitting close to the
top of the head. This peculiar covering is worn universally in the East,
where the people shave their heads and cut their hair close. It was
imported into Europe by the Knights Templars, and became a
distinguishing badge of their order. From the *freres serjens* of the
Temple it passed to the *freres serjens* of the law.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[366:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_585.md) Ex cod. MS. apud
sub-thesaurarium Hosp. Medii Templi, f. 4. a. Dugd. Orig. Jurid. cap.
43, 46.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[367:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_586.md) MS. in Bib. Int.
Temp. No. 17. fo. 408.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[368:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_587.md) Burton's
Leicestershire, p. 235.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[368:†](hkt15.htm#fr_588.md) After the courts of
King's Bench and Exchequer had by a fiction of law drawn to themselves a
vast portion of the civil business originally transacted in the Common
Pleas alone, the degree of serjeant-at-law, with its exclusive privilege
of practising in the last-named court, was not sought after as before.
The advocates or banisters of the [King's](errata.htm#14.md) Bench and
Exchequer were, consequently, at different times, commanded by writ to
take upon them the degree of the *coif*, and transfer their practice to
the Common Pleas.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[370:\*](hkt15.htm#fr_589.md) *Malcom*. Lond.
Rediviv., vol. ii. p. 282.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](hkt16.md)

</div>
