<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pi04)  [Next](pi06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0804005990/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pale Ink*, by Henriette Mertz, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

### CHAPTER III

### Chinese Whimsy?

Hwui SHAN was a mendicant Buddhist Priest, so the Classics tell us, a
Pi-k’iu (or the Sanskrit, Bhikshu), who was in China in 499 A.D. and who
told a story at Court of having been to a far country 20,000 LI east of
the Great Han Country—the Great Han Country was said to be 20,000 LI
east of China. There is no mention in this specific account of Hwui
Shan's journey as to how he got there, how he got back to China, how
long he was away or where he came from originally. Since there is none
in this account, we propose to confine ourselves to that which is
contained within his own words.

Boiling down Hwui Shan's account, we learn that he had established
contact with a people some 40,000 LI or 13,000 miles distant, to the
east, having a high degree of civilization. These people had a writing;
woven clothing; some kind of paper; they had a valuable tree or plant
that had a pear-shaped fruit, reddish in color, that was edible, that
was preserved without spoiling, and that looked like bamboo shoots—the
country derived its name from this plant. The people built houses but
their cities had no walls. They had no weapons and did not fight. They
had some system of law and order as criminals were punished according to
an established principle. They had a ruler who was the "Chief of the
Multitudes" and lesser nobles called "Tui-lu." Every second year the
ruler changed the color of his garments. Cattle were domesticated;
koumiss was made from milk and grapes were cultivated. The country
contained gold, silver and copper, but no iron. They had formal marriage
and burial customs. In 458 A.D., five Buddhist priests, from Kabul, went
to this country and taught the people their religion.

The Kingdom of Women added to this, the fact that approximately 350
miles east of Fu-sang another kind of people were found. They were light
in color, neat and clean, with long hair. At the second month, the women
became pregnant and at the sixth or seventh month, the child was born.
The baby was nursed from the hair at the back of the mother's neck; it
could

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

walk in a little over three months; and, at three or four years, became
adult. The women had great respect for their husbands. They ate some
species of fragrant salt plant and also little beans or kernels. The
women looked like those of China but the men, while they had human
bodies, had the heads of dogs and they made the sound of dogs. Their
houses were made of adobe, were circular in shape and had entrances that
looked like burrows. In 507 A.D., some men from Tsin-ngan were blown
across the sea to this unknown coast and they could not understand the
language of the people.

The Classics contain other sections that relate to this story, or
portions of it, some elaborated and others quite detailed—a few
contribute highly significant descriptive matter. They all refer by name
to Fu-sang or the Kingdom of Women. Other Chinese literature, as well as
poetry, anterior to Hwui Shan, peculiarly enough, also contains
reference to Fu-sang.

In the year 499 A.D., when Hwui Shan was supposed to have returned to
China, China was embroiled in a series of bitter civil wars. The Ts‘i
Dynasty, which was then in power, was overthrown within the next year or
two, and, by 502 A.D., the Liang Dynasty, under the Emperor Wu-ti,
emerged. Buddhism, which had had a foothold in China sometime earlier
but had been banished under the Ts‘i Dynasty, was, under the Emperor
Wu-ti, revived. The Emperor was a devout follower of the Buddha, having
for a period of time retired to a Buddhist monastery. Under this
unusually favorable protective covering, Hwui Shan found a sympathetic
ear at Court.

As would be normal, when a new Emperor succeeded to the throne,
governors of the provinces, or those holding offices of state under the
Emperor, came to pay tribute. Just so when Wu-ti ascended, there came
four Princes, or feudal lords, to the Court, to pay their respects. It
so happened that these princes were present at the same time that Hwui
Shan was there and, one of them, Yu-Kie, was charged by the Emperor to
question him and to write down his answers. This writing, which has also
been preserved, is called the Liang-Sse-Kong-Ki, or the memoirs of the
Four Lords of the Liang Dynasty.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

Yu-Kie, the [inquisitor](errata.htm#11), appears to have been something
of a wit. While he wrote down the answers that Hwui Shan gave, he
inserted little touches of extravagancy of his own. The story was a
perfect foil for his sense of humor and, being unable to resist, he spun
yarns by the hour for the benefit of the courtiers. In spite of these
far-flung stretches of imagination on the part of Yu-Kie, his account
both adds tremendously to the preceding information and, in a sense,
corroborates it.

From Yu-Kie's account, we learn that Fu-sang was at the extreme east.
About 10,000 LI (3,000 miles) northwest was the Kingdom of Women. The
women there took serpents for husbands; they lived in holes; they had no
books; they believed in certain forms of prayers; the women were very
moral and those who strayed from the straight and narrow were instantly
punished. Then Yu-Kie wrote: "At a great distance to the south of this
country is the mountain Yen-kuen (a smoking or burning mountain) the
inhabitants of which eat locusts, crabs and hairy serpents to preserve
themselves from heat. Upon the summit of this mountain there live fire
rats—weasels or squirrels—the hair of which serves for the fabrication
of an incombustible material which is cleansed by fire instead of water.
To the north, at a great distance, of this Kingdom of Women, is a Black
Gorge or Valley, and north of the Black Gorge are mountains so high that
they reach to the heavens and are snow-covered all year. The sun does
not show itself there at all. It is there, it is said, that the Luminous
Dragon resides. At a great distance to the west of the Kingdom of Women,
is a fountain that has the taste of wine. In this region, there is also
found a Sea of Varnish of which the waves dye black the feathers and
furs that are dipped in them, and not too far, another sea the color of
milk. The territory surrounded by these natural marvels is of great
extent and extremely fertile. Dogs, ducks and horses of great height
live in it, and, finally, birds which produce human beings. The males
born of these birds do not live. The daughters only are raised with care
by their fathers, who carry them with their beaks or upon their wings.
As soon as they commence to walk, they become mistresses of themselves.
They are all of

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

remarkable beauty and very hospitable, but they die before reaching the
age of thirty years. The rabbits of this country are white and as large
as horses, their hair being a foot long. The sables are as large as
wolves. Their hair is black and of extraordinary thickness."

The Marquis d’Hervey de Saint-Denys, whose translation of the
Liang-Sse-Kong-Ki this has followed, then translates: "The attendants of
the Court were much amused at these stories. They all laughed and
clapped their hands, and said that better stories had never been told."

He further translates: "A minister of the Emperor, named Wang-Yun,
interrupted Yu-Kie with this bantering objection: 'If we believe the
official accounts which have been collected regarding the 'Kingdom of
Women', situated to the west of the country Tsan-yai and to the south of
the Kingdom of Dogs, it is merely inhabited by barbarians who have a
woman as their sovereign; but there has never been any question of
serpents filling the office of husbands. How do you account for that?'
Yu-Kie responded with pleasantry with a new explosion of
[extravagances](errata.htm#12), in the midst of which there appeared
here and there a true idea, burlesqued for diversion."

The Marquis d’Hervey himself, most significantly, commented on the above
passage saying: "This curious fragment shows that the Chinese of the
Sixth Century were not as credulous as might be believed; that they knew
how to distinguish between the true and the improbable; and that the
extravagancies of their story-tellers, at which they were the first to
laugh, does not diminish the merit of the writers that they respected."
The scholarly Marquis, from this it will be noted, was ready to laugh
along with the Chinese.

As a record of an extended journey, it must be conceded that Hwui Shan's
account as it comes to us now, is distressingly short. Early Chinese
writings, from our vantage point, are clipped to barest verbal
necessities and set down only the most essential words. Twice after this
account was written, the Annals of China were condensed. Much that had
been written was eliminated and Hwui Shan's story was no exception. If
we had

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

his complete report, many questions that arise no doubt would have been
answered. That is apparent from the account in the memoirs of the Four
Lords, as set down by Yu-Kie. Details, left out of Hwui Shan's own
report, spoke of the "smoking mountain to the south of the Kingdom of
Women; the Black Gorge to the north, having snow-capped peaks to the
north of it; the sweet-tasting water in the fountain to the west where
there was a Sea of Varnish and one the color of milk." Yu-Kie set down
these things as answers to the questions which he had put to Hwui Shan.
The women of the Kingdom had serpents for husbands and they lived
underground. They did not know how to write, they had no books—but they
had a form of religious worship.

Hwui Shan's own recording stated that the Kingdom of Women was about 350
miles inland, to the east, from the coast, which presumably would be 350
miles inland from where he landed. He told us that the males of this
Kingdom had dog's heads; that the people had no writing—yet, in Fu-sang,
he stated that they had a writing. Yu-Kie, in recording the account as
he got it from Hwui Shan, told us that the Kingdom of Women was 3,000
miles northwest of Fu-sang; that the men were serpents; and that the
people had no books. If the people of Fu-sang could read and write, and
the people of the Kingdom of Women could not, it could reasonably be
presumed that they would be some distance apart since no trace of a
writing seeped through. Hwui Shan located the Kingdom of Women 350 miles
eastward from the coast where he landed and Yu-Kie located it, from Hwui
Shan's oral discussion, as being approximately 3,000 miles northwest of
where he found the people with a writing. If the two unrelated groups
were 3,000 miles apart, the ability to write on the part of one, and the
lack of it on the part of the other, would be understandable. Dog's
heads with male bodies appeared as husbands in one account while
serpents filled the office in the other. Hwui Shan probably related
both—that he saw dog's heads and that he saw serpents, for we have
evidence of both.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

Since Yu-Kie was not himself in this strange country and had knowledge
of it solely from Hwui Shan, and since Yu-Kie has given natural
phenomena to the north, south and west of the Kingdom of Women, of which
Hwui Shan's account itself is silent, Hwui Shan, then, it stands to
reason, must have written down far more than we now have and likewise
must have given rather extensive oral accounts.

If there is any truth in these two accounts from the Classics, that
which Hwui Shan set down himself and that from the Liang-Sse-Kong-Ki,
which Yu-Kie wrote down after interrogating Hwui Shan, then, as in the
case of the document recorded by Yu in 2250 B.C., the Shan Hai King,
this account can be located geographically, if it exists.

In this instance, we are told that approximately 13,000 miles east from
China, one arrived at Fu-sang. Due east, at approximately 350 miles, was
the Kingdom of Women. In addition, approximately 3,000 miles northwest
of Yu-Kie's Fu-sang was the Kingdom of Women. The Kingdom of Women would
therefore lie 350 miles east of the Fu-sang on the west coast and 3,000
miles northwest of the Fu-sang described by Yu-Kie.

From a fixed point in the area, where the Kingdom of Women was
supposedly located, a Black Gorge would be found at some distance north,
beyond which were snow-capped mountains reaching to the heavens; to the
south of this Kingdom of Women, was a smoking mountain where the
inhabitants ate crabs, locusts and hairy bugs; to the west was a
fountain, or spring, having pleasant-tasting water and, to the west of
it was a sea of varnish and close by another sea the color of milk. The
area was said to be extremely fertile, of great extent and giant horses
and birds would be found there.

This account, as in that of Yu some 2700 years earlier, indicates that
the story-teller had been someplace. While the tale may have been
colored and condensed, which no doubt it was, and what fragmentary bits
we have to work with may be very imperfect, yet, that which is written
indicates basically an eyewitness account—not wholly a figment of
imagination, even with Yu-Kie's added whimsies.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

By a process of elimination, provided the places exist, we should be
able to trace the path of the vagabonding fifth century Buddhist priest.

If we start out following his trail, could we travel eastward from China
some 13,000 miles and reach a coast? Could we go inland from there 350
miles? If we could, would we be able to locate at some distance north
from the spot 350 miles inland, a black canyon or gorge? Would we be
able to locate a place to the west that had a wine-like flavored spring,
and farther west, a "sea of varnish" with another sea not too far away
the color of milk? Are we able to identify a smoking mountain at a great
distance to the south where the people ate crabs? Then would we be able
to travel approximately 3,000 miles northwesterly and still be on land?
If so, would there be a possibility that, on this spot 3,000 miles to
the northwest, we would find a cultured people? Do land and water masses
exist that would not be inconsistent with such a description and make it
within the realm of probability?

We have no means of knowing the starting point in China from which the
measurement originated. Neither do we know whether the measurement
followed the Asiatic coast as far north as Bering Strait and then came
down the Alaskan coast, or whether the journey lay easterly from
Kamchatka, following the Kamchatka Current, along the Aleutians and on
down. Either one way or the other, some land mass would exist on the
other side of China, to the east. If the beginning of their tabulation
started in the south of China, which is the place where the story was
told, then an approximation of 13,000 miles might well have taken the
Buddhist priest as far south as the southern coast of California. There
is no positive way in which we can affirm or deny the precise spot. The
French, who studied the matter, came to the conclusion that it must be
close to San Francisco.

If Hwui Shan landed on the coast, in the vicinity of Los Angeles, which,
in my opinion, approximately fixes the place, would he have been able to
travel 350 miles inland, and, if so, would he have found a people there
in 458-500 B.C.? If so, what would these people be like? If he stood on
this spot, 350

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

miles inland, would he have been able to have found all of the natural
marvels such as the Black Gorge, the Sea of Varnish or the smoking
mountain?

If we have tentatively located Fu-sang as being on the southern coast of
California, according to Hwui Shan's account, and then went 350 miles
inland, to the Kingdom of Women, it would be possible. On the other
hand, using Yu-Kie's mileage and directions, if we placed ourselves on
the southern California coast and travelled 3,000 miles northwest from
his Fu-sang, we would be adrift in the north Pacific. The accounts do
not tally. Either there must be two different places called Fu-sang or
two different ones called the Kingdom of Women—or else the area is
extensive and the focal points are not the same.

Taking the original landing point from Hwui Shan's own account, and
travelling east 350 miles—fixing that point and using it as a center,
then reversing our directions, we could go back west again those 350
miles from the Kingdom of Women to Fu-sang. If the center, as fixed, is
the center of the Kingdom of Women, we might continue in reverse
direction and go backward from the Kingdom of Women 3,000 miles to
Yu-Kie's Fu-sang. If we did that, would we be anywhere? The answer then
is obvious. We would be.

Reasoning through on that premise, the epicenter of the Kingdom of Women
would be identical in both accounts, but Fu-sang would not. The only
conclusion that could be reached is that, in the one account, Fu-sang
related to an extensive territory while the other related to an apparent
center of it. As an example, today, when we refer to "Mexico," we mean
the entire country. When a Mexican says "Mexico," he refers only to his
capitol city. Fu-sang seems to fall in a like category. Hwui Shan must
have used the name to designate the entire territory that he
visited—while Yu-Kie used it to describe the center of a culture. On
that supposition, the two accounts would reconcile and be accurate and,
at the same time, both could be located geographically.

If, then, these places exist where Hwui Shan has located them, we should
be able to put our finger on them. Distance

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

must be considered as an approximation and not
[callipered](errata.htm#13) down to an absolute mile, since mileage has
been given in general terms—1,000 LI or 40,000 LI not 1,268 LI nor
39,754 LI. Again, Hwui Shan's story was not told to the Emperor until
three years after his return to China; a civil war intervened; and a
period of time elapsed from the time he left Fu-sang until the day when
he returned to China. In all fairness, we must give Hwui Shan some small
margin of latitude for any lapse that might have occurred, due to the
time element, plus the variations that Yu-Kie is known to have
contributed, and the two condensations known to have taken place. This
story, although fine-tooth-combed but not solved, is one of the world's
most intriguing riddles.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Kuen 327 and the Liang-Sse-Kong Ki](pi06)

</div>
