<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pi14)  [Next](pi16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0804005990/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pale Ink*, by Henriette Mertz, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

### CHAPTER XIII

### Across the Sea

The Fourth Book of the Classic of Mountains and Seas, entitled "The
Classic of the Eastern Mountains," is divided into four sections—other
than that each pertains to the "Eastern Mountains" no one of the four
sections is related to any one of the others.

The first section of the Fourth Book, identified a range of mountains
approximately 1200 miles in extent, running due north and south. Twelve
peaks have been named, each having a river flowing in an easterly
direction—northeast, east or southeast. The second section climbed over
mountainous territory for 2200 miles, also due north and south. The
third section took a water course, due north and south for approximately
2000 miles. The fourth section was short, starting at the "North Sea"
and travelling south and east.

There may be some indication in the untranslated portions that I do not
have, that told how the Chinese got across the Eastern Sea to the
Eastern Mountains. Since it is not available, to decide independently
how they got there, would only be pulling a conclusion out of thin air.
Therefore, with no apology, we shall jump across and only try to solve
the geographical problems that we actually have.

The first identification of a mountain range that was described in the
Classics, Book Four, Section 1, appeared that it might be the Cascades
or Sierras, since they were coastal and fulfilled the requirement in
that they ran north and south for more than 1200 miles. All rivers on
the coastal range, however, emptied into the Pacific—to the west. The
Cascades and Sierras, therefore, had to be eliminated—the rivers ran in
the wrong direction. The Andes were then considered as a possibility, as
that great range, extending north and south, had all major rivers
flowing easterly to the Atlantic. The eastern slope of the Andes is one
tremendous rain-forest. One of the items in the Classics stated that the
recorder travelled for a time over shifting sand—there was no shifting
sand on the eastern slope of the Andean

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

range; that range was then eliminated. The only remaining range of great
extent would be the Rockies. There, rivers did flow in an easterly
direction—into the Mississippi basin.

The opening sentence of the section started out by saying that "Suh-Chu
Mountain" on its northern side adjoined the "Sunless Mountain" and that
drinkable water was found in a river flowing northeasterly. I chased up
and down a dozen or more times on my map, from Canada to Mexico, and
each time examined every peak without even a flicker of a clue. Being
unable to locate "Suh-Chu Mountain" or the good drinking water, I
finally passed it over. The second peak had to be passed over for the
same reason. The third one "rang a bell." The Chinese had named it
"Aspen Mountain." "Aspen," to me, meant only one thing—Estes Park,
Colorado. Taking a chance that the third peak was somewhere in Colorado,
I pinpointed it there. From that point, I worked both forward and
backward. Going backward to peak number one, "Suh-Chu Mountain," I found
myself looking at Sweetwater River, in Wyoming, flowing northeast—good
drinking water. Working my way down the map, the shifting sand, the sand
that had eliminated the Andean range, was found precisely on the spot
where the Chinese had placed it—and today, we have commemorated that
spot, unknowingly insofar as the Chinese were concerned, with our Great
Sand Dunes National Monument. From then on, peak after peak tallied. It
seemed unbelievable at first—but it worked. If the first one worked, the
others would have to do so.

In a few spots, winding through Tennessee Pass, Berthoud Pass, Rabbit's
Ear Pass or Fall River Pass, mileage is about twenty miles short. But,
in 1200 miles, a few minor errors of 4000 years ago can be forgiven,
particularly if one knows that frightfully rugged terrain.

When one considers the difficulties and dangers of conquering one
mountain peak and then can form a mental picture of himself trekking
down 2200 miles over 17 peaks, on the very crest of the Continental
Divide, from Manitoba to Mazatlan, some small appreciation of the
seemingly [insurmountable](errata.htm#40) task will be understood. We
can do no more than to stand with

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

bowed heads before the intrepid Chinese who mapped those jagged
snow-capped peaks over 4000 years ago.

That their record has survived until today is, likewise, one of those
peculiar turns of fate that make the reality of it stranger than
fiction.

 

#### THE CLASSIC OF MOUNTAINS AND SEAS <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

##### *Fourth Book*

###### THE CLASSIC OF THE EASTERN MOUNTAINS

1\. The beginning of the "Classic of the Eastern Mountains" says that
SUH-CHU Mountain on its northern side adjoins KAN-MEI Mountain (or
Sunless Mountain). SHIH River (or "drinkable water") is found here, a
stream that flows northeasterly into the sea. In it there are many water
animals called YUNG-YUNG. These look like brindled cattle \[i.e., they
resemble cattle that are striped like tigers.\] . Their voices sound
like the grunting of swine.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: A peak (5930 ft.) twenty miles due west of
Casper, Wyoming, appears to be SUH-CHU Mountain. On its northern side,
it adjoins the Big Horn Range. SHIH River (or drinkable water) is the
Sweetwater River which here joins the North Platte and flows
northeasterly, eventually into the Mississippi and the sea. The animals,
which in color are like brindled cattle, are probably beaver or
otter.</span>

</div>

2\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, LEI Mountain (or
the Mountain of Creeping Plants) is to be found. Upon this there are
gems and below it there is gold. Hu River is found here, stream that
flows easterly into SHIN River. In this there are many HWOH-SHI. \[These
are tadpoles; the book entitled the RH’-YA calls them HWOH-TUNG.\]

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Three hundred LI is approximately equivalent
to</span>

</div>

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span id="img_11100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Book 4 Sec.
1](tn/11100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11100.jpg)  
Book 4 Sec. 1  
</span>

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">one hundred miles—a Chinese LI is just a fraction
under one-third of a statute mile. One hundred miles due south, Medicine
Bow Peak (12005 feet) is found. Gold and semi-precious gems are
plentiful in the area. The Hu River is a small tributary flowing down
the eastern slope of Medicine Bow Peak emptying into the Laramie which
flows easterly into the North Platte.</span>

</div>

3\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, KEU-CHWANG Mountain
(or Aspen Mountain) is to be found. Upon this there are many gems and
much gold, and below it many green jade stones. Wild animals are found
there which look like dogs with six legs. These are called
TS’UNG-TS’UNG, the name being given them in imitation of their cry.
Birds are also found there which look like domestic fowls, but which
have hair like a rat. These are called TSZ’ rats. When they are seen,
the country is subject to great draught. The CHI River is found here, a
stream flowing northerly into Hu River. In this there are many
lancet-fish. These are of a dark color, spotted (or striped) with blue,
and have a bill like a lancet. \[These were originally found in the
Eastern Sea, and they are now found in the KIANG-TUNG River also.\]
Those who eat them are not subject to epidemic diseases.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: One hundred miles south, "Aspen Mountain"
probably is Long's Peak, Colorado. Mile after mile of the most
spectacular golden-leafed Aspen trees stretch clear across
Colorado—truly an unforgettable sight, even to the Chinese. Gold, as is
well known, abounds in this area from Steamboat Springs to Cripple
Creek. The CHI River is a fork of the Laramie which flows north. The two
rivers, one from Medicine Bow and the other from Long's Peak, join—as
the Chinese noted. Identification of the fish, rainbow or speckled trout
or any other, will be left to the fishermen of Colorado. The birds with
hair like a rat, may be bats.</span>

</div>

4\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, PUH-T’SAN Mountain
is found. It has no grass or trees, and no water.

Note: Of four or five major peaks approximately 100 miles

south, Gray's Peak appears to be the one noted by the Chinese.

5\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, FAN-T’IAO Mountain
(or the Foreign Range) is to be found. It

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

has no grass or trees, but has much sand. The KIEN River (Diminishing
River) is found here, a stream flowing northerly into the sea. In this
there are many KAN fish. (The KAN fish is described as a fish three feet
long, that is found in the YANG-TSZ’ River, having a large mouth and
yellowish gills, and a greenish back.) \[One authority names these "the
yellow-jawed fish."\]

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Mount Princeton, 100 miles south, immediately
north of Monarch Pass, is probably the high peak, with the Sangre de
Cristo Range, which starts there, being the "foreign range" mentioned in
the record. The Chinese state that they found much sand. Along the
western side of the crest of the Sangre de Cristo Range, stretches mile
after mile of sand—culminating in our Great Sand Dunes National
Monument. Sand there is. The "Diminishing River" is a tributary of the
Arkansas.</span>

</div>

6\. And it says that four hundred LI to the south, KU-MAO Mountain (or
the Mountain of the Maiden) is found. Upon this there are many
lacquer-trees, and below it many mulberry trees, and silk-worm oaks.
KU-MAO River is found here, a stream flowing northerly into the sea, in
which there are many KAN fish.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Blanca, the "White Maiden," Spanish name for
the Chinese identification of the "Mountain of the Maiden," stands 130
miles due south. The Huerfano, a tributary of the Arkansas, flows
northerly from Blanca Peak to joint the Arkansas.</span>

</div>

7\. And it says that, four hundred LI to the south, KAO-SHI Mountain is
to be found. Upon this there are many gems and below it many sharp
stones. \[From these they are able to make smooth lancets to cure boils
and swellings.\] CHU-SHING River is found here, a stream flowing
easterly into a marsh, and in it there are many gems and much gold.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: North Truches Peak, highest point in New
Mexico, appears to be the peak identified in the Classics. There are two
streams flowing easterly from the peak that appear to be surrounded with
marsh, both are shown interrupted. Semi-precious stones of many kinds
are found in the territory—turquoise is there in abundance, as is
rock-crystal and jadeite.</span>

</div>

8\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, YOH (Lofty)
Mountain is found. Upon this there are many mulberry-trees, and below it
many [ailanthus](errata.htm#41)-trees. LOH River is

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

found here, a stream flowing easterly into a marsh, and in it there are
many gems and much gold.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: The "Lofty" mountain is Manzano Peak, high
point in the range of the same name. The stream flowing into a marsh was
not identifiable on my map. There may be one that is not large enough to
be shown—or the possibility exists that one may have dried up in the
intervening 4,000 years. Climatic conditions, according to scientists,
apparently changed in this specific area within the past 700-800 years,
since many Indian sites, of an early age, show an exodus from here about
1200-1300 A.D., presumably caused by [drought](errata.htm#42) or some
climatic change.</span>

</div>

9\. And it says that three hundred LI to the south, Wolf Mountain is to
be found. Upon this there is no grass and there are no trees, and below
it there is much water (or there are many streams), in which there are
many KAN-TSZ’ fish. \[These are not fully described.\] They have wild
animals, which look like the (quadrumana, called) KW’A-FU, but they have
hair like that of swine, and their voice is like an expiration of the
breath.

When these are seen, then heaven sends down great rains.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: 95 miles south of Manzano is Sierra Blanca,
with many noisy streams chasing down its slopes—two main tributaries
flow into the Rio Hondo. The wild animals that look like swine and are
the size of monkey, I am not able to identify—they may be small
peccary.</span>

</div>

10\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, Lone Mountain is
found. Upon this there are many gems and much gold, and below it many
beautiful stones. MOH-T’U (Muddy) River is found here, a stream flowing
southeasterly into a mighty flood, in which there are many T’IAO-YUNG.
These look like yellow serpents with fishes fins. They go out and in.
They are bright (or smooth). When these are seen, then the region is
subject to great draught.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: South from Sierra Blanca is Guadalupe, or
"Lone" peak, highest point in Texas. Flowing southeast from the peak is
Delaware Creek, emptying into the Pecos, which on occasion, floods.
Again, there are many semi-precious stones, as well as gold, in the
mountains. Guadalupe, identified as "Lone" peak, is the only one of
considerable height in the area. Travellers,</span>

</div>

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">who had just come over the rugged terrain where
towering peaks surrounded them at every turn, would spot this "lone"
peak quickly.</span>

</div>

11\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, T’AI (Bald)
Mountain is found. \[Then the mountain was called the Eastern YOH or
T’AI-TSUNG, which is now called T’AI Mountain. It is in the northwestern
part of FUNG-KAO District, and the distance from the foot of the
mountain to its summit is forty-eight LI and three hundred paces.\] Upon
this there are many gems, and below it there is much gold. Wild animals
are found here which look like sucking pigs, but they have pearls. They
are called TUNG-TUNG, their name being given in imitation of their cry.
The HWAN River is found here, a stream flowing easterly into a river (or
into the river. i.e. The YANG-TSZ’ River). \[One authority says that it
flows into the sea.\] In this there are many water-gems (quartz
crystals).

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Exactly 100 miles south, in the Davis Range,
stands Bald Peak—and called "Bald Mountain" by the Chinese, an unusually
pointed coincidence. The animals with pearls, are undoubtedly small
peccary with tusks. The stream that flows easterly into a river, is the
Coyanosa Draw, which flows east into the Pecos. Quartz of countless
varieties is present.</span>

</div>

12\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, Bamboo Mountain is
found, bordering on a river (or *the* river). \[One authority says that
it is on the shore—or that it is at the boundary line.\] There is no
grass or trees, but there are many green-jasper and green-jade stones.
The Km River (or water impeded in its course by rocks) is found here, a
stream flowing southeasterly into TS’U-TAN River (or a body of water).
In this (country) there is a great abundance of dye-plants!

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: This last peak named could be either Emory
Peak or Chinati Peak, both on the Rio Grande. Although Emory Peak is 100
miles south and Chinati only 85 miles, it is believed that, of the two,
Chinati fits the description. Not too far away, the river is impeded in
its course—near the little town of Ruidoso (noisy)—and the Rio Grande
flows southeast, while it bends around Emory Peak. The ancient Chinese
scholar who examined this account added that from the description it
appeared</span>

</div>

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">that the river formed a boundary line—and so it
does. The large body of water, recorded by the Chinese, is the Gulf of
Mexico into which the Rio Grande empties.</span>

</div>

13\. The first section of the "Classic of the Eastern Mountains" thus
gives the entire distance along the twelve mountains, from SUH-CHU
Mountain to Bamboo Mountain, as three thousand six hundred LI. Their
gods all have human bodies and dragon's heads. When they are offered a
sacrifice of animals having hair, a dog is used. In other sacrifices the
blood of a fish is used to besmear the things offered. \[To use blood in
besmearing the things offered in sacrifice is called "NI." KUNG-YANG'S
"Chronicles" say that in offering sacrifices of creatures having flesh
and blood, to the god of the land, and of grain, they besmear with blood
the being that is sacrificed. The name of this species of sacrifice is
pronounced "NI."\]

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: The Chinese computation of 1200 miles figures
approximately 100 miles more, as the crow flies, than my map indicates.
However, that distance is compensated for in the area from Medicine Bow
Peak to Blanca Peak, where the circuitous route threads through half a
dozen insurmountably high mountain passes. In measuring distance by
stepping off paces, the Chinese would inevitably have had to have
travelled a greater distance on foot than a pair of dividers measures
that distance on a flat paper map. On level stretches, the tabulation is
within a mile or two of being accurate—a most astounding feat for anyone
at any time in that country. The general path has followed longitude
106° W., with comparatively little variation, from latitude 43° N. to
30° N.</span>

</div>

##### Second Section

1\. The beginning of the second section of the "Eastern Classic" says
that K’UNG-SANG Mountain (or the Mountain of the Empty Mulberry-Trees)
on the northern side adjoins the SHIN River. \[This mountain rises from
the KIN-SEH Forest—see the book called "CHEU-LI."\] On the eastern side
(it adjoins the states of) Tsu and Wu; on the southern side a number of
sandy mounds, and on the western side the MIN (or Muddy) Marsh. Here
there are wild animals which look

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span id="img_11700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Book 4 Sec. 2
(1)](tn/11700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11700.jpg)  
Book 4 Sec. 2 (1)  
</span>

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

<span id="img_11800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Book 4 Sec. 2
(2)](tn/11800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11800.jpg)  
Book 4 Sec. 2 (2)  
</span>

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

like cattle, but which are striped like tigers. Their voices resemble
the sound of a person stretching and yawning. \[Perhaps rather the sound
of one moaning.\] These are named LING-LING, and this name is an
imitation of their cry. When these are seen, then heaven sends down
great rains.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: This second journey has its start in Canada,
on the western side of Lake Winnipegosis, Manitoba. The peak is Hart
Mountain, the highest peak in the region, on the northern side of which
flows the Bell River into Dawson Bay. The "MIN" or Muddy Marsh on the
west, is well described—the marsh area due west of Lake Winnipegosis
extends for hundreds of miles. This is the lichen-rich tundra area in
which caribou feed.</span>

</div>

2\. And it says that, six hundred LI to the south, TS’AO-CHI Mountain is
found. Below this there are many paper-mulberry trees, but there is no
water (or river). There are many birds and wild animals.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: 600 Chinese miles, or 200 statute miles, there
is a high peak in Moose Mountain Provincial Park, Saskatchewan, from
which no river flows. Main breeding ground in North America for
migratory birds and water-fowl, this specific territory is one of the
largest known. The Canadian government is spending millions of dollars
in conservation programs to provide protection for their wild life right
on this very spot. Deer, elk, moose, bear, as well as wolves, have
roamed over this vast wasteland since time immemorial. The Chinese found
the most characteristic feature of the country to be the abundance of
birds and wild animals.</span>

</div>

3\. And it says that, four hundred LI to the southwest, YIH-KAO Mountain
is found. Upon this there are many gems and much gold, and below it
there is much white plaster-rock. The YIH-KAO River is found here, a
stream flowing easterly to the KIH-NU River. In this there are many
clams with pearly shells. \[These are clams or mussels with pearly
shells, as beautiful as gems, these pearly shells belonging to a species
of mussel called SHAN-PAN.\]

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: 140 miles, or a fraction over 400 LI, to the
southwest, a peak rises near Sioux Pass, Montana, just above the
junction of the Yellowstone with the Missouri. The Missouri flows
easterly</span>

</div>

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

to meet the Yellowstone which comes in from the south. And,
interestingly enough, the Musselshell River converges with the Missouri
immediately above this point—the Chinese said they found mussels with
pearly shells! The region through which the Chinese traveled south from
Moose Mountain Provincial Park, would take them through an extensive
area of "white plaster-rock" and perhaps even passing the small town of
White Earth, North Dakota, which would have been in direct line with
their course.

It may well be that the most incredible coincidence of all will be found
to be located right here. In this precise area, due north of Grenora, in
the northwest corner of North Dakota, stands a large boulder on which is
inscribed undecipherable carvings said to predate the earliest known
tribesmen. This boulder falls within the immediate path of one
travelling from Moose Mountain Provincial Park to the confluence of the
Yellowstone with the Missouri. The probability seems undeniably strong
that this marker was carved and left there by those first world
map-makers sent out by Yu.

A second series of inscribed rocks of the same nature, is located in the
southeast corner of Alberta, Canada, ten miles over the border. The
Canadian Government has created Writing-on-Stone Provincial Park around
the area. These obelisks are also covered with undecipherable
hieroglyphics. It is my belief that if study were made of both stone
carvings, that in Alberta and that in North Dakota, it might be found to
be that the hieroglyphics were an archaic form of Chinese—such, for
example, as were found inscribed on the bones dug up in China, described
earlier. The stone in Alberta would lie in a probably path of those
coming south, preceding Section One, where our first identification
started at the Sweetwater River—the beginning of the section being lost.

The carvings are undecipherable—they are known to be ancient. They lie
in what I believe to be the path of the early Chinese, as indicated on
the second map. If the inscriptions, after study, are found to be
archaic Chinese, we will then have the necessary "bones," located on the
spot, which archeologists must have, as well as the documentary proof.

They spoke also of gold and gems. Unusually fine agate is found in the
area and gold in quantity, as is well known.

</div>

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

4\. And thence going to the south, five hundred LI by water, and three
hundred LI over shifting sands, one end of the KOH (or Bean) Mountain is
reached. There is no grass and there are no trees here, but there are
many smooth whetstones.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Travelling south by water for 166 miles, as
directed, the Chinese would have taken the Yellowstone River, which
joins the Missouri at that point. 166 miles south on the Yellowstone
would have brought them between the present towns of Miles City and Big
Horn, in Montana. Thence 100 miles "over shifting sands," the travelers
would arrive at the northern end of the Big Horn Mountains and the peak
would be either Hunt Mountain or the adjacent peak near Wolf. This area
is desolate as we know—it passes close by the Custer Battlefield
National Monument.</span>

</div>

5\. And it says that, three hundred and eighty LI to the south, the
other end of Bean Mountain is found. There is no grass and there are no
trees here. The LI River is found here, a stream flowing easterly into
the Yu Marsh. In it there are many CHU-P’IEH fish (or water animals).
These look like lungs, but have eyes and six feet, and they have pearls.
They taste sour, but pleasant, and are eaten without producing sickness.
\[They do not cause diseases at any time. LU-SHI'S edition of the book
of Confucius, called "Spring and Autumn," says that the LI River
contains fish called CHU-PIEH, which have six feet, and which are
beautiful as the "vermilion" fish.\]

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: 125 miles south, or 380 LI, there is a peak at
the southern end of the Big Horn Range, which bears no name on my map, a
short distance from Casper, Wyoming and about 25 miles due west from
Teapot Dome. From the peak, a stream flows easterly into a marshy area.
The water animals that look like lungs and have six feet, may be some
crab or crustacean having six feet that is small and lung-shaped.</span>

</div>

6\. And it says that, three hundred and eighty LI to the south, YU-NGO
Mountain (or an excessively high peak) is found. Upon this there are
many japonica-trees and JAN-trees, and below it there is much prickly
succory. The TSAH-YU River is found here, a stream flowing easterly into
the Yellow River. Here there are wild beasts which look like rabbits,
but which

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

have a crow's bill, an owl's eyes, and a serpent's tail. When they see a
man, they pretend to sleep. They are called CHIU-YU, this sound being an
imitation of their cry. When these are seen, grasshoppers or locusts
cause great destruction. \[Grasshoppers are a species of locusts. It
says that they ruin the herbage. Their name is pronounced CHUNG.\]

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Precisely 125 miles to the south, Medicine Bow
Peak towers 12,000 feet above the landscape—the excessively high peak
noted by the Chinese. Three or four tributaries of the Laramie flow east
from the peak into the main river. Description of the opossum could not
have been better done. Locusts are common—and do destroy the herbage as
the Chinese so fittingly stated.</span>

</div>

7\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, TU-FU Mountain is
found. There is no grass and there are no trees here, but there is much
water (or there are many streams).

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: 100 miles south, would bring the travellers
into Estes Park. Longs Peak, 85 miles south from Medicine Bow, is no
doubt the one although there are many peaks in this vicinity. The 15
mile variation may be accountable to the difficulty in negotiating the
high mountain passes between the two peaks over which the Chinese would
have had to travel. Five or six major rivers have their source on Longs
Peak or close by.</span>

</div>

8\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, KANG Mountain is
found. There is no grass and there are no trees here, but there is much
water, and there are many green-jade stones (or there are many
water-jade stones). \[These are a species of water-gems—i.e., rock
crystals.\] There are many great serpents, and there are also wild
beasts which look like foxes, but which have fish's fins. These are
named CHU-JU, and derive their name from their cry. When these are seen,
the country has reason to fear disasters.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Mount Harvard or Mount Princeton would fit the
description as both are approximately the distance south. Branches of
the Arkansas, Rio Grande and Colorado, with countless tributaries, rise
within a twenty mile radius of either peak—there is much water. Rock
crystal, jadeite and turquoise are found in the region. The animal that
looks like a fox with</span>

</div>

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">fish's fins is not identified—unless it might be the
flying squirrel which is in the area or some [species](errata.htm#43) of
lizard.</span>

</div>

9\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, LU-K’I Mountain is
found. There is no vegetation, and there are no trees, but there are
many stones and much sand. The Sand River is found here, a stream
flowing southerly into the CH’AN River (or into a limpid river). In this
there are many LI pelicans; these look like ducks, but have men's legs.
They derive their name from their cry. When these are seen, then the
country will see great literary achievements. \[These pelicans have long
legs, which somewhat resemble human shanks.\]

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: 100 miles south, we come to Summit Peak, from
which one branch of the Rio Grande flows south. The Chinese report "much
sand." Today, our Great Sand Dunes National Monument has been located in
this very area—there is much sand. The particular species of duck is not
identified.</span>

</div>

10\. And it says that, three hundred and eighty LI to the south, KU-SHE
Mountain is found. There is no grass and there are no trees there, but
there is much water (or there are many streams).

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: 125 miles south, would bring the travellers to
the vicinity of Santa Fe, New Mexico, where there are half a dozen peaks
within a fifteen mile radius, any one of which would fit the
description—Chicoma Peak (11950), Redondo Peak (11252), N. Truches Peak
(13306), Baldy Peak (12623), Rincon Peak (11500), or Thompson Peak
(10546). The region is extremely barren. Four main branches of the Rio
Grande have their source here—there are many streams.</span>

</div>

11\. And it says that, going to the south, three hundred LI by water,
and one hundred LI over shifting sand, the northern KU-SHE Mountain is
found. There is no grass and there are no trees there, but there are
many stones.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: South from Santa Fe, by water, the Chinese
would have gone by way of the Rio Grande to a point opposite Ladrones
Peak and then over shifting sand for 30 more miles to South Baldy at the
north end of the Black Range. The area is devoid of grass, as stated. It
is a curious thing that both the Yellowstone River and the Rio Grande
provide a water route due south. There is no other place in our country
where this</span>

</div>

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">could be so in mountainous regions or where detailed
physical characteristics show such marked similarity as they do in these
two interior water journeys. It could hardly be coincidental.</span>

</div>

12\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, Southern KU-SHE
Mountain is found. There is no grass and there are no trees there, but
there is much water (or there are many streams there).

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Exactly 100 miles due south, at the southern
end of the Black Range, stands Cook's Peak. There is no grass and there
are no trees but neither did I find an over abundance of water—this is
sandy desert, although small tributaries of the Rio Grande are in the
section, there are no large streams. This is just the other side of the
river from the White Sands National Monument.</span>

</div>

13\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, Green-jade-stone
Mountain is found. There is no grass here but there are many trees. Many
great serpents are found here, and there are also many green-jade stones
and quartz crystals.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: This appears to be either Animas Peak or Big
Hatchet Peak, both approximately 100 miles south, and both in desert
areas. A great deal of turquoise and jadeite comes from this territory
as does quartz of many varieties.</span>

</div>

14\. And it says that, five hundred LI to the south, W’EI-SHI Mountain
is found. There is no grass and there are no trees here, but there are
many gems and much gold. YUEN River is found here, a stream flowing
easterly into a sand marsh (or into a sandy marsh). \[One authority
states that the name of the mountain is pronounced KIAH-SHI instead of
W’EI-SHI.\]

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Directly south, 166 miles, there is a peak
(8304 ft.), near Madera, State of Chihuahua, Mexico. This was the only
place where my map has failed to indicate a major river as specified—the
area is sandy and marshy and filled with small lakes, and in that, it is
correct. It may be that in the intervening 4000 years, the river has
drained into the marsh or just disappeared. Gold and gems are in the
entire region.</span>

</div>

15\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, KU-FUNG Mountain
is found. There is no grass, and there are no trees here, but there are
many gems and much gold. Wild beasts are found here which look like
foxes, but which have wings (or

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

fins). Their voice sounds like that of a wild goose, and they are called
PI-PI. When these are seen, then heaven sends down great draught.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: 100 miles south, there is a peak (8671 ft.)
about seven miles from the small town of Pamachic, State of Chihuahua,
in which area mining has been carried on for years. The "wild beast" is
not known. Again, this may be some kind of lizard.</span>

</div>

16\. And it says that, five hundred LI to the south, FU-LI Mountain is
found. Upon this there are many gems and much gold, and, below it, many
lancet-stones. They have wild beasts which look like foxes, but which
have nine tails and nine heads, and tiger's claws. They are called
LUNG-CHIH. Their voice is like that of an infant child, and they eat
men.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Here is where we find the nine-headed,
nine-tailed foxes! Five hundred LI, or 166 miles, there are two peaks to
the south that fit the description, due north by northeast of the city
of Culiacan State of Sinaloa, one on the State border and the other just
within the State of Durango.</span>

</div>

17\. And it says that, five hundred LI to the south, YIN Mountain is
found. To the south, the YIN River is to be seen, and to the north the
Hu Marsh (or lakes and marshes). Here they have wild beasts which look
like horses, but they have sheep's eyes, four horns and cattle tails.
Their voice is like the howl of a dog, and they are called YIU-YIU. When
these are seen, the country will be visited by many crafty foreigners.
They have birds which look like ducks, but they have rat's tails, and
can climb trees. They are called CHIE-KEU. When these are seen, the
country will have much sickness.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: South, exactly 166 miles, is the peak
Triangulo (7832 ft.) about 75 miles due east of the city of Mazatlan,
and a little to the north. To the south of Triangulo flows the Presidio
River and to the north, is a considerable lake and marsh area in central
Durango, as well as a swampy region all along the coast to the
north.</span>

</div>

18\. The second section of the "Classic of the Eastern Mountains" thus
gives the entire distance along the seventeen mountains, from KUNG-SANG
Mountain to YIN Mountain, as six

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

thousand six hundred and forty LI. Their gods all have wild beast's
bodies, but human faces. They bear the KOH fish. \[With a species of
stag's or deer's horns they catch the KOH fishes.\] When they are
offered a sacrifice of living beings having hair or feathers, a fowl is
used. When the people pray to them for offspring, they retire to a
screened place.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: According to the Classics, the distance along
the seventeen mountains is 2214 miles. The distance shown by these notes
is 30° of latitude, or roughly 2100 miles due south, 1¼°, or 85 miles,
where between Moose Mountain Provincial Park and Sioux Peak, there was a
turn from south to southwest, and the Yellowstone River flowed southwest
for a part of its course. A further variation came at Long's Peak down
to Summit Peak where I lost about 25 miles. With these two
compensations, that would add 110 miles to the 2100, this computation
arrives at a distance counted as 2210 miles. After turning from
southwest and the Yellowstone River, the Chinese have followed longitude
106° W. for practically the entire distance down to Mazatlan. The rich
minerals that the Chinese noted from North Dakota to central Mexico,
needs no explanation here—gold is in the hills. The same is true of
gems, jade-stones and quartz. This entire territory is one of our
richest in turquoise, jadeite, quartz, jasper, in yellow, green and
blue, opals from Mexico and tourmaline, to name a few. The country over
which the Chinese travelled, is the most formidable that we have on the
North American continent, encompassed with difficulties at every turn.
In no one place has there been mention of any hardship or
struggle—meticulous notes, nothing more.</span>

</div>

##### Third Section

1\. The beginning of the third section of the "Eastern Classic" says
that, SHI-HU Mountain on the north adjoins SIANG Mountain. Upon it there
are many gems and much gold, and below it there are many thorny plants.
Here there are wild beasts which look like elks, but which have fish
eyes, and they are called WAN-HU (or YUEN-HU), deriving their name from
their cry.

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

<span id="img_12700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Book 4 Sec. 3
(1)](tn/12700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12700.jpg)  
Book 4 Sec. 3 (1)  
</span>

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<span id="img_12800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Book 4 Sec. 3
(2)](tn/12800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12800.jpg)  
Book 4 Sec. 3 (2)  
</span>

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Section three starts at Mt. Fairweather in
southern Alaska. On its north are the St. Elias Mountains—Mt. Hubbard,
Mt. St. Elias and Mt. Logan. It lies just at the tip of Yukon Territory
where "much gold" has been found. The animals may be moose, elk or
reindeer.</span>

</div>

2\. And it says that going to the south by water for eight hundred LI,
K’I Mountain is found (or a mountain with two peaks). Upon this there
are many peach-trees and plum-trees. There are also many wild beasts and
many tigers.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Note: This is the only one of the journeys in the series that covers the
distance by a water route.

Travelling from Mt. Fairweather, eight hundred LI, or roughly 266 miles,
south, the twin peaks of Mt. Burkett and Kates Needle stand, separated
by a glacier, immediately north of Wrangell. This portion of the Alaskan
coast is warmed by the waters of the Kamchatka Current so that in spite
of its northern latitude, fruit trees grow there in a tempered climate,
today. Scientists believe that in the early periods of the Christian
era, or before 900 A.D., climatic conditions in the polar regions were
far different from what they are now. They were temperate, or even warm.
We know that to be true of the north Atlantic at the time of the
crossing of the Norsemen. As glaciers recede in Greenland, villages are
being uncovered. Rachel Carson speaks of it in her
[magnificent](errata.htm#44) book "The Sea Around Us."

</div>

3\. And it says that, going to the south by water for five hundred LI,
CHU-KEU Mountain is found. There are no trees or grass here, but there
are many stones, and much sand. The distance around the mountain is one
hundred LI. There are many MEI (or sleeping fish) here. \[These MEI fish
are of excellent flavor.\]

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: South, 166 miles, is a peak (9140 ft.) due
east of Prince Rupert, in British Columbia, Canada, that measures the
correct distance. My map gives no name for it. The stretch of coast here
is bleak.</span>

</div>

4\. And it says that, going south by water for seven hundred LI, Middle
FU Mountain is found. Here there are no trees or grass, but there is
much sand.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Towering Mt. Waddington (13,260 ft.), 233
miles</span>

</div>

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">south, stands snow-capped just inside Queen
Charlotte Strait.</span>

</div>

5\. And it says that, going to the east by water for one thousand LI,
HU-SHE Mountain is found. Here there are no trees or grass, but there
are many stones and much sand.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: This is the only point where directions turn
"east" from the normal "south," and, due to the change, it furnished the
clue to locating the third section. The turn east for a distance of 330
miles follows Vancouver Island, the one spot on the northwest coast that
one can go 330 miles east by water. The mountain at the other end of the
330 miles, is Mt. Olympus, on the tip of Cape Flattery, dominating the
scene around Seattle.</span>

</div>

6\. And it says that, going to the south by water for seven hundred LI,
MANG-TSZ’ (the Eldest Child) Mountain is found. Here there are many
trees; japonicas and T’ONG trees, and also many peach-trees and
plum-trees. In the grass there are many mushroom-rushes (or mushrooms
and rushes, or KIUN rushes). \[These are not fully described. They are
called KW’UN.\] They have wild beasts, and many elks and deers. The
distance around the mountain is one hundred LI. Upon it there is a
flowing stream called PIH-YANG (or the river of Clear Jade-stone). In
this there are many sturgeons and mud-sturgeons. \[These mud-sturgeons
are a species of eel. They resemble sturgeons, but have a long body like
an eel. One authority says that they are a species of herring.\]

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: South, again by water for 233 miles, is Mt.
Hood. The Chinese evidently went a short distance up the Columbia River
to get a better view of one of our most beautiful peaks—they note a
great many fruit trees, trees, mushrooms and rushes. The area as we know
it is one of great fertility, centering around the rose-bowered city of
Portland. Trees would be there in greatest profusion—giant firs of every
variety. Mt. Hood is probably thirty miles around its base as the
travellers say. The river is the Columbia in which there are many fish
and those that the translator thought might be some kind of sturgeon
are, as we know, salmon, for which the Columbia is famous. Large
animals, likewise, are in the area in abundance.</span>

</div>

7\. And going south by water for five hundred LI, and over shifting sand
for five hundred LI, a mountain is reached which

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

is called K’I-CHUNG Mountain, the distance around which is two hundred
LI. There is no grass and there are no trees here, but there are great
serpents, and upon the mountain there are many precious stones. It has a
body of water, the distance around which is forty LI, all bubbling up
and running off. \[Now, to the east of the Yellow River is the FAN
River, and in the YIN (Dark) District it has the FUN River's Spring (or
source). In this place the water rushes out, overflowing, bubbling up,
and running rapidly. It is deep and can not be restrained. This is of
the same class as the water above referred to.\] This is called
SHAN-TSEH (or the Deep Marsh). In it there are great tortoises. \[They
have beaks like the common tortoise, the tortoise being a great turtle;
the shell has variegated marks, like those of the precious
tortoise-shell, but it is thinner.\] Here there are fish (or water
animals) which look like carp, which have six feet and a bird's tail.
These are called KOH-KOH fish, deriving this name from an imitation of
their cry.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Travelling south for 166 miles by water and
thence over shifting sand for another 166 miles, the Chinese came to Mt.
Shasta. From the mouth of the Columbia to Winchester Bay, in Oregon, is
exactly 160 miles and, overland from Winchester Bay to Mt. Shasta, is
about 170 miles. The distance around the base of Mt. Shasta, one of our
greatest peaks, is probably close to the sixty mile estimate of the
pedestrian Chinese. In the area that they covered on foot, "over
shifting sand," they evidently took a side excursion to see the sights
at Klamath Falls, passing Upper Klamath Lake. The Falls have been
described as a place where the water "rushes out, overflowing, bubbling
up and running rapidly." "It is deep and cannot be restrained." How
true. Upper Klamath Lake is the body of water, the distance around which
was said to be about twelve miles although today the distance around the
lake is considerably greater. Spectacular Klamath Falls and Mt. Shasta
are two of our "show places"—they impressed the Chinese tourists.</span>

</div>

8\. And it says that, going to the south by water for eight hundred LI,
MEI-YU Mountain \[or MIN-TSZ’\] Mountain is reached. Upon this there are
many trees and much grass, and

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

an abundance of gold and gems, and also much ocher. Here there are wild
beasts which look like little cattle, but which have horse's tails, and
which are called TSING-TSING, deriving their name from an imitation of
their cry.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: After leaving Mt. Shasta, and going due west
to the coast, coming out just to the south of Klamath, California, 266
miles south would have brought the Chinese to Los Gatos Peak, on the
south side of San Francisco Bay. The "abundance of gold" was amply
proved by the ’49ers during the "Gold Rush." The "wild beasts which look
like little cattle," are most probably the small seals in San Francisco
Bay, which, in color, are like cattle.</span>

</div>

9\. And going to the south by water for five hundred LI, and over
shifting sand for three hundred LI, WU-KAO (or Not Lofty) Mountain is
reached. Here the YIU (Young) Sea may be seen. \[This is now called the
"Little Sea."\] To the east the FU-tree may be seen \[or FU-SANG\] .
There is no grass and there are no trees here, and much wind is found
upon the mountain. The distance around it is a hundred LI.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: South by water for 166 miles and then overland
for 100 miles, the Chinese travelled from San Francisco Bay by water to
Morro Bay, 166 miles, and thence overland to the peak directly in back
of Santa Barbara, for 100 miles. They stood on the peak, facing south,
and saw Santa Barbara Channel—the Yiu Sea. Here comes the most amazing
statement of the entire record—"To the east the FU-tree may be seen \[or
Fu-sang\] ." This instant document was written in the time of Yu, 2250
B.C., 2700 years before the time of Hwui Shan. At that early date, the
Chinese had identified "Fu-sang." This is within 30 miles of the
identical spot where I had previously calculated that Hwui Shan landed,
at Point Hueneme, and from which place he journeyed east to the Kingdom
of Women. As stated earlier, corn has been taken from excavations in
this area, which, by the carbon-14 process, has been dated as being 4000
years old. The Chinese of 2200 B.C. named the tree Fu or Fu-Sang, and it
was recognized at that time. Chinese literature, antedating Hwui Shan by
more than a thousand years, makes frequent reference to
"Fu-sang."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small"><span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span> Hwui Shan, without question, studied these ancient
records and knew precisely where he was going before he started out—he
came within 30 miles of the spot, identified in Yu's record, as being
"Fu-sang" and Hwui Shan himself identified that place as being
"Fu-sang." This statement on the part of Yu, appears to be the most
highly significant identification in linking a definite point located
4000 years ago with Hwui Shan's description of 500 A.D., in Kuen 327.
"To the east grows the FU-tree"—and it did.</span>

</div>

10\. The third section of the "Eastern Classic" thus gives the entire
distance along the nine mountains, from SHI-HU Mountain to WU-KAO
Mountain, as six thousand eight hundred LI. Their gods all have human
bodies and sheep's horns. When a sacrifice is offered to them, a ram is
used. They use millet for food. When these gods are seen, then wind,
rain, and floods cause ruin.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Note: Section three gives the entire mileage from Mt. Fairweather, in
Alaska, to Santa Barbara, California, as roughly 2260 miles. My
calculations show 2100 miles—the variant, I believe, comes about in the
area from Mt. Hood to Mt. Shasta, where the editor of the document, in
China, has taken a straight line due south overlooking the journey of
166 miles over "shifting sand" which departed from an absolute due south
direction. Given that 166 miles "over shifting sand" stretched out to
the south instead of going inland, my calculations would come to 2266
miles—or six miles over the Chinese figure.

Again, there is a description of the Katchina—human bodies and sheep's
horns—and that in 2250 B.C., identified with the prayer for rain.

</div>

##### Fourth Section

1\. The beginning of the fourth section of the "Eastern Classic" says
that the Northern HAO Mountain slopes down to the North Sea. It has
trees which look like Aspens, but which have red flowers. The fruit is
like the jujube, but it has no pit. It tastes sour, but delicious. It is
eaten without causing any ill results. The Stull River (or drinkable
water) is found here, a

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

stream that flows northeasterly into the sea. Here there are wild
animals which look like wolves, but which have red heads and rat's eyes.
Their voices sound like those of sucking pigs, and they are called
HIEH-TSU. They eat men. There are birds here which look like domestic
fowls, but have white heads, rat's legs, and tiger's claws. They are
called KWEI \[or K’I\] birds, and they eat men.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: The last section of the Fourth Book starts at
the "North Sea." The Strait of Juan de Fuca enters to the south of
Vancouver Island and would be the only place on the Pacific coast where
a large body of water is north of any land for an extended way. Mt.
Rainier—Hao Mountain—slopes down to it. The Shih River is either the
White River, which flows northeast for about fifteen miles before
turning north and then west, emptying into Puget Sound, or it is the
American, which also flows northeast from Rainier into the Naches, a
tributary of the Yakima and the Columbia—and then to the sea. The white
headed birds, the size of domestic fowl, having tiger's claws, that eat
men, may in all probability be the bald eagle, which is common in the
northwest.</span>

</div>

2\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the south, MAO Mountain is
found. Here there are no trees and no grass. The TS’ANG-T’I River is
found here, a stream flowing westerly into the CHEN River (or a large
body of water). In this there are many SIU fish. \[These are shrimps, or
the eels indicated by the character TS’IU, and possibly the character
SIU was then pronounced the same as TS’IU.\] These look like the carp,
but have a larger head. Those who eat them have no swellings.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: 100 miles due south of Mt. Rainier, stands one
of our most majestic peaks—Mt. Hood. The mountain is snowcapped and the
tree-line is low. The small stream flowing westerly from Mt. Hood enters
the Columbia near Gresham. The Columbia is the large river containing
many fish that look like carp but have a larger head—again, they are
salmon.</span>

</div>

3\. And it says that, three hundred and twenty LI to the south, the
Eastern SHI Mountain is found. Upon this there are many green gems. Here
there are trees which look like aspens, but which have red veins. Their
sap is like blood, and they have no

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

<span id="img_13500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Book 4 Sec.
4](tn/13500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13500.jpg)  
Book 4 Sec. 4  
</span>

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

fruit. These are called K’I. They can break horses by its use \[i.e., by
rubbing them with this sap, horses become tame and gentle.\] Clear River
is found here, a stream flowing northeasterly into the sea. In this
there are many delicious cowries and many cuttle-fish. These look like a
goby, and have only one head with ten bodies. They smell like
sedge-grass or a jungle. Those who eat them have no asthma. \[It says
that they cure the disease which consists of a difficulty in
breathing.\]

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Bachelor Butte, in central Oregon, stands 100
miles due south of Mt. Hood. From it, Squaw River flows northeasterly
into the Deschutes, the Columbia, and to the sea. The fish with ten
bodies, in this instance, may be a small octopus.</span>

</div>

4\. And it says that, three hundred LI to the southeast, NU-CHING
Mountain is found. Upon this there are no trees, grass, or stones. KAO
(Rich, Fertilizing) River is found here, a stream flowing westerly into
LIH (Cauldron) River. In this there are many thin fish which look like
herring, but have only one eye. Their voice sounds like vomiting \[i.e.,
like the sound of a man retching and vomiting\]. When these are seen,
then heaven sends down a great draught.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Turning now to the southeast, we find Gearhart
Mountain from which the Sprague River flows westerly into Upper Klamath
Lake. The churning of the waters around Klamath Falls, may be the reason
for the identification by the Chinese of a "cauldron." The "one-eyed"
fish, I am unable to identify—it may be a "whimsy" or it may be some
water animal that suggested itself to the Chinese as having one
eye.</span>

</div>

5\. And it says that, two hundred LI to the southeast, the KIN (Imperial
or Majestic) Mountain is found. Here there are many gems and much gold,
but no stones. The SHI River is found there, a stream flowing northerly
into KAO Marsh. In this there are many eels and cowrie-shells. Here
there are wild animals which look like sucking pigs, but which have
tusks. These are called TANG-K’ANG, deriving their name from their cry.
When these are seen, then heaven causes the earth to produce much grain.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Continuing in a southeasterly direction, the
Chinese came to Crane Mountain, the majestic peak. Crane Mountain</span>

</div>

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">has a stream flowing westerly into a marsh—the
entire area around is a swamp and marsh. The animals with tusks are
probably small boar or peccary which 4000 years ago may have been in
that region.</span>

</div>

6\. And it says that, two hundred LI to the southeast, TSZ’-T’UNG
Mountain is found. TSZ’-T’UNG River is found here, a stream flowing
westerly into YU-JU Marsh. In this there are many HWAH fish. These look
like fish, but have bird's wings. They go out and in. They are bright.
Their voices sound like those of the YUEN-YANG. When these are seen,
then heaven sends down a great [drought](errata.htm#45).

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Mahogany Peak, Nevada, fits the Chinese
description. It has a small stream flowing west into a marshy area. This
northwest section of Nevada is marsh and small lakes; it is a great
feeding ground for water-fowl. The animal identified as a fish with
wings, that go in and out of the water, may be a variety of duck or
other water-fowl which abounds in the region.</span>

</div>

7\. And it, says that, two hundred LI to the northeast, YEN
(Sharp-pointed) Mountain is found. Here there are many precious stones
and much gold. There are also wild beasts which look like swine, but
which have men's faces and yellow bodies, but red tails. These are
called HOH-YU. Their voices sound like that of an infant child. These
wild animals eat men, and eat vermin and serpents. When these are seen,
then heaven sends down great rains.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Again the direction turned, this time to the
northeast. Approximately 66 miles northeast from Mahogany Peak are two
peaks, either one of which could fit the specifications Split Peak and
Trident Peak both between 60 and 70 miles away. Trident, being some 1000
feet higher, is probably the one noted. No river or stream is mentioned
as flowing from the peak and no major one was found. The Chinese note
the presence of many precious stones and much gold. One of the most
unusual gem deposits in the world is the opalized forest of Virgin
Valley in northwestern Nevada, through which region the Chinese have
just taken us. One of the largest known opals, 533 grams, a black opal
with flashes of yellow, red,</span>

</div>

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">green and blue came from this specific region and is
now housed in the collection of the National Museum.</span>

</div>

8\. And it says that, two hundred LI to the east, T’AI (Immense)
Mountain is found. Upon it there are many precious stones and much gold,
and there are also many wax-trees. \[These wax-trees do not shed their
leaves in winter.\] Here there are many wild animals which look like
cattle, but which have a white head, one eye, and a serpent's tail. They
are called FEI. When they go upon the water, they dry it up, and when
they go upon the grass, they kill it. When these are seen, then heaven
sends down a great pestilence. \[It says that its body is full of a
poisonous principle. The book called "K’I-KIN" says that it is a locust
or cricket called K’IUNG. Its body looks harmless, but it causes the
veins to wither and dry up, being more poisonous than the CHAN. All
creatures fear it, and wish to keep at a great distance from it.\] The
KEU River is found here, a stream flowing northerly into LAO River. In
this are many fish.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: Travelling due east from Trident for 70 miles,
we find Capitol Peak, at the northeast end of the Santa Rosa
Mountains—at the head of Paradise Valley. My map indicates hot springs
in the valley, as well as mines in the general region—Getchell mine is
about 50 miles distant. This whole territory is rich in precious stones
and valuable minerals, as is well known. Trees would undoubtedly be
green in the protected valley with hot springs not far away. A botanist
would be able to identify the tree and whether it now grows there or
whether 4000 years ago it did—some of these trees may be like the
[ginko](errata.htm#46), which grew over considerable territory,
anciently, but does not grow here today. The river flowing northerly
into the Lao River, is the Little Owyhee which flows north from Capitol
Peak into the Owyhee, a tributary of the Snake and the Columbia.</span>

</div>

9\. The fourth section of the "Eastern Classic" thus gives the entire
distance along the eight mountains, from HAO Mountain to TAI Mountain,
as one thousand seven hundred and twenty LI.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: This fourth section has been calculated by the
Chinese to be 1720 LI, or 573 miles. From peak to peak, my pair of
dividers came out exactly 570 miles—or a three mile variation</span>

</div>

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">from the ancient Chinese. Since this section is
relatively short, and further, that it terminates in the middle of a
mountain range with no way out, it is reasonable to assume that what we
have is merely the first few pages of someone's little bamboo note
book—the remainder has been lost.</span>

</div>

10\. The above record of the "Classic of the Eastern Mountains" thus
gives the distance along these forty-six mountains as eighteen thousand
eight hundred and sixty LI.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Note: In compiling the entire record, back in China,
it is evident that whoever did the job went on the assumption that each
single section of the Fourth Book followed in sequence, south from the
one that preceded it—one man started where another man left off. On
reading the notes, it is apparent that that could hardly have been the
case.</span>

</div>

 

In this Fourth Book of the Classic of the Eastern Mountains, compiled,
according to the Chinese in 2250 B.C., we have set forth the translation
as it was found. We faithfully followed directions, as promised at the
start, and in every instance, where we were told to go south 100 miles,
we went south 100 miles—where we were directed to go by water, even in
the interior, we went by water. Every mountain was found where the
Chinese said it would be found—all rivers with the exception of two in
the desert area, were found and found to flow in the proper direction.
In two sections, I got lost in the tortuous mountain passes and came out
short on mileage. I do not overlook the fact that errors are bound to be
present—they are inescapable.

On this Chinese "Cook's Tour," we thrilled with them at the sight of the
golden aspen trees in Colorado; trekked across the Great Sand Dunes
National Monument; saw the wild life in Canada and the pearly mussels in
the Musselshell River; picked up black opals and a few nuggets in
northern Nevada and turquoise in New Mexico; took a side excursion to
see Klamath Falls and Mt. Shasta; watched the seals sporting on the
rocks in San Francisco Bay; enjoyed eating the Columbia River salmon;
were amused by the ’possum pretending to sleep; and finally came to the
place where the FU-tree grew—just where Hwui Shan had said it did—2700
years later.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

On each one of these four journeys, the most outstanding characteristic
of the region, as we know it, was the thing noted by the Chinese—and
many of them we have set aside as National Parks.

This is the mile by mile record that the ancient Chinese kept in their
bamboo note-books.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[110:1](pi15.htm#fr_0) The information contained
within the square brackets is a part of the Chinese text as it appears
in the Classics. The notes were put there by a scholar at an early date
who no doubt was trying to locate the mountains and rivers in China.
Information within the parenthesis is a contribution of the translator
from Chinese to English.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. The Great American Desert](pi16)

</div>
