<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](doth01)  [Next](doth03) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Duties of the Heart*, by Rabbi Bachye, tr. by Edwin Collins,
\[1909\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### INTRODUCTION

BACHYE'S "Guide to the Duties of the Heart" is the unique work that
first linked the ethical science of the West with the emotional and
spiritual morality of the East. It combines, in an artistic unity,
elements drawn from the philosophy and contemplative mysticism of the
Arabs, from Biblical and Rabbinic Judaism, and from Greek thought. By
exhibiting the spiritual foundations of universal Ethics, and of the
moral law of the Bible, in the light of pure reason, Bachye prepared the
way for finding that common ground on which, wholly or in part, all the
moral religions, and all the non religious systems of morality, are
rooted. Therefore, although actually written in Spain, a land of the
West, it forms a fitting opening volume for the "Wisdom of the East
Series."

Only a small part of the original finds a place in the following pages;
but I have in my translation—sometimes literal, now and again a
summarised [paraphrase](errata.htm#0)—endeavoured to give a selection of
passages connected by the author's central thought,

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

and showing his line of argument and the aim and spirit of his work,
instead of a mere collection of pithy sayings and isolated, beautiful,
but disconnected reflections. This was the only way of doing justice to
an author, some of whose reasonings are out of date, but the spirit of
whose main contention is eternally valid; a teacher of virtue and duty,
who did not attempt to inculcate this or that individual virtue, but
aimed at the formation of character and conditions in which right
conduct would be inevitable, so that details might well be left to take
care of themselves.

If the modern world owes its delight in physical beauty, and much of its
sense of the true in Nature and in Art, to Greece; its ideal of
goodness, and practically all the spiritual elements in our thought and
feeling, our conception of holiness, and every moral characteristic of
civilisation and of culture, have come to us from the Orient. For the
form and system of Ethics we may be indebted to the few Hellenic
thinkers whose sublime intellects raised them above the phenomenal world
into a clear atmosphere of ideas, always suffused with the light of
truth and justice; but all the permanent and vital contents of Ethics
came, living and pulsating, with their vitalising possibilities, both
into that atmosphere and into our life of to-day, with the glow of dawn
from the East. Indeed, the two cardinal ideas essential to all present
and future moral systems—the sanctity of human life as such, and the
absolutely universal authority and validity of moral law and
obligation—are entirely absent from even the writings of Plato, the
greatest

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

of the Greeks. These two are among the most definite colours that the
prism of modern thought has enabled us to single out in our perception
of the pure white light, from the sun of righteousness, that shone on
Sinai. They are specially characteristic of the Hebrew moral teaching
which the three great religions—Judaism, Christianity and Islamism—have
spread throughout the world.

In the world's organism, it seems to be the special function of the
Oriental peoples to secrete, or to absorb from what is, or may be,
beyond and above the physical universe, all that man needs to nourish
the life of his soul and to perfect his individuality; while it is the
function of the Western civilised nations to show the Eastern peoples
how the material resources and the forces of nature may be mastered, and
the observed relations which we call nature's laws may be applied to
serve the purposes of material life, individual and communal. The
Semitic religious, and the Aryan-Oriental mystic, intuitions, seem to be
the chlorophyl that draws, from the sunlight of spiritual being,
elements essential to the healthy growth of the human race; and if
Western humanity is to be saved from becoming a dry and sapless log, it
must perenially renew that foliage which brings it into contact with the
ambient upper air, warmed by the glow of righteousness and love.

It is to help in this process of renewing the spiritual and moral life
of the West that the "Orient Press" is publishing the present series of
selections.

In the middle and latter half of the eleventh century, Spain became the
rallying-point, and a radiating

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

centre, of Jewish culture—religious, philosophical, and poetic; and
while practically the whole of the Western world was then sunk in the
intellectual darkness of the Middle Ages, the Jews of Spain were not
only cultivating the sciences and developing, to its highest perfection,
their own spiritual and intellectual heritage; they were also preparing
the way for the Renaissance, and for the re-enfranchisement of Western
thought, by their study, and dissemination, in Hebrew and Arabic
translations, of the philosophy of Greece. It was the Jews of Spain who
were the chief students of the so-called Arabian philosophy, and the
chief instruments by whom it was subsequently made effective on European
culture. "It was," says Lewes, in his "History of Philosophy," "through
their translators, and through their original thinkers, such as
Avicebron \[Jehudah Ibn Gebirol, the author of the "Vons Vitæ," *b*.
1021; *d*. 1070\], and Moses Maimonides, that the West became leavened
with Greek and Oriental thought."

It is to this brilliant period in the history of Jewish literature that
our author belongs.

Rabbi Bachye bar Joseph ibn Bakoda was a contemporary of the
poet-philosopher Ibn Gebirol, and held, in the Jewish community, the
position of Dayan—an office which combines something of the duties of a
judge in civil, religious, and matrimonial causes, with those of a Rabbi
authorised to answer questions on all matters of Jewish law and life,
and on the application, to special and exceptional cases, of the general
principles found in the Bible and Talmud.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

Next to nothing is known of his life, and even the exact date of his
birth, and the place where he held office, are not known with certainty.
The evidence, however, seems in favour of Jellinek's opinion that he
lived in Saragossa, was born in the second half of the eleventh century,
and died in the first half of the twelfth century.

He was a man of the most amiable and genial character, and, though
profoundly religious, extremely liberal-minded. He was an industrious
student of all the science of his day, and held it to be a sacred duty
to gain, both by observation and by independent thought, a knowledge, as
complete as possible, of the material world and of the history of man.
Believing that every accession to our knowledge, and every strengthening
of our instrument of thought, must tend to deepen our admiration for the
Creator, and tend to fit us more and more thoroughly for fulfilling the
ideal of our *raison d’être*, and, by perfecting our character, tend to
perfect us in our worldly conduct and in our relations with our
fellow-men; he held it to be a moral and religious duty to study what
are usually called secular subjects. Thus natural science, mathematics,
anthropology, zoology, history, etc., etc., are numbered by him among
the matters with which the seeker after spiritual and moral truth is
bound to occupy himself. He teaches also, by his own example, as well as
by express injunction, the duty of "learning from everybody, no matter
to what race or creed he may belong," no matter what may be his
religious opinions.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

Before the writing of his "Duties of the Heart," no systematic treatise
on Ethics had appeared among the Jews. Hebrew literature, from the Bible
onwards, is, of course, full of ethical and moral teaching, and the same
must be said of the Talmud and the Midrashim, "The Sentences of the
Fathers," and of Rabbi Nathan; while "The Masecheth Derech Eretz," Ibn
Gebirol's "The Choicest of the Pearls," and "The Son of Proverbs," by
Samuel Hannagid, must be mentioned among the chief works with ethical
contents. But no scientific working out of a system of ethics based on
one central thought, and claiming universal validity, had even been
thought of. Bachye also complained that although there was no lack of
guidance as to the duties of the body and its members, by which he
understood all the outward conduct of life—even honesty in dealing,
deeds of charity and benevolence and even the activities of the tongue
and lips in prayer and praise, and in good or evil speaking, in telling
the truth and in lying—there was no book dealing with the Duties of the
Heart and Mind.

It was to supply this want that he wrote, in Arabic, the book which was
destined in its Hebrew Translation <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0) to
become one of the most popular as well as the most authoritative
expositions of spiritual Judaism. This work has never appeared in
English.

By the Duties of the Heart Bachye understands the whole of conduct, and
of thought in its ideal essence. For he holds that the outward act is,

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

morally, of no significance, except in so far as it represents a
manifestation of character and an expression of intention.

The whole of conduct belongs to the domain of ethics. Every act, and
every abstention from action, is either right or wrong. Even the amount
one eats, the wearing of certain clothes, the use of language, the
simplest movements of the body, are, all of them, parts of conduct to be
distinguished as either right or wrong. But what makes them so is not
the act itself, but the intention with which it is done or left undone.
And, since our intentions are conditioned by our state of mind and
feeling, the first and the final duty, the foundation of ethics, is the
perfection of our own souls.

Thus Bachye is at one with Stephen in asserting that "the moral law has
to be asserted in the form: not 'do this,' but 'be this.'"

The perfection of the human soul, however, from which all right conduct
must result, and which every righteous act and every righteous thought
tends to produce, is only attained by bringing it into complete unison
with God, through such a perfect love of Him that His will is our will,
and we have no desire that is out of harmony with His wisdom and His
benevolence.

But Bachye's ethics is not theological in the sense of taking as its
starting-point the Bible, or any other revelation or authoritative
statement of the will of God, who can only be known through His works,
the universe and man, who is the world in miniature (the microcosm). He
does not even take for

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

granted the existence of a God at all, nor appeal to revelation for
assertion of that truth. He starts *ab initio*, and claims to deal with
the problems of absolute being by the aid of reason and—note
well—*observation of the material world*.

He starts by submitting to the test of reason the questions,—"Is there a
Creator or not?" and if so, "Is there more than one Creator?" and "What
can we know about Him?"

He then proceeds to demonstrate the duty of devoting the heart and mind
to the study and contemplation of the works of God, whence conviction of
the infinite goodness of the Creator, and of the infinite indebtedness,
and obligation to gratitude, of the creature, are borne in upon the
mind.

Contemplation of the results of such study will lead to true humility,
and to perfect trust in God and resignation to His will, devotion to His
service and the concentration (unification) of all works on His service.
This service does not mean religious observance, though it may, and in
the case of Israelites must, include it; but means the doing of His will
and ethical conduct. Asceticism is recommended as a means of removing
hindrances to union with God.

Full intellectual recognition of the goodness of the Creator will,
through gratitude and humility, lead to perfect and disinterested love
of God and an understanding of His will, which includes benevolence to
all creatures. Hence this love of God will suffice, without rewards or
punishments, even without the commands of the Bible or of human
legislation, to induce perfect conduct in every relation of life. The

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

restraints and commands of the Bible are given to bring the less
intelligent of mankind this; but, being of divine origin, the Law will
also be accepted as *part* of their duty by those who reach ethical
conduct and feeling through reason; and such of them as are Israelites
will keep the specially Jewish laws. Thus the obligation to right
conduct is not Jewish but universal, and valid for all reasonable beings
as *creatures*; and the contemplation of the one infinite cause of good
takes the place of the contemplation of the idea of justice. The
specially Jewish obligations are only binding on Jews, and the higher
obligations of philosophic contemplation only on those gifted with
exceptional mental powers. So that all men can be equally
meritorious—the Jew, the heathen, the philosopher, and the fool or
slave—since each perfectly fulfils the will of God *as it applies to
him*, and pays *in full* <span class="smallcaps">his</span> debt of
gratitude, small or great.

The ethical system of Bachye is distinctly Oriental. All the impulse to
virtuous conduct springs from the point of contact between the human
soul and the unseen soul of the universe. It is the individual in
communion with God, the creature bowed in [awesome](errata.htm#1)
gratitude before the Creator, who recognises the obligations of ethical
conduct; not the citizen seeking the best way to become a good citizen
and preserve the State. Moreover, the development is not from the outer
circle of sociological duties to the inner circle of the family, and the
centre, the individual soul, as in Greek ethics; not from the
circumference of deeds to the centre of ideals and soul perfection;

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

but from the centre, the soul, to the outward act.

It is interesting to note that, although Bachye is an orthodox Rabbi,
his ethics is not a Jewish theological work, but sets forth a motive to
right conduct, starting from universal reason, and appealing, not only
to the Children of Israel, nor even to the wise and intelligent alone,
but to all mankind. Human reason is the ultimate test of conduct, of
revelation, and of faith. The duties of the heart are more important
than those of the body, because they are of universal application, and
not limited by time, or place, or circumstance.

<span class="smallcaps">Edwin Collins</span>.

*Feb*. 1, 1904.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[10:\*](doth02.htm#fr_0) By Jehudah Ibn Tibbon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom, the Highest Good](doth03)

</div>
