<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](doth37)  [Next](doth39) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Duties of the Heart*, by Rabbi Bachye, tr. by Edwin Collins,
\[1909\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (<span class="smallcaps">From the Sixth Gate.</span>)

### <span class="smallcaps">Of Trust in God</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Of</span> all things the most necessary to him
who would serve God, <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_11) is trust in
God.

  .     .     .     .     .     .     .

If one does not trust in God, one trusts in something, or in some one,
else. And he who quits his trust otherwhere than in the One Eternal,
removes God and His ruling providence from over him, and puts himself in
the hands of that thing or person in whom he trusts.

  .     .     .     .     .     .     .

He who trusts in his own wisdom or abilities, or in the strength of his
body and in his own efforts, will labour in vain, weaken his powers, and
find his skill inadequate to the attainment of his desires; . . . and
trust in wealth may be the destruction of

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

the soul. He who trusts in God will be led to serve none other than Him,
in that he will not build his hopes on a man, and will not wait, in
anxious anticipation, for any human being; and he will not serve them,
or try to curry favour with them; and he will not be hypocritical to
please mankind, to the detriment of his service of God; and he will have
no fear of man nor of human fault-finding. He will be independent, and
strip off from himself the livery of human favours and benefactions.

  .     .     .     .     .     .     .

He who trusts in God is able to turn his attention from worldly
anxieties and devote it to doing what is right. For, in the restfulness
of his soul and the liberty of his mind, and in the diminution of his
anxieties in regard to worldly affairs, he may be compared to an
alchemist who knows how to turn silver into gold and brass and tin to
silver. Only that he is better off; for he needs neither implements nor
materials in his alchemy, and he needs not store up his gold in fear of
robbers, nor restrict his production to what is only enough for the day
and be in fear for the morrow. For he has confidence that God will
supply his wants when and where it may be requisite.

If he who trusts in God is wealthy, he will hasten cheerfully to fulfil
all the religious and ethical obligations of wealth; and if he is
without wealth, he will look upon its absence as a blessing from God,
relieving him from the responsibilities its

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

possession involves, and from the anxiety of guarding and administrating
it.

The wealthy man who trusts in God will not find his wealth a hindrance
to his faith; for he does not place his reliance upon his wealth, which
is, in his eyes, trust money assigned to him for a limited period that
he may apply it in various appointed ways. He will not be proud, nor
will he make any mention of his goodness to any one to whom he has been
commanded to give some of this wealth, and he will not require any
reward, or thanks, or praise; but he will render thanks to the Creator
who has made him the agent of His beneficence. And if he loses his
wealth he will not be anxious, or mourn its absence, but will be
thankful to God at the taking away of what was only entrusted to him,
just as he thanked God for the original gift; and he will rejoice in his
portion, and not seek the injury of any one else, and not envy any other
man his wealth.

The worldly advantages of trust in God include peace of mind from
worldly anxieties, and rest for the soul from the disturbances of
trouble caused by any want in the satisfaction of bodily appetites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[42:\*](doth38.htm#fr_12) It must be remembered
that Bachye regards moral virtues, aid all righteous conduct, as part of
the service of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Keeping Account with the Soul](doth39)

</div>
