[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wscs33) 
[Next](wscs35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/093281395X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors*, by Kersey Graves, \[1875\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

### Chapter XXIX.

#### HOW MEN, INCLUDING JESUS CHRIST, CAME TO BE WORSHIPPED AS GODS

##### JESUS CHRIST A DEMIGOD, ACCORDING TO CHRISTIAN WRITERS

IT is truly surprising to observe the damaging concessions of some of
the early Christian writers, ruinous to the dogmas of their own faith
with respect to the divinity of Jesus Christ, placing him, as they do,
on an exact level with the heathen demigods, proving that the belief in
his divinity originated in the same manner the belief in theirs did, by
which it is clearly shown to be a pagan derived doctrine. Several
Christian writers admit the belief in earth-born Gods (called Sons of
Gods), and their coming into the world by human birth was prevalent
among the heathen long prior to the time of Christ. Hear the proof.

We will first quote St. Justin relative to the prevalence of the belief
among the ancient Greeks and Romans. Addressing them, he says, "The
title of Son of God (As applied to Jesus Christ) is very justifiable
upon the account of his wisdom, considering you have your Mercury in
your worship, under the title of Word or Messenger of God." (Reeves
Apol. p. 76.) Here is the proof that the tradition of the Son of God
coming alto the world, and "the Word becoming flesh," was established
amongst the ancient Greeks and Romans long prior to the era of
Christianity, or the birth of Christ.

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

And yet more than a hundred millions of Christian professors can now be
found, who, in their historic ignorance, suppose St. John was the first
writer who taught the doctrine of "the Word becoming flesh," and that
Jesus Christ was "the first and only begotten Son of God" who ever made
his appearance on earth. How true it is that "ignorance is the mother of
devotion" to creeds.

How "the man Christ Jesus" came to be worshiped as a God, is pretty
clearly indicated by Bishop Horne, who shows that the doctrine of the
incarnation was of universal prevalence long before Jesus Christ came
into the flesh. He says, "That God should, in some extraordinary manner,
visit and dwell with man, is an idea, which, as we read the writings of
the ancient heathen, meets us in a thousand different forms." If, then,
the tradition of God being born into the world was so universally
established in heathen countries before the Christian era, as here
shown, why *should* not, and why *will* not, our good Christian brethren
dismiss their prejudices, and tear the scales from their eyes, so as to
see that this universal belief would as naturally lead to the
deification and worship of "the man Christ Jesus" as water flows down a
descending plane?

And, certainly a thousand times more reasonable is the assumption that
his deification originated in this way, than that, with all his
frailties and foibles, he was entitled to the appellation of a God—a
conclusion strongly corroborated by the testimony of that able Christian
writer, Mr. Norton, who tells us that many of the first Christians being
converts from Gentileism, their imaginations were familiar with the
reputed incarnation of heathen deities." How natural it would be for
such converts to worship "the man Christ Jesus" as a God on account of
his *superior manhood!*

Again, that ancient pillar of the Christian church, St. Justin, concedes
that the ancient oriental heathen held all

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

the cardinal doctrines of the Christian faith relating to the
incarnation long prior to the introduction and establishment of
Christianity. Hear him: Addressing the pagans, he says, "For by
declaring the Logos the first begotten Son of God, our Master, Jesus
Christ, to be born of a virgin without any human mixture, and to be
crucified, and dead, and to have risen again into heaven, we say no more
in this than what you say of those whom you style the sons of Jove."
(Reeves, Apol. vol. i. p. 69.) Now, Christian reader, mark the several
important admissions which are made here:—

1\. Here is traced to ancient heathen tradition the belief in an
incarnate Son of God.

2\. The doctrine of a "first begotten Son of God."

3\. Of his being born of a virgin.

4\. Of his crucifixion.

5\. Of his resurrection.

6\. Of his final ascension into heaven.

All these cardinal doctrines of Christianity are here shown to have been
in existence, and to have been preached by pagan priests long anterior
to the Christian era, thus entirely oversetting the common belief of
Christendom that these doctrines were never known or preached in the
world until heralded by the first disciples of the Christian religion. A
fatal mistake, truly! This suicidal admission of St. Justin (a standard
Christian writer) thus entirely uptrips all pretensions to originality
in the fundamental doctrines of the Christian faith, and shows it to be
a mere travesty of the more ancient heathen systems.

And we have still other testimony to corroborate this conclusion. The
French writer Bazin says, "The most ancient histories are those of Gods
becoming incarnate in order to govern mankind." Again he says, "The idea
sprang up everywhere from confused ideas of God, which prevailed
everywhere among mankind that Gods formerly

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

descended upon earth. The fertile imagination of the people of various
nations converted men into Gods."

And to the same effect is the declaration of Mr. Higgins, that "there
was incarnate Gods in all religions."

Sadly beclouded and warped indeed must be that mind which cannot see
that here is set in as plain view as the cloudless sun at noonday, the
origin of the deification of "the man Christ Jesus." No unbiased mind
can possibly stave off the conclusion that such a universal prevalence
of the practice of God-making throughout the religious world would cause
*such a man* as Jesus Christ to be worshiped as a *God*—especially when
we look at the various motives which promoted men to Gods, which we will
now present.

#### MOTIVES TO INCARNATION, OR THE CAUSE OF MEN BEING WORSHIPED AS GODS

The causes which led to the conception of Gods and Sons of God becoming
clothed in human flesh—the manner in which the absurd idea originated of
an infinite being descending from heaven, assuming the form of a man,
being born of a pure and spotless virgin, and finally being killed by
his own children, the subjects of his own government, are palpably plain
and easily understood in the light of oriental history.

And at the same time it is so shockingly absurd, that the rapid march of
science and civilization will soon inaugurate the era when the man or
woman who shall still be found clinging to these childish and
superstitious conceptions—the offspring of ignorance, and the relics of
barbarism, and a certain proof of undeveloped or unenlightened
minds—will be looked upon as deplorably ignorant and superstitious. We
will proceed to enumerate some of the causes which promoted men to the
dignity of Gods.

1\. God *must* come down to suffer and sympathize with the people.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

The people of all ancient religious countries were so externally-minded,
that they demanded a God whom they could know by virtue of his
corporeity, really sympathized with their sorrows, their sufferings,
their wrongs, and their oppressions, and, like Jesus Christ, "touched
with a feeling of our infirmities" (Heb. iv. 15)—a God so far invested
with human attributes, human frailties, and human sympathies, that he
could shoulder their burdens and their infirmities, and take upon
himself a portion of their sufferings. Hence it is said of Christ,
"himself took our infirmities." (Matt. iii. 17.)

The same conception runs through the pagan systems. One writer sets
forth the matter thus: "The *Creator* occasionally assumed a mortal form
to assist mankind in great emergencies" (as Jesus Christ was afterward
reported as being the Creator. See Col. i. 16.) "And as repeated
sojourners on earth in various capacities, they (the Saviors) became
practically acquainted with all the sorrows and temptations of humanity,
and could justly judge of its sins while they sympathized with its
weaknesses and its sufferings. When they again returned to the higher
regions (heaven), they remembered the lower forms they had dwelt
amongst, and felt a lively interest in the world they had once
inhabited. They could penetrate even the secret thoughts of mortals."

The people then demanding a God of sympathy and suffering (as shown
above), their credulous imaginations would not be long in finding one.
Let a man rise up in society endowed with an extraordinary degree of
spirituality and sympathy for human suffering; let him, like Chrishna,
Pythagoras, Christ, and Mahomet, spend his time in visiting the hovels
of the poor, or consoling their sorrows, laboring to mitigate their
griefs, and in performing acts of charity, disinterested alms and deeds
of benevolence, kindness and love, and so certain would he sooner or
later command the

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

homage of a God. For this was always the mode adopted, in an ignorant,
undeveloped, and unenlightened age, for accounting not merely for moral
greatness, but for every species of mental and physical superiority, as
will be hereafter shown. We will proceed to notice the second cause of
men being invested with divine attributes.

2\. The people must and would have an external God they could see, hear,
and talk to.

All the oriental nations, as well as Christian, taught that "God was a
spirit," but no nation or class of people, not even the founders of
Christianity, entertained a consistent view of the doctrine. Only a few
learned philosophers saw the scientific impossibility of an infinite
spirit being crowded into the human form. Hence they alone were
contented to "worship God in spirit and in truth." Every religious
nation went counter to the spirit of this injunction in worshiping for a
God a being in the human form. Even the founders of Christianity, though
making high claims to spirituality, were too gross, too sensuous in
their conceptions, too externally-minded, and too idolatrous in their
feelings and proclivities, to be content to "worship God in spirit."
Hence their deification of the "Man Christ Jesus" to answer the
requisition of an external worship, by which they violated the command
to "worship God *as a spirit*."

That the practice of promoting men to the Godhead originated with minds
on the external plane, and evinces a want of spiritual development, is
clearly set forth by the author of "The Nineteenth Century" (a Christian
writer) who tells us, "The idea of the primitive ages were wholly
sensuous, and the masses did not believe in anything except that which
they could touch, see, hear and taste." A true description, no doubt, of
the ancient pagan worshipers of demigods. But we warn the Christian
reader not to cast anchor here, for we have at our elbow abundance of
Christian testimony from the pens of the very oracles of the

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

church to prove that the same state of things, the same state of
society, the same state of mind, the same proclivity for God-making,
existed with the people among whom Christ was born, and that it was
owing to this sensuous, idolatrous state of mind among his disciples
that he received the homage and title of a God.

Hence the famous Archbishop Tillotson says, "Another very common notion,
and rife in the heathen world, and a great source of their idolatry, was
their deification of great men fit to be worshiped as Gods." . . .
"There was a great inclination in mankind to the worship of a visible
Deity. So God was pleased to appear in our nature, that they who were
*fond* of a visible Deity might have one, even a true and natural
incarnation of God the Father, the express image of his person." Now, we
enjoin the reader to mark this testimony well, and impress it indelibly
upon his memory. According to this orthodox Christian bishop, Jesus
Christ appeared on earth as a God in condescension to the wishes of a
people too devoid of spirituality, and too strongly inclined to
idolatry, to worship God as a spirit. For he admits the worship of a
God-man or a man-God is a species of idolatry. This tells the whole
story of the apotheosis of "the man Christ Jesus." We have no doubt but
that here is suggested one of the true causes of his elevation to the
Deityship. Again he says, "The world was mightily bent on addressing
their requests and supplications, not to the Deity immediately, but by
some Mediator between the Gods and men." (See Wadsworth's Eccles. Biog.
p. 172.) Here, then, we have the most conclusive proof that the belief
in mediators is of pagan origin. We will now hear from another
archbishop on this subject. in his "Caution to the Times" (p. 71),
Archbishop Whately says, "As the Infinite Being is an object too remote
and incomprehensible for our minds to dwell upon, he has manifested
himself in his Son, the man Jesus Christ." Precisely

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

so! just the kind of reasoning employed to account for the worship of
man-Gods among the heathen. This logic fits one case as well as the
other.

The Christian writer F. D. Maurice declares in like manner, "We accept
the fact of the incarnation (of Jesus Christ), because we feel that it
is impossible to know the absolute invisible God without an incarnation,
as man needs to know him, and *craves* to know him." (Logical Essay, p.
79.) Here is more pagan logic—the same reasoning they employed to prove
the divinity of their Saviors and demi-gods. And the Rev. Dr. Thomas
Arnold declares, "It (the incarnation of Christ) was very necessary,
especially at a time when men were so accustomed to worship their
highest Gods under the *form of men*." (Sermon on Christian Life, p.
61.) Let the reader attentively observe the explicit avowal here made,
and mark well its pregnant inferences. He makes Jesus Christ come into
the world in condescension to the idolatrous rivalry of the Jews to be
up with the heathen nations in worshiping God in the form of man; that
is, the founders of Christianity, having been Jews, disclosed the true
Jewish character in running after and adopting the customs of heathen
countries then so rife—that of hunting up a great man, and making him a
God—which was only one case out of many of the Jews adopting some of the
numerous forms of idolatry and other religious customs of their heathen
neighbors. Their whole history, as set forth in the Bible, proves, as we
have shown in another chapter, that they were strongly prone to such
acts. It is not strange, therefore, that they should and did convert
"the man Christ Jesus" into a God. We will now listen to another
Christian writer, the notable and noteworthy Dr. T. Chambers. "Whatever
the falsely or superstitiously fearful imagination conjures up because
of God being at a *distance*, can only be dispelled by God being
*brought nigh* to us. . . .

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

The veil which hides the *unseen God* from the eyes of mortals must be
*somehow* withdrawn." (Select Works, vol. iii. p. 161.) Most significant
indeed is this species of reasoning. It is the same kind of logic which
had led to the promotion of more than a score of great men to the
God-head among the ancient heathen. "*The veil which hides the unseen
God must be removed*,"—says Dr. Chambers; and so had reasoned in
soliloquy a thousand pagans long before, when *determined to worship men
for Gods*. It is simply saying, "We are too carnally-minded to worship
God in spirit; we must and *will* have a God of *flesh* and *blood*—a
God who can be recognized by the external senses; he must "become flesh,
and dwell amongst us." (See John i. 14.) Our author continues: "Now all
this (removing the veil from the unseen God) has been done once, and
done only once in the person of Jesus Christ." (*Ibid*.) *Mistake, most
fatal mistake, brother Chambers!* It has been done *more than a score of
times* in various heathen countries—a fact which proves you ignorant of
oriental history.

Now let the reader mark the foregoing citations from standard Christian
authors, setting forth some of the reasons which led the founders of
Christianity to adopt a visible man-God in their worship in the person
of Jesus Christ. Language could hardly be used to prove more
conclusively that the whole thing grew out of an idolatrous proclivity
to man-worship,—that is, the gross, sensuous, carnally-minded propensity
to worship an *external, visible* God,—proving, with the corroborative
evidence of many other facts, that they were not a whit above the
heathen in spiritual development. The reason employed by the Tibetan for
the worship of the Hindoo Chrishna as a God, tells the whole story of
the worship and the deification of Jesus Christ. "We could not always
have God behind the clouds; so we had him come down where we could see
him." This is the same kind of reasoning made use of by the Christian
writer above

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

quoted, all of which discloses a state of mind among both heathen and
Christians that would not long rest satisfied without deifying
*somebody*, in order to have a *visible God* to worship. And hence
Christians deified "the man Christ Jesus" for this purpose.

The more externally minded (says Fleurbach), the greater was the
determination to worship a personal God"—*God in the form of man*. And
as the Jewish founders of Christianity (as every chapter of their
history demonstrates) were dwelling on the external plane, it was not an
act of direct innovation, therefore, for them to fall into the habit of
worshiping the personal Jesus as a God. It involved no serious incursion
on previous thoughts or habits. And warped and blinded, indeed, must be
that mind which cannot here discover the true key to the apotheosis of
Jesus—one of the real causes of his being stripped of his manhood, and
advanced to the Godhead. It was as naturally to be expected from the
then state of the religious world, and the state of the Jewish mind
concerned in the founding of Christianity, as that an autumnal crop of
fruit should succeed the bloom of spring.

Let it be specially noted, that all the Christian writers above cited
tell us, in effect, that God sent his Son Jesus Christ into the world to
be worshiped as a God in condescension to the ignorance and
superstitious tendencies, and we will add, *idolatrous proclivities* of
the people. From this stand-point we challenge the world to show why God
may not have sent the oriental Saviors into the world for the same
reason—that is, in condescension to the prejudices of the devout
worshipers under the heathen systems. Why, then, is there not as much
probability that *he did do so?* Why would he not be as likely to
accommodate *their ignorance* and *prejudices* in this way as *those* of
the *founders* of the *Christian system*. This question we shall keep
standing before

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

the Christian world till it is answered, and we challenge them to meet
it, and overthrow it if they can.

3\. Men deified on account of mental and moral superiority.

The ancient nations, in their entire ignorance of the philosophy of the
human mind, and the laws controlling its actions, always accounted for
the appearance of great men amongst them by supposing them to be Gods.
Every country occasionally produced a man, who, by virtue of natural
superiority, rose so high in the scale of moral and intellectual
greatness as to fill the ideal of the people with respect to the
characteristics of a God. So low, so limited, so narrow, so greatly
circumscribed were the conceptions of deity, of the undeveloped and
intellectually dwarfed minds of all religious countries in that age,
that a man had to rise but a few degrees above the common level of the
populace to become a God. He could "easily fill the bill," and exhibit
all the qualities they assigned to the highest God in the heavens. And
this is as true of the Jewish mind as that of any other nation, a
portion of whom adored Jesus as a God. Or if they lacked anything in
natural inclination, they made it up by imitation, a propensity which
they possessed in no small degree, that is, a proneness to imitate the
customs of other nations.

Mr. Higgins tells us that "men of brilliant intellects and high moral
attainments, and great healers (of which Christ was one), were *almost
certain* to be deified." In like manner Archbishop Tillotson says, "they
deified famous and eminent persons by advancing them after their death
to the dignity of an inferior kind of Gods fit to be worshiped by men on
earth." Mark the expression, "*after their death*." We have shown in
another chapter that Jesus Christ was not generally considered a God,
even by his followers, till more than three hundred years after his
death, when Constantine declared him to be "God of very God"—a
circumstance of itself sufficient to establish the conclusion that he
did

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

not possess this character. A God would be adored as such by *everybody
while living*, but a man's worshipers rise up *after his death*, as in
the case of "the man Christ Jesus." Great mental endowments, or great
moral attainments, would, in most countries, bring the most ignorant
down on their knees to worship such a man as a God. But it required
years, and sometimes centuries, to get him fully established among the
Gods. This is as true of Jesus Christ as the other human-descended
deities. Whatever amount of homage Jesus might have received while
living, any person who will institute a thorough, unbiased scrutiny in
the case will discover that it was his great healing powers and superior
mental qualities which finally deified him. His ignorant admirers knew
no way of accounting for such extraordinary qualities but to suppose him
to be the embodiment of infinite wisdom. Like the Chinaman who
exclaimed, "See the God in that man," when an Englishman cured a young
woman of partial blindness by anointing her eyes with kerosene. Such a
deed would deify almost any man, in almost any country, before the dawn
of letters and the recognition of the science of mind.

The missionary Rev. D. O. Allen's method of accounting for the
deification of the Hindoo God Chrishna is so suggestive, that we here
present it. He tells us that "as the exploits ascribed to Chrishna
exceed mere human power, the difficulty was removed by placing him among
the incarnations of Vishnu." (India, Ancient and Modern, p. 26.) Exactly
so! We are glad of such historic information. We hope the Christian
reader will note the lesson it suggests. For certainly, every reader,
who has not had his reason shipwrecked on the shoals of a blind and
dogmatic theology, can see here a key to unlock the great mystery of the
Christian incarnation—the *divinity of Jesus Christ*. As some of the
exploits of Chrishna were supposed to "exceed mere human power," we are
told the difficulty

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

was explained by imagining him to be a God. How powerful the suggestion!
how conclusive the explanation, not only for the Godhood of this
sin-atoning Savior, but for that of "our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,"
and all the other Lords, and Gods, and Saviors of antiquity! A single
hint will sometimes explain whole volumes of obscure history, as does
this of the Rev. Christian Hindoo missionary D. O. Allen. And surely,
most deplorably blinded by superstition must be the two hundred millions
of Christ worshipers, the three hundred millions who worship Chrishna,
the one hundred and twenty million adorers of Confucius, the fifty
millions of suppliants of Mithra the Mediator, and the one hundred and
fifty millions of followers of Mahomet, who cannot see here a
satisfactory solution of the deityship of all these Gods, and all the
other man-Gods of antiquity.

The question is sometimes asked, How could two hundred millions of
people come to believe that Jesus was a God merely because of his
superiority as a man? We will answer by pointing to the history of the
Hindoo Chrishna, and by asking the same question with respect to his
Godhead. How could *three hundred millions* of people be brought to
believe in his divinity, and worship *him* as a God, merely because he
was a superior human being? One question is as easily answered as the
other, and posterity will answer both questions alike. When we observe
it taught as an important and easily learned lesson of history, and one
based on a thousand facts, that no man could rise to intellectual
greatness or moral distinction in the era in which Christ was born
without being advanced to the dignity of a God, and worshiped as such,
it is really a source of humility and sorrow to every unshackled lover
of truth and humanity to reflect that there are so many millions of
people whose mental vision is so beclouded by a dogmatic and inexorable
theology that they cannot see the logical potency of these facts,—that
they cannot be even moved by this great and

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

overwhelming amount of evidence against the divinity dogma, and observe
that it explodes it into a thousand fragments, but still cling to the
delusion that "the man Christ Jesus," with all the human qualities and
human frailties with which his own history (the Gospels) invest him, was
nevertheless a God,—ay, the monstrous delusion that any being possessing
a *finite form* could be an *infinite being*—a most self-evident and
shocking absurdity. And we challenge all Christendom to show, or
approximate one inch toward showing, that there was sufficient
difference between Christ and Chrishna to require us to accept one as a
man and the other as a God. It cannot be done.

We have shown, then, by the foregoing exposition, that one cause of the
deification of men was simply an attempt to solve the problem of human
greatness,—an attempt to account for the moral and intellectual
superiority of men which enabled them to perform deeds and otherwise
exhibit a character far above the capacity of the multitude to
comprehend, and which they could find no other way to account for than
to suppose them to be Gods, while the low and groveling conceptions
which most religious nations, and especially the Jews, had formed of the
character and essential attributes of the Infinite Deity (often
investing him with the most ignoble human attributes, human passions,
and human imperfections), made it perfectly easy to convert their great
men by imagination into Gods. The Jews represented God not only as a
coming down from heaven in *propria persona*, and walking, talking,
wrestling, &c., as a man (on one occasion we are told he and Jacob
scuffled all night), but he is often represented as acting the part of a
wicked man, such as lying (see 2 Chron. v. 22), getting mad (see Deut.
i. 37), swearing, sanctioning the high-handed and demoralizing crimes of
stealing (see Ex. iii. 2), of robbery (see Ex. xii. 36), of murder (see
Deut. xiii. 2) and even fornication (see Gen. xxxi. 1, and Num. xxxi)

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

and thus they invested Deity with such mean, low, despicable attributes
as to reduce his moral character to a level with the most immoral man in
society. So that it was very easy, if not very natural, to elevate their
great men (if it really required any elevation) to a level with their
God.

Men and Gods were in character and conception so nearly alike, that it
was easy to bring them on a level, or to mistake one for the other. And
hence it is we find an incarnated God, Savior, Son of God, Redeemer,
&c., figuring in he early history of nearly every oriental religious
nation whose name and history has descended to us. Indeed, the practice
of deifying men, or mistaking men for Gods, was once so common, so
nearly universal, that it must require a mind very ignorant of oriental
history to adore Jesus Christ as having been the *only character* of
this kind who figured in the religious world. It was, as before
suggested, deemed the most rational way of accounting for the marked
superiority among men, to suppose that some men had a divine birth, and
were begotten by the great Infinite Deity himself, and descended to the
earth through the purest human (virgin) channel.

As Mr. Higgins remarks, "Every person who possessed a striking
superiority of mind, either for talent or goodness, was supposed
anciently to have a portion of the divine mind or essence incorporated
or incarnated in him." The Jews had a number of men whose names imply a
participation in the divine nature, among which we will cite Elijah and
Elisha (El-i-jah and El-i-sha), El being the Hebrew name or term for
God, while Jah is Jehovah (see Ps. lxviii. 4), and Sha means a Savior.
Elijah, then, is an approximation to God-Jehovah, and Elisha is God—a
Savior. The character of men and Gods were cast in molds so
approximately similar, so nearly identical, as to make the transition,
or change from one to the other, so slight and easy; either

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

of men into Gods or Gods into men, that several nations went so far as
to teach that a man might by his own natural exertions, his own
voluntary powers, raise himself to a level with the Deity, and thereby
become a God.

Mr. Ritter in his "History of Ancient Philosophy" (Chap. II.), tells us
that some of the Buddhist sect held that "a man by freeing himself by
holiness of conduct from the obstacles of nature, may deliver his
fellows from the corruption of the times, and become a benefactor and
redeemer of his race, and also *even become a God*"—a "Buddha"—i.e., a
Savior and Son of God. Singular enough that the Christian should object
to this doctrine as being rather blasphemous, when his own bible
abundantly and explicitly teaches the same doctrine in effect!

We find the same thing substantially taught over and over again in the
Christian Scriptures. "Be ye perfect even as your Father in heaven is
perfect " (Matt. v. 18), requires a man to become morally perfect as
God, which is all that the Buddhist precept requires or contemplates,
and no man can become *perfect* as God without *becoming a God*. But we
are not left to mere inference in the matter, We have the doctrine
several times expressed and unquestionably taught in the Christian bible
of man's power and prerogative to become either a God or Son of God.
"Said I not that ye are Gods?" (Ex. iv. 16). "Behold now, we are the
sons of God." (1 John i. 2.)

Here is the Buddhist doctrine as explicitly stated as it can be taught.
It is, then, a Christian bible doctrine as well as a pagan doctrine,
that man can become a God, and that God can be born of woman, and
thereby invested with all the frail and imperfect attributes of man. It
cannot be considered a matter of marvel, therefore, that so many of the
good, the great, and the wise men of almost every country, including
"the man Christ Jesus," should be honored and adored with the titles of
Deity, and worshiped

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

as God absolute, "Son of God," "Savior," "Redeemer," "Mediator," &c.

4\. God comes down and is incarnated to fight and conquer the devil. We
will proceed to enumerate other causes and motives which conspired in
various cases to invest some one or more of the great men of a nation
with divine honors, and adore them as veritable Gods and Saviors "come
down to us in the form of men." It was a tenant of faith with most of
the ancient religions, that almost at the dawn of human existence a
devil or evil principle found its way into the world, to the great
discomfiture of man and the no small annoyance of the Supreme Creator
himself, and that hence there must needs be a Savior, a Redeemer, an
Intercessor to combat and if possible "destroy the devil and his works."

For this purpose appeared the Savior Chrishna, in India, the Savior
Osiris, in Egypt, the God or Mediator Mithra, in Persia, the Redeemer
Quexalcote, in Mexico, the Savior Jesus Christ, in Judea, &c. In the
initiatory chapter on the transgression and fall of man, some of the
oriental bibles graphically describe the scene of "the war in heaven"—a
counterpart to the story of St. John, as found in the twelfth chapter of
Revelation, wherein Michael and the dragon are represented as the
captains and commander-in-chief of their respective embattled hosts, and
in which the former was crowned as victor in the contest, as he
succeeded in vanquishing and "casting out the evil one." In the pagan
military drama the scene of the war in heaven is transferred to the
earth. A God, a Savior (a Son of God), comes down to put a stop to the
machinations of the "Evil One," i.e., to "destroy the devil and his
works" as we are told Christ came for that purpose. (1 John iii. 8) See
the Author's "Biography of Satan."

The Egyptian story runs thus: "Osiris appeared on earth to benefit
mankind, and after he had performed the

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

duties of his mission, and had fallen a sacrifice to Typhon (the devil,
or evil principle), which, however, he eventually overcame ('overcame
the wicked one,' 1 John ii. 11), by rising from the dead, after being
crucified, he became the judge of mankind in a future state." (See
Kerrick's "Ancient Egypt;" also Wilkinson's "Egypt.")

The Buddhist, or Hindoo, version of the story is on this wise: "The
prince (of darkness), or evil spirit, Ravana, or Mahesa, got into a
contest and a war with the divine hero Rama, in which the latter proved
victorious, and put to flight the army of 'the wicked one,' but not till
after considerable injury had been done to the human family, and the
whole order of the universe subverted; to rectify which, and to achieve
a final and complete triumph over Ravana (the devil) and his works, and
thus save the human race from utter destruction, the gods besought
Vishnu (the second person of the Trinity) to descend to the earth and
take upon himself the form and flesh of man. And it was argued that as
the mission appertained to man, the God Vishnu, when he descended to the
earth in the capacity of a Savior, should become half man and half God,
and that the most feasible way to accomplish this end was for him to be
born of a woman.

And that the glory and honor of his triumph over Ravana, the devil,
would be greater if achieved in this capacity than if he were to come
down from heaven and conquer Ravana wholly with his attributes as a God,
or wholly in his divine character—i.e., as absolute God, uninvested with
human nature. The suggestion was approved by Vishnu, who descended and
took upon himself the form of man" ("the form of a servant"—Phil. ii.
7). And that his metamorphosis or earth-born life might be the purer, it
was decided that he should be born of a woman wholly uncontaminated with
man—that is, a virgin. And thus, far back in the midnight of mythology
and fable,

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

originated the story of divine Saviors and Gods being born of virgins—a
conception now found incorporated in the religious histories of various
ancient nations.

And now let us observe how substantially the Christian story of a Savior
conforms to the above. Jesus, like the Saviors of India and Egypt, was
believed to be a man-God—half man and half God, and reputedly he came
into the world, like them, to "destroy the devil and his works, or the
works of the devil—that is, to put an end to the evil or malignant
principle introduced into the world by the serpent in the garden of
Eden; as it is declared "the seed of the woman shall bruise the
serpent's head" (Gen. iii. 15)—which is interpreted as referring to
Christ. And like these and various other pagan Saviors Jesus is assigned
the highest and most ennobling human origin—a birth from a virgin. And,
as in the instances above named, Jesus had also several encounters with
the devil; first in the wilderness, then on a mountain, and finally,
like them, falls a sacrifice to his insidious, malignant power acting
through the agency and mediumship of Judas Iscariot; for his betrayal is
ascribed wholly to Satan, whom John called the serpent, entering into
Judas and prompting the act. (See Rev. xii. 3). And thus Christ, like
the other saviors, falls a victim to the serpentine or satanic power
acting through the instrumentality of a Judas Iscariot; but finally,
triumphed, like the Savior of Egypt (Osiris), by rising from the
dead—"the first fruits of immortality." And thus the stories run
parallel—the more modern Christian with the more ancient pagan.

(For a full exposition of the belief and traditions respecting a devil
and a hell in all ages and all countries, see the Author's "Biography of
Satan.")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX: Sacred Cycles Explaining the Advent of the Gods, the
Master-Key to the Divinity of Jesus Christ](wscs35)
