[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wscs00) 
[Next](wscs02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/093281395X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors*, by Kersey Graves, \[1875\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### PREFACE.

INVERSELY to the remoteness of time has been man's ascent toward the
temple of knowledge. Truth has made its ingress into the human mind in
the ratio by which man has attained the capacity to receive and
appreciate it. Hence, as we tread back the meandering pathway of human
history, every step in the receding process brings us to a lower plane
of intelligence and a state of mind more thoroughly encrusted with
ignorance and superstition. It is, therefore, no source of surprise to
learn, when we take a survey of the world two or three thousand years in
the past, that every religious writer of that era committed errors on
every subject which employed his pen, involving a scientific principle.
Hence, the bible, or sacred book, to which he was a contributor, is now
found to bear the marks of human imperfection. For the temple of
knowledge was but partially reared, and its chambers but dimly lighted
up. The intellectual brain was in a dark, feeble and dormant condition.
Hence, the moral and religious feelings were drifted about without a
pilot on the turbulent waves of superstition, and finally stranded on
the shoals of bigotry. The Christian bible, like other bibles, having
been written in an age when science was but budding into life, and
philosophy had attained but a feeble growth, should be expected to teach
many things incompatible with the principles of modern science. And
accordingly it is found to contain, like other bibles, numerous
statements so obviously at war with present established scientific
truths that almost any school-boy,

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

at the present day, can demonstrate their falsity. Let the unbiased
reader examine and compare the oriental and Christian bibles together,
and he will note the following facts, viz:—

1\. That the cardinal religious conceptions of all bibles are
essentially the same—all running in parable grooves.

2\. That every chapter of every bible is but a transcript of the mental
chart of the writer.

3\. That no bible, pagan or Christian, contains anything surpassing the
natural, mental and moral capacity of the writer to originate. And hence
no divine aid or inspiration was necessary for its production.

4\. That the moral and religious teachings of *no bible* reach a higher
altitude than the intelligence and mental development of the age and
country which produced it.

That the Christian bible, in *some respects*, is superior to some of the
other bibles, but *only to the extent* to which the age in which it was
written was superior in intelligence and natural mental capacity to the
era in which the older bibles were penned; and that this superiority
consists not its more exalted religious conceptions, but only in the
fact that, being of more modern origin, the progress of mind had worn
away some of the legendary rubbish of the past. Being written in a later
and more enlightened age, it is consequently a little less encrusted
with mythological tradition and oriental imagery. Though not free from
these elements, it possesses them in less degree. And by comparing
Christ's history with those of the oriental Gods, it will be found:—

1\. That he taught no new doctrine or moral precept.

2\. That he inculcated the same religion and morality, which he
elaborated, as other moral teachers, to great extremes.

3\. That Christ differs so little in his character, preaching, and
practical life from some of the oriental Gods, that no

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

person whose mind is not deplorably warped and biased by early training
can call one divine while he considers the other human.

That if Christ was a God, then all were Gods.

THE AUTHOR.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.

The author desires to say that this work has been carefully reviewed and
corrected, and some additions made, embracing two chapters from "the
Bible of Bibles," and some explanatory notes, and is now able to place
before the reader a greatly improved edition.

The author also desires to say here, that the many flattering letters he
has received from various parts of the country, from those who have
supplied themselves with the work, excites in his mind the hope it will
ultimately effect something towards achieving the important end sought
to be attained by its publication—the banishment of that wide-spread
delusion comprehended in the belief in an incarnate, virgin-born God,
called Jesus Christ, and the infallibility of his teachings, with the
numerous evils growing legitimately out of this belief—among the most
important of which is, its cramping effect upon the mind of the
possessor, which interdicts its growth, and thus constitutes a serious
obstacle to the progress both of the individual and of society. And such
has been the blinding effect of this delusion upon all who have fallen
victims to its influence, that the numerous errors and evils of our
popular system of religious faith, which constitutes its legitimate
fruits, have passed from age to age, unnoticed by all except scientific
and progressive maids, who are constantly bringing these errors and
evils to light. This state of

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

things has been a source of sorrow and regret to every philanthropist
desiring the welfare of the race. And if this work shall achieve
anything towards arresting this great evil, the author will feel that he
is amply compensated for the years of toil and mental labor spent in its
preparation.

NOTE.—As the different works consulted have assigned different dates for
the same event, the author has, in one or two cases, followed their
example, accepting them as authority; as in the date of the birth and
death of the Gods of Mexico. The reader will also notice that the name
of the same God is found in different countries. Example—Adonis and
Bacchus are found amongst the Gods of both Greece and Egypt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](wscs02)
