[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wscs45.md) 
[Next](wscs47.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/093281395X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors*, by Kersey Graves, \[1875\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

### CHAPTER XLI.

#### THE PRECEPTS AND PRACTICAL LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST.

#### HIS TWO HUNDRED ERRORS

THE exaltation of men to the character and homage of divine beings has
always had the effect to draw a vail over their errors and
imperfections, so as to render them imperceptible to those who worship
them as Gods. This is true of nearly all the deified men of antiquity,
who were adored as incarnate divinities, among which may be included the
Christian's man-God, Jesus Christ. The practice of the followers of
these Gods has been, when an error was pointed out in their teachings,
brought to light by the progress of science and general intelligence, to
bestow upon the text some new and unwarranted meaning, entirely
incompatible with its literal reading, or else to insist with a godly
zeal on the correctness of the sentiment inculcated by the text, and
thus essay to make error pass for truth. In this way millions of the
disciples of these Gods have been misled and blinded, and made to
believe by their religious teachers and their religious education, that
everything taught by their assumed-to-be divine exemplars is perfect
truth, in perfect harmony with science, sense, and true morals. Indeed,
the perversion of the mind and judgment by a religious education has
been in many cases carried to such an extreme as to cause their devout
and prejudiced followers either to entirely overlook and ignore their
erroneous teachings, or

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

to magnify them into God-given truths, and thus, as before stated,
clothe error with the livery of truth. This state of things, it has long
been noticed by unprejudiced minds, exists amongst the millions of
professed believers in the divinity of Jesus Christ. Hence the errors,
both in his moral lessons and his practical life, have passed from age
to age unnoticed, because his pious and awe-stricken followers, having
been taught that he was a divine teacher, have assumed that his
teachings must all be true; and hence, too, have instituted no scrutiny
to determine their truth or falsity. But we will now proceed to show
that the progress of science and general intelligence has brought to
light many errors, not only in his teachings, but in his practical life
also. In enumerating them, we will arrange them under the head:

##### *Moral and Religious Errors*

1\. The first moral precept in the teachings of Christ, which we will
bring to notice, is one of a numerous class, which may very properly be
arranged under the head of *Moral Extremism*. We find many of his
admonitions of this character. Nearly everything that is said is
*oversaid*, carried to extremes—thus constituting an overwrought,
extravagant system of morality, impracticable in its requisitions; as,
for example, "Take no thought for the morrow." (Matt. v.) If the spirit
of this injunction were carried out in practical life, there would be no
grain sown and no seed planted in spring, no reaping done in harvest,
and no crop garnered in autumn; and the result would be universal
starvation in less than twelve months. But, fortunately for society, the
Christian world have laid this positive injunction upon the table under
the rule of "indefinite postponement."

2\. Christ's assumed-to-be most important requisition is found in the
injunction, "Seek ye first the Kingdom of

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God, and his
righteousness, and all else shall be added unto you." (Matt. vi. 33.)
His early followers understood by this injunction, and doubtless
understood it correctly, that they were to spend their lives in
religious devotion, and neglect the practical duties of life, leaving
"Providence" to take care of their families—a course of life which
reduced many of them to the point of starvation.

3\. The disciple of Christ is required, "when smitten on one cheek, to
turn the other also;" that is, when one cheek is pommeled into a jelly
by some vile miscreant or drunken wretch, turn the other, to be smashed
up in like manner. This is an extravagant requisition, which none of his
*modern* disciples even attempt to observe.

4\. "Resist not evil" (Matt. v. 34) breathes forth a kindred spirit.
This injunction requires you to stand with your hands in your pocket
while being maltreated so cruelly and unmercifully that the forfeiture
of your life may be the consequence—at least Christ's early followers so
understood it.

5\. The disciple of Christ is required, when his cloak is formally
wrested from him, to give up his coat also. (See Matt. v.) And to carry
out the principle, if the marauder demands it, he must next give up his
boots, then his shirt, and thus strip himself of all his garments, and
go naked. This looks like an invitation and bribe to robbery.

6\. "Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth." (Matt. vi. 19.) This
is another positive command of Christ, which the modern Christian world,
by common consent, have laid on the table under the rule of "indefinite
postponement," under the conviction that the wants of their families and
the exigencies of sickness and old age cannot be served if they should
live up to such an injunction.

7\. "Sell all that thou hast, . . . and come and follow

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

me," is another command which bespeaks more piety than wisdom, as all
who have attempted to comply with it have reduced their families to
beggary and want.

8\. "If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him."
Then he must hate it, as there are but the two principles, and "from
hate proceed envy, strife, evil surmising, and persecution." Evidently
the remedy in this case for . . . worldly-mindedness" is worse than the
disease.

9\. "He that cometh to me, and hateth not father, mother, brother, and
sister, &c., cannot be my disciple." (Luke xiv. 26). This breathes forth
the same spirit as the last text quoted above. Many learned expositions
have been penned by Christian writers to make it appear that *hate* in
this case does not *mean hate*. But certainly it would be a slander upon
infinite wisdom to leave it to be inferred that he could not say or
"inspire" his disciples to say *exactly* what he meant, and to say it so
*plainly* as to leave no *possibility* of being misunderstood, or leave
any ground for dispute about the meaning.

10\. "Rejoice and be exceeding glad" when persecuted. (Matt. v. 4.) Now,
as a state of rejoicing is the highest condition of happiness that can
be realized, such advice must naturally prompt the religious zealot to
court persecution, in order to obtain complete happiness, and
consequently to pursue a dare-devil life to provoke persecution.

11\. "Whosoever shall seek to save his life, shall lose it," &c. (Luke
xvii. 33.) Here is displayed the spirit of martyrdom which has made
millions reckless of life, and goaded on the frenzied bigot to seek the
fiery fagot and the halter. We regard it as another display of religious
fanaticism.

12\. "Ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake." (Matt. x. 12.)
How repulsive must have been their

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

doctrines or their conduct! No *sensible* religion could excite the
universal hatred of mankind. For it would contain *something* adapted to
the moral, religious, or spiritual taste of *some* class or portion of
society, and hence make it and its disciples loved instead of hated. And
then how could they be "hated of all men," when not one man in a
thousand ever heard of them? Here is more of the extravagance of
religious enthusiasm.

13\. "Shake off the dust of your feet" against those who cannot see the
truth or utility of your doctrines. (Matt. x. 14.) Here Christ
encourages in his disciples a spirit of contempt for the opinions of
others calculated to *make them* "hated." A proper regard for the rules
of good-breeding would have forbidden such rudeness toward strangers for
a mere honest difference of opinion.

14\. "Take nothing for your journey, neither staff, nor scrip, nor
purse" (Mark vi. 8); that is "sponge on your friends, and force
yourselves on your enemies," the latter class of which seem to have been
much the most numerous. A preacher who should attempt to carry out this
advice at the present day would be stopped at the first toll-gate, and
compelled to return. Here is more violation of the rules of
good-breeding, and the common courtesies of civilized life.

15\. "Go and teach all nations," &c. Why issue an injunction that could
not possibly be carried out? It never has been, and never will be,
executed, for three-fourths of the human race have never yet heard of
Christianity. It was not, therefore, a mark of wisdom, or a superior
mind, to issue such an injunction.

16\. "And he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that
believeth not shall be damned." What intolerance, bigotry, relentless
cruelty, and ignorance of the science of mind are here displayed! No
philosopher would give utterance to, or indorse such a sentiment. It

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

assumes that belief is a creature of the will, and that a man can
believe anything he chooses, which is wide of the truth. And the
assumption has been followed by persecution, misery, and bloodshed.

17\. "All things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall
receive." (Matt. xxi. 22.) Here is an entire negation of natural law in
the necessity of physical labor as a means to procure the comforts of
life. When anything is wanted in the shape of food or raiment, it is to
be obtained, according to this text, by going down on your knees and
asking God to bestow it. But no Christian ever realized "*all things
whatsoever* asked for in prayer," thought "*believing with all his
heart*" he should obtain it. The author knows, by his own practical
experience, that this declaration is not true. This promise has been
falsified thousands of times by thousands of praying Christians.

18\. "Be not called rabbi." "Call no man your father." (Matt. xxiii.)
The Christian world assume that much of what Christ taught is mere idle
nonsense, or the incoherent utterings of a religious fanatic; for they
pay no more practical attention to it than the barking of a dog. And
here is one command treated in this manner: "Call no man father." Where
is the Christian who refuses to call his earthly sire a father?

19\. "Call no man master." (Matt. xxiii.) And yet mister, which is the
same thing, is the most common title in Christendom.

20\. He who enunciates the two words, "'Thou fool,' shall be in danger
of hell fire." (Matt. xxii.) Mercy! Who, then, can be saved? For there
is probably not a live Christian in the world who has not called
*somebody* a "fool," when he knew him to be such, and could not with
truthfulness be called anything else. Here, then,

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

is another command universally ignored and "indefinitely postponed."

21\. "Swear not at all, neither by heaven nor earth." (Matt. v.) And yet
no Christian refuses to indulge in legal, if not profane, swearing which
the text evidently forbids.

22\. "Men ought always to pray." (Luke xviii.) No time to be allowed for
eating or sleeping. More religious fanaticism.

23\. "Whosoever will be chief among you let him be your servant" (Matt.
xx. 27); that is, no Christian professor shall be a president, governor,
major-general, deacon, or priest. Another command laid on the table.

24\. "Love your enemies." (Matt. v. 44.) Then what kind of feeling
should we cultivate toward friends? And how much did *he love his
enemies* when he called them "fools" "liars," "hypocrites," "generation
of vipers," &c.? And yet he is held up as "our" example in love,
meekness, and forbearance. But no man ever did love an enemy. It is a
moral impossibility, as much so as to love bitter or nauseating food.
The advice of the Roman slave Syrus is indicative of more sense and
wisdom—"Treat your enemy kindly, and thus make him a friend."

25\. We are required to forgive an enemy four hundred and ninety times;
that is, "seventy times seven." (Matt. vii.) Another outburst of
religious enthusiasm; another proof of an overheated imagination.

26\. "Be ye perfect, even as your Father in heaven is perfect." (Matt.
v. 48.) Here is more of the religious extravagance of a mind uncultured
by science. For it is self-evident that human beings can make no
approximation to divine perfection. The distance between human
imperfection and a perfect God is, and ever must be, infinite.

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

27\. Christ commended those who "became eunuchs for the kingdom of
heaven's sake" (Matt. xix. 12)—a custom requiring a murderous,
self-butchering process; destructive of the energies of life and the
vigor of manhood, and rendering the subject weak, effeminate, and
mopish, and unfit for the business of life. It is a low species of
piety, and discloses a lamentable lack of a scientific knowledge of the
true functions of the sexual organs on the part of Jesus.

28\. Christ also encouraged his disciples to "pluck out the eye," and
"cut off the hand," as a means of rendering it impossible to perpetrate
evil with those members. And we would suggest, if such advice is
consistent with sound reasoning, the head also should be cut off, as a
means of *more effectually* carrying out the same principle. Such advice
never came from the mouth of a philosopher. It is a part of Christ's
system of extravagant piety.

29\. He also taught the senseless, oriental tradition of "the
unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost"—a fabulous being who figured
more anciently in the history of various countries. (See Chapter XXII.)
No philosopher or man of science could harbor such childish
misconceptions as are embodied in this tradition, which neither
describes the being nor explains the nature of the sin.

30\. We find many proofs, in Christ's Gospel history, that he believed
in the ancient heathen tradition which taught that disease is caused by
demons and evil spirits. (See Luke vii. 21, and viii. 2.)

31\. Many cases are reported of his relieving the *obsessed* by casting
out the diabolical intruders, in imitation of the oriental custom long
in vogue in various countries, by which he evinced a profound ignorance
of the natural causes of disease.

32\. Christ also taught the old pagan superstition that "God is a God of
anger," while modern science teaches

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

that it would be as impossible for a God of perfect and infinite
attributes to experience the feeling of anger as to commit suicide; and
recent discoveries in physiology prove that anger is a species of
suicide, and that it is also a species of insanity. Hence an angry God
would be an insane God—an omnipotent lunatic, "ruling the kingdom of
heaven," which would make heaven a *lunatic asylum*, and rather a
dangerous place to live.

33\. And Christ's injunction to "fear God" also implies that he is an
angry being. (See Luke xxiii. 40.) But past history proves that "the
fear of God" has always been the great lever of priestcraft, and the
most paltry and pitiful motive that ever moved the human mind. It has
paralyzed the noblest intellects, crushed the elasticity of youth, and
augmented the hesitating indecision of old age, and finally filled the
world with cowardly, trembling slaves. No philosopher will either love
or worship a God he fears. "The fear of the Lord" is a very ancient
heathen superstition.

34\. The inducement Christ holds out for leading a virtuous life by the
promise of "Well done, thou good and faithful servant," bespeaks a
childish ignorance of the nature of the human mind and the true science
of life. It ranks with the promise of the nurse of sugar-plums to the
boy if he would keep his garments unsoiled. (For the remainder of the
two hundred errors of Christ, see Vol. II.)

There are many other errors found in the precepts and practical life of
Jesus Christ (which we are compelled to omit an exposition of here),
such as his losing his temper, and abusing the money-changers by
overthrowing their counting-table, and expelling them from the temple
with a whip of cords when engaged in a lawful and laudable business; his
getting mad at and cursing the fig tree; his dooming Capernaum to hell
in a fit of anger; his being

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

deceived by two of his disciples (Peter and Judas), which prompted him
to call them devils; his implied approval of David, with his fourteen
crimes and penitentiary deeds, and also Abraham, with his falsehoods,
polygamy, and incest, and his implied sanction of the Old Testament,
with all its errors and numerous crimes; his promise to his twelve
apostles to "sit upon the twelve thrones of Israel" in heaven, thus
evincing a very limited and childish conception of the enjoyments of the
future life; his puerile idea of sin, consisting in a personal affront
to a personal God; his omission to say anything about human freedom, the
inalienable rights of man, &c.

##### *The Scientific Errors of Christ*

That Jesus Christ was neither a natural or moral philosopher is evident
from the following facts:—

1\. He never made any use of the word "philosophy."

2\. Never gave utterance to the word "Science."

3\. Never spoke of a natural law, or assigned a natural cause for
anything. The fact that he never made use of these words now so current
in all civilized countries, is evidence that he was totally ignorant of
these important branches of knowledge, the cultivation of which is now
known to be essential to the progress of civilization. And yet it is
claimed his religion has been a great lever in the advancement of
civilization. But this is a mistake—a solemn mistake, as elsewhere
shown. (See Chap. XLV.)

4\. Everything to Christ was miracle; everything was produced and
controlled by the arbitrary power of an angry or irascible God. He
evidently had no idea of a ruling principle in nature or of the
existence of natural law, as controlling any event he witnessed. Hence
he set no bounds to anything, and recognized no limits to the possible.
He believed God to be a supernatural personal

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

being, who possessed unlimited power, and who ruled and controlled
everything by his arbitrary will, without any law or any limitation to
its exercises. Hence he told his disciples they would have anything they
prayed for in faith; that by faith they could roll mountains into the
sea, or bring to a halt the rolling billows of the mighty deep. He
evidently believed that the forked lightning, the out-bursting
earth-shaking thunder, and the roaring, heaving volcano were but pliant
tools or obsequious servants to the man of faith. And he displays no
less ignorance of the laws of mind than the laws of nature; thus proving
him to have been neither a natural, moral, nor mental philosopher. He
omitted to teach the great moral lessons learned by human experience, of
which he was evidently totally ignorant.

5\. He never taught that the practice of virtue contains its own reward.

6\. That the question of right and wrong of any action is to be decided
by its effect upon the individual, or upon society.

7\. That no life can be displeasing to God which is useful to man.

8\. And he omitted to teach the most important lesson that can engage
the attention of man, viz.: that the great purpose of life is
self-development.

9\. That no person can attain or approximate to real happiness without
bestowing a special attention to the cultivation and exercise of all the
mental and physical faculties, so far as to keep them in a healthy
condition. None of the important lessons above named are hinted at in
his teachings, which, if punctually observed, would do more to advance
the happiness of the human race than all the sermons Christ or Chrishna
ever preached, or ever taught.

10\. And then he taught many doctrines which are

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

plainly contradicted by the established principle of modern science,
such as,—

11\. Diseases being produced by demons, devils, or wicked spirits. (See
Mark ix. 20.)

Christ nowhere assigns a natural cause for disease, or a scientific
explanation for its cure.

12\. His rebuking a fever discloses a similar lack of scientific
knowledge. (See Luke iv. 39.)

13\. His belief in a literal hell and a lake of fire and brimstone (see
Matt. xviii. 8) is an ancient heathen superstition science knows nothing
about, and has no use for.

14\. His belief in a personal devil also (see Matt. xvii. 88), which is
another oriental tradition, furnishes more sad roof of an utter want of
scientific knowledge, as science has no place for and no use for such a
being.

15\. Christ taught the unphilosophical doctrine of repentance, as he
declared he "came to call sinners to repentance" (Matt. ix. 13)—a mental
process, which consists merely in a revival of early impressions, and
often leads a person to condemn that which is right, as well as that
which is wrong. (For proof, see Chapter XLIII.)

16\. The doctrine of "forgiveness," which Christ so often inculcated, is
also at variance with the teachings of science, as it can do nothing
toward changing the nature of the act forgiven, or toward canceling its
previous effects upon society. Science teaches that every crime has its
penalty attached to it, which no act of forgiveness, by God or man, can
arrest or set aside.

17\. But nothing evinces, perhaps, more clearly Christ's total lack of
scientific knowledge than his holding a man responsible for his belief,
and condemning for disbelief, as he does in numerous instances (see Mark
xvi. 16), for a man could as easily control the circulation of the blood
in his veins as control his belief. Science teaches

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

that belief depends upon evidence, and without it, it is impossible to
*believe*, and with it, it is impossible to *disbelieve*. How foolish
and unphilosophical, therefore, to condemn for either belief or
disbelief!

18\. The numerous cases in which Christ speaks of the heart as being the
seat of consciousness, instead of the brain, evinces a remarkable
ignorance of the science of mental philosophy. He speaks of an "upright
heart," "a pure heart," &c., when "an upright liver," "a pure liver,"
would be as sensible, as the latter has as much to do with the character
as the former.

19\. And the many cases in which he makes it meritorious to have a right
"faith," and places it above reason, and assumes it to be a voluntary
act, shows his utter ignorance of the nature of the human mind.

20\. And Christ evinced a remarkable ignorance of the cause of physical
defects, when he told his hearers a certain man was born blind, in order
that he might cure him. (Matt. Vii. 22.)

21\. And Christ's declaration, that those who marry are not worthy of
being saved (see Luke xx. 34), shows that he was very ignorant of the
nature of the sexual functions of the human system.

22\. Nothing could more completely demonstrate a total ignorance of the
grand science of astronomy than Christ's prediction of the stars falling
to the earth. (See Luke xxi. 25.)

23\. And the conflagration of the world, "the gathering of the elect,"
and the realization of a fancied millennium, which he several times
predicted would take place in his time, "before this generation pass
away" (Matt. xxiv. 34), Proves a like ignorance, both of astronomy and
philosophy.

24\. And his cursing of the fig tree for not bearing fruit in the winter
season (see Matt. xxi. 20), not only

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

proves his ignorance of the laws of nature, but evinces a bad temper.

25\. Christ endorses the truth of Noah's flood story (see Luke xvii.
27), which every person at the present day, versed in science and
natural law, knows is mere fiction, and never took place.

And numerous other errors, evincing the most profound ignorance of
science and natural law, might be pointed out in Christ's teachings, if
we had space for them. It has always been alleged by orthodox
Christendom, that Christ's teaching and moral system are so faultless as
to challenge criticism, and so perfect as to defy improvement. But this
is a serious mistake. For most of his precepts and moral inculcations
which are not directly at war with the principles of science, or do not
involve a flagrant violation of the laws of nature, are, nevertheless,
characterized by a lawless and extravagant mode of expression peculiar
to semi-savage life, and which, as it renders it impossible to reduce
them to practice, shows they could not have emanated from a philosopher,
or man of science, or a man of evenly-balanced mind. They impose upon
the world a system of morality, pushed to such extremes that its own
professed admirers do not live it out, or even attempt to do so. They
long ago abandoned it as an impracticable duty. We will prove this by
enumerating most of its requisitions, and showing that they are daily
violated and trampled under foot by all Christendom. Where can the
Christian professor be found who, 1. "takes no thought for the morrow;"
or, 2. who "lays not up treasure on earth," or, at least, *tries* to do
it; or, 3. who "gives up all his property to the poor;" or who, "when
his cloak is wrested from him by a robber," gives up his coat also; or
who calls no man master or mister (the most common title in
Christendom); or who calls no man father (if he has a

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

father) or who calls no man a fool (when he knows he is a fool); or who,
when one cheek is pommeled into a jelly by some vile miscreant or
drunken wretch, turns the other to be battered up in the same way; or
who prays without ceasing; or who rejoices when persecuted; or who
forgives an enemy four hundred and ninety times (70 times 7); or who
manifests by his practical life that he loves his enemies (the way he
loves him is to report him to the grand jury, or hand him over to the
sheriff); or who forsakes houses and land, and everything, "for the
kingdom of heaven's sake." No Christian professor lives up to these
precepts, or any of them, or even tries to do so. To talk, therefore, of
finding a practical Christian, while nearly the whole moral code of
Christ is thus daily and habitually outraged and trampled under foot by
all the churches and every one of the two hundred millions of Christian
professors, is bitter irony and supreme solecism. We would go five
hundred miles, or pay five hundred dollars, to see a Christian. If a man
can be a Christian while openly and habitually violating every precept
of Christ, then the word has no meaning. These precepts, the Christian
world finding to be impossible to practice, have unanimously laid upon
the table under the rule of "indefinite postponement." They are the
product of a mind with an ardent temperament, and the religious
faculties developed to excess, and unrestrained by scientific or
intellectual culture. A similar vein of extravagant religious duty is
found in the Essenian, Buddhist, and Pythagorean systems. As Zera
Colburn possessed the mathematical faculty to excess, and Jenny Lind the
musical talent, Christ in like manner was all religion. And from the
extreme ardor of his religious feeling, thus derived, sprang his
extravagant notions of the realities of life. This peculiarity of his
organization explains the whole mystery.

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

##### *Christ as a Man, and Christ as a Sectarian*

To every observant and unbiased mind a strange contrast must be visible
in the practical life of Jesus Christ when viewed in his twofold
capacity of a man and a priest. While standing upon the broad plane of
humanity, with his deep sympathetic nature directed toward the poor, the
unfortunate, and the downtrodden, there often gushed forth from his
impassioned bosom the most sublime expressions of pity, and the
strongest outburst of commiseration for wrongs and sufferings, and his
noble goodness and tender love yearned with a throbbing heart to relieve
them. But the moment he put on the sacerdotal robe, and assumed the
character of a priest, that moment, if any one crossed his path by
refusing to yield to his requisitions of faith, or dissented from his
religious creed, his whole nature was seemingly changed. It was no
longer, "Blessed are ye," but "Cursed are ye," or "Woe unto you." Like
the founders of other religious systems, he, was ardent toward friends
and bitter toward enemies, and extolled his own religion, while he
denounced all others. His way was the only way, and all who did not walk
therein, or conform thereto, were loaded with curses and imprecations,
and all who could not accomplish the impossible mental achievement of
believing everything he set forth or urged upon their credence, and
that, too, *without evidence*, were to be eternally damned. All who
climbed up any other way were thieves and robbers. All who professed
faith in any other religion than his were on the road to hell. Like the
oriental Gods, he taught that the world was to be saved through faith in
him and his religion. All who did not honor him were to be dishonored by
the Father. And "without faith (in him and his religion), it is
impossible to please God." He declared that all who were not for him
were against him; and all

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

who were not on the same road are "heathens and publicans." His
disciples were enjoined to shake off the dust from their feet as a
manifestation of displeasure toward those who could not conscientiously
subscribe to their creeds and dogmas. Thus we discover a strong vein of
intolerance and sectarianism in the religion of the otherwise, and in
other respects, the kind and loving Jesus. Though most benignantly kind
and affectionate while moving and acting under the controlling impulses
of his lofty manhood, yet when his ardent religious feelings were
touched, he became chafed, irritated, and sometimes intolerant. He then
could tolerate no such thing as liberty of conscience, or freedom of
thought, or the right to differ with him in religious belief. His
extremely ardent devotional nature, when roused into action in defense
of a stereotyped faith, eclipsed his more noble, lofty, and lovely
traits, and often dimmed his mental vision, thus presenting in the same
individual a strange medley, and a strange contrast of the most opposite
traits of character. That such a being should have been considered and
worshipped as a God, and for the very reason that he possessed such
strange, contradictory traits of character, and often let his religion
run riot with his reason, will be looked upon by posterity as one of the
strangest chapters in the history of the human race. But so it is.
Extraordinary good qualities, though intermingled with many errors and
human foibles, have deified many men.

NOTE. One Christian writer alleges, in defense of the objectionable
precepts of Jesus Christ, that "He taught some errors in condescension
to the ignorance of the people." If this be true, that he taught both
truth and falsehood, then the question arises, How can we know which is
which? By what rule can we discriminate them, as he himself furnishes
none? Or how are we to determine that he taught truth at all? And then
this plea would account for and excuse all the errors found in the
teachings of the oriental Gods. If it will apply in one case, it will in
the other. And thus it proves too much.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLII: Christ As a Spiritual Medium](wscs47.md)
