[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wscs13) 
[Next](wscs15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/093281395X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors*, by Kersey Graves, \[1875\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

#### TITLES OF THE SAVIORS.

THE various deific titles applied to Jesus Christ in the New Testament
are regarded by some Christian writers as presumptive evidence of his
divinity. But the argument proves too much for the case; as we find the
proof in history that many other beings, whom Christians regard as men,
were honored and addressed by the same titles, such as God, Lord,
Savior, Redeemer, Mediator, Messiah, etc.

The Hindoo Chrishna, more than two thousand years ago, was prayerfully
worshiped as "God the Most High." His disciple Amarca once addressed him
thus: "Thou art the Lord of all things, the God of the universe, the
emblem of mercy, the bestower of salvation. Be propitious O most High
God," etc. Here he is addressed both as Lord and God. He is also styled
"God of Gods."

Adonis of Greece was addressed as "God Supreme," and Osiris of Egypt as
"the Lord of Life." In Phrygia, it was "Lord Atys," as Christians say,
"Lord Jesus Christ." Narayan of Bermuda was styled the " Holy Living
God."

The title "Son of God" was so common in nearly all religious countries
as to excite but little awe or attention.

St. Basil says, "Every uncommonly good man was called 'the Son of God.'"
The "Asiatic Researches" says, "The Tamulese adored a divine Son of
God," and Thor of the Scandinavians was denominated "the first-born Son
of God;" and so was Chrishna of India, and other demigods.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

It requires, therefore, a wide stretch of faith to believe that Jesus
Christ was in any peculiar sense "the Son of God," because so
denominated, or "the only begotten Son of God," when so many others are
reported in history bearing that title.

The title Savior is found in the legends of every religions country. So
also God, Redeemer, and Mediator. "When a Mogul or Thibetan is asked who
is Chrishna," says the Christian missionary Huc, "the reply is,
instantly, 'the Savior of men.'" Buddha was known as "the Savior,
Creator and Wisdom of God," and Mithra as both Mediator and Savior, also
as "the Redeemer," and Chrishna as "the Divine Redeemer," also "the
Redeemer of the World." The terms Mediator and Intercessor were also
frequently applied to him by his disciples. And both he and Quexalcote
were hailed as "the Messiah." In short, most ancient religious nations
were *honored with* or *expected* a Messiah.

Was Jesus Christ the "Lamb of God?" (John i. 9.) So was Chrishna styled
"the Holy Lamb." The Mexicans, preferring a full-grown sheep, had their
"Ram of God." The Celts had their "Heifer of God," and the Egyptians
their Bull of God." All these terms are ludicrous emblems of Deity,
representing him as a quadruped, as the title "Lamb of God" does Jesus
Christ, a term no less ludicrous than the titles of the pagan Gods as
cited above.

And was Christ "the True Light?" (John i. 9.) So was Chrishna likewise
called "the True Light," also "the Giver of Light," "the Inward Light,"
etc. Osiris was "the Redeemer of Light," and Pythagoras was both "Light
and Truth." Apollonius was styled the "True Light of the World;" while
Simon Magus was called "the Light of all Men."

Several nations had also their Christs, though in many cases the word is
differently spelled. Chrest, the Greek mode of spelling Christ, may be
found on several of the

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

ancient tombstones of that country. The Christian writer Elsley, in his
"Annotations of the Gospels" (vol. i. p. 25), spells the word Christ in
this manner, *Chrest*. The people of Loretto had a black Savior, called
Chrest, or Christ. Lucian, in his "Philopatris," admits the ancient
Gentiles had the name of Christ, which shows it was a heathen title. The
Chaldeans had their Chris, the Hindoos their Chrishna, the Greeks their
Chrest, and the Christians their Christ, all, doubtless, derived from
the same original root.

As for Jesus, it was a common name among the Jews long before the advent
of Christ. Josephus refers to seven or eight persons by that name, as
"Jesus, brother of Onias," "Jesus, son of Phabet," etc. Joshua in the
Greek form, Jesus, was in still more common use.

Again, was Jesus Christ "the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the
End?" so, likewise, Chrishna proclaimed, "I am the Beginning, the
Middle, and the End." Osiris and Chrishna were both proclaimed "Judge of
the Dead," as Jesus was "Judge of quick and dead." Isaiah represents the
Father as proclaiming, "I am Jehovah; besides me there is no Savior."
(Isa. xliii. 11.) With what consistency, then, can Christ be called
"*the Savior*," if there is but *one Savior*, and that is the Father?

And other divine titles besides those above named—in fact, all those
applied to Christ—are found used also in reference to the older pagan
gods, and hence prove nothing.

#### ORIGIN OF THE TERMS MEDIATOR, INTERCESSOR, ETC.

Several causes contributed to originate a belief in the offices
imaginarily assigned to divine God-descended Mediators, Redeemers, and
Intercessors.

1\. In the first place, the Great *Supreme* God was believed to be too
far off and too aristocratic to be on familiar terms with his subjects,
or at all times accessible to their prayers.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hence, was gotten
up a "Mediator," or middle God, to stand midway between the Great
Supreme and the people, and transmit messages one from the other, and
thus serve as agent for both parties. Confirmatory of this statement is
the declaration of Mamoides, in his "Guide to the Erring," that "the
ancient Sabeans conceived the principal God, on account of his great
distance, to be inaccessible; and hence, in imitation of the people in
their conduct toward their king, who had to address him through a person
appointed for the purpose, they imaginarily employed a middle divinity,
who was called a Mediator, to present their claims to the Supreme God."
Here the whole secret is out, the whole thing is explained, and we now
understand why Christ is called a Mediator, Intercessor, "Advocate with
the Father," etc.

2\. Again, the Supreme God was supposed to be frequently angry with the
people, and threatening to punish if not to destroy them. "I will punish
the multitude." (Jer. xlvi. 25.) "I will destroy the people." (Ex.
xxiii. 27). Hence, this middle divinity, this second person of the
trinity, stepped in to plead and intercede on their behalf, being, as we
must presume, a better-natured and more merciful being than the Father.
And thus interceding, he received the titles of Intercessor and
"Advocate with the Father." (1 John, ii. 1.)

3\. The principal circumstance, however, which led to the conception of
a divine Savior was the desire to find some way to continue in sin and
wrong-doing and escape its natural and legitimate consequences; in other
words, to evade the penalty. Hence, it came to be believed that people
might run riot in sin, and plunge into the indulgence of their passions
and their lusts, till the hour of death approached, when they would have
nothing to do but to ask forgiveness, and cast the burden of their sins
and sufferings on the merits of "a crucified Savior and

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Redeemer," who
"suffered once for all, that we might escape," and thus dodge the
penalty for sin. It was, as Mr. Fleurbach expresses it, "A realized wish
to be free from the laws of morality, and escape the natural
consequences of wrong doing."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X: The Saviors of Royal Descent, But Humble
Birth](wscs15)
