[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wscs25) 
[Next](wscs27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/093281395X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors*, by Kersey Graves, \[1875\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

### CHAPTER XXI.

#### THE ATONEMENT—ITS ORIENTAL OR HEATHEN ORIGIN

THERE were various practices in vogue amongst the orientalists, which
originated with the design of appeasing the anger and propitiating the
favor of a presumed to be irascible deity. Most of these practices
consisted in some kind of sacrifice or destructive offering called the
"atonement." But here let it be observed, that the doctrine of atonement
for sin, by sacrifice, was unfolded by degrees, and that the crucifixion
of a God was not the first practical exhibition of it. On the contrary,
it appears to have commenced with the most valueless or cheapest species
of property then known. And from this starting-point ascended gradually,
so as finally to embody the most costly commodities; and did not stop
here, but reached forward till it laid its murderous hands on human
beings, and immolated them upon its bloody altars. And finally, to cap
the climax, it assumed the effrontery to drag a God off the throne of
heaven, to stretch its blood-thirsty spirit, as evinced by Paul's
declaration, "Without the shedding of blood there can be no remission of
sin." Rather a bloody doctrine, and one which our humanity rejects with
instinctive horror.

We will trace the doctrine of the atonement briefly through its
successive stages of growth and development.

The idea seems to have started very early in the practical history of
the human race, that the sacrifice and consequent deprivation of earthly
goods, or some terrestrial enjoyment, would have the effect to mitigate
the anger, propitiate the

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

favor, and obtain the mercy of an imaginary and vengeful God. This idea
obviously was suggested by observing that their earthly rulers always
smiled, and became less rigorous in their laws, and milder in their
treatment of their subjects, when they made them presents of some
valuable or desirable commodity. They soon learned that such offerings
had the effect to cheek their cruel and bloody mode of governing the
people; so that when their houses were shaken down, or swallowed up by
earthquakes, the trees riven by lightning, and prostrated by storms, and
their cattle swept away by floods, supposing it to be the work of an
angry God, the thought arose in their minds at once, that perhaps his
wrath could be abated by the same expedient as that which had served in
the case of their mundane lords—that of making presents of property. But
as this property could not be carried up to the celestial throne, the
expedient was adopted of burning it, so that the substance or
quintessence of it would be conveyed up to the heavenly Potentates in
the shape of steam and smoke, which would make for him, as the Jews
express it," a sweet-smelling savor." Abundant and conspicuous is the
evidence in history to show that the custom of burnt-offerings and
atonements for sin originated in this way.

The first species of property made use of for burnt-offerings appears to
have been the fruits of the earth—vegetables, fruits, roots, etc.,—the
lowest kind of property in point of value. But the thought soon
naturally sprang up in the mind of the devotee, that a more valuable
offering would sooner and more effectually secure the divine favor.
Hence, levies were made on living herds of cattle, sheep, goats and
other domestic animals. This was the second step in the ascending scale
toward Gods.

And here we find the key to open and solve the mystery of Jehovah's
preferring Abel's offering to Cain's. While the latter consisted in mere
inanimate substances, the former

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

embraced the firstlings of the flock—a higher and more valuable species
of property, and quite sufficient to induce the selfish Jehovah to
prefer Abel's offering to Cain's, or rather for the selfish Jews to
cherish this conception. In all nations where offerings were made, the
conclusion became established in the minds of the people that the amount
of God's favor procured in this way must be proportionate to the value
of the commodity or victim offered up—a conviction which ultimately led
to the seizure of human beings for the atoning offerings, which brings
us to the *third* stage of growth in the atonement doctrine. Children
frequently constituted the victims in this case. The sacrifice of
Jephthah's daughter, as related in Judges xi. 30, and other cases cited
by bible writers, Isaiah xxxii. 25, and modern Christian authors, prove
that this practice was in vogue among "God's holy people."

One step more (constituting the *fourth* stage of development) brings us
to the sacrifice of Gods. The climax is now reached; the conception can
go no higher. The ancient Burmese taught that while common property in
burnt-offerings would procure the temporary favor of the ruling God, the
sacrifice of human beings would secure his good pleasure for a thousand
years, and cancel out all the sins committed in that period. And when
one of the three Gods on the throne of heaven was dragged down, or
*voluntarily came down* (as some of the sects taught), and was put to
death on the cross as an atonement for sin, such was the value of the
victim, such the magnitude of the offering, that it "atoned" for *all*
sin, past, present and future, for all the human race.

The Hindoos, cherishing this conception, taught that the crucifixion of
their sin-atoning Savior Chrishna (1200 B.C.) put an end to both animal
and human sacrifices, and accordingly such offerings ceased in most
Hindoo countries centuries ago. Thus far back in the mire and midnight
of

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

human ignorance, and amid the clouds of mental darkness, while man dwelt
upon the animal plane, and was governed by his brutal feelings, and
"blood for blood" was the requisition for human offenses, originated the
bloody, savage and revolting doctrine of the atonement.

Another mode of adjudicating the sins of the people in vogue in some
countries anterior to the custom of shedding blood as an expiation, was
that of packing them on the back, head, or horns of some animal by a
formal hocus-pocus process, and then driving the animal into a
wilderness, or some other place so remote that the brute could not find
its way back amongst the people with its cargo of sins. The cloth or
fabric used for inclosing the sins and iniquities of the people was
usually of a red or scarlet color—of the semblance of blood. In fact, it
was generally dipped in blood. This, being lashed to the animal, would
of course be exposed to the weather and the drenching rains, would
consequently, in the course of time, fade and become white. Hence, we
have the key to Isaiah's declaration, "Though your sins be (red) as
scarlet, they shall become (white) as wool." (See Isaiah, i. 18.) And
thus the meaning of this obscure text is clearly explained by tracing
its origin to its oriental source.

And there are many other texts in the Christian bible which might be
elucidated in a similar manner by using oriental tradition, or oriental
sacred books, as a key to unlock and explain their meaning. We have
stated above that some animal was made use of by different nations to
convey the imaginary load of the people's sins out of the country. For
this purpose the Jews had their "scape-goat," the Egyptians their
"scape-ox," the Hindoos their "scape-horse," the Chaldeans their
"scape-ram," the Britons their" scape-bull," the Mexicans their
"scape-lamb" and "scape-mouse," the Tamalese their "scape-hen," and the
Christians at a later period their *scape-God*. Jesus Christ

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

may properly be termed the scape-God of orthodox Christians, as he
stands in the same relation to his disciples, who believe in the
atonement, as the goat did to the Jews, and performs the same end and
office. The goat and the other sin-offering animals took away the sin of
the nation in each case respectively. In like manner Jesus Christ takes
away the sin of the world, being called "the Lamb of God that taketh
away the sin of the world." (John i. 29.) And more than two thousand
years ago the Mexicans sacrificed a lamb as an atonement, which they
called "the Lamb of God"—the same title scripturally applied to Jesus
Christ. The conception in each case is, then, the same—that of the
atonement for sin by the sacrifice of an innocent victim.

The above citations show that the present custom of orthodox
Christendom, in packing their sins upon the back of a God, is just the
same substantially as that of various heathen nations, who were
anciently in the habit of packing them upon the backs of various dumb
animals. If some of our Christian brethren should protest against our
speaking of the church's idea of atonement as that of packing their sins
upon the back of a God, we will here prove the appropriateness of the
term upon the authority of the bible. Peter expressly declares Christ
bore our sins upon his own body on a tree (see 1 Peter ii. 24), just as
the Jews declared the *goat bore their* sins on his body, and the
ancient Brahmins taught that the bulls and the heifers bore theirs away,
etc., which shows that the whole conception is of purely heathen origin.
And hereafter, when they laugh at the Jewish superstition of a
scapegoat, let them bear in mind that more sensible and intelligent
people may laugh in turn at their superstitious doctrine of a scape-God.

These superstitious customs were simply expedients of different nations
to evade the punishment of their sins—an attempt to shift their
retributive consequences on to other beings. The divine atonement more
especially possessed

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

this character. This system teaches that the son of God and Savior of
the world was sent down and incarnated, in order to die for the people,
and thus suffer by proxy the punishment meted out by divine wrath for
the sins of the whole world. The blood of a God must atone for the sins
of the whole human family, as rams, goats, bullocks and other animals
had atoned for the sins of families and nations under older systems.
Thus taught Brahminism, Budhism, Persianism, and other religious
systems, before the dawn of Christianity. The nucleus of the atoning
system is founded in the doctrine, "Without the shedding of blood there
is no remission for sin" (Rom. v. g)—a monstrous and morally revolting
doctrine—a doctrine which teaches us that *somebody's* blood must be
shed, somebody's veins and arteries depleted, for every trivial offense
committed against the moral law. Somebody must pay the penalty in blood,
somebody must be slaughtered for every little foible or peccadillo or
moral blunder into which erring man may chance to stumble while upon the
pilgrimage of life, while journeying through the wilderness of time,
even if a God has to be dragged from his throne in heaven, and murdered
to accomplish it. Nothing less will mitigate the divine wrath.

Whose soul—possessing the slightest moral sensibility—does not inwardly
and instinctively revolt at such a doctrine? We would not teach it to
the world, for it is founded in butchery and bloodshed, and is an old
pagan superstition, which originated far back in the midnight of mental
darkness and heathen ignorance, when the whole human race were under the
lawless sway of their brutal propensities, and when the ennobling
attributes of love, mercy and forgiveness had as yet found no place, no
abiding home, in the human bosom. The bloody soul of the savage first
gave it birth. We hold the doctrine to be a high-handed insult to the
All-loving Father, who, we are

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

told, is "long-suffering in mercy," and "plentiful in forgiveness," to
charge *Him* with sanctioning such a doctrine, much less with
originating it.

There is no "mercy or forgiveness" in putting an innocent being to death
for any pretext whatever. And for the Father to consent to the brutal
assassination of His own innocent Son upon the cross to gratify an
implacable revenge toward his own children, the workmanship of his own
hands, rather than forgive a moral weakness implanted in their natures
by a voluntary act of his own, and for which consequently he alone ought
to be responsible, would be nothing short of murder in the first degree.

We cherish no such conception. We cannot for a moment harbor a
blasphemous doctrine, which represents the Universal Father as being a
bloody-minded and murderous being, instead of a being of infinite love,
infinite wisdom, and infinite in all the moral virtues. Such a character
would be a deep-dyed stigma upon any human being. And no person actuated
by a strict sense of justice would accept salvation upon any such terms
as that prescribed by the Christian atonement.

It is manifestly too unjust, too devoid of moral principle, besides
being a flagrant violation of the first principles of civil and criminal
jurisprudence. It is a double wrong to punish the innocent for the
guilty. It is the infliction of injustice on the one hand, and the
omission of justice on the other. It inflicts the highest penalty of the
law upon an innocent being, whom that law ought to shield from
punishment, while it exculpates and liberates the guilty party, whose
punishment the moral law demands. It robs society of a useful people on
the one hand, and turns a moral pest upon community on the other, thus
committing a two-fold wrong, or act of injustice. No court in any
civilized country would be allowed to act upon such a principle; and the
judge who should indorse it, or favor a law, or

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

principle, which punishes the innocent for the guilty, would be ruled
off the bench at once.

Here, however, we are sometimes met with the plea, that the offering of
Jesus Christ was a voluntary act, that it was made with his own free
will. But the plea don't do away with either the injustice or
criminality of the act.

No innocent person has a right to suffer for the guilty, and the courts
have no right to accept the offer or admit the substitute. An
illustration will show this. If Jefferson Davis had been convicted of
the crime of treason, and sentenced to be hung, and Abraham Lincoln had
come forward and offered to be stretched upon the gallows in his place,
is there a court in the civilized world which would have accepted the
substitute, and hung Lincoln, and liberated Davis? To ask the question
is but to answer it. It is an insult to reason, law and justice to even
entertain the proposition.

The doctrine of the atonement also involves the infinite absurdity of
God punishing himself to appease his own wrath. For if "the fullness of
the Godhead dwelt in Christ bodily" (as taught in Col. ii. 9), then his
death was the death of God—that is, a divine suicide, prompted and
committed by a feeling of anger and revenge, which terminated the life
of the Infinite Ruler—a doctrine utterly devoid of reason, science or
sense. We are sometimes told man owes a debt to his Maker, and the
atonement pays that debt. To be sure! And to whom is the debt owing, and
who pays it? Why, the debt is owing to God, and God (in the person of
Jesus Christ) pays it—pays it to himself. We will illustrate. A man
approaches his neighbor, and says, "Sir, I owe you a thousand dollars,
but can never pay it." "Very well, it makes no difference," replies the
claimant, "I will pay it myself;" and forthwith thrusts his hand into
his right pocket and extracts the money, transfers it to the left pocket
and exclaims—"There, the

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

debt is paid!" A curious way of paying debts, and one utterly devoid of
sense. And yet the orthodox world have adopted it for their God. We
find, however, that they carefully avoid practicing this principle
themselves in their dealings with each other. When they have a claim
against a neighbor, we do not find them ever thrusting their hands into
their own pockets to pay it off, but sue him, and compel him to pay—if
he refuses to do it without compulsion—thus proving they do not consider
it a correct principle of trade.

But we find, upon further investigation, that the assumed debt is not
paid—after all.

When a debt is paid, it is canceled, and dismissed from memory, and
nothing more said about it. But in this case the sinner is told he must
still suffer the penalty for every sin he commits, notwithstanding
Christ died to atone for and cancel that sin.

Where, then, is the virtue of the atonement? Like other doctrines of the
orthodox creed, it is at war with reason and common sense, and every
principle of sound morality, and will be marked by coming ages as a
relic of barbarism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII: The Holy Ghost of Oriental Origin](wscs27)
