[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wscs43.md) 
[Next](wscs45.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/093281395X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors*, by Kersey Graves, \[1875\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIX.

#### THE SCRIPTURAL VIEW OF CHRIST'S DIVINITY

THE monstrous scientific paradox (as coming ages will regard it)
comprehended in the conception of an almighty, omnipresent, and infinite
Being, "the Creator of innumerable worlds," ("by him \[Christ\] were all
things made that were made," John i. 3-10), being born of a frail and
finite woman, as taught by both the oriental and Christian religion, is
so exceedingly shocking to every rational mind, which has not been sadly
warped, perverted, and coerced into the belief by early psychological
influence, that we would naturally presume that those who, on the
assumption of the remotest possibility of its truth, should venture to
put forth a doctrine so glaringly unreasonable and so obviously
untenable, would of course vindicate it and establish it by the
strongest arguments and by the most unassailable and most irrefragable
proofs; and that in setting forth a doctrine so manifestly at war with
every law and analogy of nature and every principle of science, no
language should have been used, nor the slightest admission made, that
could possibly lead to the slightest degree of suspicion that the
original authors and propagators of this doctrine had either any doubt
of the truth of the doctrine themselves, or were wanting in the most
ample, the most abundant proof to sustain it. No language, no text, not
a word, not a syllable should have been used making the most remote
concession damaging to the validity of the doctrine, so that not "the
shadow of a shade of doubt" could be left on

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

any mind of its truth. Omnipotent indeed should be the logic, and
irresistible the proof, in support of a thesis or a doctrine which so
squarely confronts and contradicts all the observation, all the
experience, the whole range of scientific knowledge, and the common
sense of mankind. How startling then, to every devout and honest
professor of the Christian faith ought to be the recent discovery of the
fact, that the great majority of the texts having any bearing upon the
doctrine of the divinity of Jesus Christ,—a large majority of the
passages in the very book on which the doctrine is predicated, and which
is acknowledged as the sole warranty for such a belief,—are actually at
variance with the doctrine, and actually amount to its virtual denial
and overthrow. For we find, upon a critical examination of the matter,
that at least three-fourths of the texts, both in the Gospels and
Epistles, which relate to the divinity of Christ, specifically or by
implication either teach a different and a contrary doctrine, or make
concessions entirely fatal to it, by investing him with finite human
qualities utterly incompatible with the character and attributes of a
divine or infinite Being. How strange, then, how superlatively strange,
that millions should yet hold to such a strange "freak of nature," such
a dark relic of oriental heathenism, such a monstrous, foolish and
childish superstition, as that which teaches the infinite Creator and
"Upholder of the universe" could be reduced so near to nonentity, as was
required to pass through the ordinary stages of human generation, human
birth, and human parturition,—a puerile notion which reason, science,
nature, philosophy, and common sense, proclaim to be supremely absurd
and self-evidently impossible, and which even the Scriptures fail to
sustain,—a logical, scriptural exposition, of which we will here present
a brief summary:—

1\. The essential attributes of a self-existing God and

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Creator, and
"Upholder of all things," are infinitude, omnipotence, omniscience, and
omnipresence, and any being not possessing all these attributes to
repletion, or possessing any quality or characteristic in the slightest
degree incompatible with any one of these attributes, cannot be a God in
a divine sense, but must of necessity be a frail, fallible, finite
being.

2\. Jesus Christ disclaims, hundreds of times over, directly or
impliedly, the inherent possession of any one of these divine
attributes.

3\. His evangelical biographers have invested him with the entire
category of human qualities and characteristics, each one of which is
entirely unbefitting a God, and taken together are the only
distinguishing characteristics by which we can know a man from a God.

4\. Furthermore, there issued from his own mouth various sayings and
concessions most fatal to the conception of his being a God.

5\. His devout biographers have reported various actions and movements
in his practical life which we are compelled to regard as absolutely
irreconcilable with the infinite majesty, lofty character, and supreme
attributes of an almighty Being.

6\. These human qualities were so obvious to all who saw him and all who
became acquainted with him, that doubts sprang up among his own
immediate followers, which ultimately matured into an open avowal of
disbelief in his divinity in that early age.

7\. Upon the axiomatical principles of philosophy it is an utter and
absolute impossibility to unite in repletion the divine and the human in
the same being.

8\. And then Christ had a human birth.

9\. He was constituted in part, like human beings, of flesh and blood.

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

10\. He became, on certain occasions, "an hungered," like finite beings.

11\. He also became thirsty (John xix. 28), like perishable mortals.

12\. He often slept, like mortals, and thus became "to dumb
forgetfulness a prey."

13\. He sometimes became weary, like human beings. (See John iv. 6.)

14\. He was occasionally tempted, like fallible mortals. (Matt. iv. i.)

15\. His "soul became exceeding sorrowful," as a frail, finite being.
(Matt. xxvi. 38.)

16\. He disclosed the weakness of human passion by weeping. (John xi.
35.)

17\. He was originally an imperfect being, "made perfect through
suffering." (Heb. ii. 10.)

18\. He "increased in wisdom and stature" (Luke ii. 52); therefore he
must have possessed finite, changeable, mortal attributes.

19\. And he finally died and was buried, like all perishable mortals. He
could not possibly, from these considerations, have been a God. It is
utterly impracticable to associate with or comprehend, in a God of
infinite powers and infinite attributes, all or any of these finite
human qualities.

20\. Dark, intellectually dark, indeed, must be that mind, and sunk,
sorrowfully sunk in superstition, that can worship a being as the great
omniscient, omnipotent, and omnipresent "I AM," who possessed all those
qualities which were constitutionally characteristic of the pious, the
noble, the devout, the Godlike, yet finite and fallible Jesus, according
to his own admissions and the representations of his own interested
biographers.

21\. The only step which the disciples of the Christian faith have made
toward disproving or setting aside

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

these arguments, objections, and difficulties, is that of assigning the
incarnate Jesus a double or twofold nature—the amalgamation of the human
and divine; a postulate and a groundless assumption, which we have
proved and demonstrated by thirteen arguments, which we believe to be
unanswerable, is not only absurd, illogical, and impossible, but foolish
and ludicrous in the highest degree. (See vol. ii.)

22\. This senseless hypothesis, and every other assumption and argument
made use of by the professors of the Christian faith to vindicate their
favorite dogma of the divinity of Jesus, we have shown to be equally
applicable to the demigods of the ancient heathen, more than twenty of
whom were invested with the same combination of human and divine
qualities which the followers and worshippers of Jesus claim for him.

23\. Testimony of the Father against the divinity of the Son. The Father
utterly precludes the Son from any participation in the divine essence,
or any claim in the Godhead, by such declarations as the following: "I
am Jehovah, and beside me there is no Savior." (Isaiah xliii. 11.) How,
then, we would ask, can Jesus Christ be the Savior? "I, Jehovah, am thy
Savior and thy Redeemer." Then Christ can be neither the Savior nor
Redeemer. "There is no God else beside me, a just God and a Savior;
there is none beside me." (Isaiah xiv. 21.) So the Father virtually
declares, according to "the inspired prophet Isaiah," that the Son, in a
divine sense, cannot be either God, Savior, or Redeemer. Again, "I am
Jehovah, thy God, and thou shalt not acknowledge a God beside me."
(Hosea xiii. 4.) Here Christ is not only by implication cut off from the
Godhead, but positively prohibited from being worshipped as God. And
thus the testimony of the Father disproves and sets aside the divinity
of the Son.

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

24\. Testimony of the mother. When Mary found, after a long search, her
son Jesus in the temple, disputing with the doctors, and chided or
reproved him for staying from home without the consent of his parents,
and declared, "thy father and I sought thee, sorrowing" (Luke ii. 48),
she proclaimed a twofold denial of his divinity. In the first place it
cannot be possible that she regarded her son Jesus as "that awful Being,
before whom even the devout saints bow in trembling fear," when she used
such language and evinced such a spirit as she did. "Why hast thou thus
dealt with us?" (Luke ii. 48) is her chiding language. And then, when
she speaks of Joseph as his father, "thy father and I," she issues a
declaration against his divinity which ought to be regarded as settling
the question forever. For who could know better than the mother, or
rather, who could know but the mother, who the father of the child Jesus
was? And as she acknowledges it was Joseph, she thus repudiates the
story of the immaculate conception, which constitutes the whole basis
for the claim of his divinity. Hence the testimony of the mother, also,
disproves his title to the Godhead.

25\. Testimony or disclaimer of the Son. We will show by a specific
citation of twenty-five texts that there is not one attribute
comprehended in or peculiar to a divine and infinite Being, but that
Christ rejects as applicable to himself—that he most conclusively
disclaims every attribute of a divine Being, both by precept and
practice, and often in the most explicit language.

26\. By declaring, "The Son can do nothing of himself" (John v. 19), he
most emphatically disclaims the attribute of omnipotence. For an
omnipotent Being can need no aid, and can accept of none.

27\. When he acknowledged and avowed his ignorance of the day of
judgment, which must be presumed to be

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

the most important event in the world's history, he disclaimed the
attribute of omniscience. "Of that day and hour knoweth no man, *neither
the Son*, but the Father only." (Matt. xxiv. 36.) Now, as an omniscient
Being must possess all knowledge, his avowed ignorance in this case is a
confession he was not omniscient, and hence not a God.

28\. And when he declares, "I am glad for your sakes I was not there"
(at the grave of Lazarus), he most distinctly disavows being
*omnipresent*, and thus denies to himself another essential attribute of
an infinite God.

29\. And the emphatic declaration, "I live by the Father" (John vi. 57),
is a direct disclaimer of the attributes of *self-existence;* as a being
who lives by another cannot be self-existent, and, per consequence, not
the infinite God.

30\. He disclaims possessing *infinite goodness*, another essential
attribute of a supreme divine Being. "Why callest thou me good? there is
none good but one, that is God." (Mark x. 18.)

31\. He disclaim *divine honors*, and directed them to the father. "I
honor my Father." (John viii. 49.) "I receive not honor from men." (John
v. 41.)

32\. He recommended supreme worship to the Father, and not to himself.
"The true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth."
(John iv. 21.)

33\. He ascribed *supreme dominion* to the Father. "Thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory forever." (Matt. vi. 13.)

34\. It will be seen, from the foregoing text, that Christ also
acknowledges that the kingdom is the Father's. A *God without a kingdom*
would be a ludicrous state of things.

35\. He conceded *supreme authority* to the Father.

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "My doctrine is
not mine, but his that sent me." (John vii. 16.)

36\. He considered the Father as the supreme protector and preserver of
even his own disciples. "I pray that thou shouldst keep them from the
evil." (John xvii. 15.) What, omnipotence not able to protect his own
disciples?

37\. In fine, he humbly acknowledged that his *power*, his *will*, his
*ministry*, his *mission*, his *authority*, his *works*, his
*knowledge*, and his *very life*, were all from, and belonged to and
were under the control of the Father. "I can do nothing of myself;" "I
came to do the will of him that sent me;" "The Father that dwelleth
within me, he doeth the work," &c. "A God within a God," is an old pagan
Otaheitan doctrine.

38\. He declared that even spiritual communion was the work of the
Father. (See John vi. 45.)

39\. He acknowledged himself controlled by the Father. (See John v. 30.)

40\. He acknowledged his entire helplessness and dependence on the
Father. "The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father
do." (John v. 19.)

41\. He acknowledged that even his body was the work of his Father; in
other words, that he was dependent on his Father for his physical life.
(See Heb. xvi. 5.)

42\. And more than all, he not only called the Father "the only true
God" (John xvii. 3), but calls him "*my Father and my God*." (John xx.
17.) Now, it would be superlative nonsense to consider a being himself a
God, or *the God*, who could use such language as is here ascribed to
the humble Jesus. This text, this language, is sufficient of itself to
show that Christ could not have laid any claim to the Godhead on any
occasion, unless we degrade him to the charge of the most palpable and
shameful contradiction.

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

43\. He uniformly directed his disciples to pray, *not to him*, but the
Father. (See Matt. vi. 6.)

44\. On one occasion, as we have cited the proof (in Matt. xi. 11), he
even acknowledged John the Baptist to be greater than he; while it must
be patent to every reader that no man could be greater than the
almighty, supreme Potentate of heaven and earth, in any sense whatever.

45\. Testimony of the disciples. Another remarkable proof of the human
sireship of Jesus is, that one of his own disciples—ay, one of the
chosen twelve, selected by him as being endowed with a perfect knowledge
of his character, mission, and origin—this witness, thus posted and thus
authorized, proclaims, in unequivocal language, that Jesus was the *son
of Joseph*. Hear the language of Philip addressed to Nathanael. "We have
found him of whom Moses, in the law and the prophets, did write—Jesus of
Nazareth, the *son of Joseph*." (John i. 45.) No language could be more
explicit, no declaration more positive, that Jesus was the son of
Joseph. And no higher authority could be adduced to settle the question,
coming as it does from "headquarters." And what will, or what can, the
devout stickler for the divinely paternal origin of Jesus Christ do with
such testimony? It is a clincher which no sophistry can set aside, no
reasoning can grapple with, and no logic overthrow.

46\. His disciples, instead of representing him as being "the only true
God," often speak of him in contradistinction to God.

47\. They never speak of him as the *God* Christ Jesus, but as "the
*man* Christ Jesus." (1 Tim. ii. 5.) "Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved
of God." (Acts ii. 23.) It would certainly be blasphemy to speak of the
Supreme Being as "a man approved of God." Christian reader, reflect upon
this text. "By that man whom he (the Father) hath ordained" (Acts xvii.
3), by the assumption

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

of the Godhead of Christ, we would be presented with the double or
twofold solecism, 1st. Of God being "ordained" by another God; and 2d.
That of his being blasphemously called a "man."

48\. Paul's, declaration has been cited, that "unto us there is but one
God—the Father." (1 Cor. iv. 8.) Now, it is plain to common sense, that
if there is but one God, and that God is comprehended in the Father,
then Christ is entirely excluded from the Godhead.

49\. If John's declaration be true, that "no man hath seen God at any
time" (John iv. 12), then the important question arises, How could
Christ be God, as he was seen by thousands of men, and seen hundreds of
times?

50\. God the Father is declared to be the "One," "the Holy One," "the
only One," &c., more than one hundred times, as if purposely to exclude
the participation of any other being in the Godhead.

51\. This *one*, this *only* God, is shown to be the Father alone in
more than four thousand texts, thirteen hundred and twenty-six of which
are found in the New Testament.

52\. More than fifty texts have been found which declare, either
explicitly or by implication, that God the Father has no equal, which
effectually denies or shuts out the divine equality of the Son. "To whom
will ye liken me, or shall I be *equal* with, saith the holy *One*."
(Isaiah XI. 25.)

53\. Christ in the New Testament is called "man," and "the Son of man,"
eighty-four times,—egregious and dishonorable misnomers, most certainly,
to apply to a supreme and infinite Deity. On the other hand, he is
called God but three times, and denominates himself "the Son of God" but
once, and that rather obscurely.

54\. The Father is spoken of, in several instances, as standing in the
relation of God to the Son, as "the God of our Lord Jesus Christ." (Acts
iii. 2.) "Ye are

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christ's, and
Christ is God's." (1 Cor. xi. 3.) Now, the God of a God is a
polytheistic, heathen conception; and no meaning or interpretation, as
we have shown, can be forced upon such texts as these, that will not
admit a plurality of Gods, if we admit the titles as applicable to
Christ, or that his scriptural biographers intend to apply such a title
in a superior or supreme sense.

55\. Many texts make Christ the mere tool, agent, image, servant, or
representative of God, as Christ, "the image of God" (Heb. i. 3),
Christ, the appointed of God (Heb. iii. 1), Christ, "the servant of God"
(Matt. xii. 18), &c. To consider a being thus spoken of as himself the
supreme God, is, as we have demonstrated, the very climax of absurdity
and nonsense. To believe "the servant of God" is God himself,—that is,
the servant of himself,—and that God and his "image" are the same, is to
descend within one step of buffoonery.

56\. And then it has been ascertained that there are more than three
hundred texts which declare, either expressly or by implication,
Christ's subordination to and dependence on the Father, as, "I can do
nothing of myself;" "Not mine, but his that sent me;" "I came to do the
will of him that sent me" (John iv. 34); "I seek the will of my Father,"
&c.

57\. And more than one hundred and fifty texts make the Son inferior to
the Father, as "the Son knoweth not, but the Father does" (Mark viii.
32); "My Father is greater than I;" "The Son can do nothing of himself"
(John v. 19), &c.

58\. There are many divine titles applied to the Father which are never
used in reference to the Son, as "Jehovah," "The Most High," "God
Almighty," "The Almighty," &c.

On the other hand, those few divine epithets or titles which are used in
application to Jesus Christ, as Lord,

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God, Savior,
Redeemer, Intercessor, &c., it has been shown were all used prior to the
birth of Christ, in application to beings known and acknowledged to be
men, and some of them are found so applied in the bible itself; as, for
example, Moses is called a *God* in two instances, as we have shown, and
cited the proof (in Ex. iv. 16, vii. 1), while the title of Lord is
applied to *men* at this day, even in Christian countries. And instances
have been cited in the bible of the term Savior being applied to men,
both in the singular and plural numbers. (See 2 Kings xiii. 5, and Neh.
ix. 27.) Seeing, then, that the most important divine titles which the
writers of the New Testament have applied to Jesus were previously used
in application to *men*, known and admitted to be such, it is therefore
at once evident that those titles do nothing toward proving him to be
the Great Divine Being, as the modern Christian world assume him to be,
even if we base the argument wholly on scriptural grounds. While, on the
other hand, we have demonstrated it to be an absolute impossibility to
apply with any propriety or any sense to a divine infinite omnipotent
Being those finite human qualities which are so frequently used with
reference to Jesus throughout the New Testament. And hence, even if we
should suppose or concede that the writers of the New Testament did
really believe him to be the great Infinite Spirit, or the almighty,
omnipotent God, we must conclude they were mistaken, from their own
language, from their own description of him, as well as his own virtual
denial and rejection of such a claim, when he applied to himself, as he
did in nine cases out of ten, strictly finite human qualities and human
titles (as we have shown), wholly incompatible with the character of an
infinite divine Being. We say, from the foregoing considerations, if the
primitive disciples of Jesus did really believe him to be the great
Infinite, both their

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

descriptions of him and his description or representation of himself,
would amply and most conclusively prove that they were mistaken. At
least we are compelled to admit that there is either an error in
applying divine titles to Jesus, or often an error in describing his
qualities and powers, by himself and his original followers, as there is
no compatibility or agreement between the two. Divine titles to such a
being as they represent him to be, would be an egregious misnomer. We
say, then, that it must be clearly and conclusively evident to every
unbiased mind, from evidence furnished by the bible itself, that if the
divine titles applied to Jesus were intended to have a divine
significance, then they are misapplied. Yet we would not here conclude
an intentional misrepresentation in the case, but simply a mistake
growing out of a misconception, and the very limited childish
conception, of the nature, character, and attributes of the "great
positive Mind," so universally prevalent in that semi-barbarous age, and
the apparently total ignorance of the distinguishing characteristics
which separate the divine and the human. We will illustrate: some
children, on passing through a wild portion of the State of Maine
recently, reported they encountered a bear; and to prove they could not
be mistaken in the animal, they described it as being a tall,
slight-built animal, with long slender legs, of yellowish auburn hue, a
short, white, bushy tail, cloven feet, large branchy horns, &c. Now, it
will be seen at once that, while their description of the animal is
evidently in the main correct, they had simply mistaken a deer for a
bear, and hence misnamed the animal.

In like manner we must conclude, from the repeated instances in which
Christ's biographers have ascribed to him all the foibles, frailties,
and finite qualities and characteristics of a human being, that if they
have in any instance called him a God in a divine sense, it is an
egregious

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

misnomer. Their *description* of him makes him a man, and *but a man*,
whatever may have been their *opinion* with respect to the propriety of
calling him a God. And if the two do not harmonize, the former must rule
the judgment in all cases. The truth is, the Jewish founders of
Christianity entertained such a low, narrow, contracted, and mean
opinion of Deity and the infinite distinction and distance between the
divine and the human, that their theology reduced him to a level with
man; and hence they usually described him as a man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL: A Metonymic View of the Divinity of Jesus
Christ](wscs45.md)
