[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wscs15.md) 
[Next](wscs17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/093281395X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors*, by Kersey Graves, \[1875\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

### CHAPTER XI.

#### CHRIST'S GENEALOGY.

IN order to exalt the dignity and character of the Christian Messiah
still higher than a mere claim for a divine origin *paternally* would
have the effect to do, two of his assumed to be inspired biographers
have set up for him a claim to a royal lineage through the maternal
line.

Hence, they tell us that he descended from and through a line of kings
embracing the house of David. But in presenting the names, and the
number of generations, in their attempts to make out this royal
distinction, this kingly exaltation of birth, they exhibit a most
egregious bungle, and the most barefaced tissue of discrepancies. For
they not only differ widely with each other in this matter, but differ
with the Old Testament genealogy, and differ with those texts which give
the maternal ancestry of Jesus.

Indeed, though varying as wide as the poles from each other, they both
miss Jesus and arrive at Joseph in tracing down the generations from
Abraham (unless we assume they intended to represent Joseph as being his
father).

Luke, in his gospel, names and counts off forty-one generations from
David, to Joseph, though he had previously represented it as being
forty-two; but Matthew says that "from Abraham to David are fourteen
generations," but according to his own showing, and according to his own
list of names, there are but thirteen. And then he tells us there are
but fourteen generations from David to the carrying

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

away into Babylon. But according to the Old Testament genealogy (see 1
Chron. iii.) there were eighteen. And then the names comprised in the
two genealogies of Matthew and Luke are so widely different from that
found in Chronicles, as to set all analogy and agreement at defiance.

In fact, in their whole list of names, from David down to Joseph, they
only come together twice. Their names are all different but two, that of
Salathiel and Zorobabel, which names alone are found in both lists.

Matthew tells us that the son of David, through whom Joseph descended,
was Solomon, but Luke says it was Nathan. The next name in Matthew's
list is that of Roboam, but the corresponding name in Luke's list is
Mattatha. Matthew's next name is Abia, which Luke gives as Menan, while
Chronicles differs from both, and gives it as Abijah. Matthew says Joram
begat Ozias, but Chronicles virtually declares Joram had no such son,
although he had a great-great-grandson Uzziah. But Luke says, in effect,
there was no such person in the genealogical tree, or family line, as
either Joram, Ozias or Uzziah. Matthew says again, "Josias begat
Jechonias and his brethren, about the time they were carried away to
Babylon." (Matt. i. 11.)

But Chronicles declares that Jechonias was Jehoiakim's son, and not
Josiah's, and that Josiah had no such son. And, besides, we learn, from
2 Kings xiii., that Josiah was killed eleven years before the exile to
Babylon, and could not well beget a son after he had been defunct a
tenth of a century.

Matthew, after naming twenty-four generations as filling out the line,
and making it complete between David and Jacob, concludes by saying,
"and Jacob begat Joseph, the husband of Mary."

But Luke, antecedent to spinning out his list to fourteen

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

generations more than Matthew, i.e., making it fourteen generations
longer, declares that "Joseph was the son of Heli." So that Joseph
either had two fathers, Jacob and Heli; or Matthew or Luke, or both,
were most egregiously mistaken, with all their "inspiration."

Again, Luke says that Salathiel was the son of Neri; but Chronicles says
he was the son of Jechonias. And after Chronicles had registered
Zorobabel as the son of Penniah, Matthew and Luke, assuming to become
"wise above what was written," both declare that he was the son of
Salathiel. They agree here in contradicting Chronicles, which is the
only instance but one of their agreement in the whole list of
progenitors from David to Joseph.

With this exception they contradict each other all the way through, and
in many instances that of Chronicles, too.

This is a strange way, indeed, of proving Jesus Christ to have had two
fathers!—to be both the son of God and son of David! And it is still
stranger that they should trace his genealogy to Joseph, if they did not
consider him Joseph's son. Otherwise, the genealogy of "Sinbad the
Sailor," or "Harry Haulaway," would have been as apropos.

Such are the beautiful harmony and agreement in the words of "divine
inspiration" which Christians prate so much about.

And all this appears to be the result of an attempt to elevate the man
Christ Jesus to a level with the demigods of antiquity, nearly all of
whom claimed to be of royal or princely descent. Such continual
blundering, guessing, cross-firing, and clashing of names as is
exhibited in the foregoing exposition, reminds us of the Hibernian's
reply when asked for the number and names of his brothers:

"Well, sir, I have fourteen brothers, and they are all named Bill but
Bob—his name is Tom."

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

Matthew and Luke's attempt to exalt and dignify the character of Christ
by making out for him a pure, holy and royal lineage we find, upon a
critical examination not only proved a very signal but a very singular
and ludicrous failure, for all his female ancestors who are brought to
notice were persons of libidinous or licentious tendencies, according to
their own biblical history.

"It is remarkable," says Dr. Alexander Walker, (a Christian writer, in
his work on Woman, p. 330), "that in the genealogy of Christ only four
women are named: Thamar, who seduced the father of her late husband, and
Rachel, a common prostitute, and Ruth, who, instead of marrying one of
her cousins, went to bed with another of them, and Bathsheba, an
adulteress, who espoused David the murderer of her first husband."

What a pedigree for an incarnate God—a being ostensibly of spotless
origin! though his impure ancestral origin does not detract from the
high moral character and distinguished moral life which marks the
history of "the man Christ Jesus," many incidents of whose life show him
to have been what is now known as a spiritual medium.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII: The World's Saviors Saved from Destruction in
Infancy](wscs17.md)
