[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wscs50.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/093281395X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors*, by Kersey Graves, \[1875\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

#### NOTE OF EXPLANATION.

IN Chapter XXXI we have traced Christianity to Essenism. This may need a
fuller explanation than we have yet devoted to this point, though we
have stated several times we consider them essentially one. The Essenes
had their "*Exoteric*" and their "*Esoteric*" doctrines. The latter,
which seems to have included the incarnation, atonement, trinity, and
all the other Buddhist doctrines as set forth in Chapter XXXII (and now
included in the term Christianity), *they never* published to the world.
Hence Chapter XXXI sets forth only their Exoteric doctrines. But as
Philo, Milman, Tytler, and other eminent authors show they held all the
doctrines of Buddhism, we assume they were a Buddhist sect. Hence, when
we speak of Christianity growing out of Buddhism, in Chapter XXXII, we
mean Buddhism under the name of Essenism. We believe Christianity is
from Essenism and Buddhism both, because they are essentially one; and
that Christianity is merely a continuation of Buddhism as taught by the
Essenian sect of Buddhists. Hence we have sometimes used the term
Essenism, and sometimes the term Buddhism, as being the fountain head of
Christianity. We have stated Christ may have been an Essene either by
birth or by conversion. But our conviction *now* is, that he was one by
birth. And *we now* think it probable that that portion of the Jewish
nation which became known as Essenes sprang up in the Buddhist school of
Pythagoras, in Alexandria, in the second or third century before Christ,
and thus became Essenian Buddhists; i.e., a sect of Jewish Buddhists who
called themselves Essenes. And consequently, neither Christ nor his
disciples made any changes in the Essenian religion, when they changed
its name to Christianity, except to ingraft a few unimportant tenets
borrowed from the principal Buddhist sect. We are *now* convinced that
Essenism was complete Buddhism, that Christ was born of Essene parents,
and that no important changes were made by *dropping* the term
*Essenism*, and *adopting* the term *Christianity* in its place.

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

<span id="note435"></span>

#### NOTE TO PAGE [178](wscs28.htm#page_178.md)

IT may not be improper to explain more fully the reason for the opinion
that the Gospel writer John did not believe that Christ first came into
existence through human birth, but believed that he, like some of the
oriental Gods, was "The Word" personified, without the process of birth;
though he may, like the heathen orientalists, have cherished the
tradition that the second God in the trinity (as he represents Christ to
be), after having sprung into existence as "The Word," was subsequently
subjected to human birth. Either so, or else his allusion to "the mother
of Christ" was done in condescension to the general belief among the
people, that he had a human mother. Be that as it may, he declares, "The
Word was made flesh" (John i. 14); nearly the same language used by the
orientalists,—which with them did not imply human birth. And the
declaration, "All things were made by him" (John i. 3), is proof
positive he believed in Christ's existence as the creator, before his
human birth. Much of John's language is so strikingly similar to that
employed by the disciples of some of the oriental religions, who
believed that a second God emanated from the mouth of the Supreme, to
perform the act of creation, that we cannot resist the conviction that
this was John's belief; especially as many of them believed, like him,
that this creative "Word" became afterward a subject of human birth.
Thus, as we conceive, the proposition is established.

<span id="note435b"></span>

### NOTE TO PAGE [346](wscs39.htm#page_346.md).

OUR most reliable authorities testify that Babylon never was destroyed,
but successfully resisted, for one hundred and fifty years after
Isaiah's time, many of the most powerful sieges, and "the mightiest
munitions of war," conducted by seven of the most skilful generals that
ever wielded the sword—Cyrus, Darius, Alexander

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

the Great, Antigonus, Demetrius, Poliorcetes, and Antiochus. She then
gradually declined by the removal of her inhabitants to other and newer
cities; thus falsifying the prediction of Jeremiah (li. 8), "Her end has
come," and of Isaiah (xiii. 22), "Her days shall not be prolonged," and
that "desolation shall come upon her in a day," and her destruction
shall be effected suddenly—all of which are falsified by the facts just
presented. And even if Babylon had been destroyed, the present existence
of Hillah, built in 1101 upon the same spot, with a population,
according to Wellstead, of twenty-five thousand, is a signal overthrow
of Jeremiah's prophecy, that it "shall become a wilderness, wherein no
man dwelleth" (li. 43), and of Isaiah, also, that it should not be dwelt
in from generation to generation. Jeremiah first predicted that her sea
and springs should dry up (li. 38), and then declared the waves of the
sea should come upon her (li. 42); and finally, that she should sink to
rise no more (li. 64). And Isaiah's prediction of ruin and destruction
included with Babylon, "the land of the Chaldeans" (l. 39), which was
then, and is yet, a great commercial country, with an annual revenue at
this time, according to Harvey Brydges, of a million pounds sterling.
Here, then, is a long series of prophecies falsified. Our authority for
saying that Hillah occupies the site of ancient Babylon is Malte-Brun's
Geography (page 655), which declares, "Hillah is situated within the
precincts of Babylon;" thus proving it is not "a wilderness, wherein no
man dwelleth." Had we, space, we should present an extended view of the
prophecies.

 

 

 
