[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wscs02.md) 
[Next](wscs04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/093281395X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors*, by Kersey Graves, \[1875\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

### EXPLANATION

"THE WORLD'S SIXTEEN CRUCIFIED SAVIORS." What an imposing title for a
book! What startling developments of religious history it implies! Is it
founded on fact or on fiction? If it has a basis of truth, where was
such an extraordinary mine of sacred lore discovered? Where were such
startling facts obtained as the title of the work suggests. These
queries will doubtless arise as soliloquies in the minds of many readers
on glancing at the title-page. And the author is disposed to gratify
this natural and most probable, in some cases, excited curiosity by a
brief explanation. In doing this, he deems it only necessary to state
that many of the most important facts collated in this work were derived
from Sir Godfrey Higgins’ Anacalypsis, a work as valuable as it is
rare—a work comprising the result of twenty years’ labor, devoted to the
investigation of religious history. And although embodying many
important historical facts which should have commanded for it a
word-wide circulation, but a few copies of this invaluable treasury of
religious knowledge have ever found their way into this country.

One of these copies the author of this work obtained, at no
inconsiderable expense, long enough to glean from its pages such facts
as he presumed would be most interesting and instructive to the general
reader, some of which will be found in nearly every chapter of this
volume. With the facts and materials derived from this source, and two
hundred other unimpeachable historical records, the present

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

work might have been swelled to fourfold its present size without
exhausting the author's ample store of materials and would have
possessed such unwieldy dimensions but for a strict conformity to the
most rigid rules of eclecticism and condensation. Encouraged by the
extensive demand for his former work, "The Biography of Satan," which
has passed through seven editions, the author cherishes the hope that
the present work will meet with a circulation commensurate with the
importance of the many invaluable facts which it contains. For he
possesses the sad conviction that the many religious errors and evils
which it is the object of this work to expose, operate very seriously to
retard the moral and intellectual growth and prosperity of all Christian
countries. They have the effect to injure mentally, morally and
religiously the great body of Christian professors.

☞ Dr. Prince, of Long Island (now deceased), wrote to the author,
respecting the thirty-fifth chapter of this work, entitled "The Logical
View of the Incarnation," after he had seen it in the columns of a
newspaper, "It is a masterly piece of logic, and will startle, if it
does not revolutionize, the orthodox world. And the chapters comprising
'The Philosophical View,' and 'The Physiological View,' were afterward
pronounced specimens of profound and unanswerable logical reasoning." We
thus call the reader's attention to these chapters in advance, in order
to induce that thorough attention to their facts and arguments which
will result in banishing from his mind the last vestiges of a belief (if
he entertain any) in the doctrine of the divine incarnation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](wscs04.md)
