[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wscs04.md) 
[Next](wscs06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/093281395X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The World's Sixteen Crucified Saviors*, by Kersey Graves, \[1875\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

### ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY

FRIENDS and brethren—teachers of the Christian faith: Will you believe
us when we tell you the divine claims of your religion are gone—all
swept away by the "logic of history," and nullified by the
demonstrations of science?

The recently opened fountains of historic law, many of whose potent
facts will be found interspersed through the pages of this work, sweep
away the last inch of ground on which can be predicated the least show
for either the divine origin of the Christian religion, or the divinity
of Jesus Christ.

For these facts demonstrate beyond all cavil and criticism, and with a
logical force which can leave not the vestige of a doubt upon any
unbiased mind, that all its doctrines are an outgrowth from older
heathen systems. Several systems of religion essentially the same in
character and spirit as that religion now known as Christianity, and
setting forth the same doctrines, principles and precepts, and several
personages filling a chapter in history almost identical with that of
Jesus Christ, it is now known to those who are up with the discoveries
and intelligence of the age, were venerated in the East centuries before
a religion called Christian, or a personage called Jesus Christ were
known to history.

Will you not, then, give it up that your religion is merely a human
production, reconstructed from heathen materials—from oriental systems
several thousand years older than yours—or will you continue, in spite
of the unanimous and unalterable verdict of history, science, facts

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

and logic, to proclaim to the world the now historically demonstrated
error which you have so long preached, that God is the author of your
religion, and Jesus Christ a Deity-begotten Messiah? Though you may have
heretofore honestly believed these doctrines to be true, you can now no
longer plead ignorance as an excuse for propagating such gigantic and
serious errors, as they are now overwhelmingly demonstrated by a
thousand facts of history to be untrue. You must abandon such exalted
claims for your religion, or posterity will mark you as being "blind
leaders of the blind." They will heap upon your honored names their
unmitigated ridicule and condemnation. They will charge you as being
either deplorably ignorant, or disloyal to the cause of truth. And shame
and ignominy will be your portion.

The following propositions (fatal to your claims for Christianity) are
established beyond confutation by the historical facts cited in this
work, viz:—

1\. There were many cases of the miraculous birth of Gods reported in
history before the case of Jesus Christ.

2\. Also many other cases of Gods being born of virgin mothers.

3\. Many of these Gods, like Christ, were (reputedly) born on the 25th
of December.

4\. Their advent into the world, like that of Jesus Christ, is in many
cases claimed to have been foretold by "inspired prophets."

5\. Stars figured at the birth of several of them, as in the case of
Christ.

6\. Also angels, shepherds, and magi, or "wise men."

7\. Many of them, like Christ, were claimed to be of royal or princely
descent.

8\. Their lives, like his, were also threatened in infancy by the ruler
of the country.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

9\. Several of them, like him, gave early proof of divinity.

10\. And, like him, retired from the world and fasted.

11\. Also, like him, declared, "My kingdom is not of this world."

12\. Some of them preached a spiritual religion, too, like his.

13\. And were "anointed with oil," like him.

14\. Many of them, like him, were "crucified for the sins of the world."

15\. And after three days’ interment "rose from the dead."

16\. And, finally, like him, are reported as ascending back to heaven.

17\. The same violent convulsions of nature at the crucifixion of
several are reported.

18\. They were nearly all called "Saviors," "Son of God." "Messiah,"
"Redeemer," "Lord," &c.

19\. Each one was the second member of the trinity of "Father, Son and
Holy Ghost."

20\. The doctrines of "Original Sin," "Fall of Man," "The Atonement,"
"The Trinity," "The Word," "Forgiveness," "An Angry God." "Future
Endless Punishment," etc., etc. (see the author's "Biography of Satan,")
were a part of the religion of each of these sin-atoning Gods, as found
set forth in several oriental bibles and holy books," similar in
character and spirit to the Christian's bible, and written, like it, by
"inspired and holy men" before the time of either Christ or Moses
(before Moses, in some cases, at least). All these doctrines and
declarations, and many others not here enumerated, the historical
citations of this work abundantly prove, were taught in various oriental
heathen nations centuries before the birth of Christ, or before
Christianity, as a religion, was known in the world.

Will you, then, after learning these facts, longer dare

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

assert that Christianity is of divine emanation, or claim a special
divine paternity for its author. Only the priest, who loves his salary
more than the cause of truth (and I fear this class are numerous,) or
who is deplorably ignorant of history will have the effrontery or
audacity to do so. For the historical facts herein set forth as clearly
prove such assumptions to be false, as figures can demonstrate the truth
of any mathematical problem. And no logic can overthrow, and no
sophistry can set aside these facts.

They will stand till the end of time in spite of your efforts either to
evade, ignore, or invalidate them.

We will here briefly state—

#### WHY ALL THE ANCIENT RELIGIONS WERE ALIKE.

Two causes are obviously assignable for Christianity in all its
essential features and phases, being so strikingly similar to the
ancient pagan systems which preceded it, as also the close analogies of
all the principal systems, whose doctrines and practical teachings have
found a place on the pages of history.

1\. The primary and constituent elements and properties of human nature
being essentially the same in all countries and all centuries, and the
feeling called Religion being a spontaneous outgrowth of the devotional
elements of the human mind, the coincidence would naturally produce
similar feelings, similar thoughts, similar views and similar doctrines
on the subject of religion in different countries, however widely
separated. This accounts in part for the analogous features observable
in all the primary systems of religious faith, which have flourished in
the past ages.

2\. A more potent cause, however, for the proximate identity extending
to such an elaborate detail, as is evinced by the foregoing schedule, is
found in the historical incident

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

which brought the disciples of the various systems of worship together,
face to face, in the then grand religious emporium of the world—the
royal and renowned city of Alexandria, the capital of Egypt. Here, drawn
together by various motives and influences, the devotee of India (the
devout disciple of Buddhism), the ever-prayerful worshipper of "Mithra,
the Mediator," the representatives of the crucified Quexalcoate of
Mexico, the self-denying Essene, the superstitious Egyptian, the godly
Chaldean, the imitative Judean founders of Christianity, and the
disciples of other sin-atoning Gods, met and interchanged ideas,
discussed their various dogmas, remolded their doctrines, and recast and
rehabilitated their systems of religious faith by borrowing from each
other, and from other systems there represented. In this way all became
remarkably similar and alike in all their doctrines and details. And
thus the mystery is solved, and the singular resemblance of all the
ancient systems of religion satisfactorily accounted for. (For a fuller
explanation of this matter, see Chapters XXX. and XXXI. of this work.)

In conclusion, please note the following points:—

1\. The religious conceptions of the Old Testament are as easily traced
to heathen sources as those of the New Testament. But we are compelled
to exclude such an exposition from this work.

2\. The comparative exhibition of the doctrines and teachings of twenty
bibles which proves them to be in their leading features essentially
alike (originally designed for this volume), is found to be, when
completed, of sufficient magnitude to constitute a volume of itself.

3\. Here I desire to impress upon the minds of my clerical brethren the
important fact, that the gospel histories of Christ were written by men
who had formerly been Jews (see Acts xxi. 20), and probably possessing
the strong proclivity to imitate and borrow which their bible shows

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

was characteristic of that nation; and being written many years after
Christ's death, according to that standard Christian author, Dr.
Lardner, it was impossible, under such circumstances, for them to
separate (if they had desired to) the real facts and events of his life
from the innumerable fictions and fables then afloat everywhere relative
to the heathen Gods who had pre-enacted a similar history. Two reasons
are thus furnished for their constructing a history of Christ almost
identical with that of other Gods, as shown in chapters XXX., XXXI. and
XXXII. of this work.

4\. The singular and senseless defense of your now tottering system we
have known to be attempted by members of your order, by the
self-complacent soliloquy "Christianity, whether divine or human, is
good enough for me." But such a subterfuge betrays both a weak mind and
a weak cause. The disciples of all the oriental systems cherished a
similar feeling and a similar sentiment. And the deluded followers of
Brigham Young exclaimed in like manner, "I want nothing better than
Mormonism." "Snakes, lizards and frogs are good enough for me," a South
Sea Islander once exclaimed to a missionary, when a reform diet was
proposed. Such logic, if universally adopted, would keep the world
eternally in barbarism. No progress can be made where such sentiments
prevail. The truth is, no system of religion, whatever its ostensible
marks of perfection, can long remain "good enough" for aspiring and
progressive minds, unless occasionally improved, like other
institutions. And then it should be borne in mind, that our controversy
does not appertain so much to the character as to the origin of the
Christian religion. Our many incontrovertible proofs, that it is of
human and heathen origin, proves at the same time that it is an
imperfect system, and as such, needing occasional improvement, like
other institutions. And its assumed perfection and divine origin

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

which have always guarded it from improvement, amply accounts for its
present corrupt, immoral, declining and dying condition. And it will ere
long die with paralysis, unless its assumption of divine perfection is
soon exchanged for the principles of improvement and reconstruction.
This policy alone can save it.

5\. We will here notice another feeble, futile and foolish expedient we
have known resorted to by persons of your order to save your sinking
cause when the evidence is presented with such cogency as to admit of no
disproof, that all the important doctrines of Christianity were taught
by older heathen systems before the era of Christ. The plea is, that
those systems were mere types, or ante-types, of the Christian religion.
But this plea is of itself a borrowed subterfuge of heathenism, and is
moreover devoid of evidence. The ancient Egyptians, also the Greeks,
claimed that Brahminism was a type, or ante-type, of their religious
systems. And Mohammedans now claim that both Judaism and Christianity
were designed by God as foreshadowing types of religion of the Koran.
And the disciples of more than a thousand systems of religion which have
flourished in past ages, could have made such logic equally available in
showing, in each case, that every system preceding theirs was designed
by Infinite Wisdom as simply a typical or ante-typical forerunner of
theirs. How ridiculous and senseless, therefore, is the argument thus
shown to be when critically examined in the light of history! So much so
as scarcely to merit a serious notice.

6\. Here permit us to say that we believe Christianity to be not only of
human origin, but of natural origin also; that is, a natural outgrowth,
like other systems, of the religious elements of the human mind—a
hypothesis which accounts most beautifully for the numerous human
imperfections now visible in nearly every line of its teachings.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Those
imperfections correspond exactly to the imperfect minds which produced
it.

7\. And we believe that the principle teacher of Christianity, "the man
Christ Jesus," possessed a very exalted and superior mind for that age
in the moral and religions departments, and in the intellectual to some
extent also. But his superiority in these respects was not probably
greater than that of Zera Colburn or Henry Safford in the mathematical
department. And all probably derived their peculiar extraordinary traits
of mind from the same causes—that of strong psychological influence
impressed upon the mind of the mothers prior to their births. Had these
ante-natal influences been as well understood then as now, we presume
Christ would have escaped the fate of an exaltation to the Godhead.

8\. In conclusion, permit us to say that the numerous and overwhelming
facts of this work render it *utterly impossible* that the exalted
claims you put forth for your religion and its assumed author (that of a
divine character) can be true. And posterity will so decide, whether you
do or not.

Cherishing for you naught but feelings of kindness and brotherly love,
and desiring to promote the truth, we will answer any question, or
discuss any proposition embraced in this work you may desire.

Your brother,

KERSEY GRAVIES.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I: Rival Claims of the Saviors](wscs06.md)
