[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc07)  [Next](cc09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558181490/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Collectanea Chemica*, ed. by A.E. Waite, \[1893\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

### THE PREFACE.

IF there had been any English publication upon this curious and
momentous subject, easy to be met with, that deserved regard, the public
had not been troubled with this. The operations herein described are all
within the compass of Nature; they are laid down in plain language, and
the reasoning upon them is suited to a common apprehension, where there
is a chemical turn of mind. Anyone inclining to these studies, if poor,
will do well to mind his proper business, without attempting the
Philosophical Work, as the necessary apparatus must require more expense
and time than he can spare; but such as are of ability may well
undertake it, both as a recreation and useful employment, in which an
ingenious labourer may be retained as an assistant for the manual
operations, at such a daily allowance as

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

may be proportioned to his labour and sufficient for a subsistence. No
more can be expected by a man who is modest and pious: one that is
vicious can never be depended upon in a work of consequence like this,
where patience is a main requisite, together with a punctilious veracity
in reciting every variation of the matter during a tedious process from
seven to nine months.

Whoever will therefore undertake this process must needs have an
assistant; and, we again repeat it, such an one whose fidelity, above
all things, may be safely relied upon; true, faithful, and religious;
being, like his employer, acute to investigate the phenomena of Nature,
especially in chemical processes.

Those who are accustomed to treat this science with contempt may
doubtless ridicule anything written expressly upon it without examining
what is advanced in its support, the title only of a book being of a
sufficient reason with many for their disregarding the contents. We
shall leave

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

such superficial people in quiet possession of that unhappy
self-sufficiency they have acquired, and rather apologise for the
plainness with which this process is delivered to those possessors of
it, if any, and yet alive, who may be displeased with our public spirit
in communicating what has so long been considered as a sacred deposition
with a few Philosophers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Introduction](cc09)
