[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc11)  [Next](cc13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558181490/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Collectanea Chemica*, ed. by A.E. Waite, \[1893\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV.

*Of the Metallic Tincture*.

WHEN we undertook a description of the vegetable process, it was chiefly
with a view to familiarise the reader to a general idea of the
Philosophic Work in metals, as both proceed upon the same principles,
only the mercuries of metals are more difficult to extract, and stronger
degrees of heat are required, as well as more of the

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

artist's time and patience; neither can he succeed in the operation
without frequent trials, and a constant consideration within his mind as
to what is within the possibility of Nature. For this purpose it is
necessary to know the composition of metals, that he may know how to
decompound and reduce them to their first principles, which is treated
of very mysteriously by the philosophers, and purposely concealed, as
the right key to unlock all the secrets of Nature. We shall be more
explicit on this head, for the time draws near when, as Sendivogius has
observed, the confection of the Stone will be discovered as plainly as
the making of cheese from rennet. But we warn the reader not to imitate
Midas in the fable, by seeking the noble tincture in metals out of
covetousness; for the true wise men seek only a medicine for human
infirmities, and esteem gold but as it furnishes them with the means of
independence and the exercise of universal beneficence. They communicate

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

their talents, without vain glory or ostentation, to such as are worthy
searchers of Nature, but concealing their names as much as possible,
while living, as well as their knowledge of the mystery from the world.

We shall herein follow their example, and yet write more plainly of the
Metallic Process than any of them has hitherto done, knowing that the
providence of the Most High will effectually guard this Arcanum from
falling into the hands of covetous gold seekers and knavish pretenders
to the Art of Transmutation; because the first sort of men will, from
their impatience, soon leave the simplicity of Nature for processes of
more subtlety invented by the latter, and adapted to such avaricious
views as the other have formed, who, judging of things by their own
griping dispositions, know not the noble liberality of Nature, but
imagine some gold must be advanced before she will replenish their
heaps. This is well foreseen by those

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

smoke sellers, who receive what they can catch, as if they were her
proper agents; and, having no conscience to put a stop to their
imposition, the deception is kept up till all vanishes in smoke.

Let it be observed, then, that all who have written on the art, from
undoubted principles, assert that the genuine process is not expensive;
time and fuel, with manual labour, being all allowed for. Besides, the
matter to be wrought upon is easy to procure by the consent of all. A
small quantity of gold and silver is, indeed, necessary when the stone
is made, as a medium for its tinging either in the white or red
tinctures, which such pretenders have urged from books of philosophers
as a plausible pretence to rob the avaricious both of their time and
money; but their pretences are so gross that none can be sufferers in
this respect, if they have not justly deserved it.

The reader may then rest assured that this process is not expensive, and
reject

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

all authors or practitioners who advance anything contrary to this
established verity, remembering the simplicity of Nature in her
operations, observing her frugal method in the production, and
consummate wisdom in the dissolution of things; always endeavouring at
something perfect in a new production. And because we are here proposing
to help her in a metallic process, as before in the vegetable, let us
consider a little how she forms the metals, in what state she has left
them, and what need there is of the artist's skill to assist her in
pushing them to that degree of perfection they are capable of attaining.

All true philosophers agree that the First Matter of metals is a moist
vapour, raised by the action of the central fire in the bowels of the
earth, which, circulating through its pores, meets with the crude air,
and is coagulated by it into an unctuous water, adhering to the earth,
which serves it for a receptacle, where it is joined to a sulphur more
or less pure, and a salt more

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

or less fixing, which it attracts from the air, and, receiving a certain
degree of concoction from the central and solar heat, is formed into
stones and rocks, minerals and metals. These were all formed of the same
moist vapour originally, but are thus varied from the different
impregnations of the sperm, the quality of salt and sulphur with which
it is fixed, and the purity of the earth which serves it for a matrix;
for whatever portion of this moist vapour is hastily sublimed to the
surface of the earth, taking along its impurities, is soon deprived of
its purer parts by the constant action of heat, both solar and central,
and the grosser parts, forming a mucilaginous substance, furnish the
matter of common rocks and stones. But when this moist vapour is
sublimed, very slowly, through a fine earth, not partaking of a
sulphureous unctuosity, pebbles are formed; for the sperm of these
beautiful, variegated stones, with marbles, alabasters, etc., separates
this depurated vapour, both for their first formation

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

and continual growth. Gems are in like manner formed of this moist
vapour when it meets with pure salt water, with which it is fixed in a
cold place. But if it is sublimed leisurely through places which are hot
and pure, where the fatness of sulphur adheres to it, this vapour, which
the philosophers call their Mercury, is joined to that fatness and
becomes an unctuous matter, which coming afterwards to other places,
cleansed by the afore-named vapours, where the earth is subtle, pure,
and moist, fills the pores of it, and so gold is made. But if the
unctuous matter comes into places cold and impure, lead, or Saturn, is
produced; if the earth be cold and pure, mixed with sulphur, the result
is copper. Silver also is formed of this vapour, where it abounds in
purity, but mixed with a lesser degree of sulphur and not sufficiently
concocted. In tin, or Jupiter, as it is called, it abounds, but in less
purity. In Mars, or iron, it is in a lesser proportion impure, and mixed
with an adust sulphur.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

Hence it appears that the First Matter of metals is one thing, and not
many, homogeneous, but altered by the diversity of places and sulphurs
with which it is combined. The philosophers frequently describe this
matter. Sendivogius calls it heavenly water, not wetting the hands; not
vulgar, but almost like rain water. When Hermes calls it a bird without
wings, figuring thereby its vaporous nature, it is well described. When
he calls the sun its father and the moon its mother, he signifies that
it is produced by the action of heat upon moisture. When he says the
wind carries it in its belly, he only means that the air is its
receptacle. When he affirms that which is inferior is like that which is
superior, he teaches that the same vapour on the surface of the earth
furnishes the matter of rain and dew, wherewith all things are nourished
in the vegetable and animal kingdoms. This now is what the philosophers
call their Mercury and affirm it to be found in all things, as it

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

is in fact. This makes some suppose it to be in the human body, others
in the dunghill, which has often bewildered such as are fond of
philosophical subtleties, and fly from one thing to another, without any
fixed theory about what they would seek, expecting to find in the
Vegetable or Animal Kingdoms the utmost perfection of the Mineral. To
this mistake of theirs, without doubt, the philosophers have contributed
with an intention of hiding their First Matter from the unworthy; in
which they were, perhaps, more cautious than is necessary, for
Sendivogius declares that occasionally, in discourse, he had intimated
the art plainly word by word to some who accounted themselves very acute
philosophers; but they conceived such subtle notions, far beyond the
simplicity of Nature, that they could not, to any purpose, understand
his meaning. Wherefore he professes little fear of its being discovered
but to those who have it according to the good pleasure and providence
of the Most High.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

This benevolent disposition has induced him to declare more openly the
First Matter, and fix the artist in his search of it to the mineral
kingdom; for, quoting Albertus Magnus, who wrote that, in his time,
grains of gold were found betwixt the teeth of a dead man in his grave,
he observes that Albertus could not account for this miracle, but judged
it to be by reason of the mineral virtue in man, being confirmed by that
saying of Morien: "And this matter, O King, is extracted from thee." But
this is erroneous, for Morien understood those things philosophically,
the mineral virtue residing in its own kingdom, distinct from the
animal. It is true, indeed, in the, animal kingdom mercury, or humidity,
is as the matter, and sulphur, or marrow in the bones, as the virtue;
but the animal is not mineral, and *vice versâ*. If the virtue of the
animal sulphur were not in man, the blood, or mercury, could not be
coagulated into flesh and bones; so if there were not a vegetable

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

sulphur In the vegetable kingdom, it could not coagulate water, or the
vegetable mercury, into herbs, etc. The same is to be understood in the
mineral kingdom.

These three kingdoms do not, indeed, differ in their virtue, nor the
three sulphurs, as every sulphur has a power to coagulate its own
mercury; and every mercury has a power of being coagulated by its own
proper sulphur, and by no other which is a stranger to it.

Now the reason why gold was found betwixt the teeth of a dead man is
this: because in his lifetime mercury had been administered to him,
either by unction, turbith, or some other way; and it is the nature of
this metal to ascend to the mouth, forming itself an outlet there, to be
evacuated with the spittle. If, then, in the time of such treatment, the
sick man died, the mercury, not finding an egress, remained in his mouth
between his teeth, and the carcase becoming a natural matrix to ripen
the mercury, it was shut up for a

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

long time, till it was congealed into gold by its own proper sulphur,
being purified by the natural heat of putrefaction, caused by the
corrosive phlegm of man's body; but this would never have happened if
mineral mercury had not been administered to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Of the Second Matter, or Seed in Metals](cc13)
