[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc14)  [Next](cc16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558181490/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Collectanea Chemica*, ed. by A.E. Waite, \[1893\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII.

*Of the Separation and Further Treatment of our Philosophical Seed*.

THE putrefaction of our subject being thus

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

completed, it exists under two forms: the moisture which was extracted,
and the residuum, being our Philosophical Earth and Water. The water
contains its seminal virtue, and the earth is a proper receptacle,
wherein it may fructify. Let the water, then be separated and kept for
use; calcine tile earth, for an impurity adheres to it which can only be
taken away by fire, and that, too, of the strongest degree: for here
there is no danger of destroying the seminal quality, and our earth must
be highly purified before it can ripen the seed. This is what
Sendivogius means when he says: *Burn the sulphur till it becomes
sulphur incombustible. Many lose in the preparation what is of most use
in the art; for our mercury is acuated by the sulphur, else it would be
of no use*. Let, therefore, the earthy part be well calcined, and return
the mercury on the calcined earth; afterwards draw it off by
distillation; then calcine, cohobate, and distil, repeating the process
till the mercury is well acuated by

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

the sulphur, and the sulphur is purified to a whiteness, and goes on to
red, a sign of its complete purification, where you have the
Philosophical Male and Female ready for conjunction. This must now be
managed with judgment, as the noble child may be yet strangled in the
birth; but all things are easy to an ingenious artist, who knows the
proportion of mixture required and accommodates his operations to the
intentions of Nature, for which purpose we shall faithfully conduct him
according to our ability.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Of the Union or Mystical Marriage in the
Philosophical Process](cc16)
