[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cc22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1558181490/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Collectanea Chemica*, ed. by A.E. Waite, \[1893\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

# PREPARATIONS

###### OF THE

# SOPHIC MERCURY. \_\_\_\_\_\_\_

##### EXPERIMENTS

FOR THE PREPARATION OF THE SOPHIC MERCURY, BY LUNA AND THE ANTIMONIAL
STELLATE REGULUS OF MARS, FOR THE PHILOSOPHERS STONE.

\_\_\_\_

Written by *Eirenæus Philalethes*, an Englishman, and a Cosmopolite.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

### THE SOPHIC MERCURY.

1\. *The Secret of the Philosophic Arsenic*.

I took one part of the Fiery Dragon, and of the Magnetical Body two
parts; I prepared them together by a strong fire, and in the first
fusion there was made about eight ounces of the true arsenic.

2\. *The Secret of Prepaying the Mercury with his Arsenic for the
Separating its Fæces*.

I did take one part of the best arsenic, and I made a marriage with two
parts of the Virgin *Diana* into one body; I ground it very fine, and
with this I have prepared my Mercury, working them altogether in heat,
until that they were most exquisitely incorporated; then I purged it
with the salt of urine, that the fæces did separate, which I put away.

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

3\. *The Purification of the Sophic Mercury*.

The Mercury, thus prepared, is yet infected with an external
uncleanness, wherefore distil it three or four times in its proper
alembic, with its steel cucurbit; then wash it with the salt of urine
until that it be clear and bright, and in its motion leaves no tail
behind it.

4\. *Another most excellent Purgation*.

Take of decrepit salt, and of the Scoriæ of Mars, of each ten ounces, of
prepared Mercury one ounce and a-half; grind the salt and the Scoriæ
very fine together, in a marble mortar; then put in the Mercury, and
grind it with vinegar, so long until no more of the Mercury appears. Put
it into a glass body, and distil it by sand in a glass alembic, until
all the Mercury be ascended pure, clear, and splendidly bright;
reiterate this three times, and you will have the Mercury excellently
well prepared for the Magistery.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

5\. *The Secret of the just Preparation of the Sophic Mercury*.

Every single preparation of the Mercury with its arsenic is one Eagle;
the Feathers of the Eagle being purged from their crow-like blackness,
make it to fly the seventh flight, and it is prepared even until the
tenth flight.

6\. *The Secret of the Sophie Mercury*.

I have taken the proper quantity of the ☿, and I mixed it with its true
arsenic, to wit, about four ounces of Mercury, and I made a thin
commixed consistence; I purged it after a due manner, and I distilled
it, and I had a pure body of Lune, whence I knew that I had rightly
prepared it. Afterwards I added to its weight of arsenic, and I
increased its former weight of Mercury, in so much that the Mercury
might prevail to a thin flux, and so I purged it, to the washing of the
blackness almost to a lunary whiteness. Then I took

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

half an ounce of the arsenic, of which I made a due marriage; I added it
to this betrothed Mercury, and there was made a temperature like
potter's loam, but a little thinner; I purged it again, after a due
manner; the purgation was laborious, and a long time. I made it with the
salt of urine which I have found to be the best in this work.

7\. *Another Purgation, but yet better*.

I have found out a better way of purging it, with vinegar and pure sea
salt, so that in the space of half-a-day I can prepare one Eagle: I made
the first Eagle to fly, and Diana is left, with a little tincture of
brass. I began the second Eagle by removing the superfluities, and then
I made it fly, and again the Doves of Diana are left, with the tincture
of brass. I conjoined the third Eagle, and I purged the superfluities,
by removing them, even to a whiteness; then I made it fly, and there was
left a great part of brass, with the

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Doves of Diana.
Then I made it fly twice by itself, to the whole extraction of all the
body. Then I joined the fourth Eagle, by adding more and more of its own
humour by degrees, and there was made a very temperate consistence, in
which there was no Hydrops (or superfluous moisture) as there was in the
former Eagles.

8\. *I have found the best way of Preparing the Sophie Mercury, viz.,
such as follows:*

The amalgamated mass, espoused or joined very intimately by a due
marriage, I put into a crucible, and into a furnace of sand for
half-an-hour, but so that it may not sublime; then I take it out, and
strongly grind it; then I put it again in a crucible, and in the
furnace, and after a quarter of an hour, or thereabouts, I grind it
again, and I make the mortar hot. By this means the amalgam begins to be
clean, and to cast forth a great deal of powder. Then I put it in the
crucible again, and to

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

the fire as before, for a convenient time, so that it be not sublimed:
otherwise the greater the fire is, the better it is; so continually
putting it in the tire, and continually grinding it, till almost all the
powder Both wholly disappear; then I wash it, and the fæces are easily
cast out, and the amalgam becomes entire without any heterogeneity. Then
I wash it with salt, and again do heat it and grind it. This I repeat to
the full, cleansing it from all manner of fæces.

9\. *A Threefold Trial of the Goodness of the Prepared Mercury*.

Take thy Mercury prepared with its arsenic of seven, eight, nine, or ten
Eagles; put it into a phial, and thou shalt lute it with the *Lutum
Sapientiæ*. Place it in a furnace of sand, and let it stand in a heat of
sublimation, so that it may ascend and descend in the glass, until it be
coagulated a little thicker than butter. Continue it unto a perfect
coagulation, until it be as white as silver.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

10\. *Another Trial*.

If by shaking it in a glass with the salt of urine, it be turned into an
impalpable white powder of its own accord, so that it doth not appear as
Mercury, and of its own accord, in a hot and dry place, it coagulates
again into a thin Mercury, it is enough: but yet better if being
agitated in fountain water, it runs into small heads or particles; for
if the grain be in the body it will not be thus converted and separated
into small minute parts.

11\. *The Third Trial*.

Distil it in a glass alembic, from a glass cucurbit; if it passes over
and leaves nothing behind it, it is a good mineral water.

12\. *The Extraction of the Sulphur from the living Mercury by
Separation*.

Take thy mixed corporal and spiritual compound, the body of which is
coagulated

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

of the volatile by digestion, and separate the Mercury from its Sulphur
by a glass still, and thou shalt have a white *Luna* fixed and resisting
*Aqua fortis*, and more ponderous than common silver.

13\. *The Magical Sol out of this Luna*.

Out of this white Sulphur, by fire, thou shalt have a yellow Sulphur, by
a manual operation, which Sol is the Red Lead of the Philosophers.

14\. *Out of this Sulphur, Aurum Potabile*.

Thou mayst turn this yellow Sulphur into an oil as red as blood, by
circulating it with the Volatile-Mercurial-Philosophical Menstruum; so
thou shalt have an admirable panacea, or universal medicine.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

15\. *The Gross Conjunction of the Menstruum with its Sulphur, for the
Formation of the Offspring of the Fire*.

Take of thy purged, best, prepared, and choicest Mercury, of seven,
eight, nine, or at most ten Eagles; mix it with the prepared Laton, or
its Red Sulphur; that is to say, two parts of the water, or at the most
three, with one of the pure Sulphur, ground and purged.

N.B.—But it is better that thou takest two parts to one.

16\. *The Working of the Mixture at a Manual Operation*.

This thy mixture thou shalt grind very well upon a marble; then thou
shalt wash it with vinegar and *Sal Ammoniac*, until it hath put off all
its black fæces; then thou shalt wash off all its saltness and acrimony
with clear fountain water; then shalt thou dry it upon clean white
paper, by turning of it from place to place with the point of a knife,
even unto an exquisite dryness.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

17\. *The Putting in of the Fetus into the Philosophical Egg*.

Now thy mixture being dried, put it into an oval glass, of the best and
most transparent glass, of the bigness of a hen's egg; in such a glass
let not thy matter exceed two ounces: seal it hermetically.

18\. *The Government of the Fire*.

Then you must have a furnace built, in which you may keep an immortal
fire; in it you shall make a heat of sand of the first degree, in which
the dew of our compound may be elevated and circulated continually, day
and night, without any intermission, etc. And in such a fire the body
will die, and the spirit will be renewed; and at length the soul will be
glorified and united with a new immortal and incorruptible body.

Thus is made a new Heaven.

FINIS.

 

 

 

 
