[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34002)  [Next](sbe34004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

# FIRST ADHYÂYA.

### PÂDA I.

The first five adhikara*n*as lay clown the fundamental positions with
regard to Brahman. Adhik. I (1) <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) treats
of what the study of the Vedânta presupposes. Adhik. II (2) defines
Brahman as that whence the world originates, and so on. Adhik. III (3)
declares that Brahman is the source of the Veda. Adhik. IV (4) proves
Brahman to be the uniform topic of all Vedânta-texts. Adhik. V (5-11) is
engaged in proving by various arguments that the Brahman, which the
Vedanta-texts represent as the cause of the world, is an intelligent
principle, and cannot be identified with the non-intelligent pradhâna
from which the world springs according to the Sânkhyas.

With the next adhikara*n*a there begins a series of discussions of
essentially similar character, extending up to the end of the first
adhyâya. The question is throughout whether certain terms met with in
the Upanishads denote Brahman or some other being, in most cases the
*g*îva, the individual soul. *S*a<u>n</u>kara remarks at the outset
that, as the preceding ten Sûtras had settled the all-important point
that all the Vedânta-texts refer to Brahman, the question now arises why
the enquiry should be continued any further, and thereupon proceeds to
explain that the acknowledged distinction of a higher Brahman devoid of
all qualities and a lower Brahman characterised by qualities
necessitates an investigation whether certain Vedic texts of primâ facie
doubtful import set forth the lower Brahman as the object of devout
meditation, or the higher Brahman as the object of true knowledge. But
that such an investigation is actually carried on in the remaining
portion of the first adhyâya, appears neither from the wording of the
Sûtras nor even from *S*a<u>n</u>kara's own treatment of the Vedic

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

texts referred to in the Sûtras. In I, 1, 20, for instance, the question
is raised whether the golden man within the sphere of the sun, with
golden hair and beard and lotus-coloured eyes--of whom the *Kh*ândogya
Upanishad speaks in I, 6, 6--is an individual soul abiding within the
sun or the highest Lord. *S*a<u>n</u>kara's answer is that the passage
refers to the Lord, who, for the gratification of his worshippers,
manifests himself in a bodily shape made of Mâyâ. So that according to
*S*a<u>n</u>kara himself the alternative lies between the sagu*n*a
Brahman and some particular individual soul, not between the sagu*n*a
Brahman and the nirgu*n*a Brahman.

Adhik. VI (12-19) raises the question whether the ânandamaya, mentioned
in Taittirîya Upanishad II, 5, is merely a transmigrating individual
soul or the highest Self. *S*a<u>n</u>kara begins by explaining the
Sûtras on the latter supposition--and the text of the Sûtras is
certainly in favour of that interpretation--gives, however, finally the
preference to a different and exceedingly forced explanation according
to which the Sûtras teach that the ânandamaya is not Brahman, since the
Upanishad expressly says that Brahman is the tail or support of the
ânandamaya <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6).--Râmânu*g*a's
interpretation of Adhikara*n*a VI, although not agreeing in all
particulars with the former explanation of *S*a<u>n</u>kara, yet is at
one with it in the chief point, viz. that the ânandamaya is Brahman. It
further deserves notice that, while *S*a<u>n</u>kara looks on Adhik. VI
as the first of a series of interpretatory discussions, all of which
treat the question whether certain Vedic passages refer to Brahman or
not, Râmânu*g*a separates the adhikara*n*a from the subsequent part of
the pâda and connects it with what had preceded. In Adhik. V it had been
shown that Brahman cannot be

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

identified with the pradhâna; Adhik. VI shows that it is different from
the individual soul, and the proof of the fundamental position of the
system is thereby completed <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7).--Adhik.
VII (20, 31) demonstrates that the golden person seen within the sun and
the person seen within the eye, mentioned in *Kh*. Up. I, 6, are not
some individual soul of high eminence, but the supreme Brahman.--Adhik.
VIII (22) teaches that by the ether from which, according to *Kh*. Up.
I, 9, all beings originate, not the elemental ether has to be understood
but the highest Brahman.--Adhik. IX (23). The prâ*n*a also mentioned in
*Kh*. Up. I, ii, 5 denotes the highest Brahman <span
id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8)--Adhik. X (24-27) teaches that the light
spoken of in *Kh*. Up. III, 13, 7 is not the ordinary physical light but
the highest Brahman <span id="fr_9"></span>[3](#fn_9).--Adhik. XI
(28-31) decides that the prâ*n*a mentioned in Kau. Up. III, 2 is
Brahman.

### PÂDA II.

Adhik. I (1-8) shows that the being which consists of mind, whose body
is breath, &c., mentioned in *Kh*. Up. III, 14, is not the individual
soul, but Brahman. The Sûtras of this adhikara*n*a emphatically dwell on
the difference of the individual soul and the highest Self, whence
*S*a<u>n</u>kara is obliged to add an explanation--in his comment on
Sûtra 6--to the effect that that difference is to be understood as not
real, but as due to the false limiting adjuncts of the highest
Self.--The comment of Râmânu*g*a throughout closely follows the words of
the Sûtras; on Sûtra 6 it simply remarks that the difference of the
highest Self

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

from the individual soul rests thereon that the former as free from all
evil is not subject to the effects of works in the same way as the soul
is <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10).--Adhik. II (9, 10) decides that
he to whom the Brahmans and Kshattriyas are but food (Ka*th*a. Up. I, 2,
25) is the highest Self.--Adhik. III (11, 12) shows that the two entered
into the cave (Ka*th*a Up. I, 3, 1) are Brahman and the individual
soul <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11).--Adhik. IV (13-17) shows that
the person within the eye mentioned in *Kh*. Up. IV, 15, 1 is
Brahman.--Adhik. V (18-20) shows that the ruler within (antaryâmin)
described in B*ri*. Up. III, 7, 3 is Brahman. Sûtra 2,0 clearly enounces
the difference of the individual soul and the Lord; hence
*S*a<u>n</u>kara is obliged to remark that that difference is not
real.--Adhik. VI (21-23) proves that that which cannot be seen, &c,
mentioned in Mu*nd*aka Up. I, 1, 3 is Brahman.--Adhik. VII (24-32) shows
that the âtman vai*s*vânara of *Kh*. Up. V, 11, 6 is Brahman.

### PÂDA III.

Adhik. I (1-7) proves that that within which the heaven, the earth, &c.
are woven (Mu*nd*. Up. II, 2, 5) is Brahman.--Adhik. II (8, 9) shows
that the bhûman referred to in *Kh*. Up. VII, 23 is Brahman.--Adhik. III
(10-12) teaches that the Imperishable in which, according to B*ri*. Up.
III, 8, 8, the ether is woven is Brahman.--Adhik. IV (13) decides that
the highest person who is to be meditated upon with the syllable Om,
according to Pra*s*na Up. V, 5, is not the

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

lower but the higher Brahman.--According to Râmânu*g*a the two
alternatives are Brahman and Brahmâ (*g*îvasa-mash*t*irûpo \#
*nd*âdhipati*s* *k*aturmukha*h*).--Adhik. V and VI (comprising,
according to--*S*a<u>n</u>kara, Sûtras 14-21) <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12) discuss the question whether the small
ether within the lotus of the heart mentioned in *Kh*. Up. VIII, 1 is
the elemental ether or the individual soul or Brahman; the last
alternative being finally adopted. In favour of the second alternative
the pûrvapakshin pleads the two passages *Kh*. Up. VIII, 3, 4 and VIII,
12, 3, about the serene being (samprasâda); for by the latter the
individual soul only can be understood, and in the chapter, of which the
latter passage forms part, there are ascribed to it the same qualities
(viz. freeness from sin, old age, death, &c.) that were predicated in
VIII, 1, of the small ether within the heart.--But the reply to this is,
that the second passage refers not to the (ordinary) individual soul but
to the soul in that state where its true nature has become manifest,
i.e. in which it is Brahman; so that the subject of the passage is in
reality not the so-called individual soul but Brahman. And in the former
of the two passages the soul is mentioned not on its own account, but
merely for the purpose of intimating that the highest Self is the cause
through which the individual soul manifests itself in its true
nature.--What Râmânu*g*a understands by the âvirbhâva of the soul will
appear from the remarks on IV, 4.

The two next Sûtras (22, 23) constitute, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara,
a new adhikara*n*a (VII), proving that he 'after whom everything shines,
by whose light all this is lighted' (Ka*th*a Up. II, 5,15) is not some
material luminous body, but Brahman itself.--According to Râmânu*g*a the
two Sûtras do not start a new topic, but merely furnish some further
arguments strengthening the conclusion arrived at in the preceding
Sûtras.) <span id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13)

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

Adhik. VIII (24, 25) decides that the person of the size of a thumb
mentioned in Ka*th*a Up. II, 4, 12 is not the individual soul but
Brahman.

The two next adhikara*n*as are of the nature of a digression. The
passage about the a<u>n</u>gush*th*amâtra was explained on the ground
that the human heart is of the size of a span; the question may then be
asked whether also such individuals as belong to other classes than
mankind, more particularly the Gods, are capable of the knowledge of
Brahman: a question finally answered in the affirmative.--This
discussion leads in its turn to several other digressions, among which
the most important one refers to the problem in what relation the
different species of beings stand to the words denoting them (Sûtra 28).
In connexion herewith *S*a<u>n</u>kara treats of the nature of words
(*s*abda), opposing the opinion of the Mîmâ*m*saka Upavarsha, according
to whom the word is nothing but the aggregate of its constitutive
letters, to the view of the grammarians who teach that over and above
the aggregate of the letters there exists a super-sensuous entity called
'spho*t*a,' which is the direct cause of the apprehension of the sense
of a word (Adhik. IX; Sûtras 26-33).

Adhik. X (34-38) explains that *S*ûdras are altogether disqualified for
Brahmavidyâ.

Sûtra 39 constitutes, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, a new adhikara*n*a
(XI), proving that the prâ*n*a in which everything trembles, according
to *K*a*th*a Up. II, 6, 2, is Brahman.--According to Râmânu*g*a the
Sûtra does not introduce a new topic but merely furnishes an additional
reason for the

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

decision arrived at under Sûtras 24, 25, viz. that the
a<u>n</u>gush*th*amâtra is Brahman. On this supposition, Sûtras 24-39
form one adhikara*n*a in which 26-38 constitute a mere digression led up
to by the mention made of the heart in 25.--The a<u>n</u>gush*th*amâtra
is referred to twice in the Ka*th*a Upanishad, once in the passage
discussed (II, 4, 12), and once in II, 6, 17 ('the Person not larger
than a thumb'). To determine what is meant by the
a<u>n</u>gush*th*amâtra, Râmânu*g*a says, we are enabled by the passage
II, 6, 2, 3, which is intermediate between the two passages concerning
the a<u>n</u>gush*th*amâtra, and which clearly refers to the highest
Brahman, of which alone everything can be said to stand in awe.

The next Sûtra (40) gives rise to a similar difference of opinion.
According to *S*a<u>n</u>kara it constitutes by itself a new
adhikara*n*a (XII), proving that the 'light' (*g*yotis) mentioned in
*Kh*. Up. VIII, 12, 3 is the highest Brahman.--According to Râmânu*g*a
the Sûtra continues the preceding adhikara*n*a, and strengthens the
conclusion arrived at by a further argument, referring to Ka*th*a Up.
II, 5, 15--a passage intermediate between the two passages about the
a<u>n</u>gush*th*amâtra--which speaks of a primary light that cannot
mean anything but Brahman. The Sûtra has in that case to be translated
as follows: '(The a<u>n</u>gush*th*amâtra is Brahman) because (in a
passage intervening between the two) a light is seen to be mentioned
(which can be Brahman only).'

The three last Sûtras of the pâda are, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, to
be divided into two adhikara*n*as (XIII and XIV), Sûtra 41 deciding that
the ether which reveals names and forms (*Kh*. Up. VIII, 14) is not the
elemental ether but Brahman; and 42, 43 teaching that the vi*gñ*ânamaya,
'he who consists of knowledge,' of B*ri*. Up. IV, 3, 7 is not the
individual soul but Brahman.--According to Râmânu*g*a the three Sûtras
make up one single adhikara*n*a discussing whether the *Kh*andogya
Upanishad passage about the ether refers to Brahman or to the individual
soul in the state of release; the latter of these two alternatives being
suggested by the circumstance that the released soul is the subject of
the passage immediately preceding ('Shaking off

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

all evil as a horse shakes off his hair,' &c.). Sûtra 41 decides that
'the ether (is Brahman) because the passage designates the nature of
something else,' &c. (i.e. of something other than the individual soul;
other because to the soul the revealing of names and forms cannot be
ascribed, &c.)--But, an objection is raised, does not more than one
scriptural passage show that the released soul and Brahman are
identical, and is not therefore the ether which reveals names and forms
the soul as well as Brahman?--(The two, Sûtra 42 replies, are different)
'because in the states of deep sleep and departing (the highest Self) is
designated as different' (from the soul)--which point is proved by the
same scriptural passages which *S*a<u>n</u>kara adduces;--and 'because
such terms as Lord and the like' cannot be applied to the individual
soul (43). Reference is made to IV, 4, 14, where all *g*agadvyâpâra is
said to belong to the Lord only, not to the soul even when in the state
of release.

### PÂDA IV.

The last pâda of the first adhyâya is specially directed against the
Sâ<u>n</u>khyas.

The first adhikara*n*a (1-7) discusses the passage Ka*th*a Up. I, 3, 10;
11, where mention is made of the Great and the Undeveloped--both of them
terms used with a special technical sense in the
*S*â<u>n</u>khya-*s*âstra, avyakta being a synonym for
pradhâna.--*S*a<u>n</u>kara shows by an exhaustive review of the topics
of the Ka*th*a Upanishad that the term avyakta has not the special
meaning which the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas attribute to it, but denotes the body,
more strictly the subtle body (sûkshma *s*arîra), but at the same time
the gross body also, in so far as it is viewed as an effect of the
subtle one.

Adhik. II (8-10) demonstrates, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, that the
tricoloured a*g*â spoken of in *S*ve. Up. IV, 5 is not the pradhâna of
the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas, but either that power of the Lord from which the
world springs, or else the primary causal matter first produced by that
power.--What Râmânu*g*a

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

in contradistinction from *S*a<u>n</u>kara understands by the primary
causal matter, follows from the short sketch given above of the two
systems.

Adhik. III (11-13) shows that the pa*ñk*a pa*ñk*a*g*anâ*h* mentioned in
B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 17 are not the twenty-five principles of the
Sâ<u>n</u>khyas.--Adhik. IV (14, 15) proves that Scripture does not
contradict itself on the all-important point of Brahman, i.e. a being
whose essence is intelligence, being the cause of the world.

Adhik. V (16-18) is, according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, meant to prove that
'he who is the maker of those persons, of whom this is the work,'
mentioned in Kau. Up. IV, 19, is not either the vital air or the
individual soul, but Brahman.--The subject of the adhikara*n*a is
essentially the same in Râmânu*g*a's view; greater stress is, however,
laid on the adhikara*n*a being polemical against the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas,
who wish to turn the passage into an argument for the pradhâna doctrine.

The same partial difference of view is observable with regard to the
next adhikara*n*a (VI; Sûtras 19-22) which decides that the 'Self to be
seen, to be heard,' &c. (B*ri*. Up. II, 4, 5) is the highest Self, not
the individual soul. This latter passage also is, according to
Râmânu*g*a, made the subject of discussion in order to rebut the
Sâ<u>n</u>khya who is anxious to prove that what is there inculcated as
the object of knowledge is not a universal Self but merely the
Sâ<u>n</u>khya purusha.

Adhik. VII (23-27) teaches that Brahman is not only the efficient or
operative cause (nimitta) of the world, but its material cause as well.
The world springs from Brahman by way of modification (pari*n*âma; Sûtra
26).--Râmânu*g*a views this adhikara*n*a as specially directed against
the Se*s*vara-sâ<u>n</u>khyas who indeed admit the existence of a
highest Lord, but postulate in addition an independent pradhâna on which
the Lord acts as an operative cause merely.

Adhik. VIII (28) remarks that the refutation of the Sâ<u>n</u>khya views
is applicable to other theories also, such as the doctrine of the world
having originated from atoms.

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

After this rapid survey of the contents of the first adhyâya and the
succinct indication of the most important points in which the views of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara and Râmânu*g*a diverge, we turn to a short
consideration of two questions which here naturally present themselves,
viz., firstly, which is the principle on which the Vedic passages
referred to in the Sûtras have been selected and arranged; and,
secondly, if, where *S*a<u>n</u>kara and Râmânu*g*a disagree as to the
subdivision of the Sûtras into Adhikara*n*as, and the determination of
the Vedic passages discussed in the Sûtras, there are to be met with any
indications enabling us to determine which of the two commentators is
right. (The more general question as to how far the Sûtras favour either
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's or Râmânu*g*a's general views cannot be considered at
present.)

The Hindu commentators here and there attempt to point out the reason
why the discussion of a certain Vedic passage is immediately followed by
the consideration of a certain other one. Their explanations--which have
occasionally been referred to in the notes to the translation--rest on
the assumption that the Sûtrakâra in arranging the texts to be commented
upon was guided by technicalities of the Mîmâ*m*sâ-system, especially by
a regard for the various so-called means of proof which the Mîmâ*m*saka
employs for the purpose of determining the proper meaning and position
of scriptural passages. But that this was the guiding principle, is
rendered altogether improbable by a simple tabular statement of the
Vedic passages referred to in the first adhyâya, such as given by
Deussen on page 130; for from the latter it appears that the order in
which the Sûtras exhibit the scriptural passages follows the order in
which those passages themselves occur in the Upanishads, and it would
certainly be a most strange coincidence if that order enabled us at the
same time to exemplify the various pramâ*n*as of the Mîmâ*m*sâ in their
due systematic succession.

As Deussen's statement shows, most of the passages discussed are taken
from the *Kh*ândogya Upanishad, so many indeed that the whole first
adhyâya may be said to consist of a discussion of all those *Kh*ândogya
passages of which it

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

is doubtful whether they are concerned with Brahman or not, passages
from the other Upanishads being brought in wherever an opportunity
offers. Considering the prominent position assigned to the Upanishad
mentioned, I think it likely that the Sûtrakâra meant to begin the
series of doubtful texts with the first doubtful passage from the
*Kh*ândogya, and that hence the sixth adhikara*n*a which treats of the
anândamaya mentioned in the Taittirîya Upanishad has, in agreement with
Râmânu*g*a's views, to be separated from the subsequent adhikara*n*as,
and to be combined with the preceding ones whose task it is to lay down
the fundamental propositions regarding Brahman's nature.--The remaining
adhikara*n*as of the first pâda follow the order of passages in the
*Kh*ândogya Upanishad, and therefore call for no remark; with the
exception of the last adhikara*n*a, which refers to a Kaushîtaki
passage, for whose being introduced in this place I am not able to
account.--The first adhikara*n*a of the second pâda returns to the
*Kh*ândogya Upanishad. The second one treats of a passage in the Ka*th*a
Upanishad where a being is referred to which eats everything. The reason
why that passage is introduced in this place seems to be correctly
assigned in the *S*rî-bhâshya, which remarks that, as in the preceding
Sûtra it had been argued that the highest Self is not an enjoyer, a
doubt arises whether by that being which eats everything the highest
Self can be meant <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14).--The third
adhikara*n*a again, whose topic is the 'two entered into the cave'
(Ka*th*a Up. I, 3, 1), appears, as Râmânu*g*a remarks, to come in at
this place owing to the preceding adhikara*n*a; for if it could not be
proved that one of the two is the highest Self, a doubt would attach to
the explanation given above of the 'eater' since the 'two entered into
the cave,' and the 'eater' stand under the same prakara*n*a, and must
therefore be held to refer to the same matter.--The fourth adhikara*n*a
is again occupied with a *Kh*ândogya passage.--The fifth adhikara*n*a,
whose topic is the Ruler within (antaryâmin), manifestly owes its place,
as remarked by Râmânu*g*a also,

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

to the fact that the Vedic passage treated had been employed in the
preceding adhikara*n*a (I, 2, 14) for the purpose of strengthening the
argument <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15).--The sixth adhikara*n*a,
again, which discusses 'that which is not seen' (adre*s*ya; Mu*nd*. Up.
I, 1, 6), is clearly introduced in this place because in the preceding
adhikara*n*a it had been said that ad*ri*sh*t*a, &c. denote the highest
Self;--The reasons to which the last adhikara*n*a of the second pâda and
the first and third adhikara*n*as of the third pâda owe their places are
not apparent (the second adhikara*n*a of the third pâda treats of a
*Kh*ândogya passage). The introduction, on the other hand, of the
passage from the Pra*s*na Upanishad treating of the akshara O*m*kâra is
clearly due to the circumstance that an akshara, of a different nature,
had been discussed in the preceding adhikara*n*a.--The fifth and sixth
adhikara*n*as investigate *Kh*ândogya passages.--The two next Sûtras
(22, 23) are, as remarked above, considered by *S*a<u>n</u>kara to
constitute a new adhikara*n*a treating of the 'being after which
everything shines' (Mu*nd*. Up. II, 2, 10); while Râmânu*g*a looks on
them as continuing the sixth adhikara*n*a. There is one circumstance
which renders it at any rate probable that Râmânu*g*a, and not
*S*a<u>n</u>kara, here hits the intention of the author of the Sûtras.
The general rule in the first three pâdas is that, wherever a new Vedic
passage is meant to be introduced, the subject of the discussion, i.e.
that being which in the end is declared to be Brahman is referred to by
means of a special word, in most cases a nominative form <span
id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16). From this rule there is in the preceding
part of the adhyâya only one real exception, viz. in I, 2, 1, which
possibly may be due to the fact that there a new pâda begins, and it
therefore was considered superfluous

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

to indicate the introduction of a new topic by a special word. The
exception supplied by I, 3, 19 is only an apparent one; for, as remarked
above, Sûtra 19 does not in reality begin a new adhikara*n*a. A few
exceptions occurring later on will be noticed in their places.--Now
neither Sutra 22 nor Sutra 23 contains any word intimating that a new
Vedic passage is being taken into consideration, and hence it appears
preferable to look upon them, with Râmânu*g*a, as continuing the topic
of the preceding adhikara*n*a.--This conclusion receives an additional
confirmation from the position of the next adhikara*n*a, which treats of
the being 'a span long' mentioned in Ka*th*a Up. II, 4, 12; for the
reason of this latter passage being considered here is almost certainly
the reference to the alpa*s*ruti in Sûtra 21, and, if so, the
a<u>n</u>gush*th*amâtra properly constitutes the subject of the
adhikara*n*a immediately following on Adhik. V, VI; which, in its turn,
implies that Sutras 22, 23 do not form an independent adhikara*n*a.--The
two next adhikara*n*as are digressions, and do not refer to special
Vedic passages.--Sutra 39 forms anew adhikara*n*a, according to
*S*a<u>n</u>kara, but not according to Râmânu*g*a, whose opinion seems
again to be countenanced by the fact that the Sûtra does not exhibit any
word indicative of a new topic. The same difference of opinion prevails
with regard to Sûtra 40, and it appears from the translation of the
Sûtra given above, according to Râmânu*g*a's view, that '*g*yoti*h*'
need not be taken as a nominative.--The last two adhikara*n*as finally
refer, according to Râmânu*g*a, to one *Kh*andogya passage only, and
here also we have to notice that Sûtra 42 does not comprise any word
intimating that a new passage is about to be discussed.

From all this we seem entitled to draw the following conclusions. The
Vedic passages discussed in the three first pâdas of the Vedânta-sûtras
comprise all the doubtful--or at any rate all the more important
doubtful--passages from the *Kh*andogya Upanishad. These passages are
arranged in the order in which the text of the Upanishad exhibits them.
Passages from other Upanishads are discussed as opportunities offer,
there being always a special reason why a certain *Kh*andogya passage is
followed by

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

a certain passage from some other Upanishad. Those reasons can be
assigned with sufficient certainty in a number of cases although not in
all, and from among those passages whose introduction cannot be
satisfactorily accounted for some are eliminated by our following the
subdivision of the Sûtras into adhikara*n*as adopted by Râmânu*g*a, a
subdivision countenanced by the external form of the Sûtras.

The fourth pâda of the first adhyâya has to be taken by itself. It is
directed specially and avowedly against Sânkhya-interpretations of
Scripture, not only in its earlier part which discusses isolated
passages, but also--as is brought out much more clearly in the
*S*rî-bhâshya than by *S*a<u>n</u>kara--in its latter part which takes a
general survey of the entire scriptural evidence for Brahman being the
material as well as the operative cause of the world.

Deussen (p. 221) thinks that the selection made by the Sûtrakâra of
Vedic passages setting forth the nature of Brahman is not in all cases
an altogether happy one. But this reproach rests on the assumption that
the passages referred to in the first adhyâya were chosen for the
purpose of throwing light on what Brahman is, and this assumption can
hardly be upheld. The Vedânta-sûtras as well as the Pûrvâ
Mîmâ*m*sâ-sûtras are throughout Mîmâ*m*sâ i.e. critical discussions of
such scriptural passages as on a primâ facie view admit of different
interpretations and therefore necessitate a careful enquiry into their
meaning. Here and there we meet with Sutrâs which do not directly
involve a discussion of the sense of some particular Vedic passage, but
rather make a mere statement on some important point. But those cases
are rare, and it would be altogether contrary to the general spirit of
the Sutrâs to assume that a whole adhyâya should be devoted to the task
of showing what Brahman is. The latter point is sufficiently determined
in the first five (or six) adhikara*n*as; but after we once know what
Brahman is we are at once confronted by a number of Upanishad passages
concerning which it is doubtful whether they refer to Brahman or not.
With their discussion all the remaining adhikara*n*as of the

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

first adhyâya are occupied. That the Vedânta-sûtras view it as a
particularly important task to controvert the doctrine of the
Sâ<u>n</u>khyas is patent (and has also been fully pointed out by
Deussen, p. 23). The fifth adhikara*n*a already declares itself against
the doctrine that the world has sprung from a non-intelligent principle,
the pradhâna, and the fourth pâda of the first adhyâya returns to an
express polemic against Sâ<u>n</u>khya interpretations of certain Vedic
statements. It is therefore perhaps not saying too much if we maintain
that the entire first adhyâya is due to the wish, on the part of the
Sûtrakâra, to guard his own doctrine against Sâ<u>n</u>khya attacks.
Whatever the attitude of the other so-called orthodox systems may be
towards the Veda, the Sâ<u>n</u>khya system is the only one whose
adherents were anxious--and actually attempted--to prove that their
views are warranted by scriptural passages. The Sâ<u>n</u>khya tendency
thus would be to show that all those Vedic texts which the Vedântin
claims as teaching the existence of Brahman, the intelligent and sole
cause of the world, refer either to the pradhâna or some product of the
pradhâna, or else to the purusha in the Sânkhya sense, i.e. the
individual soul. It consequently became the task of the Vedântin to
guard the Upanishads against misinterpretations of the kind, and this he
did in the first adhyâya of the Vedânta-sûtras, selecting those passages
about whose interpretation doubts were, for some reason or other, likely
to arise. Some of the passages singled out are certainly obscure, and
hence liable to various interpretations; of others it is less apparent
why it was thought requisite to discuss them at length. But this is
hardly a matter in which we are entitled to find fault with the
Sûtrakâra; for no modern scholar, either European or Hindu, is--or can
possibly be--sufficiently at home, on the one hand, in the religious and
philosophical views which prevailed at the time when the Sûtras may have
been composed, and, on the other hand, in the intricacies of the
Mîmâ*m*sâ, to judge with confidence which Vedic passages may give rise
to discussions and which not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xxxii:1](sbe34003.htm#fr_5) The Roman numerals
indicate the number of the adhikara*n*a; the figures in parentheses
state the Sûtras comprised in each adhikara*n*a.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xxxiii:1](sbe34003.htm#fr_6) Deussen's
supposition (pp. 30, 150) that the passage conveying the second
interpretation is an interpolation is liable to two objections. In the
first place, the passage is accepted and explained by all commentators;
in the second place, *S*a<u>n</u>kara in the passage immediately
preceding Sûtra 12 quotes the adhikara*n*a 'ânandamayo \# bhyâsât' as
giving rise to a discussion whether the param or the aparam brahman is
meant. Now this latter point is not touched upon at all in that part of
the bhâshya which sets forth the former explanation, but only in the
subsequent passage, which refutes the former and advocates the latter
interpretation.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xxxiv:1](sbe34003.htm#fr_7) Eva*m*
*g*i*gñ*asitasya brahma*n*a*s*
*k*etanabhogyabhûta*g*a*d*arûpasattvara*g*astamomayapradhânâd
vyâv*ri*ttir uktâ idânî*m* karmava*s*vât
trigu*n*âtmakaprak*ri*tisa*m*sarganimittanânâvidhântadukhasâgaranima*gg*anenâ*s*uddhâ*k*
*k*a pratyagâtmano \# nyan nikhilaheyapratayanîka*m* nirati*s*ayânandam
brahmeti pratipâdyate, ânandamayo \# bhyâsât.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xxxiv:2](sbe34003.htm#fr_8) There is no reason
to consider the passage 'atra ke*k*it' in *S*a<u>n</u>kara's bhashya on
Sutra 23 an interpolation as Deussen does (p. 30). It simply contains a
criticism passed by *S*a<u>n</u>kara on other commentators.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xxxiv:3](sbe34003.htm#fr_9) To the passages on
pp. 150 and 153 of the Sanskrit text, which Deussen thinks to be
interpolations, there likewise applies the remark made in the preceding
note.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xxxv:1](sbe34003.htm#fr_10) *G*îvaysa iva
parasyâpi brahma*n*a*h* *s*arîrantarvaititvam abbyupagata*m* *k*et
tadvad eva *s*arîrasambandhaprayuktasukhadukhopabhogaprâptir iti *k*en
na, hetuvai*s*eshyât, na hi *s*arîrântarvartitvam eva
sukhadukhopabhogahetu*h* api tu pu*n*yapâparûpakarmaparava*s*atva*m*
ta*k* *k*âpahatapâpmana*h* paramâtmano na sambhavati.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxxv:2](sbe34003.htm#fr_11) The second
interpretation given on pp. 184-5 of the Sanskrit text (beginning with
apara âha) Deussen considers to be an interpolation, caused by the
reference to the Pai<u>n</u>gi-upanishad in *S*a<u>n</u>kara's comment
on I, 3, 7 p. 232). But there is no reason whatsoever or such an
assumption. The passage on p. 232 shows that *S*a<u>n</u>kara considered
the explanation of the mantra given in the Pai<u>n</u>gi-upanishad worth
quoting, and is in fact fully intelligible only in case of its having
been quoted before by *S*a<u>n</u>kara himself.--That the 'apara' quote
the B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka not according to the Kâ*n*va text--to quote from
which is *S*a<u>n</u>kara's habit--but from the Mâdhyandina text, is due
just to the circumstance of his being an 'apara,' i.e. not
*S*a<u>n</u>kara.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xxxvi:1](sbe34003.htm#fr_12) Sutras 14-21 are
divided into two adhikara*n*as by the Adhikara*n*aratnamâlâ, but really
constitute a simple adhikara*n*a only.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xxxvi:2](sbe34003.htm#fr_13) Ita*s* *k*aitad
evam. Anuk*ri*tes tasya *k*a. Tasya daharâkâ*s*asya parabrahma*n*o \#
nukârâd ayam apahatapâpmatvâdigu*n*ako vimuktabandha*h* pratyagâtmâ na
daharâkâ*s*a*h* tadanukâras tatsâmya*m* tathâ hi pratyagâtmano \# pi
vimuktasya <span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span> parabrahmânukâra*h*
srûyate yadâ pa*s*ya*h* pa*s*yate rukmavar*n*a*m* kartâram î*s*a*m*
purusha*m* brahmayoni*m* tadâ vidvân pu*n*yapâpe vidhûya nira*ñg*ana*h*
parama*m* sâmyam upaitîty ato \# nukartâ pra*g*âpativâkyanirdish*t*a*h*
anukârya*m* para*m* brahma na daharâkâ*s*a*h*. Api *k*a smaryate.
Sa*m*sâri*n*o \# pi muktâvasthâyâ*m* paramasâmyâpattilaksha*n*a*h*
parabrahmânukâra*h* smaryate ida*m* *gñ*ânam upâ*s*ritya, &c.--Ke*k*id
anuk*ri*tes tasya *k*âpi smaryate iti *k*a sûtradvayam
adhikara*n*ântara*m* tam eva bhântam anubhâti sarva*m* tasya bhâsâ
sarvam ida*m* vibhâtîty asyâ*h* *s*rute*h* parabrahmaparatvanir*n*ayâya
prav*ri*tta*m* vadanti. Tat tv ad*ris*yatvâdigu*n*ako dharmokte*h*
dyubhvâdyâyatana*m* sva*s*abdâd ity adhi kara*n*advayena tasya
prakara*n*asya brahmavishayatvapratipâdanât *g*yoti*sk*ara*n*âbhidhânât
ity âdishu parasya brahma*n*o bhârûpatvâvagates *k*a
pûrvapakshânutthânâd ayukta*m* sûtrâksharavairûpyâ*k* *k*a.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xlii:1](sbe34003.htm#fr_14) Yadi paramâtmâ na
bhoktâ eva*m* tarhi bhokt*ri*tayâ pratîyamâno *g*îva eva syâd ity
âsa<u>n</u>kyâha attâ.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xliii:1](sbe34003.htm#fr_15)
Sthânâdivyapade*s*â*k* *k*a ity atra ya*h* *k*akshushi tish*th*ann ity
âdinâ pratipâdyamâna*m* *k*akshushi sthitiniyamanâdika*m* paramâtmana
eveti siddha*m* k*ri*tvâ akshipurushasya paramâtmatva*m* sâdhitam
idâni*m* tad eva samarthayate antaryâ °.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xliii:2](sbe34003.htm#fr_16) Ânandamaya*h* I,
1, 12; anta*h* I, 1, 20; âkâ*s*a*h* I, 1, 22; prâna*h* I, 1, 23;
*g*yoti*h* I, 1, 24; prâna*h* I, 1, 28; attâ I, 2, 9; guhâ*m*
pravish*t*au I, 2, 11; antara I, 2,13; antaryâmî I, 2, 18;
ad*ris*yatvâdigu*n*aka*h* I, 2, 21; vai*s*vânara*h* I, 2, 24;
dyubhvâdyâyatanam I, 3, 1; bhûmâ I, 3, 8; aksheram I, 3, 10; sa*h* I, 3,
13; dahara*h* I, 3, 14; pramita*h* I, 3, 24; (*g*yoti*h* I, 3, 40;)
âkâ*s*a*h* I, 3, 41.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Adhyâya](sbe34004)
