[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34139)  [Next](sbe34141) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

# SECOND ADHYÂYA.

### FIRST PÂDA.

REVERENCE TO THE HIGHEST SELF!

1\. If it be objected that (from the doctrine expounded hitherto) there
would result the fault of there being no room for (certain) Sm*ri*tis;
we do not admit that objection, because (from the rejection of our
doctrine) there would result the fault of want of room for other
Sm*ri*tis.

It has been shown in the first adhyâya that the omniscient Lord of all
is the cause of the origin of this world in the same way as clay is the
material cause of jars and gold of golden ornaments; that by his
rulership he is the cause of the subsistence of this world once
originated, just as the magician is the cause of the subsistence of the
magical illusion; and that he, lastly, is the cause of this emitted
world being finally reabsorbed into his essence, just as the four
classes of creatures are reabsorbed into the earth. It has further been
proved, by a demonstration of the connected meaning of all the
Vedânta-texts, that the Lord is the Self of all of us. Moreover, the
doctrines of the pradhâna, and so on, being the cause of this world have
been refuted as not being scriptural.--The purport of the second
adhyâya, which we now begin, is to refute the objections (to the
doctrine established hitherto) which might be founded on Sm*ri*ti and
Reasoning, and to show that the doctrines of the pradhâna, &c. have only
fallacious arguments to lean upon, and that the different Vedânta-texts
do not contradict one another with regard to the mode of creation and
similar topics.--The first point is to refute the objections based on
Sm*ri*ti.

Your doctrine (the pûrvapakshin says) that the omniscient

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brahman only is
the cause of this world cannot be maintained, 'because there results
from it the fault of there being no room for (certain) Sm*ri*tis.' Such
Sm*ri*tis are the one called Tantra which was composed by a *ri*shi and
is accepted by authoritative persons, and other Sm*ri*tis based on
it <span id="fr_257"></span>[1](#fn_257); for all of which there would
be no room if your interpretation of the Veda were the true one. For
they all teach that the non-intelligent pradhâna is the independent
cause of the world. There is indeed room (a raison d'être) for Sm*ri*tis
like the Manu-sm*ri*ti, which give information about matters connected
with the whole body of religious duty, characterised by injunction <span
id="fr_258"></span>[2](#fn_258) and comprising the agnihotra and similar
performances. They tell us at what time and with what rites the members
of the different castes are to be initiated; how the Veda has to be
studied; in what way the cessation of study has to take place; how
marriage has to be performed, and so on. They further lay down the
manifold religious duties, beneficial to man, of the four castes and
â*s*ramas <span id="fr_259"></span>[3](#fn_259). The Kâpila Sm*ri*ti, on
the other hand, and similar books are not concerned with things to be
done, but were composed with exclusive reference to perfect knowledge as
the means of final release. If then no room were left for them in that
connexion also, they would be altogether purposeless; and hence we must
explain the Vedânta-texts in such a manner as not to bring them into
conflict with the Sm*ri*tis mentioned <span
id="fr_260"></span>[4](#fn_260).--But how, somebody may ask the
pûrvapakshin, can the eventual fault of there being left no room for
certain Sm*ri*tis be used as an objection against that sense of *S*ruti
which--from various

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

reasons as detailed under I, 1 and ff.--has been ascertained by us to be
the true one, viz. that the omniscient Brahman alone is the cause of the
world?--Our objection, the pûrvapakshin replies, will perhaps not appear
valid to persons of independent thought; but as most men depend in their
reasonings on others, and are unable to ascertain by themselves the
sense of *S*ruti, they naturally rely on Sm*ri*tis, composed by
celebrated authorities, and try to arrive at the sense of *S*ruti with
their assistance; while, owing to their esteem for the authors of the
Sm*ri*tis, they have no trust in our explanations. The knowledge of men
like Kapila Sm*ri*ti declares to have been *ri*shi-like and
unobstructed, and moreover there is the following *S*ruti-passage, 'It
is he who, in the beginning, bears in his thoughts the son, the *ri*shi,
kapila <span id="fr_261"></span>[1](#fn_261), whom he wishes to look on
while he is born' (*S*ve. Up. V, 2). Hence their opinion cannot be
assumed to be erroneous, and as they moreover strengthen their position
by argumentation, the objection remains valid, and we must therefore
attempt to explain the Vedânta-texts in conformity with the Sm*ri*tis.

This objection we dispose of by the remark, 'It is not so because
therefrom would result the fault of want of room for other
Sm*ri*tis.'--If you object to the doctrine of the Lord being the cause
of the world on the ground that it would render certain Sm*ri*tis
purposeless, you thereby render purposeless other Sm*ri*tis which
declare themselves in favour of the said doctrine. These latter
Sm*ri*ti-texts we will quote in what follows. In one passage the highest
Brahman is introduced as the subject of discussion, 'That which is
subtle and not to be known;' the text then goes on, 'That is the
internal Self of the creatures, their soul,' and after that remarks
'From that sprang the Unevolved, consisting of the three gu*n*as, O best
of Brâhma*n*as.' And in another place it is said that 'the Unevolved is

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

dissolved in the Person devoid of qualities, O Brâhma*n*a.'--Thus we
read also in the Purâ*n*a, 'Hear thence this short statement: The
ancient Nârâya*n*a is all this; he produces the creation at the due
time, and at the time of reabsorption he consumes it again.' And so in
the Bhagavadgîtâ also (VII, 6), 'I am the origin and the place of
reabsorption of the whole world.' And Âpastamba too says with reference
to the highest Self, 'From him spring all bodies; he is the primary
cause, he is eternal, he is unchangeable' (Dharma Sûtra I, 8, 23, 2). In
this way Sm*ri*ti, in many places, declares the Lord to be the efficient
as well as the material cause of the world. As the pûrvapakshin opposes
us on the ground of Sm*ri*ti, we reply to him on the ground of Sm*ri*ti
only; hence the line of defence taken up in the Sûtra. Now it has been
shown already that the *S*ruti-texts aim at conveying the doctrine that
the Lord is the universal cause, and as wherever different Smr*it*is
conflict those maintaining one view must be accepted, while those which
maintain the opposite view must be set aside, those Sm*ri*tis which
follow *S*ruti are to be considered as authoritative, while all others
are to be disregarded; according to the Sûtra met with in the chapter
treating of the means of proof (Mîm. Sûtra I, 3, 3), 'Where there is
contradiction (between *S*ruti and Sm*ri*ti) (Sm*ri*ti) is to be
disregarded; in case of there being no (contradiction) (Sm*ri*ti is to
be recognised) as there is inference (of Sm*ri*ti being founded on
*S*ruti).'--Nor can we assume that some persons are able to perceive
supersensuous matters without *S*ruti, as there exists no efficient
cause for such perception. Nor, again, can it be said that such
perception may be assumed in the case of Kapila and others who possessed
supernatural powers, and consequently unobstructed power of cognition.
For the possession of supernatural powers itself depends on the
performance of religious duty, and religious duty is that which is
characterised by injunction <span id="fr_262"></span>[1](#fn_262); hence
the sense of injunctions (i.e. of the Veda)

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

which is established first must not be fancifully interpreted in
reference to the dicta of men 'established' (i.e. made perfect, and
therefore possessing supernatural powers) afterwards only. Moreover,
even if those 'perfect' men were accepted as authorities to be appealed
to, still, as there are many such perfect men, we should have, in all
those cases where the Sm*ri*tis contradict each other in the manner
described, no other means of final decision than an appeal to
*S*ruti.--As to men destitute of the power of independent judgment, we
are not justified in assuming that they will without any reason attach
themselves to some particular Sm*ri*ti; for if men's inclinations were
so altogether unregulated, truth itself would, owing to the multiformity
of human opinion, become unstable. We must therefore try to lead their
judgment in the right way by pointing out to them the conflict of the
Sm*ri*tis, and the distinction founded on some of them following *S*ruti
and others not.--The scriptural passage which the pûrvapakshin has
quoted as proving the eminence of Kapila's knowledge would not justify
us in believing in such doctrines of Kapila (i.e. of some Kapila) as are
contrary to Scripture; for that passage mentions the bare name of Kapila
(without specifying which Kapila is meant), and we meet in tradition
with another Kapila, viz. the one who burned the sons of Sagara and had
the surname Vâsudeva. That passage, moreover, serves another purpose,
(viz. the establishment of the doctrine of the highest Self,; and has on
that account no force to prove what is not proved by any other means,
(viz. the supereminence of Kapila's knowledge.) On the other hand, we
have a *S*ruti-passage which proclaims the excellence of Manu <span
id="fr_263"></span>[1](#fn_263), viz. 'Whatever Manu said is medicine'
(Taitt. Sa*m*h. II, 2, 10, 2). Manu himself, where he glorifies the
seeing of the one Self in everything ('he who equally sees the Self in
all beings and all beings in the Self, he as a sacrificer to the Self
attains self-luminousness,'

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

i.e. becomes Brahman, Manu Sm*ri*ti XII, 91), implicitly blames the
doctrine of Kapila. For Kapila, by acknowledging a plurality of Selfs,
does not admit the doctrine of there being one universal Self. In the
Mahâbhârata also the question is raised whether there are many persons
(souls) or one; thereupon the opinion of others is mentioned, 'There are
many persons, O King, according to the Sâ<u>n</u>khya and Yoga
philosophers;' that opinion is controverted 'just as there is one place
of origin, (viz. the earth,) for many persons, so I will proclaim to you
that universal person raised by his qualities;' and, finally, it is
declared that there is one universal Self, 'He is the internal Self of
me, of thee, and of all other embodied beings, the internal witness of
all, not to be apprehended by any one. He the all-headed, all-armed,
all-footed, all-eyed, all-nosed one moves through all beings according
to his will and liking.' And Scripture also declares that there is one
universal Self, 'When to a man who understands the Self has become all
things, what sorrow, what trouble can there be to him who once beheld
that unity?' (Î*s*. Up 7); and other similar passages. All which proves
that the system of Kapila contradicts the Veda, and the doctrine of Manu
who follows the Veda, by its hypothesis of a plurality of Selfs also,
not only by the assumption of an independent pradhâna. The
authoritativeness of the Veda with regard to the matters stated by it is
independent and direct, just as the light of the sun is the direct means
of our knowledge of form and colour; the authoritativeness of human
dicta, on the other hand, is of an altogether different kind, as it
depends on an extraneous basis (viz. the Veda), and is (not immediate
but) mediated by a chain of teachers and tradition.

Hence the circumstance that the result (of our doctrine) is want of room
for certain Sm*ri*tis, with regard to matters contradicted by the Veda,
furnishes no valid objection.--An additional reason for this our opinion
is supplied by the following Sûtra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_257"></span>[291:1](sbe34140.htm#fr_257) The Sm*ri*ti
called Tantra is the Sâ<u>n</u>khya*s*âstra as taught by Kapila; the
Sm*ri*ti-writers depending on him are Âsuri, Pa*ñk*a*s*ikha, and others.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[291:2](sbe34140.htm#fr_258) Mîmâ*m*sâ Sû. I,
1, 2: *k*odanâlaksha*n*o\#rtho dharma*h*. Commentary: *k*odanâ iti
kriyâyâ*h* pravartaka*m* va*k*anam âhu*h*.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[291:3](sbe34140.htm#fr_259) Purushârtha; in
opposition to the rules referred to in the preceding sentence which are
kratvartha, i.e. the acting according to which secures the proper
performance of certain rites.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[291:4](sbe34140.htm#fr_260) It having been
decided by the Pûrvâ Mîmâ*m*sâ already that Sm*ri*tis contradicted by
*S*ruti are to be disregarded.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[292:1](sbe34140.htm#fr_261) On the meaning of
'kapila' in the above passage, compare the Introduction to the
Upanishads, translated by Max Müller, vol. ii, p. xxxviii ff.--As will
be seen later on, *S*a<u>n</u>kara, in this bhâshya, takes the Kapila
referred to to be some *ri*shi.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[293:1](sbe34140.htm#fr_262) I.e. religious
duty is known only from the injunctive passages of the Veda.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[294:1](sbe34140.htm#fr_263) After it has been
shown that Kapila the dvaitavâdin is not mentioned in *S*ruti, it is now
shown that Manu the sarvâtmavâdin is mentioned there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 1, 2](sbe34141)
