[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34177)  [Next](sbe34179) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2\. And on account of (the impossibility of) activity.

Leaving the arrangement of the world, we now pass on to the activity by
which it is produced.--The three gu*n*as, passing out of the state of
equipoise and entering into the condition of mutual subordination and
superordination, originate activities tending towards the production of
particular effects.--Now these activities also cannot be ascribed to a
non-intelligent pradhâna left to itself, as no such activity is seen in
clay and similar substances, or in chariots and the like. For we observe
that clay and the like, and chariots--which are in their own nature
non-intelligent--enter on activities tending towards particular effects
only when they are acted upon by intelligent beings such as potters, &c.
in the one case, and horses and the like in the other case. From what is
seen we determine what is not seen. Hence a non-intelligent cause of the
world is not to be inferred because, on that hypothesis, the activity
without which the world cannot be produced would be impossible.

But, the Sâ<u>n</u>khya rejoins, we do likewise not observe activity on
the part of mere intelligent beings.--True; we however see activity on
the part of non-intelligent things such as chariots and the like when
they are in conjunction with intelligent beings.--But, the
Sâ<u>n</u>khya again objects, we never actually observe activity on the
part of an intelligent

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

being even when in conjunction with a non-intelligent thing.--Very well;
the question then arises: Does the activity belong to that in which it
is actually observed (as the Sâ<u>n</u>khya says), or to that on account
of the conjunction with which it is observed (as the Vedântin
avers)?--We must, the Sâ<u>n</u>khya replies, attribute activity to that
in which it is actually seen, since both (i.e. the activity and its
abode) are matter of observation. A mere intelligent being, on the other
hand, is never observed as the abode of activity while a chariot is.
The <span id="fr_328"></span>[1](#fn_328) existence of an intelligent
Self joined to a body and so on which are the abode of activity can be
established (by inference) only; the inference being based on the
difference observed between living bodies and mere non-intelligent
things, such as chariots and the like. For this very reason, viz. that
intelligence is observed only where a body is observed while it is never
seen without a body, the Materialists consider intelligence to be a mere
attribute of the body.--Hence activity belongs only to what is
non-intelligent.

To all this we--the Vedântins--make the following reply.--We do not mean
to say that activity does not belong to those non-intelligent things in
which it is observed; it does indeed belong to them; but it results from
an intelligent principle, because it exists when the latter is present
and does not exist when the latter is absent. Just as the effects of
burning and shining, which have their abode in wood and similar
material, are indeed not observed when there is mere fire (i.e. are not
due to mere fire; as mere fire, i.e. fire without wood, &c., does not
exist), but at the same time result from fire only as they are seen when
fire is present and are not seen when fire is absent; so, as the
Materialists also admit, only intelligent bodies are observed

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

to be the movers of chariots and other non-intelligent things. The
motive power of intelligence is therefore incontrovertible.--But--an
objection will be raised--your Self even if joined to a body is
incapable of exercising moving power, for motion cannot be effected by
that the nature of which is pure intelligence.--A thing, we reply, which
is itself devoid of motion may nevertheless move other things. The
magnet is itself devoid of motion, and yet it moves iron; and colours
and the other objects of sense, although themselves devoid of motion,
produce movements in the eyes and the other organs of sense. So the Lord
also who is all-present, the Self of all, all-knowing and all-powerful
may, although himself unmoving, move the universe.--If it finally be
objected that (on the Vedânta doctrine) there is no room for a moving
power as in consequence of the oneness (aduality) of Brahman no motion
can take place; we reply that such objections have repeatedly been
refuted by our pointing to the fact of the Lord being fictitiously
connected with Mâyâ, which consists of name and form presented by
Nescience.--Hence motion can be reconciled with the doctrine of an
all-knowing first cause; but not with the doctrine of a non-intelligent
first cause.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_328"></span>[368:1](sbe34178.htm#fr_328) The next sentences
furnish the answer to the question how the intelligent Self is known at
all if it is not the object of perception.--Pratyakshatvâbhâve katham
âtmasiddhir ity âsa<u>n</u>kya anumânâd ity âha, prav*ri*ttîti.
Anumânasiddhasya *k*etanasya na pravr*i*ttyâ*s*rayateti dar*s*ayitum
evakâra*h*. Katham anumânam ity apekshâyâ*m* tatprakâra*m*; sû*k*ayati
kevaleti. Vailaksha*n*ya*m* prâ*n*âdimattvam. Ân. Gi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 2, 3](sbe34179)
