[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34075)  [Next](sbe34077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

7\. And on account of the two conditions of standing and eating (of
which the former is characteristic of the highest Lord, the latter of
the individual soul).

With reference to that which is the abode of heaven, earth, and so on,
the text says, 'Two birds, inseparable friends,' &c. (Mu. Up. III, 1,
1). This passage describes the two states of mere standing, i.e. mere
presence, and of eating, the clause, 'One of them eats the sweet fruit,'
referring to the eating, i.e. the fruition of the results of works,

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

and the clause, 'The other one looks on without eating,' describing the
condition of mere inactive presence. The two states described, viz. of
mere presence on the one hand and of enjoyment on the other hand, show
that the Lord and the individual soul are referred to. Now there is room
for this statement which represents the Lord as separate from the
individual soul, only if the passage about the abode of heaven and earth
likewise refers to the Lord; for in that case only there exists a
continuity of topic. On any other supposition the second passage would
contain a statement about something not connected with the general
topic, and would therefore be entirely uncalled for.--But, it may be
objected, on your interpretation also the second passage makes an
uncalled-for statement, viz. in so far as it represents the individual
soul as separate from the Lord.--Not so, we reply. It is nowhere the
purpose of Scripture to make statements regarding the individual soul.
From ordinary experience the individual soul, which in the different
individual bodies is joined to the internal organs and other limiting
adjuncts, is known to every one as agent and enjoyer, and we therefore
must not assume that it is that which Scripture aims at setting forth.
The Lord, on the other hand, about whom ordinary experience tells us
nothing, is to be considered as the special topic of all scriptural
passages, and we therefore cannot assume that any passage should refer
to him merely casually <span id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_174).--

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> That the mantra
'two birds,' &c. speaks of the Lord--and the individual soul we have
already shown under I, 2, 11.--And if, according to the interpretation
given in the Pai<u>n</u>gi-upanishad (and quoted under I, 2, 11), the
verse is understood to refer to the internal organ (sattva) and the
individual soul (not to the individual soul and the Lord), even then
there is no contradiction (between that interpretation and our present
averment that the individual soul is not the abode of heaven and
earth).--How so?--Here (i.e. in the present Sûtra and the Sûtras
immediately preceding) it is denied that the individual soul which,
owing to its imagined connexion with the internal organ and other
limiting adjuncts, has a separate existence in separate bodies--its
division being analogous to the division of universal space into limited
spaces such as the spaces within jars and the like--is that which is
called the abode of heaven and earth. That same soul, on the other hand,
which exists in all bodies, if considered apart from the limiting
adjuncts, is nothing else but the highest Self. Just as the spaces
within jars, if considered apart from their limiting conditions, are
merged in universal space, so the individual soul also is incontestably
that which is denoted as the abode of heaven and earth, since it (the
soul) cannot really be separate from the highest Self. That it is not
the abode of heaven and earth, is therefore said of the individual soul
in so far only as it imagines itself to be connected with the internal
organ and so on. Hence it follows that the highest Self is the abode of
heaven, earth, and so on.--The same conclusion has already been arrived
at under I, 2, 21; for in the passage concerning the source of all
beings (which passage is discussed under the Sûtra quoted) we meet with
the clause, 'In which heaven and

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

earth and the sky are woven.' In the present adhikara*n*a the subject is
resumed for the sake of further elucidation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_174"></span>[160:1](sbe34076.htm#fr_174) If the individual
soul were meant by the abode of heaven, earth, &c., the statement
regarding Î*s*vara made in the passage about the two birds would be
altogether abrupt, and on that ground objectionable. The same difficulty
does not present itself with regard to the abrupt mention of the
individual soul which is well known to everybody, and to which therefore
casual allusions may be made.--I subjoin Ânanda Giri's commentary on the
entire passage: *G*îvasyopâdhyaikyenâvivakshitatvât tad*gñ*âne\#pi
sarva*gñ*ânasiddhes tasyâyatanatvâdyabhâve hetvantara*m* vâ*k*yam ity
â*s*a<u>n</u>kya sûtre*n*a pariharati kuta*sk*etyâdinâ. Tad
vyâ*k*ash*t*e dyubhvâdîti. Nirde*s*am eva dar*s*ayati tayor iti.
Vibhaktyartham âha tâbhyâ*m* *k*eti. Sthitye*s*varasyâdanâ*g*
*g*îvasa*m*grahe\#pi katham î*s*varasyaiva vi*s*vâyatanatva*m* tadâha
yadîti. Î*s*varasyâyanatvenâprak*ri*tatve
*g*îvap*ri*thakkathanânupapattir ity uktam eva vyatirekadvârâha
anyatheti. *G*îvasyâyatanatvenâprak*ri*tatve tulyânupapattir iti
*s*a<u>n</u>kate nanviti. Tasyaikyârtha*m* lokasiddhasyânuvâdatvân
naivam ity âha neti. *G*îvasyâpûrvatvâbhâvenâpratipâdyatvam eva
praka*t*ayati kshetra*gñ*o hîti. Î*s*varasyâpi lokavâdisiddhatvâd
apratipâdyatety â*s*a<u>n</u>kyâha î*s*varas tv iti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 3, 8](sbe34077)
