[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34008)  [Next](sbe34010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3\. (The omniscience of Brahman follows) from its being the source of
Scripture.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

Brahman is the source, i.e. the cause of the great body of Scripture,
consisting of the *Ri*g-veda and other branches, which is supported by
various disciplines (such as grammar, nyâya, purâ*n*a, &c.); which
lamp-like illuminates all things; which is itself all-knowing as it
were. For the origin of a body of Scripture possessing the quality of
omniscience cannot be sought elsewhere but in omniscience itself. It is
generally understood that the man from whom some special body of
doctrine referring to one province of knowledge only originates, as, for
instance, grammar from Pâ*n*ini possesses a more extensive knowledge
than his work, comprehensive though it be; what idea, then, shall we
have to form of the supreme omniscience and omnipotence of that great
Being, which in sport as it were, easily as a man sends forth his
breath, has produced the vast mass of holy texts known as the
*Ri*g-veda, &c., the mine of all knowledge, consisting of manifold
branches, the cause of the distinction of all the different classes and
conditions of gods, animals, and men! See what Scripture says about him,
'The *Ri*g-veda, &c., have been breathed forth from that great Being'
(B*ri*. Up. II, 4, 10).

Or else we may interpret the Sûtra to mean that Scripture consisting of
the *Ri*g-veda, &c., as described above, is the source or cause, i.e.
the means of right knowledge through which we understand the nature of
Brahman. So that the sense would be: through Scripture only as a means
of knowledge Brahman is known to be the cause of the origin, &c., of the
world. The special scriptural passage meant has been quoted under the
preceding Sûtra 'from which these beings are born,' &c.--But as the
preceding Sûtra already has pointed out a text showing that Scripture is
the source of Brahman, of what use then is the present Sûtra?--The words
of the preceding Sûtra, we reply, did not clearly indicate the
scriptural passage, and room was thus left for the suspicion that the
origin, &c., of the world were adduced merely as determining an
inference (independent of Scripture). To obviate this suspicion the
Sûtra under discussion has been propounded.

But, again, how can it be said that Scripture is the means of knowing
Brahman? Since it has been declared that Scripture aims at action
(according to the Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

Sûtra I, 2, 1, 'As the purport of Scripture is action, those scriptural
passages whose purport is not action are purportless'), the
Vedânta-passages whose purport is not action are purportless. Or else if
they are to have some sense, they must either, by manifesting the agent,
the divinity or the fruit of the action, form supplements to the
passages enjoining actions, or serve the purpose of themselves enjoining
a new class of actions, such as devout meditation and the like. For the
Veda cannot possibly aim at conveying information regarding the nature
of accomplished substances, since the latter are the objects of
perception and the other means of proof (which give sufficient
information about them; while it is the recognised object of the Veda to
give information about what is not known from other sources). And if it
did give such information, it would not be connected with things to be
desired or shunned, and thus be of no use to man. For this very reason
Vedic passages, such as 'he howled, &c.,' which at first sight appear
purposeless, are shown to have a purpose in so far as they glorify
certain actions (cp. Pû. Mî. Sû. I, 2, 7, 'Because they stand in
syntactical connection with the injunctions, therefore their purport is
to glorify the injunctions'). In the same way mantras are shown to stand
in a certain relation to actions, in so far as they notify the actions
themselves and the means by which they are accomplished. So, for
instance, the mantra, 'For strength thee (I cut;' which accompanies the
cutting of a branch employed in the dar*s*apûr*n*amâsa-sacrifice). In
short, no Vedic passage is seen or can be proved to have a meaning but
in so far as it is related to an action. And injunctions which are
defined as having actions for their objects cannot refer to accomplished
existent things. Hence we maintain that the Vedânta-texts are mere
supplements to those passages which enjoin actions; notifying the
agents, divinities, and results connected with those actions. Or else,
if this be not admitted, on the ground of its involving the introduction
of a subject-matter foreign to the Vedânta-texts (viz. the
subject-matter of the Karmakâ*nd*a of the Veda), we must admit (the
second of the two alternatives proposed above viz.) that the

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vedânta-texts
refer to devout meditation (upâsanâ) and similar actions which are
mentioned in those very (Vedânta) texts. The result of all of which is
that Scripture is not the source of Brahman.

To this argumentation the Sûtrakâra replies as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1, 4](sbe34010)
