[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34013)  [Next](sbe34015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

8\. And (the pradhâna cannot be denoted by the word 'Self') because
there is no statement of its having to be set aside.

If the pradhâna which is the Not-Self were denoted by the term 'Being'
(Sat), and if the passage 'That is the Self, that art thou, O
*S*vetaketu,' referred to the pradhâna; the teacher whose wish it is to
impart instruction about the

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

true Brahman would subsequently declare that the pradhâna is to be set
aside (and the true Brahman to be considered); for otherwise his pupil,
having received the instruction about the pradhâna, might take his stand
on the latter, looking upon it as the Non-Self. In ordinary life a man
who wishes to point out to a friend the (small) star Arundhatî at first
directs his attention to a big neighbouring star, saying 'that is
Arundhatî,' although it is really not so; and thereupon he withdraws his
first statement and points out the real Arundhatî. Analogously the
teacher (if he intended to make his pupil understand the Self through
the Non-Self) would in the end definitely state that the Self is not of
the nature of the pradhâna. But no such statement is made; for the sixth
Prapâ*th*aka arrives at a conclusion based on the view that the Self is
nothing but that which is (the Sat).

The word 'and' (in the Sûtra) is meant to notify that the contradiction
of a previous statement (which would be implied in the rejected
interpretation) is an additional reason for the rejection. Such a
contradiction would result even if it were stated that the pradhâna is
to be set aside. For in the beginning of the Prapâ*th*aka it is
intimated that through the knowledge of the cause everything becomes
known. Compare the following consecutive sentences, 'Have you ever asked
for that instruction by which we hear what cannot be heard, by which we
perceive what cannot be perceived, by which we know what cannot be
known? What is that instruction? As, my dear, by one clod of clay all
that is made of clay is known, the modification (i.e. the effect) being
a name merely which has its origin in speech, while the truth is that it
is clay merely,' &c. Now if the term 'Sat' denoted the pradhâna, which
is merely the cause of the aggregate of the objects of enjoyment, its
knowledge, whether to be set aside or not to be set aside, could never
lead to the knowledge of the aggregate of enjoyers (souls), because the
latter is not an effect of the pradhâna. Therefore the pradhâna is not
denoted by the term 'Sat.'--For this the Sûtrakâra gives a further
reason.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1, 9](sbe34015)
