[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34143)  [Next](sbe34145) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

5\. But (there takes place) denotation of the superintending (deities),
on account of the difference and the connexion.

The word 'but' discards the doubt raised. We are

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

not entitled to base the assumption of the elements and the sense organs
being of an intellectual nature on such passages as 'the earth spoke,'
&c. because 'there takes place denotation of that which presides.' In
the case of actions like speaking, disputing, and so on, which require
intelligence, the scriptural passages denote not the mere material
elements and organs, but rather the intelligent divinities which preside
over earth, &c., on the one hand, and Speech, &c., on the other hand.
And why so? 'On account of the difference and the connexion.' The
difference is the one previously referred to between the enjoying souls,
on the one hand, and the material elements and organs, on the other
hand, which is founded on the distinction between intelligent and
non-intelligent beings; that difference would not be possible if all
beings were intelligent. Moreover, the Kaushîtakins in their account of
the dispute of the prâ*n*as make express use of the word 'divinities' in
order to preclude the idea of the mere material organs being meant, and
in order to include the superintending intelligent beings. They say,
'The deities contending with each for who was the best;' and, again,
'All these deities having recognised the pre-eminence in prâ*n*a' (Kau.
Up. II, l4).--And, secondly, Mantras, Arthavâdas, Itihâsas, Purâ*n*as,
&c. all declare that intelligent presiding divinities are connected with
everything. Moreover, such scriptural passages as 'Agni having become
Speech entered into the mouth' (Ait. Âr. II, 4, 2, 4) show that each
bodily organ is connected with its own favouring divinity. And in the
passages supplementary to the quarrel of the prâ*n*as we read in one
place how, for the purpose of settling their relative excellence, they
went to Pra*g*âpati, and how they settled their quarrel on the ground of
presence and absence, each of them, as Pra*g*âpati had advised,
departing from the body for some time ('They went to their father
Pra*g*âpati and said,' &c.; *Kh*. Up. V, 1, 7); and in another place it
is said that they made an offering to prâ*n*a (B*ri*. Up. VI, 1, 13),
&c.; all of them proceedings which are analogous to those of men, &c.,
and therefore strengthen the hypothesis that the text refers to the
superintending

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

deities. In the case of such passages as, 'Fire thought,' we must assume
that the thought spoken of is that of the highest deity which is
connected with its effects as a superintending principle--From all this
it follows that this world is different in nature from Brahman, and
hence cannot have it for its material cause.

To this objection raised by the pûrvapakshin the next Sûtra replies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 1, 6](sbe34145)
