[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34099)  [Next](sbe34101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

31\. On account of the impossibility of (the gods being qualified) for
the madhu-vidyâ, &c., *G*aimini (maintains) the non-qualification (of
the gods for the Brahma-vidyâ).

A new objection is raised against the averment that the gods, &c. also
are entitled to the knowledge of Brahman. The teacher, *G*aimini,
considers the gods and similar beings not to have any claim.--Why?--On
account of the impossibility, in the case of the so-called Madhu-vidyâ,
&c. If their claim to the knowledge of Brahman were admitted, we should
have to admit their claim to the madhu-vidyâ ('the knowledge of the
honey') also, because that also is a kind of knowledge not different
(from the knowledge of Brahman). But to admit this latter claim is not
possible; for, according to the passage, 'The Sun is indeed the honey of
the devas' (*Kh*. Up. III, 1, 1), men are to meditate on the sun (the
god Âditya) under the form of honey, and how, if the gods themselves are
admitted as meditating worshippers, can Âditya meditate upon another
Âditya?--Again, the text, after having enumerated five kinds of nectar,
the red one, &c. residing in the sun, and after having stated that the
five classes of gods, viz. the Vasus, Rudras, Âdityas, Maruts, and
Sâdhyas, live on one of these nectars each, declares that 'he who thus
knows this nectar becomes one of the Vasus, with Agni at their head, he
sees the nectar and rejoices, &c., and indicates thereby that those who
know the nectars enjoyed by the Vasus, &c., attain the greatness of the
Vasus, &c. But how should the Vasus themselves know other Vasus enjoying
the nectar, and what other Vasu-greatness should they desire to
attain?--We have also to compare the passages 'Agni is one foot, Âditya
is one foot, the quarters are one foot' (*Kh*. Up. III, 18, 2); 'Air is
indeed the absorber' (*Kh*. Up. IV, 3, 1); 'Âditya is Brahman, this is
the doctrine.' All these passages treat of the meditation on the Self of
certain divinities, for which meditation these divinities themselves

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

are not qualified.--So it is likewise impossible that the *ri*shis
themselves should be qualified for meditations connected with *ri*shis,
such as expressed in passages like B*ri*. Up. II, 2, 4, 'These two are
the *ri*shis Gautama and Bharadvâ*g*a; the right Gautama, the left
Bharadvâ*g*a.'--Another reason for the non-qualification of the gods is
stated in the following Sûtra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 3, 32](sbe34101)
