[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34194)  [Next](sbe34196) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

19\. If it be said that (the formation of aggregates may be explained)
through (Nescience, &c.) standing in the relation of mutual causality;
we say 'No,' because they merely are the efficient causes of the origin
(of the immediately subsequent links).

Although there exists no permanent intelligent principle of the nature
either of a ruling Lord or an enjoying soul, under whose influence the
formation of aggregates could take place, yet the course of mundane
existence is rendered possible through the mutual causality <span
id="fr_394"></span>[1](#fn_394) of Nescience and so on, so that we need
not look for any other combining principle.

The series beginning with Nescience comprises the following members:
Nescience, impression, knowledge, name and form, the abode of the six,
touch, feeling, desire, activity, birth, species, decay, death, grief,
lamentation, pain, mental affliction, and the like <span
id="fr_395"></span>[2](#fn_395). All these terms constitute

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

a chain of causes and are as such spoken of in the Bauddha system,
sometimes cursorily, sometimes at length. They are, moreover, all
acknowledged as existing, not by the Bauddhas only, but by the followers
of all systems. And as the cycles of Nescience, &c. forming
uninterrupted chains of causes and effects revolve unceasingly like
water-wheels, the existence of the aggregates (which constitute bodies
and minds) must needs be assumed, as without such Nescience and so on
could not take place.

This argumentation of the Bauddha we are unable to accept, because it
merely assigns efficient causes for the origination of the members of
the series, but does not intimate an efficient cause for the formation
of the aggregates. If the Bauddha reminds us of the statement made above
that the existence of aggregates must needs be inferred from the
existence of Nescience and so on, we point out that, if he means thereby
that Nescience and so on cannot exist without aggregates and hence
require the existence of such, it remains to assign an efficient cause
for the formation of the aggregates. But, as we have already shown--when
examining the Vai*s*eshika doctrine--that the formation of aggregates
cannot be accounted for even on the assumption of permanent atoms and
individual souls in

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

which the ad*ri*sh*t*a abides  <span id="fr_396"></span>[1](#fn_396);
how much less then are aggregates possible if there exist only momentary
atoms not connected with enjoying souls and devoid of abodes (i.e.
souls), and that which abides in them (the ad*ri*sh*t*a).--Let us then
assume (the Bauddha says) that Nescience, &c. themselves are the
efficient cause of the aggregate.--But how--we ask--can they be the
cause of that without which--as their abode--they themselves are not
capable of existence? Perhaps you will say that in the eternal sa*m*sâra
the aggregates succeed one another in an unbroken chain, and hence also
Nescience, and so on, which abide in those aggregates. But in that case
you will have to assume either that each aggregate necessarily produces
another aggregate of the same kind, or that, without any settled rule,
it may produce either a like or an unlike one. In the former case a
human body could never pass over into that of a god or an animal or a
being of the infernal regions; in the latter case a man might in an
instant be turned into an elephant or a god and again become a man;
either of which consequences would be contrary to your
system.--Moreover, that for the purpose of whose enjoyment the aggregate
is formed is, according to your doctrine, not a permanent enjoying soul,
so that enjoyment subserves itself merely and cannot be desired by
anything else; hence final release also must, according to you, be
considered as subserving itself

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

only, and no being desirous of release can be assumed. If a being
desirous of both were assumed, it would have to be conceived as
permanently existing up to the time of enjoyment and release, and that
would be contrary to your doctrine of general impermanency.--There may
therefore exist a causal relation between the members of the series
consisting of Nescience, &c., but, in the absence of a permanent
enjoying soul, it is impossible to establish on that ground the
existence of aggregates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_394"></span>[404:1](sbe34195.htm#fr_394) The kâra*n*atvât
of *S*a<u>n</u>kara explains the pratyayatvât of the Sûtra; kârya*m*
praty ayate *g*anakatvena ga*kkh*ati.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[404:2](sbe34195.htm#fr_395) The commentators
agree on the whole in their explanations of the terms of this
series.--The following is the substance of the comment of the
Brahmavidyâbhara*n*a: Nescience is the error of considering that which
is momentary, impure, &c. to be permanent, pure, &c.--Impression
(affection, sa*m*skâra) comprises desire, aversion, &c., and the
activity caused by them.--Knowledge (vi*gñ*âna) is the
self-consciousness (aham ity âlayavi*gñ*ânasya v*ri*ttilâbha*h*)
springing up in the embryo.--Name and form is the rudimentary flake--or
bubble-like condition of the embryo.--The <span id="page_405">p.
405</span> abode of the six (sha*d*âyatana) is the further developed
stage of the embryo in which the latter is the abode of the six
senses.--Touch (spar*s*a) is the sensations of cold, warmth, &c. on the
embryo's part.--Feeling (vedanâ) the sensations of pleasure and pain
resulting therefrom.--Desire (t*ri*sh*n*â) is the wish to enjoy the
pleasurable sensations and to shun the painful ones.--Activity (upâdâna)
is the effort resulting from desire,--Birth is the passing out from the
uterus--Species (*g*âti) is the class of beings to which the new-born
creature belongs.--Decay (*g*arâ).--Death (mara*n*am) is explained as
the condition of the creature when about to die (mumûrshâ).--Grief
(*s*oka) the frustration of wishes connected therewith.--Lament
(paridevanam) the lamentations on that account.--Pain (du*h*kha) is such
pain as caused by the five senses.--Durmanas is mental affliction.--The
'and the like' implies death, the departure to another world and the
subsequent return from there.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[406:1](sbe34195.htm#fr_396) Ânanda Giri and
Go. Ânanda explain: Â*s*râya*s*rayibhûteshv iti bhokt*ri*vi*s*esha*n*am
ad*ri*sh*t*â*s*rayeshv ity artha*h*.--The Brahma-vidyâbhara*n*a says:
Nityeshv â*s*râya*s*rayibhûteshv a*n*ushv abhyupagamyamâneshu
bhokt*ri*shu *k*a satsv ity anvaya*h*. Â*s*râya*s*rayibhûteshv ity
asyopakâryopakârakabhâvaprâpteshv ity artha*h*.--And with regard to the
subsequent â*s*rayâ*s*rayi*s*ûnyeshu: â*s*rayâ*s*rayitva*s*ûnyeshu,
aya*m* bhâva*h*, sthireshu paramâ*n*ushu yadanvaye paramâ*n*ûnâ*m*
sa*m*ghâtâpatti*h* yadvyatireke *k*a na tad upakârakam upakâryâ*h*
paramâ*n*ava*h* yena tatk*ri*to bhoga*h* prârthyate sa tatra karteti
grahîtu*m* *s*akyate, ksha*n*ikeshu tu paramâ*n*ushu
anvayavyatirekagrahasyânekaksha*n*asâdhyasyâsa*m*bhavân
nopakâryopakârakabhâvo nirdhârayitu*m* *s*akya*h*.--Ânanda Giri remarks
on the latter: Ad*ri*sh*t*â*s*rayakârt*ri*râhityam âhâ*s*rayeti. Another
reading appears to be â*s*ayâ*s*raya*s*ûnyeshu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 2, 20](sbe34196)
