[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34156)  [Next](sbe34158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

18\. From reasoning and from another Vedic passage.

That the effect exists before its origination and is non-different from
the cause, follows from reasoning as well as from a further scriptural
passage.

We at first set forth the argumentation.--Ordinary experience teaches us
that those who wish to produce certain effects, such as curds, or
earthen jars, or golden ornaments, employ for their purpose certain
determined causal substances such as milk, clay, and gold; those who
wish to produce sour milk do not employ clay, nor do those who intend to
make jars employ milk and so on. But, according to that doctrine which
teaches that the effect is non-existent (before its actual production),
all this should be possible. For if before their actual origination all
effects are equally non-existent in any causal substance, why then
should curds be produced from milk only and not from clay also, and jars
from clay only and not from milk as well?--Let us then maintain, the
asatkâryavâdin rejoins, that there is indeed an equal non-existence of
any effect in any cause, but that at the same time each causal substance
has a certain capacity reaching beyond itself (ati*s*aya) for some
particular effect only and not for other effects; that, for instance,
milk only, and not clay, has a certain capacity for curds; and clay
only, and not milk, an analogous capacity for jars.--What, we ask in
return, do you understand by that 'ati*s*aya?' If you understand by it
the antecedent condition of the effect (before its actual origination),
you abandon your doctrine that the effect does not exist in the cause,
and prove our doctrine according to which it does so exist. If, on the
other hand, you understand by the ati*s*aya a certain power of the cause
assumed to the end of accounting for the fact that only one determined
effect springs from the cause, you must admit that the power can

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

determine the particular effect only if it neither is other (than cause
and effect) nor non-existent; for if it were either, it would not be
different from anything else which is either non-existent or other than
cause and effect, (and how then should it alone be able to produce the
particular effect?) Hence it follows that that power is identical with
the Self of the cause, and that the effect is identical with the Self of
that power.--Moreover, as the ideas of cause and effect on the one hand
and of substance and qualities on the other hand are not separate ones,
as, for instance, the ideas of a horse and a buffalo, it follows that
the identity of the cause and the effect as well as of the substance and
its qualities has to be admitted. (Let it then be assumed, the opponent
rejoins, that the cause and the effect, although really different, are
not apprehended as such, because they are connected by the so-called
samavâya connexion <span id="fr_297"></span>[1](#fn_297).--If, we reply,
you assume the samavâya connexion between cause and effect, you have
either to admit that the samavâya itself is joined by a certain
connexion to the two terms which are connected by samavâya, and then
that connexion will again require a new connexion (joining it to the two
terms which it binds together), and you will thus be compelled to
postulate an infinite series of connexions; or else you will have to
maintain that the samavâya is not joined by any connexion to the terms
which it binds together, and from that will result the dissolution of
the bond which connects the two terms of the samavâya relation <span
id="fr_298"></span>[2](#fn_298).--Well then, the opponent rejoins, let
us assume that the samavâya connexion as itself being a connexion may be
connected with the terms which it joins without the help of any further
connexion.--Then, we reply, conjunction (sa*m*yoga) also must be
connected with the two terms which it joins without the help of the
samavâya

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

connexion; for conjunction also is a kind of connexion <span
id="fr_299"></span>[1](#fn_299).--Moreover, as substances, qualities,
and so on are apprehended as standing in the relation of identity, the
assumption of the samavâya relation has really no purport.

In what manner again do you--who maintain that the cause and the effect
are joined by the samavâya relation--assume a substance consisting of
parts which is an effect to abide in its causes, i.e. in the material
parts of which it consists? Does it abide in all the parts taken
together or in each particular part?--If you say that it abides in all
parts together, it follows that the whole as such cannot be perceived,
as it is impossible that all the parts should be in contact with the
organs of perception. (And let it not be objected that the whole may be
apprehended through some of the parts only), for manyness which abides
in all its substrates together (i.e. in all the many things), is not
apprehended so long as only some of those substrates are
apprehended.--Let it then be assumed that the whole abides in all the
parts by the mediation of intervening aggregates of parts <span
id="fr_300"></span>[2](#fn_300).--In that case, we reply, we should have
to assume other parts in addition to the primary originative parts of
the whole, in order that by means of those other parts the whole could
abide in the primary parts in the manner indicated by you. For we see
(that one thing which abides in another abides there by means of parts
different from those of that other thing), that the sword, for instance,
pervades the sheath by means of parts different from the parts of the
sheath. But an assumption of that kind would lead us into a regressus in
infinitum, because in order to explain how the whole abides in certain

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

given parts we should always have to assume further parts  <span
id="fr_301"></span>[1](#fn_301).--Well, then, let us maintain the second
alternative, viz. that the whole abides in each particular part.--That
also cannot be admitted; for if the whole is present in one part it
cannot be present in other parts also; not any more than Devadatta can
be present in *S*rughna and in Pâ*t*aliputra on one and the same day. If
the whole were present in more than one part, several wholes would
result, comparable to Devadatta and Yag*ñ*adatta, who, as being two
different persons, may live one of them at *S*rughna and the other at
Pâ*t*aliputra.--If the opponent should rejoin that the whole may be
fully present in each part, just as the generic character of the cow is
fully present in each individual cow; we point out that the generic
attributes of the cow are visibly perceived in each individual cow, but
that the whole is not thus perceived in each particular part. If the
whole were fully present in each part, the consequence would be that the
whole would produce its effects indifferently with any of its parts; a
cow, for instance, would give milk from her horns or her tail. But such
things are not seen to take place.

We proceed to consider some further arguments opposed to the doctrine
that the effect does not exist in the cause.--That doctrine involves the
conclusion that the actual origination of an effect is without an agent
and thus devoid of substantial being. For origination is an action, and
as such requires an agent  <span id="fr_302"></span>[2](#fn_302), just
as the action of walking does. To speak of an action without an agent
would be a contradiction.

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But if you deny
the pre-existence of the effect in the cause, it would have to be
assumed that whenever the origination of a jar, for instance, is spoken
of the agent is not the jar (which before its origination did not exist)
but something else, and again that when the origination of the two
halves of the jar is spoken of the agent is not the two halves but
something else. From this it would follow that the sentence, 'the jar is
originated' means as much as 'the potter and the other (operative)
causes are originated  <span id="fr_303"></span>[1](#fn_303).' But as a
matter of fact the former sentence is never understood to mean the
latter; and it is, moreover, known that at the time when the jar
originates, the potter, &c. are already in existence.--Let us then say,
the opponent resumes, that origination is the connexion of the effect
with the existence of its cause and its obtaining existence as a
Self.--How, we ask in reply, can something which has not yet obtained
existence enter into connexion with something else? A connexion is
possible of two existing things only, not of one existing and one
non-existing thing or of two non-existing things. To something
non-existing which on that account is indefinable, it is moreover not
possible to assign a limit as the opponent does when maintaining that
the effect is non-existing before its origination; for experience
teaches us that existing things only such as fields and houses have
limits, but not non-existing things. If somebody should use, for
instance, a phrase such as the following one, 'The son of a barren woman
was king previously to the coronation of Pûr*n*avarman,' the declaration
of a limit in time implied in that phrase does not in reality determine
that the son of the barren woman, i.e. a mere non-entity, either was or
is or will be king. If the son of a barren woman could become an
existing thing subsequently to the activity of some causal

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

agent, in that case it would be possible also that the non-existing
effect should be something existing, subsequently to the activity of
some causal agent. But we know that the one thing can take place no more
than the other thing; the non-existing effect and the son of the barren
woman ace both equally non-entities and can never be.--But, the
asatkâryavâdin here objects, from your doctrine there follows the result
that the activity of causal agents is altogether purposeless. For if the
effect were lying already fully accomplished in the cause and were
non-different from it, nobody would endeavour to bring it about, no more
than anybody endeavours to bring about the cause which is already fully
accomplished previously to all endeavour. But as a matter of fact causal
agents do endeavour to bring about effects, and it is in order not to
have to condemn their efforts as altogether useless that we assume the
non-existence of the effect previously to its origination.--Your
objection is refuted, we reply, by the consideration that the endeavour
of the causal agent may be looked upon as having a purpose in so far as
it arranges the causal substance in the form of the effect. That,
however, even the form of the effect (is not something previously
non-existing, but) belongs to the Self of the cause already because what
is devoid of Selfhood cannot be begun at all, we have already shown
above.--Nor does a substance become another substance merely by
appearing under a different aspect. Devadatta may at one time be seen
with his arms and legs closely drawn up to his body, and another time
with his arms and legs stretched out, and yet he remains the same
substantial being, for he is recognised as such. Thus the persons also
by whom we are surrounded, such as fathers, mothers, brothers, &c.,
remain the same, although we see them in continually changing states and
attitudes; for they are always recognised as fathers, mothers, brothers,
and so on. If our opponent objects to this last illustrative example on
the ground that fathers, mothers, and so on remain the same substantial
beings, because the different states in which they appear are not
separated from each other by birth or death, while the effect, for
instance a jar, appears only after

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

the cause, for instance the clay, has undergone destruction as it were
(so that the effect may be looked upon as something altogether different
from the cause); we rebut this objection by remarking that causal
substances also such as milk, for instance, are perceived to exist even
after they have entered into the condition of effects such as curds and
the like (so that we have no right to say that the cause undergoes
destruction). And even in those cases where the continued existence of
the cause is not perceived, as, for instance, in the case of seeds of
the fig-tree from which there spring sprouts and trees, the term 'birth'
(when applied to the sprout) only means that the causal substance, viz.
the seed, becomes visible by becoming a sprout through the continual
accretion of similar particles of matter; and the term 'death' only
means that, through the secession of those particles, the cause again
passes beyond the sphere of visibility. Nor can it be said that from
such separation by birth and death as described just now it follows that
the non-existing becomes existing, and the existing non-existing; for if
that were so, it would also follow that the unborn child in the mother's
womb and the new-born babe stretched out on the bed are altogether
different beings.

It would further follow that a man is not the same person in childhood,
manhood, and old age, and that terms such as father and the like are
illegitimately used.--The preceding arguments may also be used to refute
the (Bauddha doctrine) of all existence being momentary only <span
id="fr_304"></span>[1](#fn_304).

The doctrine that the effect is non-existent previously to its actual
origination, moreover, leads to the conclusion that the activity of the
causal agent has no object; for what does not exist cannot possibly be
an object; not any more than the ether can be cleft by swords and other
weapons for striking or cutting. The object can certainly not be the
inherent cause; for that would lead to the erroneous conclusion that
from the activity of the causal agent, which has for its object the
inherent cause, there results something else

Page 341

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (viz. the effect).
And if (in order to preclude this erroneous conclusion) the opponent
should say that the effect is (not something different from the cause,
but) a certain relative power (ati*s*aya) of the inherent cause; he
thereby would simply concede our doctrine, according to which the effect
exists in the cause already.

We maintain, therefore, as our final conclusion, that milk and other
substances are called effects when they are in the state of curds and so
on, and that it is impossible, even within hundreds of years, ever to
bring about an effect which is different from its cause. The fundamental
cause of all appears in the form of this and that effect, up to the last
effect of all, just as an actor appears in various robes and costumes,
and thereby becomes the basis for all the current notions and terms
concerning the phenomenal world.

The conclusion here established, on the ground of reasoning, viz. that
the effect exists already before its origination, and is non-different
from its cause, results also from a different scriptural passage. As
under the preceding Sûtra a Vedic passage was instanced which speaks of
the non-existing, the different passage referred to in the present Sûtra
is the one (*Kh*. Up. VI, 2, 1) which refers to that which is. That
passage begins, 'Being only was this in the beginning, one without a
second,' refers, thereupon, to the doctrine of the Non-existent being
the cause of the world ('Others say, Non-being was this in the
beginning'), raises an objection against that doctrine ('How could that
which is be born of that which is not?'), and, finally, reaffirms the
view first set forth, 'Only Being was this in the beginning.' The
circumstance that in this passage the effect, which is denoted by the
word 'this,' is by Scripture, with reference to the time previous to its
origination, coordinated with the cause denoted by the term 'Being,'
proves that the effect exists in--and is non-different from--the cause.
If it were before its origination non-existing and after it inhered in
its cause by samavâya, it would be something different from the cause,
and that would virtually imply an abandonment of the promise made in the
passage, 'That instruction by which we hear what is not heard,' &c.

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (VI, 1, 3). The
latter assertion is ratified, on the other hand, through the
comprehension that the effect exists in--and is not different from--the
cause.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_297"></span>[335:1](sbe34157.htm#fr_297) Samavâya, commonly
translated by inherence or intimate relation, is, according to the
Nyâya, the relation connecting a whole and its parts, substances, and
qualities, &c.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[335:2](sbe34157.htm#fr_298) Samavâyasya
svâtantryapaksha*m* dûshayati anabhyupagamyamâne*k*eti. Samavâyasya
samavâyibhi*h* sambandho neshyate ki*m* tu svâtantryam evety
atrâvayavâvayavinor dravyagu*n*âdînâ*m* *k*a viprakarsha*h* syât
sa*m*nidhâyakâbhâvâd ity artha*h*. Ân. Gi.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[336:1](sbe34157.htm#fr_299) A conclusion which
is in conflict with the Nyâya tenet that sa*m*yoga, conjunction, as, for
instance, of the jar and the ground on which it stands, is a quality
(gu*n*a) inherent in the two conjoined substances by means of the
samavâya relation.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[336:2](sbe34157.htm#fr_300) So that the whole
can be apprehended by us as such if we apprehend a certain part only;
analogously to our apprehending the whole thread on which a garland of
flowers is strung as soon as we apprehend some few of the flowers.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[337:1](sbe34157.htm#fr_301) Kalpântaram
utthâpayati atheti, tathâ *k*a yathâvayavai*h* sûtra*m* kusumâni
vyâpnuvat katipayakusumagraha*n*e\#pi g*r*ihyate tathâ
katipayâvayavagraha*n*e\#pi bhavaty avayavino graha*n*am ity artha*h*.
Tatra kim ârambhakâvayavair eva teshv avayavî vartteta ki*m* vâ
tadatiriktâvayavair iti vikalpyâdyam pratyâha tadâpîti. Yatra yad
varttate tat tadatiriktâvayavair eva tatra vartamâna*m* d*ri*sh*t*am iti
d*ri*sh*t*ântagarbha*m* hetum â*k*ash*t*e ko*s*eti. Dvitîyam dûshayati
anavastheti. Kalpitânantâvayavavyavahitatayâ prak*ri*tâvayavino
dûraviprakarshât tantunish*th*atvam pa*t*asya na syâd iti bhâva*h*. An.
Gi.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[337:2](sbe34157.htm#fr_302) I.e. a something
in which the action inheres; not a causal agent.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[338:1](sbe34157.htm#fr_303) Every action,
[*S*a<u>n</u>kara](errata.htm#3) says, requires an agent, i. e. a
substrate in which the action takes place. If we deny that the jar
exists in the clay even before it is actually originated, we lose the
substrate for the action of origination, i. e. entering into existence
(for the non-existing jar cannot be the substratum of any action), and
have to assume, for that action, other substrates, such as the operative
causes of the jar.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[340:1](sbe34157.htm#fr_304) Which doctrine
will be fully discussed in the second pâda of this adhyâya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 1, 19](sbe34158)
