[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34126)  [Next](sbe34128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

16\. (He whose work is this is Brahman), because (the 'work') denotes
the world.

In the Kaushîtaki-brâhma*n*a, in the dialogue of Bâlâki and
A*g*âta*s*atru, we read, 'O Bâlâki, he who is the maker of

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

those persons, he of whom this is the work, he alone is to be known'
(Kau. Up. IV, 19). The question here arises whether what is here
inculcated as the object of knowledge is the individual soul or the
chief vital air or the highest Self.

The pûrvapakshin maintains that the vital air is meant. For, in the
first place, he says, the clause 'of whom this is the work' points to
the activity of motion, and that activity rests on the vital air. In the
second place, we meet with the word 'prâ*n*a' in a complementary passage
('Then he becomes one with that prâ*n*a alone'), and that word is well
known to denote the vital air. In the third place, prâ*n*a is the maker
of all the persons, the person in the sun, the person in the moon, &c.,
who in the preceding part of the dialogue had been enumerated by Bâlâki;
for that the sun and the other divinities are mere differentiations of
prâ*n*a we know from another scriptural passage, viz. 'Who is that one
god (in whom all the other gods are contained)? Prâ*n*a and he is
Brahman, and they call him That' (B*ri*. Up. III, 9, 9).--Or else, the
pûrvapakshin continues, the passage under discussion represents the
individual soul as the object of knowledge. For of the soul also it can
be said that 'this is the work,' if we understand by 'this' all
meritorious and non-meritorious actions; and the soul also, in so far as
it is the enjoyer, can be viewed as the maker of the persons enumerated
in so far as they are instrumental to the soul's fruition. The
complementary passage, moreover, contains an inferential mark of the
individual soul. For A*g*âta*s*atru, in order to instruct Bâlâki about
the 'maker of the persons' who had been proposed as the object of
knowledge, calls a sleeping man by various names and convinces Bâlâki,
by the circumstance that the sleeper does not hear his shouts, that the
prâ*n*a and so on are not the enjoyers; he thereupon wakes the sleeping
man by pushing him with his stick, and so makes Bâlâki comprehend that
the being capable of fruition is the individual soul which is distinct
from the prâ*n*a. A subsequent passage also contains an inferential mark
of the individual soul, viz. 'And as the master feeds with his people,
nay, as his people feed on the master, thus does this conscious Self
feed with

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

the other Selfs, thus those Selfs feed on the conscious Self' (Kau. Up.
IV, 20). And as the individual soul is the support of the prâ*n*a, it
may itself be called prâ*n*a.--We thus conclude that the passage under
discussion refers either to the individual soul or to the chief vital
air; but not to the Lord, of whom it contains no inferential marks
whatever.

To this we make the following reply.--The Lord only can be the maker of
the persons enumerated, on account of the force of the introductory part
of the section. Bâlâki begins his colloquy with A*g*âta*s*atru with the
offer, 'Shall I tell you Brahman?' Thereupon he enumerates some
individual souls residing in the sun, the moon, and so on, which
participate in the sight of the secondary Brahman, and in the end
becomes silent. A*g*âta*s*atru then sets aside Bâlâki's doctrine as not
referring to the chief Brahman--with the words, 'Vainly did you
challenge me, saying, Shall I tell you Brahman,' &c.--and proposes the
maker of all those individual souls as a new object of knowledge. If now
that maker also were merely a soul participating in the sight of the
secondary Brahman, the introductory statement which speaks of Brahman
would be futile. Hence it follows that the highest Lord himself is
meant.--None, moreover, but the highest Lord is capable of being the
maker of all those persons as he only is absolutely
independent.--Further, the clause 'of whom this is the work' does not
refer either to the activity of motion nor to meritorious and
non-meritorious actions; for neither of those two is the topic of
discussion or has been mentioned previously. Nor can the term 'work'
denote the enumerated persons, since the latter are mentioned
separately--in the clause, 'He who is the maker of those persons'--and
as inferential marks (viz. the neuter gender and the singular number of
the word karman, work) contradict that assumption. Nor, again, can the
term 'work' denote either the activity whose object the persons are, or
the result of that activity, since those two are already implied in the
mention of the agent (in the clause, 'He who is the maker'). Thus there
remains no other alternative than to

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

take the pronoun 'this' (in 'He of whom this is the work') as denoting
the perceptible world and to understand the same world--as that which is
made--by the term 'work.'--We may indeed admit that the world also is
not the previous topic of discussion and has not been mentioned before;
still, as no specification is mentioned, we conclude that the term
'work' has to be understood in a general sense, and thus denotes what
first presents itself to the mind, viz. everything which exists in
general. It is, moreover, not true that the world is not the previous
topic of discussion; we are rather entitled to conclude from the
circumstance that the various persons (in the sun, the moon, &c.) which
constitute a part of the world had been specially mentioned before, that
the passage in question is concerned with the whole world in general.
The conjunction 'or' (in 'or he of whom,' &c.) is meant to exclude the
idea of limited makership; so that the whole passage has to be
interpreted as follows, 'He who is the maker of those persons forming a
part of the world, or rather--to do away with this limitation--he of
whom this entire world without any exception is the work.' The special
mention made of the persons having been created has for its purpose to
show that those persons whom Bâlâki had proclaimed to be Brahman are not
Brahman. The passage therefore sets forth the maker of the world in a
double aspect, at first as the creator of a special part of the world
and thereupon as the creator of the whole remaining part of the world; a
way of speaking analogous to such every-day forms of expression as, 'The
wandering mendicants are to be fed, and then the Brâhma*n*as <span
id="fr_246"></span>[1](#fn_246).' And that the maker of the world is the
highest Lord is affirmed in all Vedânta-texts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_246"></span>[271:1](sbe34127.htm#fr_246) By the Brâhma*n*as
being meant all those Brâhma*n*as who are not at the same time wandering
mendicants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 4, 17](sbe34128)
