[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34167)  [Next](sbe34169) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

29\. And because the objection (raised against our view) lies against
his (the opponent's) view likewise.

Those also who maintain that the world has sprung from the pradhâna
implicitly teach that something not made up of parts, unlimited, devoid
of sound and other qualities--viz. the pradhâna--is the cause of an
effect--viz. the world--which is made up of parts, is limited and is
characterised by the named qualities. Hence it follows from that
doctrine also either that the pradhâna as not consisting of parts has to
undergo a change in its entirety, or else that the view of its not
consisting of parts has to be abandoned.--But--it might be pleaded in
favour of the Sâ<u>n</u>khyas--they do not maintain their pradhâna to be
without parts; for they define it as the state of equilibrium of the
three gu*n*as, Goodness, Passion, and Darkness, so that the pradhâna
forms a whole containing the three gu*n*as as its parts.--We reply that
such a partiteness as is here proposed does not remove the objection in
hand because still each of the three qualities is declared to be in
itself without parts <span id="fr_310"></span>[1](#fn_310). And each
gu*n*a by itself assisted merely by the two other gu*n*as constitutes
the material cause of that part of the world which resembles it in its
nature <span id="fr_311"></span>[2](#fn_311).--So that the objection
lies against the Sâ<u>n</u>khya

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

view likewise.--Well, then, as the reasoning (on which the doctrine of
the impartiteness of the pradhâna rests) is not absolutely safe, let us
assume that the pradhâna consists of parts.--If you do that, we reply,
it follows that the pradhâna cannot be eternal, and so on.--Let it then
be said that the various powers of the pradhâna to which the variety of
its effects is pointing are its parts.--Well, we reply, those various
powers are admitted by us also who see the cause of the world in
Brahman.

The same objections lie against the doctrine of the world having
originated from atoms. For on that doctrine one atom when combining with
another must, as it is not made up of parts, enter into the combination
with its whole extent, and as thus no increase of bulk takes place we do
not get beyond the first atom  <span id="fr_312"></span>[1](#fn_312) If,
on the other hand, you maintain that the atom enters into the
combination with a part only, you offend against the assumption of the
atoms having no parts.

As therefore all views are equally obnoxious to the objections raised,
the latter cannot be urged against any one view in particular, and the
advocate of Brahman has consequently cleared his doctrine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_310"></span>[353:1](sbe34168.htm#fr_310) So that if it
undergoes modifications it must either change in its entirety, or
else--against the assumption--consist of parts.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[353:2](sbe34168.htm#fr_311) The last clause
precludes the justificatory remark that the stated difficulties can be
avoided if we assume the three gu*n*as in combination only to undergo
modification; if this were so the inequality of the different effects
could not be accounted for.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[354:1](sbe34168.htm#fr_312) As an atom has no
parts it cannot enter into partial contact with another, and the only
way in which the two can combine is entire interpenetration; in
consequence of which the compound of two atoms would not occupy more
space than one atom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 1, 30](sbe34169)
