[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34101)  [Next](sbe34103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

33\. Bâdarâya*n*a, on the other hand, (maintains) the existence (of
qualification for Brahma-vidyâ on the part of the gods); for there are
(passages indicatory of that).

The expression 'on the other hand' is meant to rebut the pûrvapaksha.
The teacher, Bâdarâya*n*a, maintains the existence of the qualification
on the part of the gods, &c. For, although the qualification of the gods
cannot be admitted with reference to the madhu-vidyâ, and similar topics
of knowledge, in which the gods themselves are implicated, still they
may be qualified for the pure knowledge of Brahman, qualification in
general depending on the presence of desire, capability, &c. <span
id="fr_215"></span>[2](#fn_215) Nor does the impossibility of
qualification in certain cases interfere with the presence of
qualification in those other cases where it is not impossible. To the
case of the gods the same reasoning applies as to the case of men; for
among men also, all are not qualified for everything, Brâhma*n*as, for
instance, not for the râ*g*asûya-sacrifice <span
id="fr_216"></span>[3](#fn_216).

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And, with
reference to the knowledge of Brahman, Scripture, moreover, contains
express hints notifying that the devas are qualified; compare, for
instance, *Br*i. Up. 1, 4, 10, 'Whatever Deva was awakened (so as to
know Brahman) he indeed became that; and the same with *ri*shis;' *Kh*.
Up. VIII, 7, 2, 'They said: Well, let us search for that Self by which,
if one has searched it out, all worlds and all desires are obtained.
Thus saying, Indra went forth from the Devas, Viro*k*ana from the
Asuras.' Similar statements are met with in Sm*ri*ti, so, for instance,
in the colloquy of the Gandharva and Yâ*gñ*avalkya <span
id="fr_217"></span>[1](#fn_217).--Against the objection raised in the
preceding Sûtra (32) we argue as follows. Words like âditya, and so on,
which denote devas, although having reference to light and the like, yet
convey the idea of certain divine Selfs (persons) endowed with
intelligence and pre-eminent power; for they are used in that sense in
mantras and arthavâda passages. For the devas possess, in consequence of
their pre-eminent power, the capability of residing within the light,
and so on, and to assume any form they like. Thus we read in Scripture,
in the arthavâda passage explaining the words 'ram of Medhâtithi,' which
form part of the Subrahma*n*ya-formula, that 'Indra, having assumed the
shape of a ram, carried off Medhâtithi, the descendant of Ka*n*va'
(Sha*d*v. Br. I, 1). And thus Sm*ri*ti says that 'Âditya, having assumed
the shape of a man, came to Kuntî.' Moreover, even in such substances as
earth, intelligent ruling beings must be admitted to reside, for that
appears from such scriptural passages as 'the earth spoke,' 'the waters
spoke,' &c. The non-intelligence of light and the like, in so far as
they are mere material elements, is admitted in the case of the sun
(âditya), &c. also; but--as already remarked--from the use of the words
in mantras and

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

arthavâdas it appears that there are intelligent beings of divine nature
(which animate those material elements).

We now turn to the objection (raised above by the pûrvapakshin) that
mantras and arthavâdas, as merely subserving other purposes, have no
power of setting forth the personality of the devas, and remark that not
the circumstance of subordination or non-subordination to some other
purpose, but rather the presence or absence of a certain idea furnishes
a reason for (our assuming) the existence of something. This is
exemplified by the case of a person who, having set out for some other
purpose, (nevertheless) forms the conviction of the existence of leaves,
grass, and the like, which he sees lying on the road.--But, the
pûrvapakshin may here object, the instance quoted by you is not strictly
analogous. In the case of the wanderer, perception, whose objects the
grass and leaves are, is active, and through it he forms the conception
of their existence. In the case of an arthavâda, on the other hand,
which, as forming a syntactical unity with the corresponding injunctory
passage, merely subserves the purpose of glorifying (the latter), it is
impossible to determine any energy having a special object of its own.
For in general any minor syntactical unity, which is included in a more
comprehensive syntactical unity conveying a certain meaning, does not
possess the power of expressing a separate meaning of its own. Thus, for
instance, we derive, from the combination of the three words
constituting the negative sentence, '(Do) not drink wine,' one meaning
only, i.e. a prohibition of drinking wine, and do not derive an
additional meaning, viz. an order to drink wine, from the combination of
the last two words, 'drink wine.'--To this objection we reply, that the
instance last quoted is not analogous (to the matter under discussion).
The words of the sentence prohibiting the drinking of wine form only one
whole, and on that account the separate sense which any minor
syntactical unity included in the bigger sentence may possess cannot be
accepted. In the case of injunction and arthavâda, on the other hand,
the words constituting the arthavâda form a separate group of their own
which refers to some accomplished

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

thing <span id="fr_218"></span>[1](#fn_218), and only subsequently to
that, when it comes to be considered what purpose they subserve, they
enter on the function of glorifying the injunction. Let us examine, as
an illustrative example, the injunctive passage, 'He who is desirous of
prosperity is to offer to Vâyu a white animal.' All the words contained
in this passage are directly connected with the injunction. This is,
however, not the case with the words constituting the corresponding
arthavâda passage, 'For Vâyu is the swiftest deity; Vâyu he approaches
with his own share; he leads him to prosperity.' The single words of
this arthavâda are not grammatically connected with the single words of
the injunction, but form a subordinate unity of their own, which
contains the praise of Vâyu, and glorify the injunction, only in so far
as they give us to understand that the action enjoined is connected with
a distinguished divinity. If the matter conveyed by the subordinate
(arthavâda) passage can be known by some other means of knowledge, the
arthavâda acts as a mere anuvâda, i.e. a statement referring to
something (already known) <span id="fr_219"></span>[2](#fn_219). When
its contents are contradicted by other means of knowledge it acts as a
so-called gu*n*avâda, i.e. a statement of a quality <span
id="fr_220"></span>[3](#fn_220). Where, again, neither of the two
mentioned conditions is found, a doubt may arise whether the arthavâda
is to be taken as a gu*n*avâda on account of the absence of other means
of knowledge, or as an arthavâda referring to something known (i.e. an
anuvâda) on account of the absence of contradiction by other means of
proof. The latter alternative is, however, to be embraced by reflecting
people.--The same reasoning applies to mantras also.

There is a further reason for assuming the personality of the gods. The
Vedic injunctions, as enjoining sacrificial offerings to Indra and the
other gods, presuppose certain characteristic shapes of the individual
divinities, because

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

without such the sacrificer could not represent Indra and the other gods
to his mind. And if the divinity were not represented to the mind it
would not be possible to make an offering to it. So Scripture also says,
'Of that divinity for which the offering is taken he is to think when
about to say vausha*t*' (Ai. Br. III, 8, 1). Nor is it possible to
consider the essential form (or character) of a thing to consist in the
word only <span id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_221); for word (denoting) and
thing (denoted) are different. He therefore who admits the
authoritativeness of the scriptural word has no right to deny that the
shape of Indra, and the other gods, is such as we understand it to be
from the mantras and arthavâdas.--Moreover, itihâsas and purâ*n*as
also--because based on mantra and arthavâda which possess authoritative
power in the manner described--are capable of setting forth the
personality, &c. of the devas. Itihâsa and purâ*n*a can, besides, be
considered as based on perception also. For what is not accessible to
our perception may have been within the sphere of perception of people
in ancient times. Sm*ri*ti also declares that Vyâsa and others conversed
with the gods face to face. A person maintaining that the people of
ancient times were no more able to converse with the gods than people
are at present, would thereby deny the (incontestable) variety of the
world. He might as well maintain that because there is at present no
prince ruling over the whole earth, there were no such princes in former
times; a position by which the scriptural injunction of the
râ*g*asûya-sacrifice  <span id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_222)would be
stultified. Or he might maintain that in former times the spheres of
duty of the different castes and â*s*ramas were as generally unsettled
as they are now, and, on that account, declare those parts of Scripture
which define those different duties to be purposeless. It is therefore
altogether unobjectionable to assume that the men of ancient times, in
consequence of their eminent religious

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

merit, conversed with the gods face to face. Sm*ri*ti also declares that
'from the reading of the Veda there results intercourse with the
favourite divinity' (Yoga Sûtra II, 44). And that Yoga does, as Sm*ri*ti
declares, lead to the acquirement of extraordinary powers, such as
subtlety of body, and so on, is a fact which cannot be set aside by a
mere arbitrary denial. Scripture also proclaims the greatness of Yoga,
'When, as earth, water, light, heat, and ether arise, the fivefold
quality of Yoga takes place, then there is no longer illness, old age,
or pain for him who has obtained a body produced by the fire of Yoga'
(*S*vet. Up. II, 12). Nor have we the right to measure by our
capabilities the capability of the *ri*shis who see the mantras and
brâhma*n*a passages (i.e. the Veda).--From all this it appears that the
itihâsas and purâ*n*as have an adequate basis.--And the conceptions of
ordinary life also must not be declared to be unfounded, if it is at all
possible to accept them.

The general result is that we have the right to conceive the gods as
possessing personal existence, on the ground of mantras, arthavâdas,
itihâsas, purâ*n*as, and ordinarily prevailing ideas. And as the gods
may thus be in the condition of having desires and so on, they must be
considered as qualified for the knowledge of Brahman. Moreover, the
declarations which Scripture makes concerning gradual emancipation <span
id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_223)agree with this latter supposition only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_215"></span>[218:2](sbe34102.htm#fr_215) See above, [p.
197](sbe34094.htm#page_197).

<span id="fn_216"></span>[218:3](sbe34102.htm#fr_216) Which can be
offered by kshattriyas only.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[219:1](sbe34102.htm#fr_217)
*S*rautali<u>n</u>genânumânabâdha*m* dar*s*ayitvâ smârtenâpi tadbâdha*m*
dar*s*ayati smârtam iti. Ki*m* atra brahma am*ri*tam ki*m* svid vedyam
anuttamam, *k*intayet tatra vai gatvâ gandharvo mâm ap*rikkh*ata,
Vi*s*vâvasus tato râ*g*an vedânta*gñ*ânakovida iti mokshadharme
*g*anakayâ*gñ*avalkyasa*m*vâdât prahlâdâ*g*agarasa*m*vâdâ*k*
*k*oktânumânâsiddhir ity artha*h*.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[221:1](sbe34102.htm#fr_218) As opposed to an
action to be accomplished.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[221:2](sbe34102.htm#fr_219) Of this nature is,
for instance, the arthavâda, 'Fire is a remedy for cold.'

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221:3](sbe34102.htm#fr_220) Of this nature is,
for instance, the passage 'the sacrificial post is the sun' (i.e.
possesses the qualities of the sun, luminousness, &c.; a statement
contradicted by perception).

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222:1](sbe34102.htm#fr_221) And therefore to
suppose that a divinity is nothing but a certain word forming part of a
mantra.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[222:2](sbe34102.htm#fr_222) The
râ*g*asûya-sacrifice is to be offered by a prince who wishes to become
the ruler of the whole earth.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[223:1](sbe34102.htm#fr_223) In one of whose
stages the being desirous of final emancipation becomes a deva.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 3, 34](sbe34103)
