[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34051)  [Next](sbe34053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

15\. And on account of the passage referring to that which is
distinguished by pleasure (i.e. Brahman).

There is, moreover, really no room for dispute whether Brahman be meant
in the passage under discussion or not, because the fact of Brahman
being meant is established 'by the reference to that which is
distinguished by pleasure.' For the same Brahman which is spoken of as
characterised by pleasure in the beginning of the chapter <span
id="fr_150"></span>[2](#fn_150), viz. in the clauses, 'Breath is
Brahman, Ka is Brahman, Kha is Brahman,' that same Brahman we must
suppose to be referred to in the present passage also, it being proper
to adhere to the subject-matter under discussion; the clause, 'The
teacher will tell you the way <span id="fr_151"></span>[3](#fn_151),'
merely announcing that the way will be proclaimed \[by the teacher; not
that a new subject will be started\].--How then, it may be asked, is it
known that Brahman, as distinguished by pleasure, is spoken of in the
beginning of the passage?--We reply: On hearing the speech of the fires,
viz. 'Breath is Brahman, Ka is Brahman, Kha is Brahman,' Upako*s*ala
says, 'I understand that breath is Brahman, but I do not understand that
Ka or Kha is Brahman.' Thereupon the fires reply, 'What is Ka is Kha,
what is Kha is Ka.' Now the word Kha denotes in ordinary language the
elemental ether. If therefore the word Ka which means pleasure were not
applied to qualify the sense of 'Kha,' we should conclude

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

that the name Brahman is here symbolically <span
id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_152) given to the mere elemental ether as it
is (in other places) given to mere names and the like. Thus also with
regard to the word Ka, which, in ordinary language, denotes the
imperfect pleasure springing from the contact of the sense-organs with
their objects. If the word Kha were not applied to qualify the sense of
Ka we should conclude that ordinary pleasure is here called Brahman. But
as the two words Ka and Kha (occur together and therefore) qualify each
other, they intimate Brahman whose Self is pleasure. If <span
id="fr_153"></span>[2](#fn_153) in the passage referred to (viz. 'Breath
is Brahman, Ka is Brahman, Kha is Brahman') the second Brahman (i.e. the
word Brahman in the clause 'Ka is Brahman ') were not added, and if the
sentence would run 'Ka, Kha is Brahman,' the word Ka would be employed
as a mere qualifying word, and thus pleasure as being a mere quality
would not be represented as a subject of meditation. To prevent this,
both words--Ka as well as Kha--are joined with the word Brahman ('Ka
(is) Brahman, Kha (is) Brahman'). For the passage wishes to intimate
that pleasure also, although a quality, should be meditated upon as
something in which qualities inhere. It thus appears that at the
beginning of the chapter Brahman, as characterised by pleasure, is
spoken of. After that the Gârhapatya and the other sacred fires proclaim
in turns their own glory, and finally conclude with the words, 'This is
our knowledge, O friend, and the knowledge of the Self;' wherein they
point back to the Brahman spoken of before. The words, 'The teacher will
tell you the way' (which form the last clause of the concluding
passage), merely promise an explanation of the way, and thus preclude
the idea of another topic being started. The teacher thereupon saying,
'As water does not cling to a lotus leaf, so no evil deed clings to one
who knows it' (which words intervene between the concluding

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

speech of the fires and the information given by the teacher about the
person within the eye) declares that no evil attacks him who knows the
person within the eye, and thereby shows the latter to be Brahman. It
thus appears that the teacher's intention is to speak about that Brahman
which had formed the topic of the instruction of the fires; to represent
it at first as located in the eye and possessing the qualities of
Sa*m*yadvâma and the like, and to point out afterwards that he who thus
knows passes on to light and so on. He therefore begins by saying, 'That
person that is seen in the eye that is the Self.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_149"></span>[126:1](sbe34051.htm#fr_149) The *t*îkâs say
that the contents of this last sentence are hinted at by the word 'and'
in the Sûtra.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[126:2](sbe34052.htm#fr_150) I.e. at the
beginning of the instruction which the sacred fires give to Upako*s*ala,
*Kh*. Up. IV, 10 ff.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[126:3](sbe34052.htm#fr_151) Which words
conclude the instruction given by the fires, and introduce the
instruction given by the teacher, of which the passage 'the person that
is seen in the eye,' &c. forms a part.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[127:1](sbe34052.htm#fr_152)
Â*s*rayântarapratyayasyâ*s*rayântare kshepa*h* pratîka*h*, yathâ
brahma*s*abda*h* paramâtmavishayo nâmâdishu kshipyate. Bhâ.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[127:2](sbe34052.htm#fr_153) The following
sentences give the reason why, although there is only one Brahman, the
word Brahman is repeated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 2, 16](sbe34053)
