[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34102)  [Next](sbe34104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

34\. Grief of him (i.e. of *G*âna*s*ruti) (arose) on account of his
hearing a disrespectful speech about himself; on account of the rushing
on of that (grief) (Raikva called him *S*ûdra); for it (the grief) is
pointed at (by Raikva).

(In the preceding adhikara*n*a) the exclusiveness of the claim of men to
knowledge has been refuted, and it has been declared that the gods, &c.
also possess such a claim. The present adhikara*n*a is entered on for
the purpose of removing the doubt whether, as the exclusiveness of the

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

claim of twice-born men is capable of refutation, the *S*ûdras also
possess such a claim.

The pûrvapakshin maintains that the *S*ûdras also have such a claim,
because they may be in the position of desiring that knowledge, and
because they are capable of it; and because there is no scriptural
prohibition (excluding them from knowledge) analogous to the text,
'Therefore <span id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_224) the *S*ûdra is unfit
for sacrificing' (Taitt. Sa*m*h. VII, 1, 1, 6). The reason, moreover,
which disqualifies the *S*ûdras for sacrificial works, viz. their being
without the sacred fires, does not invalidate their qualification for
knowledge, as knowledge can be apprehended by those also who are without
the fires. There is besides an inferential mark supporting the claim of
the *S*ûdras; for in the so-called sa*m*varga-knowledge he (Raikva)
refers to *G*âna*s*ruti Pautrâya*n*a, who wishes to learn from him, by
the name of *S*ûdra 'Fie, necklace and carnage be thine, O *S*ûdra,
together with the cows' (*Kh*. Up. IV, 2, 3). Sm*ri*ti moreover speaks
of Vidûra and others who were born from *S*ûdra mothers as possessing
eminent knowledge.--Hence the *S*ûdra has a claim to the knowledge of
Brahman.

To this we reply that the *S*ûdras have no such claim, on account of
their not studying the Veda. A person who has studied the Veda and
understood its sense is indeed qualified for Vedic matters; but a
*S*ûdra does not study the Veda, for such study demands as its
antecedent the upanayana-ceremony, and that ceremony belongs to the
three (higher) castes only. The mere circumstance of being in a
condition of desire does not furnish a reason for qualification, if
capability is absent. Mere temporal capability again does not constitute
a reason for qualification, spiritual capability being required in
spiritual matters. And spiritual capability is (in the case of the
*S*ûdras) excluded by their being excluded from the study of the
Veda.--The Vedic statement, moreover, that the *S*ûdra is unfit for
sacrifices intimates, because

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

founded on reasoning, that he is unfit for knowledge also; for the
argumentation is the same in both cases  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[1](#fn_225)--With reference to the pûrvapakshin's
opinion that the fact of the word '*S*ûdra' being enounced in the
sa*m*varga-knowledge constitutes an inferential mark (of the *S*ûdra's
qualification for knowledge), we remark that that inferential mark has
no force, on account of the absence of arguments. For the statement of
an inferential mark possesses the power of intimation only in
consequence of arguments being adduced; but no such arguments are
brought forward in the passage quoted.  <span
id="fr_226"></span>[2](#fn_226) Besides, the word '*S*ûdra' which occurs
in the sa*m*varga-vidyâ would establish a claim on the part of the
*S*ûdras to that one vidyâ only, not to all vidyâs. In reality, however,
it is powerless, because occurring in an arthavâda, to establish the
*S*ûdras' claim to anything.--The word '*S*ûdra' can moreover be made to
agree with the context in which it occurs in the following manner. When
*G*âna*s*ruti Pautrâya*n*a heard himself spoken of with disrespect by
the flamingo ('How can you speak of him, being what he is, as if he were
like Raikva with the car?' IV, i, 3), grief (su*k*) arose in his mind,
and to that grief the *ri*shi Raikva alludes with the word *S*ûdra, in
order to show thereby his knowledge of what is remote. This explanation
must be accepted because a (real) born *S*ûdra is not qualified (for the
sa*m*varga-vidyâ. If it be asked how the grief (su*k*) which had arisen
in *G*ânasruti's mind can be referred to by means of the word *S*ûdra,
we reply: On account of the rushing on (âdrava*n*a) of the grief. For we
may etymologise the word *S*ûdra by dividing it into its parts, either
as 'he rushed into grief (*S*u*k*am abhidudrâva) or as 'grief rushed on

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

him,' or as 'he in his grief rushed to Raikva;' while on the other hand
it is impossible to accept the word in its ordinary conventional sense.
The circumstance (of the king actually being grieved) is moreover
expressly touched upon in the legend <span
id="fr_227"></span>[1](#fn_227).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_224"></span>[224:1](sbe34103.htm#fr_224) The commentaries
explain 'therefore' by 'on account of his being devoid of the three
sacred fires.' This explanation does not, however, agree with the
context of the Taitt. Sa*m*h.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[225:1](sbe34103.htm#fr_225) The *S*ûdra not
having acquired a knowledge of Vedic matters in the legitimate way, i.
e. through the study of the Veda under the guidance of a guru, is unfit
for sacrifices as well as for vidyâ.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[225:2](sbe34103.htm#fr_226) The li<u>n</u>ga
contained in the word '*S*ûdra' has no proving power as it occurs in an
arthavâda-passage which has no authority if not connected with a
corresponding injunctive passage. In our case the li<u>n</u>ga in the
arthavâda-passage is even directly contradicted by those injunctions
which militate against the *S*ûdras' qualification for Vedic matters.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[226:1](sbe34103.htm#fr_227) Ha*m*savâkyâd
âtmano\#nâdara*m* *s*rutvâ *g*âna*s*rute*h* *s*ug utpannety etad eva
katha*m* gamyate yenâsau *s*ûdra*s*abdena sû*k*yate tatrâha sp*ris*yate
*k*eti. Ânanda Giri.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 3, 35](sbe34104)
