[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34128)  [Next](sbe34130) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

18\. But *G*aimini thinks that (the reference to the individual soul)
has another purport, on account of

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

the question and answer; and thus some also (read in their text).

Whether the passage under discussion is concerned with the individual
soul or with Brahman, is, in the opinion of the teacher *G*aimini, no
matter for dispute, since the reference to the individual soul has a
different purport, i.e. aims at intimating Brahman. He founds this his
opinion on a question and a reply met with in the text. After
A*g*âta*s*atru has taught Bâlâki, by waking the sleeping man, that the
soul is different from the vital air, he asks the following question,
'Bâlâki, where did this person here sleep? Where was he? Whence came he
thus back?' This question clearly refers to something different from the
individual soul. And so likewise does the reply, 'When sleeping he sees
no dream, then he becomes one with that prâ*n*a alone;' and, 'From that
Self all prâ*n*as proceed, each towards its place, from the prâ*n*as the
gods, from the gods the worlds.'--Now it is the general Vedânta doctrine
that at the time of deep sleep the soul becomes one with the highest
Brahman, and that from the highest Brahman the whole world proceeds,
inclusive of prâ*n*a, and so on. When Scripture therefore represents as
the object of knowledge that in which there takes place the deep sleep
of the soul, characterised by absence of consciousness and utter
tranquillity, i.e. a state devoid of all those specific cognitions which
are produced by the limiting adjuncts of the soul, and from which the
soul returns when the sleep is broken; we understand that the highest
Self is meant.--Moreover, the Vâ*g*asaneyi*s*âkhâ, which likewise
contains the colloquy of Bâlâki and A*g*âta*s*atru, clearly refers to
the individual soul by means of the term, 'the person consisting of
cognition' (vi*gñ*ânamaya), and distinguishes from it the highest Self
('Where was then the person consisting of cognition? and from whence did
he thus come back?' B*ri*. Up. II, 1, 16); and later on, in the reply to
the above question, declares that 'the person consisting of cognition
lies in the ether within the heart.' Now we know that the word 'ether'
may be used to denote the highest Self, as, for instance, in

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

the passage about the small ether within the lotus of the heart (*Kh*.
Up. VIII, 1, 1). Further on the B*ri*. Up. says, 'All the Selfs came
forth from that Self;' by which statement of the coming forth of all the
conditioned Selfs it intimates that the highest Self is the one general
cause.--The doctrine conveyed by the rousing of the sleeping person,
viz. that the individual soul is different from the vital air, furnishes
at the same time a further argument against the opinion that the passage
under discussion refers to the vital air.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 4, 19](sbe34130)
