[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34096)  [Next](sbe34098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

28\. If it be said (that a contradiction will result) in respect of the
word; we refute this objection on the ground that (the world) originates
from the word, as is shown by perception and inference.

Let it then be granted that, from the admission of the corporeal
individuality of the gods, no contradiction will result in the case of
sacrificial works. Still a contradiction will result in respect of the
'word' (*s*abda).--How?--The authoritativeness of the Veda has been
proved 'from its independence,' basing on the original (eternal)
connection of the word with its sense ('the thing signified') <span
id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_198). But now, although a divinity possessing
corporeal individuality, such as admitted above, may, by means of its
supernatural powers, be able to enjoy at the same time the oblations

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

which form part of several sacrifices yet it will, on account of its
very individuality, be subject to birth and death just as we men are,
and hence, the eternal connexion of the eternal word with a non-eternal
thing being destroyed, a contradiction will arise with regard to the
authoritativeness proved to belong to the word of the Veda.

To this we reply that no such contradiction exists.--Why?--'On account
of their origin from it.' For from that very same word of the Veda the
world, with the gods and other beings, originates.--But--an objection
will be raised--in Sûtra I, 1, 2 ('That whence there is the origin, &c.
of this world') it has been proved that the world originates from
Brahman; how then can it be said here that it originates from the word?
And, moreover, even if the origin of the world from the word of the Veda
be admitted, how is the contradiction in regard to the word removed
thereby, inasmuch as the Vasus, the Rudras, the Âdityas, the
Vi*s*vedevas, and the Maruts <span id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_199) are
non-eternal beings, because produced; and if they are non-eternal, what
is there to preclude the non-eternality of the Vedic words Vasu, &c.
designating them? For it is known from every-day life that only when the
son of Devadatta is born, the name Ya*gñ*adatta is given to him (lit.
made for him) <span id="fr_200"></span>[2](#fn_200). Hence we adhere to
our opinion that a contradiction does arise with regard to the 'word.'

This objection we negative, on the ground that we observe the eternity
of the connexion between such words as cow, and so on, and the things
denoted by them. For, although the individuals of the (species denoted
by the word) cow have an origin, their species <span
id="fr_201"></span>[3](#fn_201) does not have an origin, since of (the
three categories) substances, qualities, and actions the individuals
only originate, not the species. Now it is with the species that the
words are connected, not with the individuals, which, as being infinite
in number, are not capable of entering into that connexion. Hence,
although

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

the individuals do not originate, no contradiction arises in the case of
words such as cow, and the like, since the species are eternal.
Similarly, although individual gods are admitted to originate, there
arises no contradiction in the case of such words as Vasu, and the like,
since the species denoted by them are eternal. And that the gods, and so
on, belong to different species, is to be concluded from the
descriptions of their various personal appearance, such as given in the
mantras, arthavâdas, &c. Terms such as 'Indra' rest on the connexion (of
some particular being) with some particular place, analogously to terms
such as 'army-leader;' hence, whoever occupies that particular place is
called by that particular name.--The origination of the world from the
'word' is not to be understood in that sense, that the word constitutes
the material cause of the world, as Brahman does; but while there exist
the everlasting words, whose essence is the power of denotation in
connexion with their eternal sense (i. e. the âk*r*itis denoted), the
accomplishment of such individual things as are capable of having those
words applied to them is called an origination from those words.

How then is it known that the world originates from the word?--'From
perception and inference.' Perception here denotes Scripture which, in
order to be authoritative, is independent (of anything else).
'Inference' denotes Sm*r*iti which, in order to be authoritative,
depends on something else (viz. Scripture). These two declare that
creation is preceded by the word Thus a scriptural passage says, 'At the
word these Pra*g*âpati created the gods; at the words were poured out he
created men; at the word drops he created the fathers; at the words
through the filter he created the Soma cups; at the words the swift ones
he created the stotra; at the words to all he created the *s*astra; at
the word blessings he created the other beings.' And another passage
says, 'He with his mind united himself with speech (i. e. the word of
the Veda.--B*ri*. Up. I, 2, 4). Thus Scripture declares in different
places that the word precedes the creation.--Sm*r*ti also delivers
itself as follows, 'In the beginning

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

a divine voice, eternal, without beginning or end, formed of the Vedas
was uttered by Svayambhû, from which all activities proceeded. 'By the
'uttering' of the voice we have here to understand the starting of the
oral tradition (of the Veda), because of a voice without beginning or
end 'uttering' in any other sense cannot be predicated.--Again, we read,
'In the beginning Mahe*s*vara shaped from the words of the Veda the
names and forms of all beings and the procedure of all actions.' And
again, 'The several names, actions, and conditions of all things he
shaped in the beginning from the words of the Veda' (Manu I, 21).
Moreover, we all know from observation that any one when setting about
some thing which he wishes to accomplish first remembers the word
denoting the thing, and after that sets to work. We therefore conclude
that before the creation the Vedic words became manifest in the mind of
Pra*g*âpati the creator, and that after that he created the things
corresponding to those words. Scripture also, where it says (Taitt. Brâ.
II, 2, 4, 2) 'uttering bhûr he created the earth,' &c., shows that the
worlds such as the earth, &c. became manifest, i.e. were created from
the words bhûr, &c. which had become manifest in the mind (of
Pra*g*âpati).

Of what nature then is the 'word' with a view to which it is said that
the world originates from the 'word?'--It is the spho*t*a, the
pûrvapakshin says.  <span id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_202) For on the
assumption

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

that the letters are the word, the doctrine that the individual gods,
and so on, originates from the eternal words of the Veda could not in
any way be proved, since the letters perish as soon as they are produced
(i. e. pronounced). These perishable letters are moreover apprehended as
differing according to the pronunciation of the individual speaker. For
this reason we are able to determine, merely from the sound of the voice
of some unseen person whom we hear reading, who is reading, whether
Devadatta or Ya*gñ*adatta or some other man. And it cannot be maintained
that this apprehension of difference regarding the letters is an
erroneous one; for we do not apprehend anything else whereby it is
refuted. Nor is it reasonable to maintain that the apprehension of the
sense of a word results from the letters. For it can neither be
maintained that each letter by itself intimates the sense, since that
would be too wide an assumption;  <span id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_203)
nor that there takes place a simultaneous apprehension of the whole
aggregate of letters; since the letters succeed one another in time. Nor
can we admit the explanation that the last letter of the word together
with the impressions produced by the perception of the preceding letters
is that which makes us apprehend the sense. For the word makes us
apprehend the sense only if it is itself apprehended in so far as having
reference to the mental grasp of the constant connexion (of the word and
the sense), just as smoke makes us infer the existence of fire only when
it is itself apprehended; but an apprehension of the last letter
combined with the impressions produced by the preceding letters does not
actually take place, because those impressions are not objects of
perception.  <span id="fr_204"></span>[2](#fn_204) Nor, again, can it be
maintained that (although those impressions

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

are not objects of perception, yet they may be inferred from their
effects, and that thus) the actual perception of the last letter
combined with the impressions left by the preceding letters--which
impressions are apprehended from their effects--is that which intimates
the sense of the word; for that effect of the impressions, viz. the
remembrance of the entire word, is itself something consisting of parts
which succeed each other in time.--From all this it follows that the
spho*t*e is the word. After the apprehending agent, i. e. the buddhi,
has, through the apprehension of the several letters of the word,
received rudimentary impressions, and after those impressions have been
matured through the apprehension of the last letter, the spho*t*a
presents itself in the buddhi all at once as the object of one mental
act of apprehension.--And it must not be maintained that that one act of
apprehension is merely an act of remembrance having for its object the
letters of the word; for the letters which are more than one cannot form
the object of one act of apprehension.--As that spho*t*a is recognised
as the same as often as the word is pronounced, it is eternal; while the
apprehension of difference referred to above has for its object the
letters merely. From this eternal word, which is of the nature of the
spho*t*a and possesses denotative power, there is produced the object
denoted, i. e. this world which consists of actions, agents, and results
of action.

Against this doctrine the reverend Upavarsha maintains that the letters
only are the word.--But--an objection is raised--it has been said above
that the letters no sooner produced pass away!--That assertion is not
true, we reply; for they are recognised as the same letters (each time
they are produced anew).--Nor can it be maintained that the recognition
is due to similarity only, as in the case of hairs, for instance; for
the fact of the recognition being a recognition in the strict sense of
the word is not contradicted by any other means of proof.--Nor, again,
can it be said

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

that the recognition has its cause in the species (so that not the same
individual letter would be recognised, but only a letter belonging to
the same species as other letters heard before); for, as a matter of
fact, the same individual letters are recognised. That the recognition
of the letters rests on the species could be maintained only if whenever
the letters are pronounced different individual letters were
apprehended, just as several cows are apprehended as different
individuals belonging to the same species. But this is actually not the
case; for the (same) individual letters are recognised as often as they
are pronounced. If, for instance, the word cow is pronounced twice, we
think not that two different words have been pronounced, but that the
same individual word has been repeated.--But, our opponent reminds us,
it has been shown above, that the letters are apprehended as different
owing to differences of pronunciation, as appears from the fact that we
apprehend a difference when merely hearing the sound of Devadatta or
Ya*g*ñadatta reading.--Although, we reply, it is a settled matter that
the letters are recognised as the same, yet we admit that there are
differences in the apprehension of the letters; but as the letters are
articulated by means of the conjunction and disjunction (of the breath
with the palate, the teeth, &c.), those differences are rightly ascribed
to the various character of the articulating agents and not to the
intrinsic nature of the letters themselves. Those, moreover, who
maintain that the individual letters are different have, in order to
account for the fact of recognition, to assume species of letters, and
further to admit that the apprehension of difference is conditioned by
external factors. Is it then not much simpler to assume, as we do, that
the apprehension of difference is conditioned by external factors while
the recognition is due to the intrinsic nature of the letters? And this
very fact of recognition is that mental process which prevents us from
looking on the apprehension of difference as having the letters for its
object (so that the opponent was wrong in denying the existence of such
a process). For how should, for instance, the one syllable ga, when it
is pronounced in

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

the same moment by several persons, be at the same time of different
nature, viz. accented with the udâtta, the anudâtta, and the Svarita and
nasal as well as non-nasal <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_205)? Or
else <span id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_206)--and this is the preferable
explanation--we assume that the difference of apprehension is caused not
by the letters but by the tone (dhvani). By this tone we have to
understand that which enters the ear of a person who is listening from a
distance and not able to distinguish the separate letters, and which,
for a person standing near, affects the letters with its own
distinctions, such as high or low pitch and so on. It is on this tone
that all the distinctions of udâtta, anudâtta, and so on depend, and not
on the intrinsic nature of the letters; for they are recognised as the
same whenever they are pronounced. On this theory only we gain a basis
for the distinctive apprehension of the udâtta, the anudâtta, and the
like. For on the theory first propounded (but now rejected), we should
have to assume that the distinctions of udâtta and so on are due to the
processes of conjunction and disjunction described above, since the
letters themselves, which are ever recognised as the same, are not
different. But as those processes of conjunction and disjunction are not
matter of perception, we cannot definitely ascertain in the letters any
differences based on those processes, and hence the apprehension of the
udâtta and so on remains without a basis.--Nor should it be urged that
from the difference of the udâtta and so on there results also a
difference of the letters recognised. For a difference in one matter
does not involve a difference in some other matter which in itself is
free from difference. Nobody, for instance, thinks that because the
individuals

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

are different from each other the species also contains a difference in
itself.

The assumption of the spho*t*a is further gratuitous, because the sense
of the word may be apprehended from the letters.--But--our opponent here
objects--I do not assume the existence of the spho*t*a. I, on the
contrary, actually perceive it; for after the buddhi has been impressed
by the successive apprehension of the letters of the word, the spho*t*a
all at once presents itself as the object of cognition.--You are
mistaken, we reply. The object of the cognitional act of which you speak
is simply the letters of the word. That one comprehensive cognition
which follows upon the apprehension of the successive letters of the
word has for its object the entire aggregate of the letters constituting
the word, and not anything else. We conclude this from the circumstance
that in that final comprehensive cognition there are included those
letters only of which a definite given word consists, and not any other
letters. If that cognitional act had for its object the spho*t*a--i. e.
something different from the letters of the given word--then those
letters would be excluded from it just as much as the letters of any
other word. But as this is not the case, it follows that that final
comprehensive act of cognition is nothing but an act of remembrance
which has the letters of the word for its object.--Our opponent has
asserted above that the letters of a word being several cannot form the
object of one mental act. But there he is wrong again. The ideas which
we have of a row, for instance, or a wood or an army, or of the numbers
ten, hundred, thousand, and so on, show that also such things as
comprise several unities can become the objects of one and the same
cognitional act. The idea which has for its object the word as one whole
is a derived one, in so far as it depends on the determination of one
sense in many letters <span id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_207); in the same
way as the idea of a

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

wood, an army, and so on. But--our opponent may here object--if the word
were nothing else but the letters which in their aggregate become the
object of one mental act, such couples of words as *g*ârâ and râ*g*â or
pika and kapi would not be cognised as different words; for here the
same letters are presented to consciousness in each of the words
constituting one couple.--There is indeed, we reply, in both cases a
comprehensive consciousness of the same totality of letters; but just as
ants constitute the idea of a row only if they march one after the
other, so the letters also constitute the idea of a certain word only if
they follow each other in a certain order. Hence it is not contrary to
reason that the same letters are cognised as different words, in
consequence of the different order in which they are arranged.

The hypothesis of him who maintains that the letters are the word may
therefore be finally formulated as follows. The letters of which a word
consists--assisted by a certain order and number--have, through
traditional use, entered into a connexion with a definite sense. At the
time when they are employed they present themselves as such (i. e. in
their definite order and number) to the buddhi, which, after having
apprehended the several letters in succession, finally comprehends the
entire aggregate, and they thus unerringly intimate to the buddhi their
definite sense. This hypothesis is certainly simpler than the
complicated hypothesis of the grammarians who teach that the spho*t*a is
the word. For they have to disregard what is given by perception, and to
assume something which is never perceived; the letters apprehended in a
definite order are said to manifest the spho*t*a, and the spho*t*a in
its turn is said to manifest the sense.

Or let it even be admitted that the letters are different ones each time
they are pronounced; yet, as in that case we necessarily must assume
species of letters as the basis of the recognition of the individual
letters, the function of conveying the sense which we have demonstrated
in the case of the (individual) letters has then to be attributed to the
species.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

From all this it follows that the theory according to which the
individual gods and so on originate from the eternal words is
unobjectionable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_198"></span>[201:1](sbe34097.htm#fr_198) The reference is
to Pûrva Mîmâ*m*sâ Sûtras I, 1, 5 (not to I, 2, 21, as stated in Muir's
Sanskrit Texts, III, p. 69).

<span id="fn_199"></span>[202:1](sbe34097.htm#fr_199) In which classes
of beings all the gods are comprised.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[202:2](sbe34097.htm#fr_200) Which shows that
together with the non-eternality of the thing denoted there goes the
non-eternality of the denoting word.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202:3](sbe34097.htm#fr_201) Âk*ri*ti, best
translated by εἶδος.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[204:1](sbe34097.htm#fr_202) The pûrvapakshin,
i. e. here the grammarian maintains, for the reasons specified further
on, that there exists in the case of words a supersensuous entity called
spho*t*a which is manifested by the letters of the word, and, if
apprehended by the mind, itself manifests the sense of the word. The
term spho*t*a may, according as it is viewed in either of these lights,
be explained as the manifestor or that which is manifested.--The
spho*t*a is a grammatical fiction, the word in so far as it is
apprehended by us as a whole. That we cannot identify it with the
'notion' (as Deussen seems inclined to do, p. 80) follows from its being
distinctly called vâ*k*aka or abhidhâyaka, and its being represented as
that which causes the conception of the sense of a word (arthadhîhetu).

<span id="fn_203"></span>[205:1](sbe34097.htm#fr_203) For that each
letter by itself expresses the sense is not observed; and if it did so,
the other letters of the word would have to be declared useless.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205:2](sbe34097.htm#fr_204) In order to enable
us to apprehend the sense from the word, there is required the actual
consciousness of the last letter plus the impressions of the preceding
letters; just as smoke enables us to <span id="page_206">p. 206</span>
infer the existence of fire only if we are actually conscious of the
smoke. But that actual consciousness does not take place because the
impressions are not objects of perceptive consciousness.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[208:1](sbe34097.htm#fr_205) 'How should it be
so?' i.e. it cannot be so; and on that account the differences
apprehended do not belong to the letters themselves, but to the external
conditions mentioned above.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[208:2](sbe34097.htm#fr_206) With 'or else'
begins the exposition of the finally accepted theory as to the cause why
the same letters are apprehended as different. Hitherto the cause had
been found in the variety of the upâdhis of the letters. Now a new
distinction is made between articulated letters and non-articulated
tone.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[209:1](sbe34097.htm#fr_207) I. e. it is not
directly one idea, for it has for its object more than one letter; but
it may be called one in a secondary sense because it is based on the
determinative knowledge that the letters, although more than one,
express one sense only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 3, 29](sbe34098)
