[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe34028)  [Next](sbe34030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930306/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Vedanta Sutras, commentary by Sankaracharya (SBE34)*, tr. by George
Thibaut \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

23\. For the same reason breath (is Brahman).

Concerning the udgîtha it is said (*Kh*. Up. I, 10, 9), 'Prastot*ri*,
that deity which belongs to the prastâva, &c.,' and, further on (I,11,4;
5), 'Which then is that deity? He said: Breath. For all these beings
merge into breath alone, and from breath they arise. This is the deity
belonging to the prastâva.' With reference to this passage doubt and
decision are to be considered as analogous to those stated under the
preceding Sûtra. For while in some passages--as, for instance, 'For
indeed, my son, mind is fastened to prâ*n*a,' *Kh*. Up. VI, 8, 2; and,
'the prâ*n*a of prâ*n*a,' B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 18--the word 'breath' is
seen to denote Brahman, its use

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

in the sense of a certain modification of air is better established in
common as well as in Vedic language. Hence there arises a doubt whether
in the passage under discussion the word prâ*n*a denotes Brahman or
(ordinary) breath. In favour of which meaning have we then to decide?

Here the pûrvapakshin maintains that the word must be held to denote the
fivefold vital breath, which is a peculiar modification of wind (or
air); because, as has been remarked already, that sense of the word
prâ*n*a is the better established one.--But no, an objector will say,
just as in the case of the preceding Sûtra, so here also Brahman is
meant, on account of characteristic marks being mentioned; for here also
a complementary passage gives us to understand that all beings spring
from and merge into prâ*n*a; a process which can take place in connexion
with the highest Lord only.--This objection, the pûrvapakshin replies,
is futile, since we see that the beings enter into and proceed from the
principal vital air also. For Scripture makes the following statement
(Sat. Br. X, 3, 3, 6), 'When man sleeps, then into breath indeed speech
merges, into breath the eye, into breath the ear, into breath the mind;
when he awakes then they spring again from breath alone.' What the Veda
here states is, moreover, a matter of observation, for during sleep,
while the process of breathing goes on uninterruptedly, the activity of
the sense organs is interrupted and again becomes manifest at the time
of awaking only. And as the sense organs are the essence of all material
beings, the complementary passage which speaks of the merging and
emerging of the beings can be reconciled with the principal vital air
also. Moreover, subsequently to prâ*n*a being mentioned as the divinity
of the prastâva the sun and food are designated as the divinities of the
udgîtha and the pratihâra. Now as they are not Brahman, the prâ*n*a
also, by parity of reasoning, cannot be Brahman.

To this argumentation the author of the Sûtras replies: For the same
reason prâ*n*a--that means: on account of the presence of characteristic
marks--which constituted the reason stated in the preceding Sûtra--the
word prâ*n*a also

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

must be held to denote Brahman. For Scripture says of prâ*n*a also, that
it is connected with marks characteristic of Brahman. The sentence, 'All
these beings merge into breath alone, and from breath they arise,' which
declares that the origination and retractation of all beings depend on
prâ*n*a, clearly shows prâ*n*a to be Brahman. In reply to the assertion
that the origination and retractation of all beings can be reconciled
equally well with the assumption of prâ*n*a denoting the chief vital
air, because origination and retractation take place in the state of
waking and of sleep also, we remark that in those two states only the
senses are merged into, and emerge from, the chief vital air, while,
according to the scriptural passage, 'For all these beings, &c.,' all
beings whatever into which a living Self has entered, together with
their senses and bodies, merge and emerge by turns. And even if the word
'beings' were taken (not in the sense of animated beings, but) in the
sense of material elements in general, there would be nothing in the way
of interpreting the passage as referring to Brahman.--But. it may be
said, that the senses together with their objects do, during sleep,
enter into prâ*n*a, and again issue from it at the time of waking, we
distinctly learn from another scriptural passage, viz. Kau. Up. III, 3,
'When a man being thus asleep sees no dream whatever, he becomes one
with that prâ*n*a alone. Then speech goes to him with all names,'
&c.--True, we reply, but there also the word prâ*n*a denotes (not the
vital air) but Brahman, as we conclude from characteristic marks of
Brahman being mentioned. The objection, again, that the word prâ*n*a
cannot denote Brahman because it occurs in proximity to the words 'food'
and 'sun' (which do not refer to Brahman), is altogether baseless; for
proximity is of no avail against the force of the complementary passage
which intimates that prâ*n*a is Brahman. That argument, finally, which
rests on the fact that the word prâ*n*a commonly denotes the vital air
with its five modifications, is to be refuted in the same way as the
parallel argument which the pûrvapakshin brought forward with reference
to the word 'ether.' From all this it follows that the prâ*n*a, which is
the deity of the prastâva, is Brahman.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

Some (commentators) <span id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_125) quote under
the present Sûtra the following passages, 'the prâ*n*a of prâ*n*a'
(B*ri*. Up. IV, 4, 18), and 'for to prâ*n*a mind is fastened' (*Kh*. Up.
VI, 8, 2). But that is wrong since these two passages offer no
opportunity for any discussion, the former on account of the separation
of the words, the latter on account of the general topic. When we meet
with a phrase such as 'the father of the father' we understand at once
that the genitive denotes a father different from the father denoted by
the nominative. Analogously we infer from the separation of words
contained in the phrase, 'the breath of breath,' that the 'breath of
breath' is different from the ordinary breath (denoted by the genitive
'of breath'). For one and the same thing cannot, by means of a genitive,
be predicated of--and thus distinguished from--itself. Concerning the
second passage we remark that, if the matter constituting the general
topic of some chapter is referred to in that chapter under a different
name, we yet conclude, from the general topic, that that special matter
is meant. For instance, when we meet in the section which treats of the
*g*yotish*t*oma sacrifice with the passage, 'in every spring he is to
offer the *g*yotis sacrifice,' we at once understand that the word
denotes the *g*yotish*t*oma. If we therefore meet with the clause 'to
prâ*n*a mind is fastened' in a section of which the highest Brahman is
the topic, we do not for a moment suppose that the word prâ*n*a should
there denote the ordinary breath which is a mere modification of air.
The two passages thus do not offer any matter for discussion, and hence
do not furnish appropriate instances for the Sûtra. We have shown, on
the other hand, that the passage about the prâ*n*a, which is the deity
of the prastâva, allows room for doubt, pûrvapaksha and final decision.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_125"></span>[87:1](sbe34029.htm#fr_125) The v*ri*ttikâra,
the commentators say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1, 24](sbe34030)
