[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc03003)  [Next](cc03005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
1:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.i.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now these *are* the names of the
children of Israel, which came into Egypt: every man and his household
came with Jacob.

<span id="iv.i.i-p3"></span>**1.** Haec sunt nomina filiorum Israel qui
venerunt in Aegyptum cum Jahacob: quisque cum familia sua venit.

<span id="iv.i.i-p4"></span>**2.** Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,

<span id="iv.i.i-p5"></span>**2.** Reuben, Simeon, Levi, et Jehudah,

<span id="iv.i.i-p6"></span>**3.** Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,

<span id="iv.i.i-p7"></span>**3.** Issachar, Zabulon, et Benjamin,

<span id="iv.i.i-p8"></span>**4.** Dan, Nephthali, Gad, et Asser.

<span id="iv.i.i-p9"></span>**4.** Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher.

<span id="iv.i.i-p10"></span>**5.** And all the souls that came out of
the loins of Jacob were seventy souls: for Joseph was in Egypt *already*

<span id="iv.i.i-p11"></span>**5.** Fuerunt autem omnes animae egressae
ex femore Jahacob, septuaginta animae, Joseph autem crat in Aegypto.

<span id="iv.i.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Joseph died, and all his
brethren, and all that generation.

<span id="iv.i.i-p13"></span>**6.** Mortuus vero est Joseph, et omnes
fratres eius, et tota aetas illa.

<span id="iv.i.i-p14"></span>**7.** And the children of Israel were
fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding
mighty; and the land was filled with them.

<span id="iv.i.i-p15"></span>**7.** Porto creverunt filii Israel, et
aucti sunt, et multiplicati et roborati quamplurimum; adeo ut plena
ipsis esset terra.

<span id="iv.i.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.i.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p17"></span>**1.** *These are the names* It is the
intention of Moses to describe the miraculous deliverance of the people,
(from whence the Greeks gave the name to the book;) but, before he comes
to that, he briefly reminds us that the promise given to Abraham was not
ineffectual, that his seed should be multiplied

<span id="iv.i.i-p18"></span>“as the stars of the heaven, and as the
sand which is upon the sea-shore.” (<span id="iv.i.i-p18.1"></span>[Ge
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)<span id="iv.i.i-p18.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.i.i-p19"></span>This, then, is the commencement of the
book, — that although their going down from the land of Canaan into
Egypt might have seemed at the time as it were the end and abolition of
God’s covenant, yet in his own time he abundantly accomplished what he
had promised to his servant as to the increase of his descendants.
However, he only mentions by name the twelve patriarchs who went down
with their father Jacob, and then sums up the whole number of persons,
as in two other passages. (<span id="iv.i.i-p19.1"></span>[Ge
46:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027.md)<span id="iv.i.i-p19.1"></span>,
and <span id="iv.i.i-p19.2"></span>[De
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#022)<span id="iv.i.i-p19.2"></span>..md)
The calculation is perfectly accurate, if Jacob is counted among the
thirty and six souls in the first catalogue. For it is a far-fetched
addition of the Rabbins  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) to count in
Jochebed the mother of Moses, to complete the number; and it is not
probable that a woman, who was afterwards born in Egypt, should be
reckoned among the men whom Jacob brought with him. If any object that
the seventy are said to have “come out of the loins of Jacob,” the
discrepancy is easily explained by the common scriptural use of the
figure *synecdoche*  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md) That he from whom
the others sprung is not excluded, we gather from the words of Moses,
(<span id="iv.i.i-p21.1"></span>[De
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#022)<span id="iv.i.i-p21.1"></span>,.md)

<span id="iv.i.i-p22"></span>“Thy fathers went down into Egypt with
threescore and ten persons; and now the Lord thy God hath made thee as
the stars of heaven for multitude.”

<span id="iv.i.i-p23"></span>But there is no reason to add five more, as
we read in the address of Stephen recorded by Luke, (<span
id="iv.i.i-p23.1"></span>[Ac 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.i.i-p23.1"></span>;) for we cannot be surprised that in this mode
of expressing numbers this error should have occurred by the
introduction of a single letter. Should any objector make this an handle
for controversy, we should remember that the Spirit, by the mouth of
Paul, does not warn us without purpose

<span id="iv.i.i-p24"></span>“not to give heed to genealogies.” (<span
id="iv.i.i-p24.1"></span>[1Ti 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.i.i-p24.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.i.i-p25"></span><span id="iv.i.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p26"></span>**6.** *And Joseph died.* The Rabbins
ignorantly conclude from this expression that Joseph died first of his
brethren, whereas it is evident that the others were passed over, and
his name was expressly mentioned to do him honor, as being the only one
then in authority. How long they survived their father, Moses does not
say, but only marks the beginning of the change, — as much as to say,
the Israelites were humanely treated for a considerable space of time;
so that the condition of those who went down with Jacob was tolerable,
since, free from all injustice and tyranny, they tranquilly enjoyed the
hospitality accorded to them. At the same time, he gives us to
understand that, when all that generation was gone, the desire and the
memory of the land of Canaan, which they had never seen, might have died
out of the minds of their descendants, if they had not been forcibly
aroused to seek after it. And unquestionably, since that people were
forgetful and careless of meditating on God’s mercies, God could not
have better provided for their salvation than by allowing them to be
cruelly tried and afflicted; otherwise, as though their origin had been
in Egypt, they might have preferred to have remained for ever in their
nest, and by that indifference the hope of the promised heritage would
have been effaced from their hearts.

<span id="iv.i.i-p27"></span><span id="iv.i.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p28"></span>**7.** *And the children of Israel were
fruitful.*  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) To what an extent they
increased Moses relates in the 12th chapter, viz., to the number of
600,000, besides women and children; which was certainly an incredible
increase for so short a time. For, though 430 years be counted from the
date of the covenant with Abraham to the departure of the people, it is
clear that half of them had elapsed before Jacob went down into Egypt;
so that the Israelites sojourned in that land only 200 years, or little
more — say ten years more. How then could it come to pass that in so
short a time a single family could have grown into so many myriads? It
would have been an immense and extraordinary increase if 10,000 had
sprung from every tribe; but this more than quadruples that number.
Wherefore certain sceptics, perceiving that the relation of Moses
surpasses the ordinary ratio of human propagation, and estimating the
power of God by their own sense and experience, altogether refuse to
credit it. For such is the perverseness of men, that they always seek
for opportunities of despising or disallowing the works of God; such,
too, is their audacity and insolence that they shamelessly apply all the
acuteness they possess to detract from his glory. If their reason
assures them that what is related as a miracle is possible, they
attribute it to natural causes, — so is God robbed and defrauded of the
praise his power deserves; if it is incomprehensible to them, they
reject it as a prodigy.  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) But if they
cannot bring themselves to acknowledge the interference of God except in
matters by the magnitude of which they are struck with astonishment, why
do they not persuade themselves of the truth of whatever common sense
repudiates? They ask how this can be, as if it were reasonable that the
hand of God should be so restrained as to be unable to do anything which
exceeds the bounds of human comprehension. Whereas, because we are
naturally so slow to profit by his ordinary operations, it is rather
necessary that we should be awakened into admiration by extraordinary
dealings.

<span id="iv.i.i-p31"></span><span id="iv.i.i-p31.1"></span>Let us
conclude, then, that since Moses does not here speak of the natural
course of human procreation, but celebrates a miracle unheard of before,
by which God ratified the truth of his promise, we should judge of it
perversely, and maliciously, if we measure it by our own feeble reason,
instead of meditating with reverence <span id="iv.i.i-p31.2"></span>upon
what far transcends all our senses. Let us rather remember how God
reproves his unbelieving people by the Prophet Isaiah. (<span
id="iv.i.i-p31.3"></span>[Isa
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.i.i-p31.3"></span><span id="iv.i.i-p31.4"></span>) For, in order
to prove that it would not be difficult for Him, in spite of the small
number to which the Israelites were reduced, to produce a great
multitude, He bids them look into “the <span
id="iv.i.i-p31.5"></span>hole of the pit from whence they were digged,”
viz., to Abraham, and Sarah that bare them, whom he multiplied though
alone, and childless. Certain Rabbins, after their custom, imagine that
four infants were produced at a birth; for as often as they meet with
any point which perplexes them, they gratuitously invent whatever suits
them, and then obtrude their imaginations as indubitable facts; and
proceed foolishly, and unseasonably, to discuss that this is physically
probable. There are Christians, too, who, with little consideration,
have imitated them here, contending that what Moses describes is in
accordance with experience, because the fecundity of certain nations has
been almost as great. We indeed sometimes see confirmed by remarkable
examples what the Psalmist says, (<span id="iv.i.i-p31.6"></span>[Ps
107:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#036.md)<span
id="iv.i.i-p31.6"></span><span id="iv.i.i-p31.7"></span>,) that God
“maketh <span id="iv.i.i-p31.8"></span>the hungry to dwell” in the
wilderness, “that they may prepare a city for habitation, and sow the
fields, and plant vineyards, which may yield fruits of increase; and he
blesseth them also, so that they are multiplied greatly;” as also, that
“He turneth a fruitful land into barrenness,” and strips it of
inhabitants; but the design of Moses is to shew, that there never was
any fecundity, which was not inferior to the increase of the people of
Israel. Hence his comparison between the seventy souls, and the
multitude which proceeded from them, that this special blessing of God
might be distinguished from ordinary cases; hence too the accumulated
expressions, which undoubtedly are meant for amplification, that “they
<span id="iv.i.i-p31.9"></span>were fruitful, and increased abundantly,
and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land was filled with
them.” For the repetition of the adverb, *Meod*<span
id="iv.i.i-p31.10"></span>, *Meod*<span id="iv.i.i-p31.11"></span>,
<span id="iv.i.i-p31.12"></span>marks an unusual abundance, Nor do I
reject the conjecture of some, that in the word <span
id="iv.i.i-p31.13"></span>שרף<span id="iv.i.i-p31.14"></span>,
*sharatz*<span id="iv.i.i-p31.15"></span>, <span
id="iv.i.i-p31.16"></span>there is a metaphor taken from fishes, but I
know not whether it is very sound, since the word is used generally for
any multiplication.

<span id="iv.i.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.i.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
1:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.i.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii-p2"></span>**8.** Now there arose up a new king over
Egypt, which knew not Joseph.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p3"></span>**8.** Surrexit autem rex novus super
Aegyptum, qui non noverat Joseph.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p4"></span>**9.** And he said unto his people, Behold,
the people of the children of Israel *are* more and mightier than we:

<span id="iv.i.ii-p5"></span>**9.** Dixitque ad populum suum, Ecce,
populus filiorum Israel multus et robustus prae nobis.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p6"></span>**10.** Come on, let us deal wisely with
them; lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that, when there falleth
out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and right against us, and
*so* get them up out of the land.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p7"></span>**10.** Agedum, prudenter nos geramus erga
illum, ne multiplicetur; ne accidat, si obvenerit bellum, jungatur ipse
quoque hostibus nostris, et pugnet contra nos, ascendatque e terra.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p8"></span>**11.** Therefore they did set over them
task-masters to afflict them with their burdens. And they built for
Pharaoh treasure-cities, Pithom and Raamses.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p9"></span>**11.** Constituerunt igitur super illum
praefectos vectigalium,  <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) ut
affligerent illum oneribus suis: extruxeruntque urbes munitas Pharaoni
Pithom et Rhameses.  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md)

<span id="iv.i.ii-p12"></span><span id="iv.i.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii-p13"></span>**8.** *Now there arose a new king.* When
more than one hundred years had been happily passed in freedom and
repose, the condition of the elect people began to be changed. Moses
relates that the commencement of their troubles proceeded from jealousy,
and from the groundless fear of the Egyptians, because they conceived
that danger might arise from this strange nation, unless they hastened
to oppress it. But before he comes to this, he premises that the
remembrance of the benefits received from Joseph had departed, because
it might have in some measure mitigated their cruelty, had it still been
unimpaired. It is probable that this oblivion of the gratitude due to
him arose from the moderation of Joseph; for if he had demanded great
privileges for his people, and immunity from tributes and burdens, the
remembrances of the saving of the country by an Israelite would have
been famous for many ages; but it appears that he was content with the
kind hospitality afforded them, that his brethren might dwell
comfortably, and without molestation in the land of Goshen, because he
wished them to be sojourners there until the time of deliverance
arrived. And in this way he best provided for their safety, lest being
thus ensnared, they might have fallen into the nets of destruction. But
in proportion as the moderation of the holy man exposed them not to
jealousy and complaint, so was the ingratitude of the Egyptians less
excusable in forgetting, after little more than a single century, that
remarkable benefit, which should have been everywhere preserved in their
public monuments, lest the name of Joseph should ever perish. Their
unkindness, then, was intolerable, in refusing that his kindred and
descendants should sojourn with them, since they ought to have ascribed
the safety of themselves and their country, after God, to him, or rather
under the hand and with the blessing of God. But this disease has always
been flagrant in the world; and certainly it is good for us that evil
should ever be our reward from men for our kindnesses, that we may learn
in the performance of our duty to look to God alone, since otherwise we
are unduly addicted to conciliate favor and applause for ourselves, or
to seek after more earthly advantages. Still it was no common return
which the Israelites had liberally received during more than 100 years
for Joseph’s sake, that they lived comfortably in a proud, avaricious,
and cruel nation. Nevertheless, whatever happens, although we are not
only defrauded of all recompense, but even although many of whom we have
deserved well conspire for our destruction, let us never regret having
done rightly; and, in the meantime, let us learn that nothing is more
effective to restrain the desire of doing wrong, than those ties of
mutual connection, by which God has bound us together.  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) But, although the favor conferred by
Joseph had been forgotten by all, the shame and sin of ingratitude
cleaves especially to the king; in whom it was more than base to forget
by whose industry and care he received so rich a yearly revenue. For the
holy Patriarch, by buying up the land, had obtained a fifth part of the
produce as a yearly tribute for the king. But so are tyrants accustomed
to engulf whatever is paid them, without considering by what right it is
acquired.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p15"></span><span id="iv.i.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii-p16"></span>**9.** *And he said unto his people.*
<span id="iv.i.ii-p16.1"></span>That is to say, in a public assembly,
such as kings are wont to hold for consultation on public affairs. As if
Moses had said that this point was proposed by the king for deliberation
by his estates; viz., that because it was to be apprehended that the
Israelites, trusting in their multitude and strength, might rise in
rebellion, or might take advantage of any public disturbance to shake
off the yoke and to leave Egypt, they should be anticipated, and
afflicted with heavy burdens, to prevent their making any such attempt.
This Pharaoh calls  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) <span
id="iv.i.ii-p17.8"></span> “dealing <span
id="iv.i.ii-p17.9"></span>wisely with them;” for though the word <span
id="iv.i.ii-p17.10"></span>חכם<span id="iv.i.ii-p17.11"></span>,
*chakam*<span id="iv.i.ii-p17.12"></span>, <span
id="iv.i.ii-p17.13"></span>is often taken, in a bad sense, to mean “to
<span id="iv.i.ii-p17.14"></span>overreach with cunning,” still in this
case he concealed under an honest pretext the injury which he proposed
to do them, alleging that prudent advice should be taken lest the
Egyptians might suffer great loss through their carelessness and delay.
This was common with heathen nations, to profess in their counsels, that
what was right should be preferred to what was profitable; but, when it
comes to the point, covetousness generally so blinds everybody, that
they lose their respect for what is right, and are hurried away headlong
to their own advantage. They make out too that what is advantageous is
necessary; and so persuade themselves that whatever they are compelled
to do is right. For that specious yet fallacious pretext readily occurs,
and easily deceives, that, when any danger is apprehended, it ought to
be met. By the tragic poets, indeed, that detestable sentiment,
*occupandum esse scelus*<span id="iv.i.ii-p17.15"></span>, <span
id="iv.i.ii-p17.16"></span>“that <span id="iv.i.ii-p17.17"></span>we
should be beforehand in crime,” is attributed to wicked and desperate
characters; because our nature convinces us that it is unjust and
absurd; and yet is it commonly considered the best mode of precaution,
so that only those are accounted provident who consult for their own
security by injuring others, if occasion requires it. From this source
almost all wars proceed; because, whilst every prince fears his
neighbor, this fear so fills him with apprehension, that he does not
hesitate to cover the earth with human blood. Hence, too, amongst
private individuals, arises the license for deceit, murder, rapine, and
lying, because they think that injuries would be repelled too late,
unless they respectively anticipated them. But this is a wicked kind of
cunning, (however it may be varnished over with the specious name of
foresight,) unjustly to molest others for our own security. I fear this
or that person, because he both has the means of injuring me, and I am
uncertain of his disposition towards me; therefore, in order that I may
be safe from harm, I will endeavor by every possible means to oppress
him. In this way the most contemptible, and imbecile, if he be inclined
to mischief, will be armed for our hurt, and so we shall stand in doubt
of the greater part of mankind. If thus every one should indulge his own
distrust, while each will be devising to do some injury to his possible
enemies, there will be no end to iniquities. Wherefore we must oppose
the providence of God to these immoderate cares and anxieties which
withdraw us from the course of justice. Reposing on this, no fear of
danger will ever impel us to unjust deeds or crooked counsels. In the
words of Pharaoh, all is otherwise; for, having given warning that the
Israelites might, if they would, be injurious, he advises that their
strength should in some way or other be broken. For, when we have once
determined to provide for our own advantage, or quiet, or safety, we ask
not the question whether we are doing right or wrong.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p18"></span>*Behold, the people.* It not unfrequently
happens that the minds of the wicked are aroused to jealousy by the
mercies of God, acting like fans to light up their wrath. Nevertheless,
the very least proof of his favor ought not on that account to be less
agreeable to us, because it is made an occasion to the wicked of dealing
more cruelly with us. In fact, God thus attempers his bounty towards us,
lest we should be too much taken up with earthly prosperity. Thus the
blessing on which all his happiness depended banished Jacob from the
home of his father, and from his promised inheritance; but yet he
assuaged his grief with this single consolation, that he knew God to be
reconciled to him. So also his posterity, the more they experienced of
God’s goodness towards them, the more they were exposed to the enmity of
the Egyptians. But Pharaoh, to render them hated, or suspected, refers
to their power, and accuses them of disaffection, whereof they had given
no token. Yet he does not accuse them of rebellion, as if they would
take armed possession of the kingdom, but that they would depart
elsewhere; whence we may conjecture, that they made no secret of the
hope which God had given them of their return. But this seemed a
plausible excuse enough, that it was anything but just for those, who
had of their own accord sought the protection of the king, to be freely
sent away; and thus  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) Isaiah speaks
of it. (<span id="iv.i.ii-p19.1"></span>[Isa
52:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.ii-p19.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.i.ii-p20"></span><span id="iv.i.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii-p21"></span>**11.** *Therefore they did set over
them.* The Egyptians devised this remedy for gradually diminishing the
children of Israel. Since they are subjects, they may afflict them with
burdens, to depress them; and this slavery will weaken and decrease
them. But their power over them as subjects should not have been carried
so far as to impose upon inoffensive persons, to whom they had granted
free permission to reside among them, these new tributes; for they ought
first to have considered upon what conditions they had been admitted.
The exaction, then, by which Pharaoh broke faith with them, was in
itself unjust; but the crime to which he proceeded was still greater,
because he did not simply seek for pecuniary advantage, but desired to
afflict the wretched people by the heaviness of their burdens. For the
Israelites were not only compelled to pay tribute, but were put to
servile labor, as Moses immediately adds. As to the two cities, it is
doubtful in what sense they were called *miscenoth*  <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) This word is sometimes taken for cellars
and granaries, or repositories of all things necessary as provision;
but, as it sometimes signifies “fortresses,” it will not be an
unsuitable meaning, that they were commanded to build with their own
hands the prisons, which might prevent them from departing. For it is
clear from many passages (<span id="iv.i.ii-p22.7"></span>[Ge
47:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.i.ii-p22.7"></span>;
<span id="iv.i.ii-p22.8"></span>[Ex
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037.md)<span id="iv.i.ii-p22.8"></span>;
<span id="iv.i.ii-p22.9"></span>[Nu
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.ii-p22.9"></span>.md)
that Rhameses was situated in that part of the country, and we shall
presently see that the children of Israel went out from Rhameses.

<span id="iv.i.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.i.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii-p2"></span>**12.** But the more they afflicted them,
the more they multiplied and grew. And they were grieved because of the
children of Israel.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p3"></span>**12.** Quo autem magis premebant eum,
magis crescebat et augebatur: et anxietate constricti sunt propter
filios Israel.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p4"></span>**13.** And the Egyptians made the
children of Israel to serve with rigor.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p5"></span>**13.** Itaque adegerunt in servitutem
filios Israel cum saevitia.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p6"></span>**14.** And they made their lives bitter
with hard bondage, in mortar, and in brick, and in all manner of service
in the field: all their service, wherein they made them serve, *was*
with rigor.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p7"></span>**14.** Prelude amara illis fuit vita
ipsorum in servitute dura, in caemento, in lateribus, et in omni opere
agresti: quia servitium omne eorum quo serviebant illis, erat cum
saevitia.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p8"></span><span id="iv.i.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii-p9"></span>**12.** *But the more.* <span
id="iv.i.iii-p9.1"></span>Moses relates the contest between the mercy of
God and the cruelty of the king of Egypt. When, therefore, the wretched
Israelites were tyrannically afflicted, he says that God came to their
aid, and so powerfully that his interference was successful. Thus was
that wicked and deceitful design frustrated, which the Egyptians had set
on foot for destroying the Church. Thence may we, too, conceive the
hope, that whatsoever the wicked imagine against us will come to nought,
because God’s hand is greater, and shall prevail. But we must bear
afflictions patiently, because he would have us struggle against, and
rise under the weight imposed upon us;  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) <span id="iv.i.iii-p10.1"></span> and
because we know that it is the peculiar office of God to oppose himself
to unjust counsels, in order that they may not succeed, let us learn to
abstain from all deceit and violence, lest we wantonly provoke God. But
this passage is especially intended to console the believer, that he may
be prepared to take up his cross more patiently; since God is sufficient
to supply the help, to which the wrath of the wicked must finally yield.
What is said in the second part of the verse, that the Egyptians  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) <span id="iv.i.iii-p11.10"></span> were
grieved, means, that they became more anxious, as they saw that they
availed nothing, and that their unexpected increase threatened still
greater danger; for, since they feared the Israelites before they had
afflicted them, no wonder that they felt alarmed lest they should avenge
themselves when provoked. And hence the profitable instruction may be
gathered, that while the wicked proceed to horrible crimes in order to
insure their safety, the Almighty visits them with the very just return,
that thus their anxiety is augmented. Some render it, “the Egyptians
hated the people of Israel;” and so the word <span
id="iv.i.iii-p11.11"></span>קוף<span id="iv.i.iii-p11.12"></span>,
*kutz*<span id="iv.i.iii-p11.13"></span>, <span
id="iv.i.iii-p11.14"></span>is sometimes taken, but the construction of
the passage demands the rendering which I have given.

<span id="iv.i.iii-p12"></span><span id="iv.i.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii-p13"></span>**13.** *And the Egyptians made.* Thus
Moses informs us that, so far from being induced to kindness by their
fears, they were rather hardened, and spurred on to greater cruelty; for
the wicked do not perceive that God is against them, when their perverse
strivings are unsuccessful; and if this thought ever arises, still the
blind impetuosity of their folly hurries them forwards, so that they
doubt not to be able in their obstinate lust to prevail even in
opposition to God; as will be made clearer in the progress of this
history. The cruelty of the exactions is expressed, when he says that
“their lives were made bitter,” nothing being sweeter than life;
therefore, it appears, that their miseries were extreme and intolerable,
which made life burdensome. He confirms this in other words, and also
specifies their tasks, that they were engaged “in mortar and in brick,
and in all manner of (similar) services.” He twice repeats that they
were treated with rigor, *i* *e*., harshly.  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md)

<span id="iv.i.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.i.iv-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
1:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.i.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p2"></span>**15.** And the king of Egypt spake to the
Hebrew midwives; (of which the name of the one *was* Shiphrah, and the
name of the other Puah;)

<span id="iv.i.iv-p3"></span>**15.** Dixit etiam Pharao rex Aegypti ad
obstetrices Hebraeas, quarum unius nomen erat Sephera, alterius Puah.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p4"></span>**16.** And he said, When ye do the office
of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and see *them* upon the stools, if it
*be* a son, then ye shall kill him; but if it *be* a daughter, then she
shall live.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p5"></span>**16.** Sic dixit, Quando adjuvabitis ad
partum Hebraeas, et videbitis in illis quod sit masculus, interficite
eum: si autem sit foemina, vivat.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p6"></span>**17.** But the midwives feared God, and
did not as the king of Egypt commanded them, but saved the men-children
alive.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p7"></span>**17.** Timuerunt vero obstetrices Deum,
nec fecerunt sicut praeceperat illis rex Aegypti; conservaruntque
masculos in vita.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p8"></span>**18.** And the king of Egypt called for
the midwives, and said unto them, Why have ye done this thing, and have
saved the men-children alive?

<span id="iv.i.iv-p9"></span>**18.** Et vocans Pharao obstetrices, dixit
illis, Quare fecistis rem hanc, et servastis masculos?

<span id="iv.i.iv-p10"></span>**19.** And the midwives said unto
Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women *are* not as the Egyptian women; for
they *are* lively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p11"></span>**19.** Responderunt obstetrices
Pha-raoni, Quia non sunt Hebraeae muli-eres ut Aegyptiae: sunt enim
vegetae, et priusquam veniat ad eas obstetrix, pariunt.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p12"></span>**20.** Therefore God dealt well with the
midwives: and the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p13"></span>**20.** Benefecit ergo Dens
obstetri-cibus: et multiplicatus est populus, et roborati sunt
vehementer.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p14"></span>**21.** And it came to pass, because the
midwives feared God, that he made them houses.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p15"></span>**21.** Et factum est, quia timue-runt
obstetrices Deum, fecit illis domos.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p16"></span>**22.** And Pharaoh charged all his
people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and
every daughter ye shall save alive.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p17"></span>**22.** Tunc praecepit Pharao cuncto
populo suo, dicens, Omnem nature masculum in flumen projicite: om-nmem
vero foeminam vivam servabitis.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p18"></span><span id="iv.i.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p19"></span>**15.** *And the king of Egypt spake.* The
tyrant now descends from the open violence and cruelty which had availed
nothing, to secret plots and deceit. He desires the infants to be killed
at their birth; and commands the midwives to be the instruments of this
dreadful barbarity. We read of no such detestable example of inhumanity
since the world began. I admit it has occasionally happened, that, upon
the capture of a city, the conquerors have not spared even children and
infants; that is to say, either in the heat of battle, or because the
defense had been too obstinate, and they had lost many of their men,
whose death they would avenge. It has happened, too, that an uncle, or
brother, or guardian, has been impelled by the ambition of reigning to
put children to death. It has happened, again, that in the detestation
of a tyrant, and to destroy the very memory of his family, his whole
offspring has been slain; and some have proceeded to such cruelty
against their enemies, as to tear the little ones from their mothers’
breasts. But never did any enemy, however implacable, ever so vent his
wrath against a whole nation, as to command all its male offspring to be
destroyed in the midst of peace. This was a trial, such as to inflict a
heavy blow on men of the utmost firmness, much more to bring low a
fainting people, already weary of their lives. For, at first sight, each
would think it more advantageous and desirable for them to sink down
into an humbler state, than that the wrath of their enemies should be
thus provoked against them by the blessings of God. And it is probable,
such was the prostration of their minds, that they were not only sorely
smitten, but almost stupified. For nothing else remained, but that the
men should die without hope of offspring, and that the name and race of
Abraham should soon be cut off, and thus all God’s promises would come
to nought. In these days, in which we have to bear similar insults, and
are urged to despair, as if the Church would soon be utterly destroyed,
let us learn to hold up this example like a strong shield: seeing that
it is no new case, if immediate destruction seem to await us, until the
divine aid appears suddenly and unexpectedly in our extremity. Josephus
falsely conjectures that the midwives were Egyptian women, sent out as
spies; whereas Moses expressly says, that they had been the assistants
and attendants of the Hebrew women in their travail; and this erroneous
idea is plainly refuted by the whole context, in which it especially
appears that they were restrained by the fear of God from yielding to
the sinful desire of the tyrant. Hence it follows, that they were
previously possessed with some religious feeling. But another question
arises, why two midwives only are mentioned by name, when it is probable
that, in so great a population, there were many? Two replies may be
given; either that the tyrant addressed himself to these two, who might
spread the fear of his power amongst the others; or, that, desiring to
proceed with secret malice, he made a trial of the firmness of these
two, and if he had obtained their acquiescence, he hoped to have easily
succeeded with the others; for shame forbade him from issuing an open
and general command.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p20"></span><span id="iv.i.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p21"></span>**17.** *But the midwives feared God.*
Moses does not mean that they were then first affected with the fear of
God; but he assigns this reason why they did not obey his unjust
command, viz., because reverence towards God had greater influence with
them. And certainly, as all our affections are best directed by this
rein, so also it is the surest shield for resisting all temptations, and
a firm support to uphold our minds from wavering in seasons of danger.
Now, they not only dreaded this crime as being cruel and inhuman; but
because purer religion and piety flourished in their hearts; for they
knew that the seed of Abraham was chosen of God, and had themselves
experienced that it was blessed; and hence it was natural to feel, that
it would be an act of very gross impiety to extinguish in it the grace
of God. We must also observe the *antithesis* between the fear of God
and the dread of punishment, which might have deterred them from doing
right. Although tyrants do not easily allow their commands to be
despised, and death was before their eyes, they still keep their hands
pure from evil. Thus, sustained and supported by reverential fear of
God, they boldly despised the command and the threatenings of Pharaoh.
Wherefore those, whom the fear of men withdraws from the right course,
betray by their cowardice an inexcusable contempt of God, in preferring
the favor of men to his solemn commands. But this doctrine extends still
more widely; for many would be  <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md)
more than preposterously wise, whilst, under pretext of due submission,
they obey the wicked will of kings in opposition to justice and right,
being in some cases the ministers of avarice and rapacity, in others of
cruelty; yea, to gratify the transitory kings of earth, they take no
account of God; and thus, which is worst of all, they designedly oppose
pure religion with fire and sword. It only makes their effrontery more
detestable, that whilst they knowingly and willingly crucify Christ in
his members, they plead the frivolous excuse, that they obey their
princes according to the word of God; as if he, in ordaining princes,
had resigned his rights to them; and as if every earthly power, which
exalts itself against heaven, ought not rather most justly to be made to
give way. But since they only seek to escape the reprobation of men for
their criminal obedience, let them not be argued with by long
discussions, but rather referred to the judgment of women; for the
example of these midwives is abundantly sufficient for their
condemnation; especially when the Holy Spirit himself commends them, as
not having obeyed the king, because they feared God.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p23"></span><span id="iv.i.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p24"></span>**18.** *And the king of Egypt called for
the midwives.* He was not reduced to a more moderate course by equity or
mercy; but because he dared not openly expose to slaughter the wretched
and harmless infants at their birth, lest such atrocity should arouse
the wrath of the Israelites to vengeance, He therefore secretly sends
for the midwives, and inquires why they have not executed his murderous
command? I doubt not, however, that he was restrained rather by the fear
of rebellion than by shame.  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) In the
answer of the midwives two vices are to be observed, since they neither
confessed their piety with proper ingenuity, and what is worse, escaped
by falsehood. For the fabulous story which the Rabbins invent to cover
their fault, must be rejected, viz., that they did not come in time to
the Hebrew women, because they had warned them of the wicked design of
the king; and so it came to pass that they were not present when they
were delivered. What can be more tame than this invention, when Moses
shews in his narrative that they were guilty of falsehood? Some assert
that this kind of lie,  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) which they
call “the lie officious, or serviceable,” is not reprehensible; because
they think that there is no fault where no deceit for the purpose of
injury is used.  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) But I hold, that
whatever is opposed to the nature of God is sinful; and on this ground
all dissimulation, whether in word or deed, is condemned, as I shall
more largely discuss in explaining the law, if God grants me time to do
so. Wherefore both points must be admitted, that the two women lied,
and, since lying is displeasing to God, that they sinned. For, as in
estimating the conduct of saints we should be just and humane
interpreters; so also superstitious zeal must be avoided in covering
their faults, since this would often infringe on the direct authority of
Scripture. And, indeed, whensoever the faithful fall into sin, they
desire not to be lifted out of it by false defences, for their
justification consists in a simple and free demand of pardon for their
sin. Nor is there any contradiction to this in the fact, that they are
twice praised for their fear of God, and that God is said to have
rewarded them; because in his paternal indulgence of his children he
still values their good works, as if they were pure, notwithstanding
they may be defiled by some mixture of impurity. In fact, there is no
action so perfect as to be absolutely free from stain; though it may
appear more evidently in some than in others. Rachel was influenced by
faith, to transfer the right of primogeniture to her son Jacob; a
desire, undoubtedly, pious in itself, and a design worthy of praise,
anxiously to strive for the fulfillment of the divine promise; but yet
we cannot praise the cunning and deceit, by which the whole action would
have been vitiated, had not the gratuitous mercy of God interposed.
Scripture is full of such instances, which shew that the most excellent
actions are sometimes stained with partial sin. But we need not wonder
that God in his mercy should pardon such defects, which would otherwise
defile almost every virtuous deed; and should honor with reward those
works which are unworthy of praise, or even favor. Thus, though these
women were too pusillanimous and timid in their answers, yet because
they had acted in reality with heartiness and courage, God endured in
them the sin which he would have deservedly condemned. This doctrine
gives us alacrity in our desire to do rightly, since God so graciously
pardons our infirmities; and, at the same time, it warns us most
carefully to be on our guard, lest, when we are desirous of doing well,
some sin should creep in to obscure, and thus to contaminate our good
work; since it not unfrequently happens that those whose aim is right,
halt or stumble or wander in the way to it. In fine, whosoever honestly
examines himself, will find some defect even in his best endeavors.
Moreover, by the rewards of God, let us be encouraged to the confidence
of thus obtaining good success, lest we should faint at the dangers we
incur by the faithful performance of our duty; and assuredly no danger
will alarm us, if this thought be deeply impressed upon our hearts, that
whatever ill-will our good deeds may beget in this world, still God sits
in heaven to reward them.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p28"></span><span id="iv.i.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p29"></span>**21.** *He made them houses.*  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) <span id="iv.i.iv-p31.1"></span>It is not
at all my opinion that this should be expounded as referring to the
women, and I am surprised that many interpreters have been grossly
mistaken on so dear a point. All are agreed that the pronoun is
masculine, and therefore, according to ordinary usage, should refer to
males; but because the two letters <span
id="iv.i.iv-p31.2"></span>ם<span id="iv.i.iv-p31.3"></span> and <span
id="iv.i.iv-p31.4"></span>ן<span id="iv.i.iv-p31.5"></span> are
sometimes used interchangeably, they have supposed that the two clauses
of the verse must be connected, and both referred to the women. But
there is no need of this, since the sentence runs very well in this way:
— “The people multiplied and waxed very mighty, and it came to pass,
because the midwives feared God, that God made *them* <span
id="iv.i.iv-p31.6"></span>houses,” *i* *e*<span
id="iv.i.iv-p31.7"></span>., <span id="iv.i.iv-p31.8"></span>the
Israelites; as much as to say, that through the piety of these women,
they obtained an abundant offspring. And because some saw that a
suitable meaning could not be elicited by this false interpretation,
they have imagined that, by the inspiration of God, well-fortified
houses were built them by the people, where they might be secure from
the attacks of their enemies. Nothing can be more puerile than this
conceit. But lest readers should puzzle themselves unnecessarily on this
not very perplexing point, let us inquire what the Hebrews meant by this
expression, “to <span id="iv.i.iv-p31.9"></span>make houses.” When God
promises (<span id="iv.i.iv-p31.10"></span>[1Sa
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#035.md)<span
id="iv.i.iv-p31.10"></span><span id="iv.i.iv-p31.11"></span>) that he
will build for Samuel “a <span id="iv.i.iv-p31.12"></span>sure house,”
there is no question that he refers to a stable priesthood. Again, when
he declares (<span id="iv.i.iv-p31.13"></span>[2Sa
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.i.iv-p31.13"></span><span id="iv.i.iv-p31.14"></span>) that he
will build a house for David; and when a little afterwards we read in
David’s prayer, (v. 27,) “thou <span id="iv.i.iv-p31.15"></span>hast
revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee a house,” the royal
dignity is clearly to be understood. It is plain, too, from the address
of Abigail, that this was a common mode of speaking, where she says,
(<span id="iv.i.iv-p31.16"></span>[1Sa
25:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.i.iv-p31.16"></span><span id="iv.i.iv-p31.17"></span>,) “the
<span id="iv.i.iv-p31.18"></span>Lord will certainly make my lord a sure
house.” Now, it is quite unsuitable to the female sex and name that a
woman should be made head of a family. Whence it appears that the words
are forcibly  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) <span
id="iv.i.iv-p32.1"></span> wrested if we say that God made a house for
the midwives; but it will be most applicable to the whole people, that
it was multiplied by God, until it arose like a perfect building to its
full height. The conclusion is, that the Israelites owed to the
exertions of two women the fact, not only that they survived and were
preserved, but also that they flourished more and more, in order that
thus the glory of God might shine forth with greater brightness, since
he so marvelously preserved his people when very near destruction by
these weak instruments. But Moses puts the word “houses” <span
id="iv.i.iv-p32.2"></span>in the plural number, because the people were
built up by the increase of the offspring of separate families.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p33"></span><span id="iv.i.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p34"></span>**22.** *And Pharaoh charged.* If he had
not been transported with wrath and struck with blindness, he would have
seen that the hand of God was against him; but when the reprobate are
driven to madness by God, they persevere obstinately in their crimes;
and not only so, but, like the deranged  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) or frantic, they dash themselves with
greater audacity against every obstacle. It is indeed commonly the case
that cruelty, having once tasted innocent blood, becomes more thirsty
for it; nay, in general, wicked men, as if excited by their course, grow
hotter and hotter in crime, so that there is no end nor measure to their
iniquity; but here, in this very desperate rage, we must perceive the
vengeance of God, when he had given up the tyrant for the devil to
destroy him, whilst we also remember his design both to try the patience
of his people as well as to set forth his own goodness and power. The
tyrant, finding that his snares and deceit availed nothing, now shakes
off fear and flies to open violence, commanding the little ones to be
torn from the breasts of their mothers and to be cast into the river.
Lest there should be any lack of executioners, he gives this charge to
all the Egyptians, whom he knew to be more than ready for the work. He
spares the daughters, that, being enslaved and allotted to the
Egyptians, they might produce slaves for their masters, whilst by them
the races and names could not be preserved. Here it may be worth while
to meditate on a comparison with our own times. Antichrist, with all his
murderous agents, leaves in peace those who by their treacherous silence
deny Christ, and are prepared to embrace as slaves every kind of
impiety; neither does he exercise his cruelty, insatiable though it be,
where he sees no manliness to exist; and he exults and triumphs, as if
his end was gained, when he perceives any who had some courage in
professing their faith fallen into effeminacy and cowardice. But how
much better is it for us to die an hundred times, retaining our manly
firmness in death, than to redeem our life for the base service of the
devil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc03004.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="iv.i.i-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p20"></span><span id="iv.i.i-p20.1"></span> It may he
noticed, once for all, that Calvin’s references to Rabbinical
expositions of supposed difficulties are generally references to what
Sebastian Munster had inserted at the close of each chapter of his
version of the Old Testament, which is described as follows in the
title-page to its second edition, Basle, 1546: <span
id="iv.i.i-p20.2"></span>— <span id="iv.i.i-p20.3"></span>“En tibi
Lector Hebraica Biblia, Latina planeque nova Sebast. Munsteri
tralatione, post omnes omnium hactenus ubivis gentium editiones
evulgata, et quoad fieri potuit Hebraicae veritati conformata: adjectis
insuper e Rabbinorum commentariis annotationibus.” The notion that
Jochebed was included in the enumeration, is mentioned by *S.M*<span
id="iv.i.i-p20.4"></span>. in the annotations on <span
id="iv.i.i-p20.5"></span>[Ge
46:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.i.i-p20.5"></span><span id="iv.i.i-p20.6"></span>. In that verse,
as given in our authorized version, *which came* <span
id="iv.i.i-p20.7"></span>must be understood to agree with *house*<span
id="iv.i.i-p20.8"></span>, <span id="iv.i.i-p20.9"></span>the Hebrew
being <span id="iv.i.i-p20.10"></span>הכאה<span
id="iv.i.i-p20.11"></span>. The persons of that house properly of
Jacob’s own blood were seventy in number, as appears from the
enumeration in that chapter, including a daughter (v. 15) and a
granddaughter, (v. 17.) The number in Stephen’s speech is supposed by
many to be taken from the Septuagint, which says that nine souls were
born to Joseph in Egypt, and so makes the whole amount seventy-five,
both in <span id="iv.i.i-p20.12"></span>[Genesis
46](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.i.i-p20.12"></span> and
in <span id="iv.i.i-p20.13"></span>[Exodus
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.i.i-p20.13"></span>. But
Stephen spoke of the number of his kindred whom Joseph sent for, and may
reasonably be supposed to have meant thereby Jacob and his eleven sons,
with their wives and fifty-three male children, which would amount to
seventy-five souls. — *W*

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc03004.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="iv.i.i-p20.14"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p21"></span> The French translation thus explains this
figure: “de prendre le tout pour une partie, ou une partie pour le
tout,” — to take the whole for a part, or a part for the whole.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc03004.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="iv.i.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p29"></span> <span id="iv.i.i-p29.1"></span>שרף<span
id="iv.i.i-p29.2"></span>, rendered in *A* *V* *increased
abundantly*<span id="iv.i.i-p29.3"></span>, <span
id="iv.i.i-p29.4"></span>— <span id="iv.i.i-p29.5"></span>occurs <span
id="iv.i.i-p29.6"></span>first in <span id="iv.i.i-p29.7"></span>[Ge
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.i.i-p29.7"></span><span id="iv.i.i-p29.8"></span>, where it is
rendered *bring forth abundantly* <span id="iv.i.i-p29.9"></span>As a
noun it signifies reptiles. <span id="iv.i.i-p29.10"></span>מאד<span
id="iv.i.i-p29.11"></span>, *meod*<span id="iv.i.i-p29.12"></span>;
<span id="iv.i.i-p29.13"></span>in *A* *V* *exceeding* <span
id="iv.i.i-p29.14"></span>is repeated twice after <span
id="iv.i.i-p29.15"></span>עצמו<span id="iv.i.i-p29.16"></span>, *they
waxed mighty*<span id="iv.i.i-p29.17"></span>; <span
id="iv.i.i-p29.18"></span>but may properly be considered as augmenting
the force of each of the preceding verbs. — *W*

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc03004.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="iv.i.i-p29.19"></span>

<span id="iv.i.i-p30"></span> French, “un monstre incroyable:” an
incredible prodigy.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc03004.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="iv.i.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii-p10"></span> <span id="iv.i.ii-p10.1"></span>שרי סמים
*S* *M*<span id="iv.i.ii-p10.2"></span>., *Buxtorf*<span
id="iv.i.ii-p10.3"></span>, <span id="iv.i.ii-p10.4"></span>and most of
the modern lexicographers, agree with *C*<span
id="iv.i.ii-p10.5"></span>. in rendering these words *officers over the
tributes*<span id="iv.i.ii-p10.6"></span>; <span
id="iv.i.ii-p10.7"></span>though the LXX., and the *V*<span
id="iv.i.ii-p10.8"></span>., and the 21. *A* *V*<span
id="iv.i.ii-p10.9"></span>., render <span
id="iv.i.ii-p10.10"></span>מסם<span id="iv.i.ii-p10.11"></span> here
*labors*<span id="iv.i.ii-p10.12"></span>, <span
id="iv.i.ii-p10.13"></span>or *tasks* <span id="iv.i.ii-p10.14"></span>—
*W*

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc03004.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="iv.i.ii-p10.15"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii-p11"></span> Vel recondendae annonae, *C*., or for
storing corn.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc03004.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="iv.i.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii-p14"></span> “Nous faisant servir les uns aux autres;”
causing us to serve one another. — *French*.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc03004.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="iv.i.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii-p17"></span> <span
id="iv.i.ii-p17.1"></span>נתחכמה<span id="iv.i.ii-p17.2"></span>. In *A*
*V*<span id="iv.i.ii-p17.3"></span>., *Let us deal wisely* <span
id="iv.i.ii-p17.4"></span>If *C*<span id="iv.i.ii-p17.5"></span>. be
justified in saying that <span id="iv.i.ii-p17.6"></span>חכם<span
id="iv.i.ii-p17.7"></span> if often employed for the wisdom which is
evil, it is very much more often used for wisdom in a favorable sense. —
*W*

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc03004.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="iv.i.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii-p19"></span> “Comme de faict Isaie dit que les
Egyptiens ont eu plus de couleur de tenir le peuple de Dieu en
servitude, que les Assyriens, qui les sont venus molester sans titre;”
as, in fact, Isaiah says that the Egyptians had more excuse for keeping
God’s people in servitude than the Assyrians, who came to molest them
without pretext. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc03004.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="iv.i.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii-p22"></span> <span
id="iv.i.ii-p22.1"></span>מסכנות<span id="iv.i.ii-p22.2"></span>,
*miscenoth* <span id="iv.i.ii-p22.3"></span>The LXX. alone gives some
countenance to *C*<span id="iv.i.ii-p22.4"></span>.’s last
interpretation of this word, by rendering it <span
id="iv.i.ii-p22.5"></span>πόλεις ὀχυρὰς<span id="iv.i.ii-p22.6"></span>.
— *W*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc03004.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii-p10"></span> “A la facon de la palme;” like the
palm-tree. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc03004.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii-p11"></span> <span
id="iv.i.iii-p11.1"></span>ויקצו<span id="iv.i.iii-p11.2"></span>,
*C*<span id="iv.i.iii-p11.3"></span>., *And they were burdened with
anxiety* <span id="iv.i.iii-p11.4"></span>In *A* *V*<span
id="iv.i.iii-p11.5"></span>., *And they were grieved* <span
id="iv.i.iii-p11.6"></span>The verb <span
id="iv.i.iii-p11.7"></span>קוף<span id="iv.i.iii-p11.8"></span> is
generally taken for *to loathe* <span id="iv.i.iii-p11.9"></span>— *W*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc03004.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii-p14"></span> “Par lequel mot il intend inhumanite, ou
grande rudesse;” by which word he means inhumanity, or great severity. —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc03004.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="iv.i.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p22"></span> This somewhat harsh expression is thus
translated in Fr. ver., “veulent estre sages en despit de nature;” would
be wise in spite of nature.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc03004.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="iv.i.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p25"></span> Lightfoot, in his Sermon on Difficulties
of Scripture, (Pitman’s edition, 7. 209,) says, “How many, in expounding
that place, do roundly conclude, they told a lie to save their stake;
when, as I suppose, it were no hard thing to shew, that the thing they
spake was most true,” etc. And, again, in his “Handful of Gleanings out
of the Book of Exodus,” vol. 2. 357, he has a short dissertation,
headed, “The words of the Hebrew Midwives not a lie, but a glorious
confession of their faith.” In opposition to Calvin, he considers them
to have been Egyptian women.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc03004.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="iv.i.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p26"></span> “Qui tend a faire plaisir;” which tends
to give pleasure. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc03004.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="iv.i.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p27"></span> Mendacium dividitur ratione culpae et
finis; officiosum, jocosum, et perniciosum. — *S*. *Thom*., a. 2.
Mendacium officiosum dicitur, quod committitur solum causa utilitatis
propriae vel alienae; *e*.*g*., quis dicit, se non habere pecuniam, ne
iis spolietur a militibus. — *Dens*. *Tractatus de reliquis virtutibus
justitiae annexis*. Coloniae, 1776, tom. 3, p. 396. The subject is
discussed by Peter Martyr, *Loci Communes*, *Classis Secunda*, cap. 13,
with much reference to the Treatises of Augustin *de Mendacio*, in which
this passage is treated of. In Augustin’s letter to Jerome, 82.,
speaking of the “mendacium officiosum,” he says, “non tam usitatum est
in ecclesiasticis libris vocabulum officii.”

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc03004.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="iv.i.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p30"></span><span id="iv.i.iv-p30.1"></span> The
accuracy of Calvin’s criticism is undeniable, namely, — that as the
Hebrew pronoun is of the masculine form, ordinary usage would forbid our
considering this clause to be spoken of the midwives; and yet that the
masculine and feminine pronominal affixes, distinguished respectively by
a final <span id="iv.i.iv-p30.2"></span>ם<span
id="iv.i.iv-p30.3"></span> or <span id="iv.i.iv-p30.4"></span>ן<span
id="iv.i.iv-p30.5"></span>, are not used with such inflexible regularity
as to preclude all debate. In fact, Moses has used the masculine pronoun
<span id="iv.i.iv-p30.6"></span>ם<span id="iv.i.iv-p30.7"></span> at the
end of <span id="iv.i.iv-p30.8"></span>[Ex
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.i.iv-p30.8"></span><span id="iv.i.iv-p30.9"></span> of the next
chapter, where a feminine pronoun should have been expected. In the
clause under consideration, *V*<span id="iv.i.iv-p30.10"></span>. has
the ambiguous pronoun *eis*<span id="iv.i.iv-p30.11"></span>, <span
id="iv.i.iv-p30.12"></span>whilst the LXX. has <span
id="iv.i.iv-p30.13"></span>ἐποίησαν ἑαυταῖς<span
id="iv.i.iv-p30.14"></span>, <span id="iv.i.iv-p30.15"></span>which is a
departure from the Hebrew text in both words. — *W*

<span id="iv.i.iv-p31"></span>The gloss in the Geneva Bible is, —
“*i*.*e*., God increased the families of the Israelites by their means.”
Lightfoot, Harmony 2. 108, on the contrary, explains the expression,
“For which, their piety, God marrieth them to Israelites, for they were
Egyptian women, and builded up Israelitish families by them.” “Triplex
hic difficultas, (says Poole,) 1. Quis fecit? 2. Quibus? 3. Quid?” The
balance of comments appears to favor Calvin’s solution.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc03004.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="iv.i.iv-p31.19"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p32"></span> “Tire par les cheveux;” dragged by the
hair. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc03004.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="iv.i.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p35"></span> “Vertiginosi, vel phrenetici.” — *Lat*.
“Phrenetiques, ou demoniacles.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 2](cc03005.md)
