[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03061)  [Next](cc03063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span>The Ceremonial Supplements of  
the First Commandment

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>The Institution of the Passover

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span>EXODUS 12

<span id="vi.iii.i"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
12:1-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the Lord spake unto Moses and
Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying,

<span id="vi.iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen et ad
Abaton in terra Aegypti, dicendo.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p4"></span>**2.** This month *shall be* unto you the
beginning of months: it *shall be* the first month of the year to you.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Mensis iste principium vobis erit
mensium, et primus idem vobis in mensibus anni.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p6"></span>**3.** Speak ye unto all the congregation
of Israel, saying, In the tenth *day* of this month they shall take to
them every man a lamb, according to the house of *their’* fathers, a
lamb for an house.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Loquimini ad totum coetum Israel,
dicendo, Decima hujus mensis tollat sibi quisque agnum secundum domum
patrum, agnum domatim.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And if the household be too little
for the lamb, let him and his neighbor next unto his house take *it,*
according to the number of the souls: every man, according to his
eating, shall make your count for the lamb.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quod si minor fuerit familia quam
pro agno, assumet ipse vicinum suum qui propinquior fuerit domus suae,
pro numero animarum, singuli ad mensuram cibi sui numerabitis pro agno.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p10"></span>**5.** Your lamb shall be without
blemish, a male of the first year: ye shall take *it* out from the
sheep, or from the goats.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Agnus erit vobis integer masculus
anniculus, quem ex ovibus aut capris tolletis.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And ye shall keep it up until the
fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole assembly of the
congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et erit vobis in custodia usque ad
decimam quartam diem hujus mensis: mactabitque eum omnis coetus Israel
inter vesperas.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And they shall take of the blood,
and strike *it* on the two sideposts, and on the upper door-post of the
houses wherein they shall eat it.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et tollent e sanguine, ponentque
super duos postes, et in superliminari ad domus in quibus eum comedent.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And they shall eat the flesh in
that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; *and* with bitter
*herbs* they shall eat it.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et comedent carnem in ipsa nocte
assam igni, et azymos panes cum amaritudinibus comedent.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p18"></span>**9.** Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at
all with water, but roast *with* fire; his head with his legs, and with
the purtenance thereof.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Non comedetis ex co crudum, vel
coctione coctum in aquis, sed assum igni: caput ejus cum cruribus ejus,
et cum intestinis ejus.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And ye shall let nothing of it
remain until the morning; and that which remaineth of it until the
morning ye shall burn with fire.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Nec residuum facietis quicquam ex
eo usque mane: quod autem reliquum fuerit ex eo usque mane, comburetis.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And thus shall ye eat it: *with*
your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand:
and ye shall eat it in haste; it *is* the Lord’s passover.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Sic comedetis illum, lumbis
vestris accincti, et calceamenta vestra in pedibus vestris, et baculus
vester in manu vestra, et comedetis ipsum cum festinatione. Est Pesah
Jehovae.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p24"></span>**12.** For I will pass through the land
of Egypt this night, and will smite all the first-born in the land of
Egypt, both man and beast: and against all the gods of Egypt I will
execute judgment: I am the Lord.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Nam transibo per terram Aegypti
nocte hac, et percutiam omnem primogenitum in terra Aegypti ab homine
usque ad jumentum: et in cunctis diis Aegypti edam judicia: ego Jehova.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p26"></span>**13.** And the blood shall be to you for
a token upon the houses where ye *are:* and when I see the blood, I will
pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy *you,*
when I smite the land of Egypt.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et erit sanguis vobis in signum
per domos in quibus vos fueritis: et videns sanguinem ipsum transiliam
vos: nec erit in vobis plaga interitus quum percutiam terram Aegypti.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And this day shall be unto you
for a memorial; and ye shall keep it a feast to the Lord throughout your
generations: ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et erit vobis dies iste in
memoriam: et celebrabitis eum festum Jehovae in generationes vestras,
statuto aeterno celebrabitis eum.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p30"></span>**15.** Seven days shall ye eat
unleavened bread; even the first day ye shall put away leaven out of
your houses: for whosoever eateth leavened bread, from the first day
until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Septem diebus infermentata
comedetis: prima die cessare facietis fermentum e domibus vestris.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p32"></span>**16.** And in the first day *there shall
be* an holy convocation, and in the seventh day there shall be an holy
convocation to you; no manner of work shall be done in them, save *that*
which every man must eat, that only may be done of you.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et in die primo, convocatio
sancta, die quoque septimo convocatio sancta erit vobis: omne opus non
fiet in eis, veruntamen quod comedetur ab omni anima, illud tantummodo
fiet a vobis.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p34"></span>**17.** And ye shall observe *the feast
of* unleavened bread; for in this self-same day have I brought your
armies out of the land of Egypt: therefore shall ye observe this day in
your generations by an ordinance for ever.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Observabitisque infermentata:
quia hac ipsa die eduxi exercitus vestros e terra Aegypti: observabitis
*inquam* diem istum in generationibus vestris statuto perpetuo.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p36"></span>**18.** In the first *month,* on the
fourteenth day of the month at even, ye shall eat unleavened bread,
until the one and twentieth day of the month at even.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p37"></span>**18.** In primo mense, decimo quarto die
mensis, in vespera comedetis infermentata usque ad diem vicesimum primum
mensis in vespera.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p38"></span>**19.** Seven days shall there be no
leaven found in your houses: for whosoever eateth that which is
leavened, even that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of
Israel, whether he be a stranger, or born in the land.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Septem diebus fermentum non
invenietur in domibus vestris.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p40"></span>**20.** Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in
all your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Omne fermentum non comedetis: in
omnibus habitaculis vestris comedetis infermentata.

<span id="vi.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p2"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake.* Although the
institution of the Passover in some degree appertains to the Fourth
Commandment, where the Sabbath and Feast-days will be treated of; yet,
in so far as it was a solemn symbol  <span
id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) of their redemption, whereby the
people professed their obligation to God their deliverer, and in a
manner devoted themselves to His dominion, I have not hesitated to
insert it here as a supplement of the First Commandment. The observation
of the day itself will again recur in its proper place; it will only be
suitable to observe here, that God enjoined this ceremony in order that
He might wholly bind the people under obligation to Himself alone, and
that from it the Israelites might learn that they should never turn away
from Him, by whose kindness and hand they were redeemed. For by these
means He had purchased them to Himself as His peculiar people; and,
therefore, whenever He reproves them for declining from His pure
worship, He complains that they were forgetful of this great favor, the
memory of which ought to have been sufficient to retain them. In effect,
then, the celebration of the Passover taught the Israelites that it was
not lawful for them to have regard to any other God besides their
Redeemer; and also that it was just and right for them to consecrate
themselves to His service, since He had restored them from death to
life; and thus, as in a glass or picture, He represented to their eyes
His grace; and desired that they should on every succeeding year
recognize what they had formerly experienced, lest it should ever depart
from their memory. First, let us define what the Passover *(Pascha)* is;
 <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) I use its trite and ordinary
name. In its etymology there is no difficulty, except that the passage
*(transitus)* of God, is equivalent to His leaping over, *(transilitio)*
whereby it came to pass that the houses of the Israelites remained
untouched; for Isaiah,  <span id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) speaking
of the second redemption, unquestionably alludes to this place, when he
says, I will leap over Jerusalem. The reason, then, for this expression
being used is, that God’s vengeance passed over the Israelites, so as to
leave them uninjured. With respect to the twofold mention by Moses of a
passing-over, observe that the same word is not used in both places; but
*Pesah*  <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) refers to the chosen
people, and *Abar* to the Egyptians; as if he had said, my vengeance
shall pass through the midst of your enemies, and shall everywhere
destroy them; but you I will pass over untouched. Since, then, God was
willing to spare His Israel, He awakened the minds of the faithful to
the hope of this salvation, by the interposition of a sign;  <span
id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) whilst He instituted a perpetual
memorial of His grace, that the Passover might every year renew the
recollection of their deliverance. For the first Passover was celebrated
in the very presence of the thing itself, to be a pledge to strengthen
their terrified minds; but the annual repetition was a sacrifice of
thanksgiving, whereby their posterity might be reminded that they were
God’s rightful and peculiar dependents *(clientes).* Yet both the
original institution and the perpetual law had a higher reference; for
God did not once redeem His ancient people, that they might remain
safely and quietly in the land, but He wished to bring them onward even
to the inheritance of eternal life, wherefore the Passover was no less
than Circumcision a sign of spiritual grace; and so it has an analogy
and resemblance to the Holy Supper, because it both contained the same
promises, which Christ now seals to us in that, and also taught that God
could only be propitiated towards His people by the expiation of blood.
In sum, it was the sign of the future redemption as well as of that
which was past. For this reason Paul writes, that “Christ our Passover
is slain,” (<span id="vi.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>[1Co
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span id="vi.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>;)
which would be unsuitable, if the ancients had only been reminded in it
of their temporal benefit. Yet let us first establish this, that the
observation of the Passover was commanded by God in the Law, that He
might demand the gratitude of His people and devote to Himself those who
were redeemed by His power and grace. I now descend to particulars. God
commands the Israelites to begin the year with the month in which they
had come out of Egypt, as if it had been the day of their birth, since
that exodus was in fact a kind of new birth;  <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) for, whereas they had been buried in
Egypt, the liberty given them by God was the beginning of a new life and
the rising of a new light. For though their adoption had gone before,
yet, since in the mean time it had almost vanished from the hearts of
many, it was necessary that they should be in a manner re-begotten, that
they might begin to acknowledge more certainly that God was their
Father. Wherefore He says in Hosea,

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p9"></span>“I am the Lord thy God from the land of
Egypt, and thou shalt know no God but me,” (<span
id="vi.iii.ii-p9.1"></span>[Ho
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#009)<span id="vi.iii.ii-p9.1"></span>,
and <span id="vi.iii.ii-p9.2"></span>[Ho
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iii.ii-p9.2"></span>;)

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p10"></span>because He had then especially acquired
them to Himself as His peculiar people; and He speaks even more clearly
a little before,

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p11"></span>“when Israel was a child, then I loved
him,  
and called my son out of Egypt.” (<span id="vi.iii.ii-p11.2"></span>[Ho
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iii.ii-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p12"></span>Now, although it was common to the race
of Abraham with other nations to begin the year with the month of March;
yet in this respect the reason for it was different, for it was only to
the elect people that their resurrection was annually put before their
eyes. But, up to that time, the Hebrews themselves had begun their year
with the month of September, which is called in Chaldee *Tisri,* and in
which many suppose that the world was created; because immediately on
its creation the earth produced ripe fruits, so that its fecundity was
in perfection. And still there remains among the Jews a twofold manner
of dating and counting their years; for, in all matters which relate to
the common business of life, they retain the old and natural
computation, so that the first month is the beginning of Autumn; but, in
religious matters and festivals, they follow the injunctions of Moses;
and this is the legal year, beginning nearly with our month of March,
 <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) yet not precisely*,* because we
have not their ancient *embolisms;* for, since twelve circuits of the
moon would not equal the sun’s course, they were obliged to make an
intercalation, lest, in progress of years, an absurd and enormous
diversity should arise. Thence it happens that the month *Nisan,* in
which they celebrated the Passover, begins among the Jews sometimes
earlier, and sometimes later, according as the intercalation retards it.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p14"></span><span id="vi.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p15"></span>**3.** *Speak ye unto all.* A question
is asked on this passage, why, when one Lamb alone was offered in
sacrifice for the reconciliation of the Church, and God was propitiated
by the blood of one Christ alone, He should have commanded a lamb to be
slain in every house, as if there were to be a special sacrifice for
every one apart? The reply is easy; because, although all were protected
from destruction by the same blood, and the general rite united them
altogether into fellowship in the same expiation, yet still it was not
unreasonable that, by that special application, so to speak, God would
have every family separately reminded, so as to feel the grace more
peculiarly conferred on itself. Thus now-a-days we have all the same
baptism, whereby we are ingrafted in common into the body of Christ; yet
His baptism is conferred on every individual, that they may more surely
acknowledge that they are partakers in the adoption, and therefore
members of the Church. God, then, in commanding them to slay a lamb in
every house, did not wish to draw away the people to different grounds
of hope, but only to shew them in a familiar way, that all houses were
under obligation to Him, and that not only the salvation of the whole
people ought to be confessed to come from Him, but that His singular
blessing ought to shine forth in every family. The cause of his desiring
the neighbors to be added if the number of people in one house were not,
sufficient to eat the Passover, was that nothing might be left of it;
and this amongst others appears to have been the chief reason why the
whole lamb was to be consumed, viz., lest they should mix this sacred
feast with their daily food, and also lest its dignity should be
diminished by appearing in the form of tainted meat. Perhaps, too, God
provided this, lest any superstition should creep in from the
preservation of the remnants; and therefore commanded the very bones to
be burnt.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p16"></span><span id="vi.iii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p17"></span>**5.** *Your lamb shall be without
blemish.* We shall see elsewhere, that in all their sacrifices
prescribed by the Law they were diligently to beware, lest there should
be any spot or fault in them; and by this the people were reminded, that
the expiation was not legitimate, unless it possessed the utmost
perfection, such as is never to be found in men. It is not to be
wondered, therefore, that God should now require the Passover to be of
one year old, and without blemish, that the Israelites might know that
in order to propitiate God, a more excellent price was required than
could be discovered in the whole human race; and since such excellency
could much less exist in a beast, the celestial perfection and purity of
Christ was shewn forth by this visible perfection of the lamb, or kid.
It was with reference to this also that; they were commanded to keep it
up separate from the rest; of the flock, from the tenth until the
fourteenth day of the month. As to God’s will, that the side-posts and
lintel should be sprinkled with blood, by this sign He plainly taught
them, that the sacrifice would profit none but those who were stained
and marked with Christ’s blood; for this sprinkling was equivalent to
their bearing each one the mark: of His blood upon their forehead. And,
in effect, Christ, by the outpouring of His blood, has not delivered
all, but only the faithful, who sanctify themselves with it. That
internal sprinkling indeed holds the first place, which Peter teaches us
to be effected by the power of the Spirit, (<span
id="vi.iii.ii-p17.1"></span>[1Pe
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iii.ii-p17.1"></span>;) yet by this external sign the Israelites
were instructed that they could not be protected from God’s wrath,
except by holding up against it the shield of the blood. And this
corresponds with the lesson learnt above, that the same universal
sacrifice was offered particularly in every house, in order that thus
its peculiar instruction might affect them more seriously, when
generally it would have been uninteresting and ineffectual. I prefer to
be ignorant as to why He required the flesh to be roasted and not
boiled, rather than to invent such unfounded subtleties, as that Christ
was, in a manner, roasted on the Cross. A nearer approach to the truth
appears to me to be, that God desired thus to mark their haste, because,
when their implements were all packed up, the meat would be more easily
roasted on a spit than cooked in the pot. And this also is the tendency
of the precept respecting the manner of eating it, in which three things
are to be observed, the unleavened bread, the sauce of bitter herbs, and
the girded loins, together with the rest of the costume of travelers.
Undoubtedly God commanded the bread to be made without leaven on account
of their sudden departure, because He would snatch his people out of
Egypt, as it were, in a moment; and, therefore, they baked unleavened
loaves out of flour hurriedly kneaded.  <span
id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) It was required that the remembrance
of this should be renewed every year, in order that their posterity
might know that their deliverance was afforded them from above, since
their fathers hastily took flight without having made any preparation
for their journey; for any greater preparation would have thrown some
shade upon the divine grace, which shone forth more brightly on account
of their want of food. God would have them content with bitter herbs,
because hasty travelers, and especially in an enemy’s country, are
satisfied without delicacies, and whatever sauce they meet with is very
grateful to their taste, nor does its bitterness seem offensive to them,
as it does in seasons of abundance and ease. Possibly too they were
reminded of their former condition; for under so dire and bitter a
tyranny nothing could be sweet or pleasant. But their haste was still
more plainly represented by their eating the lamb hurriedly with their
shoes on their feet, and their loins girded, and leaning on their
staves. Men pass from their suppers to bed and to repose; and therefore
the ancients used both to take off their shoes and to lie down to it;
but the people’s necessity inverts this order, since they were compelled
to fly immediately from their supper. And hence the reason is subjoined,
“it is the Lord’s passover;” since they escaped in safety amidst the
confusion, and when the sword of God was raging. We must, however, bear
in mind what we have already said, that the use of this sacrament was
twofold, both to exercise the people in the recollection of their past
deliverance, and to nourish in them the hope of future redemption; and
therefore the passover not only reminded them of what God had already
done for His people, but also of what they were hereafter to expect from
Him. Consequently there is no doubt that the Israelites ought to have
learnt from this rite that they were redeemed from the tyranny of Egypt
on these terms, viz, that a much more excellent salvation still awaited
them. But this spiritual mystery was more clearly laid open by the
coming of Christ; and therefore Paul, accommodating this, ancient figure
to us, commands us, because

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p19"></span>“Christ our passover is sacrificed for
us,” to “keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of
malice, and wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth.”  
(<span id="vi.iii.ii-p19.2"></span>[1 Cor.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)<span id="vi.iii.ii-p19.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p20"></span>God therefore formerly wished the
houses, in which the Passover was celebrated, to be free from all
corruption; and far more does it become us now to take care of this,
lest the sacrifice wherewith Christ has redeemed us from eternal death,
should be polluted by any leaven of wickedness. To the same effect
 <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) is what follows, warning us
lest we should be devoted to the attractions of the world, and lest our
course should be delayed by the enticements of pleasure; but that we are
pilgrims on earth, and should be ever girt and ready to make haste; and
that although the cross of Christ be bitter, yet we should not refuse to
taste it.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p22"></span><span id="vi.iii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p23"></span>**12.** *For I will pass through the
land.* This refers to the first passover, the night in which they were
to be delivered from Egypt; and God expressly declares that He will be
the judge against the false gods, because it then especially appeared
how utterly unable they were to help, and how vain and fallacious was
their service. The absurd commentary of some of the Rabbins  <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) is tame and far-fetched, that the
idols should be cast down, because by the single miracle of their
redemption, all superstitions were magnificently overturned, and
whatsoever men believed about idols was condemned as folly and delusion.
God therefore affirms, that he would not only conquer the nation itself,
but its very gods. Perhaps Isaiah alludes to this passage when he says,

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p25"></span>“Behold, the Lord rideth upon a swift
cloud, and shall come into Egypt; and the idols of Egypt shall be moved
at his presence,” (<span id="vi.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>[Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>;)

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p26"></span>for wherever He has appeared as the
Savior of His people, He has asserted His glory in opposition to all
impious and corrupt religions.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p27"></span><span id="vi.iii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p28"></span>**14.** *And this day shall be unto
you.* This is spoken of its annual celebration, which was as well a
monument of their exodus as a symbol of their future deliverance. As to
its being called a rite, or ordinance for ever, *(edictum soeculi,)* I
admit that by this expression perpetuity is meant, but only such as
would exist until the renovation of the Church; and the same explanation
will apply to circumcision, as well as to the whole ceremonial of the
Law; for although by Christ’s coming it was abolished as concerns its
use, yet did it only then attain its true solidity; and therefore the
difference between ourselves and the ancient people detracts nothing
from this perpetual statute; just in the same way as the new Covenant
does not destroy the old in substance, but only in form. A little
further on, where he says, “save that which every man must eat, that
only may be done of you,” verse 18; the meaning is, that they must cease
from every work, except the preparation of their day’s food; and this
exception is expressly made, that they may not permit themselves to
violate their sacred festivals by other business.

<span id="vi.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="vi.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
12:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#024)<span
id="vi.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>, 43-49

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p2"></span>**24.** And ye shall observe this thing
for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever,

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p3"></span>**24.** Observabitis itaque rem istam,
(*vel* verbum istud,) in statutum tibi et filiis tuis usque in saeculum.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p4"></span>**25.** And it shall come to pass, when
ye be come to the land which the Lord will give you, according as he
hath promised, that ye shall keep this service.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p5"></span>**25.** Et erit quum intraveritis terram
quam dabit Jehova vobis, ut pollicitus est, tunc observabitis hunc
cultum.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p6"></span>**26.** And it shall come to pass, when
your children shall say unto you, What mean ye by this service?

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p7"></span>**26.** Erit autem quum dixerint vobis
filii vestri, Quis est cultus iste vobis?

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p8"></span>**27.** That ye shall say, It *is* the
sacrifice of the Lord’s passover, who passed over the houses of the
children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered
our houses. And the people bowed the head, and worshipped.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p9"></span>**27.** Tunc dicetis, Est sacrificium
Pesah Jehovae, qui transiliit domos filiorum Israel in Aegypto quando
percussit Aegyptios, et domos nostras eruit.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p10"></span>**43.** And the Lord said unto Moses
and Aaron, This *is* the ordinance of the passover; There shall no
stranger eat thereof:

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p11"></span>**43.** Et dixit Jehova ad Mosen et
Aharon, Statutum Pesah: Nullus alienigena comedet ex eo.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p12"></span>**44.** But every man’s servant that is
bought for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shall he eat
thereof.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p13"></span>**44.** Sed onmis servus viri pecunia
emptus, postquam ipsum circunciderit, comedet ex eo.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p14"></span>**45.** A foreigner and an hired
servant shall not eat thereof.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p15"></span>**45.** Advena et mercenarius non
comedet ex eo.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p16"></span>**46.** In one house shall it be eaten:
thou shalt not carry forth ought of the flesh abroad out of the house;
neither shall ye break a bone thereof.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p17"></span>**46.** In eadem domo comedetur: non
efferes extra domum foras e, carne, et os non confringetis ex eo.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p18"></span>**47.** All the congregation of Israel
shall keep it.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p19"></span>**47.** Universus coetus Israel facient
ipsum, (*vel,* mactabunt.)

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p20"></span>**48.** And when a stranger shall
sojourn with thee, and will keep the passover to the Lord, let all his
males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; and he
shall be as one that is born in the land: for no uncircumcised person
shall eat thereof.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p21"></span>**48.** Quod si inquilinus apud to
peregrinetur, ut faciat Pesah Jehovae, circuncidetur ei omnis masculus,
et tunc accedat ad faciendum illud, eritque sicut indigena terrae;
nullus autem incircuncisus veseatur ex eo.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p22"></span>**49.** One law shall be to him that is
home-born, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p23"></span>**49.** Lex una erit indigenae et
peregrino, qui peregrinatur in medio vestri.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p24"></span><span id="vi.iii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p25"></span>**24.** *And ye shall observe this
thing.* He again repeats the precept as to its annual celebration, and
expressly says, that, when they have come into the land, the
recollection of their deliverance is yearly to be revived by this rite.
He adds, however, what he had not before touched upon, that they should
also teach their children, since, without the aid of this teaching, it
would have been an unmeaning and useless spectacle. For doctrine may
justly be called the life of sacraments, without which no rigor remains
in them, so far are they from imparting to us any life. Lest, then, the
passover should be a lifeless ceremony, God in this place enjoins that
it shall not be mute; for in these words, “when your children shall say
unto you,” Moses does not mean that they are to wait until their
children make inquiry of their own accord, and anticipate the zeal of
their parents; but he only indicates the age when they are capable of
being taught. Yet, at the same time, he indirectly exhorts the children
to teachableness, when their age admits of their understanding what the
passover signifies, and enjoins them diligently to inquire into the use
of the ceremony; that thus religion may be handed down, and may ever
flourish amongst the people. Since, then, the Paschal Lamb corresponds
with the Holy Supper, we may gather from hence, that none can be duly
admitted to receive it, but those who are capable of being taught.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p26"></span><span id="vi.iii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p27"></span>**43.** *This is the ordinance of the
passover.* Since the passover was the sacred bond whereby God would hold
the elect people in obligation to Himself, He forbids all strangers from
partaking of it; because a promiscuous permission to eat of it would
have been an unworthy profanation. And in fact, since this is a
supplement to the First Commandment, it only addresses itself to those
unto whom is directed the preface of the Law, “Hear, O Israel; The Lord
our God is one Lord.” We know that among the Gentiles none but the
initiated  <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) were admitted to
their sacred rites. This was an absurd imitation  <span
id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) of this true and lawful ordinance;
because such a condition is only applicable to the institution of God,
lest strangers should promiscuously usurp the testimonies of His grace,
with which He honors His Church alone. For circumcision was then like a
hedge, which should distinguish heathen nations from the holy race of
Abraham; if, then, any should wish to celebrate the passover together
with the elect people, it was necessary that he should be circumcised,
so as to attach himself to the true God; though God did not merely refer
to the outward sign, but to the object, viz., that all who were
circumcised should promise to study sincere piety. Moses, therefore,
first of all, excludes all strangers who were unclean through their
uncircumcision; and then he adds two exceptions, viz., that servants
bought with money should be circumcised, (which was a necessary
requirement;) and that free and independent persons, if they chose to
embrace the same alternative, should also be received to the passover.
Hence it appears that this rite was not only peculiar to God’s people,
but that it was a sign of the future redemption. For strangers could not
testify that they were sharers in that redemption which had been
promised to the race of Abraham alone; and, therefore, the ceremony of
the sacred feast would have been vain and useless to them. Nor does
Moses refer only to that mixed multitude which had followed the
Israelites out of Egypt; but prescribes a law respecting all strangers,
who for many succeeding ages should come on business into the land. No
doubt but that, in celebrating the passover, they would have expected
another redemption; since that which was already vouchsafed to the
children of Abraham had not extended to them. For although they might be
reckoned among the people, yet did no portion of the land in consequence
fall to their lot, nor was their condition improved as to temporal
rights;  <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) but it was only that
they might become members of the Church. From the analogy between the
Holy Supper and the Passover, this law remains in force now, viz., that
no polluted or impure person should intrude himself at the Lord’s table,
but that only the faithful should be received, after they have professed
themselves to be followers of Christ.  <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) And this is expressed also in the
words, “One law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the
stranger,” etc., <span id="vi.iii.iii-p31.1"></span>[Ex
12:49](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#049)<span
id="vi.iii.iii-p31.1"></span>; viz., that the ordinance of the sacrament
should be solemnly observed by all, and that thus they should equally
participate in the grace offered to them in common, and that in this
respect the condition of all should be equal, though it differed as to
their inheritance of the land.

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p32"></span><span id="vi.iii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p33"></span>**46.** *Neither shall ye break a bone
thereof.* I am not certain why God desired no bone to be broken; unless
that this might also be a sign of haste; because people at table seldom
partake of the marrow, unless when their entertainment is protracted.
For I fear there is too much subtlety in the explanation which some
give, that the virtue of Christ, which is represented by the bones, is
not diminished whilst we feed on His flesh. But the former opinion which
I have glanced at above, as it is the simplest, so also it is by no
means unsuitable here; that they were commanded, when they were standing
in readiness for their journey, and eating hurriedly, to burn the bones
in order to prevent all delay. What God commanded as to the lamb, He
chose to have openly fulfilled in the person of His only-begotten Son;
that the truth corresponding with its type, and the substance with its
shadow, might shew that God would be reconciled to His people by no
other blood than Christ’s. Whence it is again clear that the ancients
under the Law were instructed by the Paschal Lamb as to the future
redemption, for otherwise this passage could not have been properly
accommodated to Christ. But when the Evangelist quotes it, (<span
id="vi.iii.iii-p33.1"></span>[Joh
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#033)<span
id="vi.iii.iii-p33.1"></span>,) he takes it for granted that thus was
typically shewn what God would bestow by His Son. Hence it came to pass
that He was distinguished by this visible mark, which proved Him to be
the true Passover. But, in order that no bone of Christ’s should be
broken, God’s providence wonderfully interfered. The soldiers were
commanded to hasten the death of Christ, no less than that of the
robbers, by breaking their bones. They execute their intention on the
robbers, but lest they should attempt the same on Christ, it is certain
that they were restrained by a divine power, so that the wholeness of
His bones might be a presage of the approaching redemption.

<span id="vi.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#000)<span id="vi.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p2"></span><span id="vi.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
13:3-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p3"></span>**3.** And Moses said unto the people,
Remember this day, in which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of
bondage; for by strength of hand the Lord brought you out from this
*place:* there shall no leavened bread be eaten.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p4"></span>**3.** Tune dixit Moses ad populum,
Memento diei hujus quo egressi estis ex Aegypto, e domo servorum: quia
in fortitudine manus eduxit vos hinc Jehova: neque comedatur
fermentatum.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p5"></span>**4.** This day came ye out, in the month
Abib.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p6"></span>**4.** Hodie vos egredimini mense Abib.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p7"></span>**5.** And it shall be, when the Lord
shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and
the Amorites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which he sware unto
thy fathers to give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou
shalt keep this service in this month.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p8"></span>**5.** Quum to introduxerit Jehova in
terram Chananaei, Hittaei, Amorrhaei, et Hivaei, et Jebusaei, de qua
juravit patribus tuis se daturum tibi, terram fluentem lacte et *melle,*
tum coles cultum istum in meuse isto.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p9"></span>**6.** Seven days thou shalt eat
unleavened bread, and in the seventh day *shall be* a feast to the Lord.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p10"></span>**6.** Septem diebus comedes
infermentata, die autem septimo solemnitas erit Jehovae.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p11"></span>**7.** Unleavened bread shall be eaten
seven days: and there shall no leavened bread be seen with thee; neither
shall there be leaven seen with thee in all thy quarters.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p12"></span>**7.** Infermentata comedentur septem
diebus: nec conspicietur apud to fermentatum, neque apparebit apud to
fermentum in universo termino tuo.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p13"></span>**8.** And thou shalt shew thy son in
that day, saying, *This is done* because of that *which* the Lord did
unto me when I came forth out of Egypt.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p14"></span>**8.** Annuntiabisque filio tuo eo die,
dicendo, Propter hoc quod fecit (*vel,* propterea quod hoe fecit) Jehova
mihi quum exirem ex Aegypto.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p15"></span>**9.** And it shall be for a sign unto
thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the
Lord’s law may be in thy mouth: for with a strong hand hath the Lord
brought thee out of Egypt.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p16"></span>**9.** Et erit tibi in signum super
manum tuam, et in memoriale inter oculos tuos, ut sit lex Jehovae in ore
tuo, quia in manu forti eduxit to Jehova ex Egypto.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p17"></span>**10.** Thou shalt therefore keep this
ordinance in his season from year to year.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p18"></span>**10.** Observabisque statutum hoc in
tempore suo quotannis.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p19"></span><span id="vi.iii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p20"></span>**3.** *And Moses said unto the people.*
He repeats what he had said more at length in the foregoing chapter,
respecting the unleavened bread, not so much to instruct as to exhort
them; for he had already expressed the matter with so much clearness,
that there was no need of further explanation; but it was useful to
stimulate them, that they might devote themselves with greater zeal to
their duty, and especially lest, after a longer lapse of time, their
ardor should, as usual, gradually abate. He therefore exhorts them, that
after they cane into the land, they should diligently observe what he
had before commanded. And from the context here, it is plain that the
two commands as to the sanctifying the first-born, and celebrating the
passover, had the same object, viz., that their deliverance should
retain the elect people in the special service of the true God.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p21"></span><span id="vi.iii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p22"></span>**4.** *This day came ye out.* He
compares the day of their coming out with the whole time of their
sojourning in the land of Canaan; as if he had said that they were
redeemed not to enjoy a mere transient joy, but that they might be
mindful of their blessing throughout all ages. He proceeds to eulogize
the extent and the fertility of the land again, principally for two
reasons. The first is, lest after such glorious victories pride should
possess their minds, and in the abundance of their good things their
eyes should be closed by fatness;the second, that by the very multitude
of their possessions they might be the more incited to the duty of
gratitude, and to the service of God. For it might be that the
conquerors of so many nations, and the lords of so rich and extensive a
territory would wax wanton, so as to be less devoted to God’s service,
unless they had been reminded that they owed it to God alone that they
had conquered so many peoples, and had obtained dominion over them. But
Moses shews them that, in proportion to God’s goodness to them, so would
they be the more inexcusable, if they did not earnestly labor to testify
heir gratitude. With this object he repeats the names of the nations, by
the destruction of which they were to become inheritors of the land; and
then adds, “a land flowing with milk and honey,” in order to arouse them
still more and more to piety by the great profusion of the blessings
which would be ever before their eyes. Those are entirely mistaken who
suppose that the month *Abib*  <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321)
is the same as *Ab,* which corresponds with our July. For it is evident
that the Israelites came out of Egypt in the month *Nisan,* about the
vernal equinox; of which circumstance, the keeping of Easter, handed
down by tradition from our forefathers, is an unquestionable proof. Now,
since the Hebrews borrowed from the Chaldeans all the names of their
months, which were in use two thousand years after, it would be absurd
in this place to regard *Abib* as a proper name, especially when, in
Scripture, we nowhere find the months designated by proper names. Since,
then, reason demonstrates that this word is applied appellatively, we
must inquire why it is applied to March or the beginning of April. Those
who translate *A bib* “ripening fruits,” have no ground for it, since
the word simply means “anything which grows;” hence it is applied to the
stalks of corn; and because in those warm climates the corn rises to its
height about the vernal equinox, from this fact, *Nisan* is called the
month of stalks. It is also a probable conjecture, (as we have already
said,) that the beginning of the year was changed, in order that the
nativity of the Church might receive more distinction; as if the world
were then renewed. The opinion of some that Noah came out of the ark in
the same month, so that the temperature of spring might receive him in
his new birth, as well as the other animals, I leave undecided as I have
done on <span id="vi.iii.iv-p23.11"></span>[Ge
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#000)<span id="vi.iii.iv-p23.11"></span>.
But if this opinion be accepted, there will be an anticipation
*(prolepsis)* in the name of the months; and in this there will be an
absurdity, because it was useful for the people to be accustomed to the
rites of the Law. But I do not enter into controversy about
uncertainties.

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p24"></span><span id="vi.iii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p25"></span>**8.** *And thou shalt shew thy son in
that day.* He repeats what we have already remarked, viz., an injunction
to parents to teach their children, that they may thus transmit the
service of God to their descendants. In the preceding chapter it was
said, “when your children shall say unto you,” etc.; and now he more
briefly commands that God’s goodness should be proclaimed, although none
should make inquiry respecting it; because parents ought to be
voluntarily disposed to educate their children in the fear of God. He
also repeats, as we have seen above, that the memory of their
deliverance should be annually renewed lest it should ever fade away,
since religion is easily neglected unless men are diligently exercised
in its study, tie uses a comparison when he says, “it shall be for a
sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes;”
as though it had been said that their redemption should be set before
their eyes in the passover, just as the ring which is on the finger, or
the ornament which is bound upon the forehead are constantly seen. For
which purpose also he had before desired that the precepts of the Law
should be inscribed both on the head, and on the hands, and fringes of
their garments. The sum is, that in the passover a monument of God’s
grace should exist, so that it might never sink into oblivion; just as
ornaments which appear on the forehead and on the fingers awaken the
attention by their being constantly beheld. But, if any should rather be
of opinion that Moses alludes to those who, conscious of their own
faithlessness, contrive means to assist their memory,  <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) I offer them no opposition; as if he
had said that, since they were disposed to forgetfulness, they should
use this remedy, to awaken themselves to gratitude. He will soon
afterwards repeat the same injunction, in connection with the offering
of the first-born. The following words, “that the Lord’s Law may be in
thy mouth,” confirm the opinion that the passover has reference to the
First Commandment. They intimate that it is not enough to perform the
external rite, unless it be associated with its proper object, viz.,
that they should devote themselves to God and to His doctrine. He
mentions the mouth, not because the main thing is, to speak or discourse
of the Law, for if piety lay in the tongue, hypocrites would be the best
worshippers of God; but he expressly requires that, when each one shall
have privately applied himself to the study of the Law, they shall also
mutually teach and exhort each other.

<span id="vi.iii.v"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v-p1"></span><span
id="vi.iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#000)<span id="vi.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v-p2"></span><span id="vi.iii.v-p2.1"></span>[Deut.
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#004)<span id="vi.iii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v-p3"></span>**3.** Thou shalt eat no leavened bread
with it: seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread therewith, *even*
the bread of affliction; (for thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt
in haste;) that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out
of the land of Egypt all the days of thy life.

<span id="vi.iii.v-p4"></span>**3.** Non comedas cum illo fermentatum:
septem diebus comedes cum illo infermentata, panem afflictionis: quia
festinanter egressus es e terra Aegypti: ut memineris diei quo egressus
es e terra Aegypti, omnibus diebus vitae tuae.

<span id="vi.iii.v-p5"></span>**4.** And there shall be no leavened
bread seen with thee in all thy coasts seven days; neither shall there
*any* *thing* of the flesh, which thou sacrificedst the first day at
even, remain all night until the morning.

<span id="vi.iii.v-p6"></span>**4.** Neque conspicietur apud to
fermentum in omni termino tuo septem diebus: neque pernoctabit de
carnibus quas sacrificabis in vespera die primo usque mane.

<span id="vi.iii.v-p7"></span><span id="vi.iii.v-p7.1"></span>[Exodus
23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#000)<span id="vi.iii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v-p8"></span><span id="vi.iii.v-p8.1"></span>[Exodus
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#018)<span id="vi.iii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v-p9"></span>**18.** Thou shalt not offer the blood of
my sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the fat of my sacrifice
remain until the morning.

<span id="vi.iii.v-p10"></span>**18.** Non immolabis cum fermento
sanguinem victimae meae: neque pernoctabit adeps agni mei usque mane.

<span id="vi.iii.v-p11"></span><span id="vi.iii.v-p11.1"></span>[Exodus
34](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#000)<span id="vi.iii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v-p12"></span><span id="vi.iii.v-p12.1"></span>[Exodus
34:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#025)<span id="vi.iii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v-p13"></span>**25.** Thou shalt not offer the blood of
my sacrifice with leaven; neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of
the passover be left unto the morning.

<span id="vi.iii.v-p14"></span>**25.** Non immolabis cum fermento
sanguinem sacrificii mei: neque pernoctabit usque mane sacrificium
solennitatis Pesah.

<span id="vi.iii.v-p15"></span><span id="vi.iii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.v-p16"></span>**<span
id="vi.iii.v-p16.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iii.v-p16.1"></span>** *Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with
it.* Because by this sign they were reminded of their having escaped in
haste, as it were from the very flames; therefore does Moses so often
enforce the prohibition of leaven. And here this reason for it is
alleged, viz., that their recollection should be recalled to the
affliction from which they were rescued; for they must needs have been
involved in the greatest straits, when there was no time even for baking
bread. Unleavened bread is therefore called “the bread of affliction,”
that the manner of their deliverance may the more enhance God’s grace.
He repeats what we have seen before, that none of the flesh of the Lamb
should be reserved to the following day. In the former passage from the
Book of Exodus, because Moses speaks generally, the command may at first
sight be referred to the perpetual sacrifice; but the latter passage
takes away all obscurity, by the express mention of the passover. We
need not wonder that in one place the word “fat” is used for the whole
carcase, or any part of the lamb, either by *synecdoche,* or that God
might commend the superior sanctity of the fat, of which they were not
permitted to eat, and which was burnt in all sacrifices.

<span id="vi.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
9](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#000)<span id="vi.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p2"></span><span id="vi.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
9:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p3"></span>**1.** And the Lord spake unto Moses in
the wilderness of Sinai, in the first month of the second year after
they were come out of the land of Egypt, saying,

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus est autem Jehova ad Mosen
in deserto Sinai, anno secundo quo egressi sunt e terra Aegypti, mense
primo, dicendo:

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p5"></span>**2.** Let the children of Israel also
keep the passover at his appointed season.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p6"></span>**2.** Facient filii Israel Pesah in
tempore suo.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p7"></span>**3.** In the fourteenth day of this
month, at even, ye shall keep it in his appointed season: according to
all the rites of it, and according to all the ceremonies thereof, shall
ye keep it.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p8"></span>**3.** Decimoquarto die mensis hujus
inter duas vesperas facietis illud tempore suo: secundum omnes titus
suos, et juxta omnes ceremonias suas facietis illud.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p9"></span>**4.** And Moses spake unto the children
of Israel, that they should keep the passover.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p10"></span>**4.** Alloquutus est itaque Moses
filios Israel ut facerent Pesah.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p11"></span>**5.** And they kept the passover on the
fourteenth day of the first month at even in the wilderness of Sinai:
according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did the children of
Israel.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p12"></span>**5.** Feceruntque Pesah in primo mense,
decimoquarto die ejusdem inter duas vesperas in deserto Sinai: secundum
omnia quae praeceperat Jehova Mosi, sic fecerunt filii Israel.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p13"></span>**6.** And there were certain men, who
were defiled by the dead body of a man, that they could not keep the
passover on that day: and they came before Moses and before Aaron on
that day.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p14"></span>**6.** Fuerunt autem quidam immundi
super anima hominis, qui non potuerunt facere Pesah die ipso: tunc
accesserunt coram Mose et coram Aharon ipso die.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p15"></span>**7.** And those men said unto him, We
*are* defiled by the dead body of a man: wherefore are we kept back,
that we may not offer an offering of the Lord in his appointed season
among the children of Israel?

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p16"></span>**7.** Dixeruntque homines illi ad cum,
Nos immundi sumus super anima hominis, ut quid prohibemur ne offeranms
oblationem Jehovae tempore suo in medio filiorum Israel?

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p17"></span>**8.** And Moses said unto them, Stand
still, and I will hear what the Lord will command concerning you.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p18"></span>**8.** Et dixit ad eos Moses, State, et
audiam quid praecipiat Jehova pro vobis.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p19"></span>**9.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p20"></span>**9.** Loquutus est autem Jehova ad
Mosen, dicendo:

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p21"></span>**10.** Speak unto the children of
Israel, saying, If any man of you, or of your posterity, shall be
unclean by reason of a dead body, or *be* in a journey afar off, yet he
shall keep the passover unto the Lord.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p22"></span>**10.** Alloquere filios Israel,
dicendo, Quicunque fuerit immundus super anima, aut fuerit in via
remota, ex vobis, vel ex generationibus vestris, faciet Pesah Jehovae.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p23"></span>**11.** The fourteenth day of the second
month at even they shall keep it, *and* eat it with unleavened bread and
bitter *herbs.*

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p24"></span>**11.** Mense secundo, decimoquarto die
inter duas vesperas facient illud: cum infermentatis: et herbis amaris
comedent illud.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p25"></span>**12.** They shall leave none of it unto
the morning, nor break any bone of it: according to all the ordinances
of the passover they shall keep it.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p26"></span>**12.** Non relinquent *quicquam* ex eo
usque mane, neque os confringent in co: seeundum onmes ritus Pesah
facient illud.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p27"></span>**13.** But the man that *is* clean, and
is not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the passover, even the same
soul shall be cut off from his people: because he brought not the
offering of the Lord in his appointed season, that man shall bear his
sin.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p28"></span>**13.** Vir autem qui est mundus, aut in
via non fuerit, et cessaverit facere Pesah, excidetur anima illa e
populis suis, quia oblation era Jehovae non obtulit tempore suo,
peccatum suum portabit vir ille.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p29"></span>**14.** And if a stranger shall sojourn
among you, and will keep the passover unto the Lord; according to the
ordinance of the passover, and according to the manner thereof, so shall
he do: ye shall have one ordinance, both for the stranger, and for him
that was born in the land.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p30"></span>**14.** Si vero habitaverit apud vos
peregrinus, et fecerit Pesah Jehovae, juxta ritum Pesah, et juxta
ceremonias ejus sic faciet: ritus unus erit vobis, tam peregrino quam
indigenae terrae.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p31"></span><span id="vi.iii.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p32"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.*
We may infer how great was the carelessness, nay, even the ingratitude
of the people, from the fact that God recalls to their recollection the
celebration of the passover, before a year had elapsed. For what would
they do fifty years hence, if there was any danger of their falling into
forgetfulness of it in so short a time? If they had been voluntarily
assiduous in their duty, it would have been unnecessary to repeat what
had been so severely enjoined even with threats. But now God, as the
year came to a close, reminds them that the day approaches on which He
had fixed the passover to be held; that the Israelites might more surely
learn that this solemn sacrifice is of yearly recurrence, and thus that
it was sinful to omit it. He then commands that all the ceremonies
should be diligently observed, and that they should not corrupt the pure
institution with any strange leaven. Finally, their obedience is
praised, because they had neither added anything to, nor diminished
anything from, God’s command.

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p33"></span><span id="vi.iii.vi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p34"></span>**6.** *And there were certain men.*
<span id="vi.iii.vi-p34.1"></span>A question is here introduced
incidentally, viz., what must be done, if any sudden defilement should
prevent any persons from celebrating the passover with the rest; since
God would expunge from amongst His people whosoever should not observe
this memorial of their redemption? Although the history is here touched
upon, yet because the doctrine as to the just and pure observance of the
passover is its main subject, nay, because this passage is a kind of
supplement to the general command, I have thought it proper to connect
them here. Moses says that certain men were found defiled over the soul
of a man,  <span id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) <span
id="vi.iii.vi-p35.1"></span> viz., either because they had touched a
dead body, or had gone into a house of mourning, or had been present at
the funeral of a dead man; for the Law accounted such to be polluted, as
will be seen elsewhere. Hence arose a kind of discrepancy; because,
whilst the unclean were not permitted to approach the sacred feast, it
was sinful to neglect this exercise of religion. Even Moses confessed
that he was perplexed as to this matter, since he sought for time to
inquire of God. The extraordinary modesty of the Prophet here displays
itself, in not daring to pronounce on a doubtful matter, although he was
their lawgiver. But he thus more clearly shewed that he by no means gave
the Law out of his own head, since he did not dare even to interpret it,
except after receiving a new command. God, therefore, by laying down a
special exception, takes away the contradiction (<span
id="vi.iii.vi-p35.2"></span>ἀντινομίαν<span
id="vi.iii.vi-p35.3"></span>). For to those, whom just necessity
excused, He assigns the second month, that they too might be partakers
of the passover, though they might not change the day at their own
option. By this privilege He not only relieves the unclean, but also
those who might be at a distance  <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) <span id="vi.iii.vi-p36.1"></span>
from the society of their fellows, concerning whom the same question
might be raised. For it was not suitable that any one should eat the
passover by himself; and even if a family were too small, the neighbors
were called in, that the number might be sufficient to eat the whole
lamb; and therefore, the traveler abroad, or even at home, if he was far
from his friends, had need of some remedy to preserve him from
punishment. Moreover, we must remember that this was not a concession to
despisers, nor was profane carelessness encouraged by this indulgence;
but it was only a provision for the necessity of those who had
inadvertently contracted defilement, or who could not escape <span
id="vi.iii.vi-p36.2"></span>it, or who were unexpectedly <span
id="vi.iii.vi-p36.3"></span>delayed on their journey. For they are said
to have complained of their own accord to Moses that, on account of
their uncleanness, they were prevented from eating the paschal lamb; and
hence we infer their pious solicitude. For such, then, another passover
is permitted; that, in the second month, they might recover what they
had lost without their fault. Meanwhile it is strictly enjoined on them
that they should change nothing in the whole ceremony; and on this
account, what we have already seen is again repeated, viz., that they
should eat it with bitter herbs, that they should not break a bone of
it, and the like. But, that the permission might not be extended too
far, the penalty is again denounced, if any, except for these two
causes, should have neglected to celebrate the passover. For we know how
men, unless they are restrained, permit themselves too great license in
searching out excuses. It is more clearly expressed here than before,
that the paschal lamb was a victim;  <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) <span id="vi.iii.vi-p37.1"></span> for
it is said in <span id="vi.iii.vi-p37.2"></span>[Nu
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#007)<span
id="vi.iii.vi-p37.2"></span><span id="vi.iii.vi-p37.3"></span>,
“wherefore are we kept back, that we may not offer an offering?” and in
<span id="vi.iii.vi-p37.4"></span>[Nu
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#013)<span
id="vi.iii.vi-p37.4"></span><span id="vi.iii.vi-p37.5"></span>, “because
he brought not the offering of the Lord.” I call attention to this,
because there are some who think that the paschal lamb was so slain as
not to be the offering of a sacrifice; whereas Paul distinctly teaches
that a victim was offered in it, and then the feast annexed to it; for
such is the meaning of his words, “Christ our Passover is sacrificed
<span id="vi.iii.vi-p37.6"></span>for us; therefore let us keep the
feast,” etc <span id="vi.iii.vi-p37.7"></span>(<span
id="vi.iii.vi-p37.8"></span>[1 Cor.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)<span
id="vi.iii.vi-p37.8"></span><span id="vi.iii.vi-p37.9"></span>.)
Whenever the word “soul”  <span id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) <span
id="vi.iii.vi-p38.4"></span>is used for a dead body, I take it to be a
tolerably common metaphor of the Hebrew language.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc03062.htm#fr_307) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p3"></span> Memorial. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc03062.htm#fr_308) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p4"></span>This paragraph not in French.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc03062.htm#fr_309) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p5"></span> <span id="vi.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>[Isa
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#005)<span id="vi.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>
*C.’s* <span id="vi.iii.ii-p5.2"></span>own translation of the words
rendered in our *A. V.,*<span id="vi.iii.ii-p5.3"></span> “passing over
he will preserve it,” *i.e.,* <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p5.4"></span>Jerusalem, is “transiliens servabit;” that of
Bishop Lowth is “leaping forward, and rescuing her.” In his note on the
passage, he expresses the opinion that the action described by the word
<span id="vi.iii.ii-p5.5"></span>פסח<span id="vi.iii.ii-p5.6"></span>,
in this chapter, is the “springing forward” of Jehovah the protector, to
defend his people from the destroying angel.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc03062.htm#fr_310) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p5.7"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p6"></span> <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>פסח<span id="vi.iii.ii-p6.2"></span> and
<span id="vi.iii.ii-p6.3"></span>עבר<span id="vi.iii.ii-p6.4"></span> in
verses 13 and 12. It is observable that *C.*<span
id="vi.iii.ii-p6.5"></span> now properly translates <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p6.6"></span>פסח<span id="vi.iii.ii-p6.7"></span>,
*transilire,* <span id="vi.iii.ii-p6.8"></span>in his own comment;
though, when commenting on it before, he had only used parts of the word
transire, which expresses no more than <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p6.9"></span>עבר<span id="vi.iii.ii-p6.10"></span>. — *W*

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc03062.htm#fr_311) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p6.11"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p7"></span> “Symbolum.” — Lat. “Signe ou Sacrement.”
— *Fr*.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc03062.htm#fr_312) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p8"></span> “Une facon de faire renaistre;” a means
of bringing about the new birth of the Church. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc03062.htm#fr_313) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p13"></span> There is a considerable abbreviation of
this passage in the French.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc03062.htm#fr_314) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p18"></span> “N’ayant pas logsir d’avoir du pain
ordinaire;” not having time to make ordinary bread — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc03062.htm#fr_315) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p21"></span> “Nous avons aussi a prendre instruction
touchant les herbes ameres, et equipages des voyageurs,” etc.; we must
also receive instruction from the bitter herbs, and their equipment as
*travelers.* — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc03062.htm#fr_316) <span
id="vi.iii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p24"></span> *C*. found in *S. M.* that Onkelos and
the Rabbis said the Egyptian idols were laid prostrate. — *W*.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc03062.htm#fr_317) <span
id="vi.iii.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p28"></span> “Ceux qui y estoyent sollennellement
introduits, et comme emmatriculez;” those who had been solemnly
introduced to them, and as it were, matriculated. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc03062.htm#fr_318) <span
id="vi.iii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p29"></span> “Vray est que cela n’a este qu’une
singerie: mais tant y a que le diable a voulu contrefaire ce qui est du
vray ordre et legitime, lequel doit estre observe en tous sacremens,
c’est puis qu’ils sont tesmoinages de la grace speciale de Dieu envers
son Eglise, qu’on ne les doit pas prostituer a tons venans;” it is true
that this was but a monkey-like imitation; but whilst the devil has thus
wished to counterfeit the true and legitimate, order, which should be
preserved in all sacraments, it is because they are the testimonies of
the special favor of God to His Church, that they must not be
prostituted to all comers. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc03062.htm#fr_319) <span
id="vi.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p30"></span> Omitted in the French.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc03062.htm#fr_320) <span
id="vi.iii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iii-p31"></span> “Fait protestation de leur roy et
Chrestiente;” made open profession of their faith and Christianity. —
*Fr.*

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc03062.htm#fr_321) <span
id="vi.iii.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p23"></span> <span id="vi.iii.iv-p23.1"></span>אביב
*C.*<span id="vi.iii.iv-p23.2"></span> has copied the Hebrew in his
text, writing it Abib, as a proper name; but in the *V.*<span
id="vi.iii.iv-p23.3"></span> it is translated “mensis novarum frugum,”
and in *S.M*<span id="vi.iii.iv-p23.4"></span>., “mensis maturescentis
frugis.” The name for July is <span id="vi.iii.iv-p23.5"></span>אב<span
id="vi.iii.iv-p23.6"></span>, which exists in Chaldee as a general name
for the fleshy fruit of trees. David Levi says, in his *Lingua Sacra,*
<span id="vi.iii.iv-p23.7"></span>that one of their Rabbis had observed
that Ab or Av is not to be found in Scripture, and that all the names of
the Jewish months, as Sivan, Nisan, etc., are not Hebrew but Chaldee;
for which reason we do not meet with them but in the books of Zechariah,
Daniel, Ezra, and Esther, which were written during the captivity; and
in these four books mention is made of seven of the months, but in the
Jerusalem Targum of Esther they all follow regularly. This is also the
opinion *of Aben-Ezra;* <span id="vi.iii.iv-p23.8"></span>but adds, “we
find three of the months named in Hebrew, viz., Zif, in <span
id="vi.iii.iv-p23.9"></span>[1Ki
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001)<span
id="vi.iii.iv-p23.9"></span><span id="vi.iii.iv-p23.10"></span>; Bul, in
same chapter, verse 38, and Ethanira in 8:2; which plainly shews that
they had names for all the months in Hebrew; but during the captivity
they adopted those of their masters.” **—** *W.*

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc03062.htm#fr_322) <span
id="vi.iii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.iv-p26"></span> “Et pourtant font des neuds a leurs
ceintures, ou quelque marque a leur bonnet;” and therefore make knots in
their girdles, or some mark in their cap. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc03062.htm#fr_323) <span
id="vi.iii.vi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p35"></span> “By occasion of the soul of a man.” —
*Douay Version*. “Ex funere.” — *Dathe.*

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc03062.htm#fr_324) <span
id="vi.iii.vi-p35.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p36"></span> Hors leurs maisons et pays. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc03062.htm#fr_325) <span
id="vi.iii.vi-p36.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p37"></span> Sacrifice. — *FR.*

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc03062.htm#fr_326) <span
id="vi.iii.vi-p37.10"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.vi-p38"></span> “The soul is here put for the body; and
that dead, as often otherwhere; see <span
id="vi.iii.vi-p38.1"></span>[Le
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#028)<span
id="vi.iii.vi-p38.1"></span>, and <span id="vi.iii.vi-p38.2"></span>[Nu
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#002)<span id="vi.iii.vi-p38.2"></span>.
Sometime the Scripture explaineth it, calling it a ‘dead soul,’ <span
id="vi.iii.vi-p38.3"></span>[Nu
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#006)<span id="vi.iii.vi-p38.3"></span>.
The Chaldee, Greek, and Latin keep the Hebrew phrase.” — *Ainsworth in
loco.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sanctifying the First Born](cc03063)
