[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03018)  [Next](cc03020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi-p1"></span>EXODUS 16

<span id="iv.xvi.i"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.xvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
16:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001)<span id="iv.xvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And they took their journey from
Elim; and all the congregation of the children of Israel came unto the
wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day
of the second month after their departing out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Profectae autem ab Elim cunctae
turmae filiorum Israel, venerunt in desertum Sin, quod est inter Elim et
Sinai, quinto decimo die mensis secundi post eorum exitum e terra
AEgypti.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And the whole congregation of the
children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et murmuraverunt omnes turmae
filiorum Israel contra Mosen et contra Aharon in deserto.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p6"></span>**3.** And the children of Israel said
unto them, Would to God we had died by the hand of the Lord in the land
of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh-pots, and when we did eat bread to
the full! for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill
this whole assembly with hunger.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et dixerunt ad eos filii Israel,
Quis det ut mortui essemus per manum Jehovae in terra AEgypti, quando
sedebamus juxta ollam carnis, et quando comedebamus panem in saturitate?
Nam eduxistis nos in hoc desertum, ut interficeretis congregationem hanc
fame.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p8"></span>**4.** Then said the Lord unto Moses,
Behold, I will rain bread heaven for you; and the people shall go out
and gather a certain rate everyday, that I may prove them, whether they
will walk in my law, or no.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Tunc ait Jehova ad Mosen, Ecce, ego
vobis pluam panem e coelo, et egredietur populus, et colligent summam
diei die suo, ut probem eum, ambuletne in lege mea an non.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p10"></span>**5.** And it shall come to pass, that on
the sixth day they shall prepare that which they bring in; and it shall
be twice as much as they gather daily.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p11"></span>**5.** In die autem sexto parabunt quod
inferant, et erit duplum prae eo quod colligent quotidie.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Moses and Aaron said unto all
the children of Israel, At even, then ye shall know that the Lord hath
brought you out from the land of Egypt:

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et dixit Moses et Aharon ad
universos filios Israel: Vespere scietis quod Jehova eduxerit vosa terra
AEgypti.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p14"></span>**7.** And in the morning, then ye shall
see the glory of the Lord; for that he heareth your murmurings against
the Lord: and what are we, that ye murmur against us?

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Mane autem videbitis gloriam
Jehovae, quia audivit murmur vestrum contra Jehovam. Etenim nos quid
sumus, ut murmuretis contra nos?

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p16"></span>**8.** And Moses said, This shall be,
when the Lord shall give you in the evening flesh to eat, and in the
morning bread to the full; for that the Lord heareth your murmurings
which ye murmur against him: and what are we? your murmurings are not
against us, but against the Lord.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et dixit Moses, Quum dederit vobis
Jehova vespere carnem ad comedendum et panem mane ad saturitatem, ex quo
audivit Jehova murmurationes vestras, quibus murmurastis contra eum.
Quid enim? non contra nos murmurastis sed contra Jehovam.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p18"></span><span id="iv.xvi.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p19"></span>**1.** *And they took their journey.*
Moses relates, that, when after a month the people came to the
wilderness of Sin near Mount Sinai, and when their provision failed,
they rebelled against God and Moses, and manna, a new and unusual kind
of food, was given them from heaven. It is uncertain with what foods
they were sustained in the meantime. Some conjecture that they brought
sufficient flour from Egypt for their supply; but to me it seems
probable that other kinds of food were used in addition; for the
barrenness of the country through which they passed was not so great but
that it produced at least fruits and herbs. Besides, we may readily
suppose, from the battle, in which it will soon be related that they
conquered the Amalekites, that they were not far from an habitable
territory. But, when they were carried away farther into the desert, all
their provision began to fail, because they had no more commerce with
the inhabitants. Hence their sedition was increased, because hunger
pressed upon them more than usual. For, although we shall afterwards be
able to gather from the context that there was some previous disturbance
in the camp, still famine, which now began to affect them more, because
in these uncultivated and miserable regions the barrenness on all sides
alarmed them, gave strength to their murmurs and impatience.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p20"></span><span id="iv.xvi.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p21"></span>**2.** *And the whole congregation.*
Moses says not that some of the people only murmured, but that they were
all gathered into mobs as in a conspiracy, or, at any rate, as they were
arranged by hundreds and thousands, that they murmured with one consent.
Yet the universal term admits of exception; nor need we suppose that all
to a man were comprehended in this impious rebellion. The best remedy
for their hunger would have been to pray to God, whom they had found to
be in all respects a bountiful Father, and whom they had heard to have
wonderfully provided for their parents, when the Egyptians and
inhabitants of Canaan were wasting with hunger in such rich and fertile
places. If they had only been persuaded that the earth is made fertile
by God’s blessing, it would at the same time have occurred to them, that
it is His peculiar office to feed the hungry, and immediately they would
have directed their prayers to Him; now, their unbelief betrays itself
in their turbulent clamor. It is indeed astonishing that wretched men,
whom their necessity should have humiliated, rose insolently against
God, and that their hunger, so far from bending their hearts to
gentleness, was the very incentive of their arrogance. But this is too
common with the wicked, (because they do not trust that God is
reconciled to them,) to neglect prayer, and to cry out in confusion, to
utter their curses, and to rush, like mad dogs, furiously here and
there. This was the case of the Israelites in the wilderness of Sin. The
want of all things, which presents itself to them, is an invitation to
them from God, that they may feel His power, by which He created the
world out of nothing, to be independent of all foreign assistance for
the maintenance of mankind. But despair seizes upon their faithless
minds, so that they reject His aid and beneficence. And not only so, but
their malignity and ingratitude instigates them to quarrel with Moses;
and this is the sum of their complaint, that they were dragged away from
abundance of bread and meat, that they might perish in the desert of
hunger. Therefore they call Moses and Aaron, by whose hand and means
they had been delivered, their murderers.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p22"></span><span id="iv.xvi.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p23"></span>**4.** *Then said the Lord unto Moses.*
It is probable that Moses passes over much in silence, because it is not
consistent that the insolence of the people was left without even a
single word of chastisement. For, although God in His extraordinary
kindness gave food to these depraved and wicked men, who were unworthy
of the sunlight and the common air, still He was without doubt unwilling
to foster their sin by His silence, and, whilst He pardoned their
ingratitude, sharply reproved their forwardness. But Moses, passing over
this, proceeds to a history especially worthy of narration, how God fed
this wretched people with bread from heaven, when He made the manna to
fall from the clouds like dew. I call it “the bread of heaven,” with the
Prophet, (<span id="iv.xvi.i-p23.1"></span>[Ps
78:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#024)<span
id="iv.xvi.i-p23.1"></span>,) who honors it with this magnificent title,
and extols God’s bounty towards His people, as if they had been admitted
to the tables of angels. For St. Paul calls the manna “spiritual meat,”
(<span id="iv.xvi.i-p23.2"></span>[1Co
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003)<span
id="iv.xvi.i-p23.2"></span>,) in another sense, viz., because it was a
type of the flesh of Christ, which feeds our minds unto the hope of
eternal life. The Prophet, however, makes no allusion to that mystery,
but alleges in this circumstance an accusation against the people,
because they not only despised the food which springs from the earth,
but also were disgusted with that bread, for which they saw the heavens
in a manner opened. But on this point somewhat must be hereafter
repeated. God now declares that He will give them daily their allowance,
as it were, that in this way He may prove the obedience of His people.
Though on this latter head interpreters are not agreed; for some
understand it as if God, by kindly providing food for the Israelites,
would bind them to obedience by His bounty; as though He should say, “I
will try whether they are altogether intractable or submissive; for
nothing shall be wanting to retain them in the way of duty.” But others
confine the meaning of the word to “their daily food;” for that this was
the proof of their fear and reverence, that they should not desire more
than was given them, but that they should he contented with their daily
provision, and thus depend on the providence of God. The former sense
pleases me best, and I have endeavored to explain it more clearly than
it can be understood from others. There is no occasion to enter into
controversy about the word “Law,”  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) for (as we shall soon see) it is used
to express the measure or rule of a pious and just life. Therefore, He
says, that He will know whether they are disposed to honor Him, and to
submit themselves to His command. But if any one prefer to embrace the
other sense, I leave him to enjoy his own opinion.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p25"></span><span id="iv.xvi.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p26"></span>**5.** *And it shall come to pass.*
Because mention is immediately made of the Sabbath, some would confine
to its observance what is said respecting the law, and extract this
sense from it, that God made the experiment whether the people would
faithfully observe the rest enjoined to them on each seventh day. But
there is a poorness in this explanation. The fact is, that after God had
promised daily supplies to His people, He now adds the exception, viz.,
that on the sixth day they should collect a double quantity, and lay
aside half of it for the use of the Sabbath. Thus the seventh day was
really hallowed before the promulgation of the Law, although it is
questionable whether it had already been observed by the patriarchs. It
appears probable that it was; but I am unwilling to make it a matter of
contention.

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p27"></span><span id="iv.xvi.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p28"></span>**6.** *And Moses and Aaron said.* The
statement that the people should know that their coming out of the land
of Egypt was the Lord’s work, is opposed to their wicked taunt, in which
they had complained of being betrayed by Moses and Aaron, when they had
been brought into the wilderness. They therefore answer, that God would
openly show that He was the author of their deliverance, that they
should make no more complaints against His ministers. But although a
sharp reproof is implied, still it is joined with a promise of God’s
continued favor. They therefore admonish them, that by this event it
would be proved that God was the Leader and Deliverer of the Israelites,
because he does not leave the work of His hands unfinished. (<span
id="iv.xvi.i-p28.1"></span>[Ps
138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)<span
id="iv.xvi.i-p28.1"></span>.) The continuance, then, of His favor, shows
that the same God, who proceeds in the prosecution of His powerful work,
had from the first begun what He carries on even to the end. The
knowledge, which they were to receive in the evening, refers to the
quails, in which God gave an instance of His power; but, because it
shone forth more brightly next day in the manna, Moses says, that in the
morning they should see the glory of the Lord. But, lest they should be
induced by this favor to think highly of themselves, and should flatter
themselves in their iniquity, he reminds them that this was not given
them in return for their sins, but that God contended after this manner
with their obstinate perversity; as much as to say that God would appear
to them, so that, beholding by the brightness of His countenance their
own impiety, they might altogether be filled with shame, and feel the
profaneness of the rebellion with which they had dared to insult Him.
And, lest they should prevaricate, and say that they had only made an
attack upon Moses and Aaron, he gives the reason why he declares them to
have waged war against God Himself, viz., because neither he nor his
brother had acted of themselves, nor had personally assumed anything in
the matter; for this is the meaning of the words, “what are we, that ye
murmur against us?” as if he disclaimed any separation from God. Now,
since by this testimony he proves himself to have been a faithful
servant; of God, we gather that none may rightly claim honor for
themselves in the Church, so as to be accounted lawful pastors, but
those who are divinely called, and thus have God. as the authorizer of
their office, and who advance nothing of themselves, but only execute
what is commanded them. Whilst such as these  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) may not be despised without
dishonoring God, whose person they represent, so do they, who exercise
dominion with no authority but their own, vainly alarm the simple in
God’s name, and  <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) instead of the
truth, are only wearing’ an empty mask. The eighth verso merely contains
an exposition of the same sentiment, except that he goes on to say in
connection, that the Israelites, when in the evening they shall have
been filled with flesh, and when bread shall have been given them in the
morning, would perceive that God is their Deliverer. Then comes the
*antithesis*, “Your murmurings are not against us, but against the
Lord.”

<span id="iv.xvi.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
16:9-18](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#009)<span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p2"></span>**9.** And Moses spoke unto Aaron, Say
unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, Come near before
the Lord: for he hath heard your murmurings.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p3"></span>**9.** Et dixit Moses ad Aharon, Dic ad
universum coetum filiorum Israel, Accedite in conspectum Jehovae quia
audivit murmurationes vestras.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p4"></span>**10.** And it came to pass, as Aaron
spoke unto the whole congregation of the children of Israel, that they
looked toward the wilderness, mid, behold, the glory of the Lord
appeared in the cloud.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p5"></span>**10.** Et factum est quum loqueretur
Aharon ad universum coetum filiorum Israel, ut respicerent versus
desertum: et ecce, gloria Jehovae apparuit in nube.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p6"></span>**11.** And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p7"></span>**11.** Loquutus enim fuerat Jehova ad
Mosen, dicendo,

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p8"></span>**12.** I have heard the murmurings of
the children of Israel: speak unto them, saying, At even ye shall eat
flesh, and in the morning ye shall he filled with bread; and ye shall
know that I am the Lord your God.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p9"></span>**12.** Audivi murmurationes filiorum
Israel: alloquere eos, dicendo, Inter vesperas comedetis carnem, et mane
saturabimini pane: itaque scietis quod ego sim Jehova Deus vester.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p10"></span>**13.** And it came to pass, that at
even the quails came up, and covered the camp; and in the morning the
dew lay round about the host.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p11"></span>**13.** Factum est ergo vespere ut
ascenderet coturnix, et operiret castra, mane autem esset descensio
roris circum castra.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p12"></span>**14.** And when the dew that lay was
gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness there lay a small round
thing, as small as the hoarfrost on the ground.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p13"></span>**14.** Et quum evanesceret descensio
roris, ecce in superficie deserti minutum rotundum, minutum quasi pruina
super terram.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p14"></span>**15.** And when the children of Israel
saw it, they said one to another, It is manna: for they wist not what it
was. And Moses said them, This is the bread which the Lord hath given
you to eat.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p15"></span>**15.** Et videntes filii Israel,
dixerunt quisque ad proximum suum, Est Man. Nesciebant enim quid esset.
Et dixit Moses ad eos, Hic est panis quem dedit Jehova vobis comedendum.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p16"></span>**16.** This is the thing which the Lord
hath commanded, Gather of it every man according to his eating, an omer
for every man, according to the number of your persons; take ye every
man for them which are in his tents.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p17"></span>**16.** Hoc est edictum quod mandat
Jehova, Colligite ex eo quisque in mensuram victus sui homer, pro summa
numeri animarum vestrarum: quisque pro iis qui sunt in tabernaculo suo
accipite.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p18"></span>**17.** And the children of Israel did
so, and gathered, some more, some less.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p19"></span>**17.** Atque ita fecerunt filii Israel
et collegerunt, alii multum, alii exiguum.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p20"></span>**18.** And when they did mete it with
an omer, he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered
little had no lack: they gathered every man according to his eating.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p21"></span>**18.** Et quum metirentur per homer,
non exeedebat is qui multum collegerat, nec minus habebat qui parum
collegerat: quisque ad mensuram victus sui colligebat.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p22"></span><span id="iv.xvi.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p23"></span>**9.** *And Moses spoke unto Aaron.*
There is no question but that he here cites them as criminals before the
tribunal of God, as if he had said that they were mistaken, if they
thought that their murmurings were unobserved. Nevertheless, he alludes
also to the cloud, which was the visible symbol of God’s presence; and
thus reproves their folly in not hesitating to provoke a God, who was so
near, and almost; before their very eyes. First, then, we must remark,
that they were in a manner drawn from their hiding-places, that their
pride might be broken; and, secondly, that their stupidity was rebuked,
for not reverencing God though present. And this is made more clear by
the context, where it is said, that the glory of the Lord appeared
“toward the wilderness,” by which word I imagine the less habitable
region to be indicated. For, although the country on all sides was
barren, and uninhabited, yet on one side the Amalekites were near, and
other tribes, as we shall soon see. The glory of God I suppose to mean,
not that which they saw daily, but which was now manifested to them in
an unusual manner to inspire alarm; because they were hardened against
its ordinary manifestations.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p24"></span><span id="iv.xvi.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p25"></span>**11.** *And the Lord spoke*  <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) *unto Moses* Moses here shows that he
had done nothing without God’s command, but had faithfully and modestly
discharged the office of a minister. And, surely, unless he had spoken
according to God’s word, he would have been rash in promising what we
have already seen. Therefore, this is put last in order, though it
happened first; and, consequently, I have used  <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) the causal particle instead of the
copula. The sum is, as before, that God will vindicate His own glory,
which the people had impiously impugned, and that He would do good to
them, unworthy as they were, in order to glorify His name; as if He had
said, After you shall have been convicted of ingratitude, you will then
be obliged to confess that I am really the only God, and at the same
time your Father.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p28"></span><span id="iv.xvi.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p29"></span>**13.** *And it came to pass.* We shall
afterwards see, that, when from weariness of the manna they began to
desire meat, quails were again given them; but, while they were yet in
their mouths, a terrible punishment was inflicted upon their gluttony.
When here they had only complained of their want of food, God for once
satiated them with flesh, that He might show them that He has in His
hand all kinds and quantity of meats. Yet, it was His will that they
should be content with one single sort; for, although they had
complained that they were deprived of flesh, at the pots of which they
had formerly sat, yet it was not reasonable that He should comply
altogether with their unholy desires. Besides, it was profitable for
them that certain bounds should be set, that they might learn dependence
on His will.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p30"></span><span id="iv.xvi.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p31"></span>**14.** *And when the dew that lay was
gone up.* The shape of the manna is here briefly described, viz., that
it was like the dew condensed into small round grains. Its taste will be
also mentioned elsewhere; but here it was sufficient to show, that this
fecundity was not natural, but miraculously given to the clouds, so that
they should daily rain manna. For as to the idle talk of certain profane
persons,  <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) that the manna falls
naturally in certain countries, who would thus display the force of
their genius, as if they convicted Moses of falsehood, because he
mightily extols a mere trifle, — it! is all an absurdity which may be
easily refuted. It is indeed true, that in certain parts of the world
they collect white grains, to which the name of manna has been vulgarly
given, but  <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) which one of the
Rabbins will have to be Arabic; but it is neither a food, nor does it
drop daily from the clouds, nor has it anything in common with this
food, which the Prophet properly dignifies with the title of “angels’
food,” because God, who opens the bowels of the earth for the ordinary
food of man, at that time made provision for the nourishment of His
people from heaven. And that it may appear beyond a doubt that this food
was then created miraculously, and contrary to the order of nature,
these points are to be taken into consideration. First, It did not
appear in the wilderness before the hour assigned by Moses in obedience
to God’s command. Secondly, No change of weather prevented the manna
from dropping in a regular measure; neither frost, nor rain, nor heat,
nor winter, nor summer, interrupted the course of its distillation.
Thirdly, A quantity sufficient for the immense multitude was found every
day, when they took up an omer for every individual. Again, on the sixth
day, the quantity was doubled, that they might lay by a second omer for
their Sabbath food. Fifthly, If they preserved any beyond their due
allowance, it was subject to putrefaction, whereas, on the Sabbath day,
the second portion remained good. Sixthly, Wherever they were, this
blessing of God always accompanied them, whilst the neighboring nations
lived on corn, and the manna was only known in their camp. Seventhly, As
soon as they entered a fruitful and corn-growing country, the manna
ceased. Eighthly, That portion, which Moses was commanded to lay up in a
vessel, did not grow corrupt. Let these points be well weighed, and the
miracle will be more than sufficiently conspicuous, and will disperse
all the clouds of objection by its intrinsic brightness.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p34"></span><span id="iv.xvi.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p35"></span>**15.** *And when the children of Israel
saw.* The Israelites manifested some appearance of gratitude in calling
the food given them from heaven, *Man*,  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) which name means “something prepared;”
but if any prefer their opinion who expound it, “a part or portion,” I
do not debate the matter, although the former is more correct. Yet,
whichever you choose, by this word they confessed that they were dealt
with bountifully, because God presented them with food without their
having to labor for it; and, therefore, they indirectly condemn their
own perverse and wicked murmuring, since it is much better to gather
food prepared for them, than to acquire it by the laborious and
troublesome culture of the earth. For although this confession was
extorted from them by the incredible novelty of the thing, yet at that
particular moment their intention was to proclaim God’s loving-kindness.
But, since unbelief had clouded their senses, so that they saw not
clearly, Moses says that “they wist not what it was.” In these words he
rebukes their slowness of heart, because, although previously advertised
of the miracle, they were astonished at the sight, as if they had heard
nothing of it before. We perceive, then, that they did but half
acknowledge God’s mercy; for their gratitude was clouded with the
darkness of ignorance, and they were compelled to confess that they did
not altogether understand it; and therefore their stupidity is reproved
not without bitterness, when Moses tells them that this was the food
promised them by God. For, if they had recognized in it the fulfillment
of the promise, there was no need of recalling it to their recollection.
As to the words themselves, the answer of Moses has misled the Greek and
Latin translators, into rendering them interrogatively,  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) “What is this?” But their difficulty
is easily removed; for Moses does not directly state that they inquired
about it as of some unknown thing, but expresses their knowledge mixed
with ignorance, for the matter was partly doubtful, partly clear; for
the power of God was visibly manifest, but the veil of unbelief
prevented them from apprehending God’s promised bounty.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p38"></span><span id="iv.xvi.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p39"></span>**16.** *This is the thing.* The
exception  <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) follows, that in
gathering the food, they should take account of the Sabbath. A certain
daily measure is prescribed; but they are commanded on the day before
the Sabbath to lay up twice as much, that they may observe its rest.
But, unquestionably, God so far extended His liberality as abundantly to
satisfy them. It is well known that an omer is the tenth part of an
ephah;  <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) and perhaps we might
discover its proportion to the measures which are now in use amongst us;
but I am unwilling to dispute respecting’ an unnecessary point; since it
is enough to be sure, that not less was given than was amply sufficient
for them.

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p42"></span><span id="iv.xvi.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p43"></span>**17.** *And the children of Israel did
so.* I do not think that the obedience of the people is here greatly
praised; since soon afterwards Moses adds that some, not contented with
their due allowance, collected more than was permitted them, and that
others also transgressed what was enjoined them as to the Sabbath day.
But I thus paraphrase the passage, that, when they had applied
themselves to the gathering of it, the whole amount was found sufficient
to fill an omer for every individual. For they did not each of them
collect a private store; but, when all had assisted, at length. they
took their prescribed portion from the common heap Thus, as each was
more especially diligent, the more he bone. flied his slower and less
industrious neighbor, without any loss to himself. This is aptly applied
by Paul to almsgiving, (<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p43.1"></span>[2Co
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#014)<span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p43.1"></span>,) wherein every one bestows of what he
possesses on his poor brethren, only let us remember that this is done
 <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) figuratively; for though there
be some likeness between the manna and our daily food, yet there is a
distinction between them to be observed, on which we shall elsewhere
remark. Since, then, the manna was a food differing from what we
commonly use, and was given daily without tillage or labor almost into
their hands, it is not to be wondered that God should have called each
one of the people to partake of it equally, and forbade any one to take
more than another. The case of ordinary food is different; for it is
necessary  <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) for the preservation
of human society that each should possess what is his own; that some
should acquire property by purchase, that to others it should come by
hereditary right, to others by the title of presentation, that each
should increase his means in proportion to his diligence, or bodily
strength, or other qualifications. In fine, political government
requires, that each should enjoy what belongs to him; and hence it would
be absurd to prescribe, as to our common food, the law which is here
laid down as to the manna. And Paul, also, wisely makes the distinction,
in enjoining that there should be an equality, not arising from a
promiscuous and confused use of property, but by the rich spontaneously
and liberally relieving the wants of their brethren, and not grudgingly
or of necessity. In this way he reminds us, that whatever goods we
possess, flow from the bounty of God, like the manna; but, since each
now possesses privately and separately whatever is given them, the same
law is not in force for the mutual communication of property, whereby
God bound His ancient people. Thence it appears that the distribution of
the manna, as it is related by Moses, is properly applied to almsgiving.
This doctrine, too, extends still further; for Paul warns believers not
to be over-anxious lest they should exhaust themselves by their bounty,
because no man’s provision failed, when the Israelites by God’s command
divided the manna among them.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
16:19-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#019)<span
id="iv.xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p2"></span>**19.** And Moses said, Let no man leave
of it till the morning.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p3"></span>**19.** Et ait Moses ad eos, Nemo
relinquat quicquam ex eo usque mane.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p4"></span>**20.** Notwithstanding they hearkened
not unto Moses; but some of them left of it until the morning, and it
bred worms, and stank: and Moses was wroth with them.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p5"></span>**20.** Sed non audierunt Mosen: quia
quidam reservarunt ex eo usque mane. Et scatere coepit vermibus, et
computruit: ideoque iratus est contra eos Moses.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p6"></span>**21.** And they gathered it every
morning, every man according to his eating: and when the sun waxed hot,
it melted.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p7"></span>**21.** Itaque collegerunt illud
singulis diebus mane: quisque secundum mensuram suam: et quum sol
incaluerat, liquefiebat.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p8"></span>**22.** And it came to pass, that on the
sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for one man: and
all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p9"></span>**22.** Fuit autem die sexto ut
colligerent panem duplum, duo scilicet homer pro uno. Et venientes
principes congregationis retulerunt Mosi.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p10"></span>**23.** And he said unto them, This is
that which the Lord hath said, Tomorrow is the rest of the holy sabbath
unto the Lord: bake that which ye will bake today, and seethe that ye
will seethe; and that which remaineth over lay up for you, to be kept
until the morning.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p11"></span>**23.** Qui dixit eis, Hoc est quod
loquutus est Jehova, Quies Sabbathi sancti cras est Jehovae; quod
cocturi estis, coquite, et quod elixaturi estis, elixate: et quicquid
residuum erit reponite vobis usque mane.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p12"></span>**24.** And they laid it up till the
morning, as Moses bade; and it did not stink, neither was there any worm
therein.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p13"></span>**24.** Et reposuerunt illud usque
mane, sicut praeceperat Moses: et non computruit, nec vermis fuit in eo.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p14"></span>**25.** And Moses said, Eat that today;
for today is a sabbath unto the Lord: today ye shall not find it in the
field.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p15"></span>**25.** Dixitque Moses, Comedite illud
hodie: quia Sabbathum est bodie Jehovae. Hodie non invenietis illud in
agro.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p16"></span>**26.** Six days ye shall gather it;
but on the seventh day, which is the sabbath, in it there shall be none.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p17"></span>**26.** Sex diebus colligetis illud:
die autem septimo est Sabbathum, non erit in illo.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p18"></span>**27.** And it came to pass, that there
went out some of the people on the seventh day for to gather, and they
found none.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p19"></span>**27.** Accidit autem die septimo ut
egrederentur quidam e populo ad colligendum illud: et non invenerunt.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p20"></span>**28.** And the Lord said unto Moses,
How long refuse ye to keep my commandments and my laws?

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p21"></span>**28.** Tunc ait Jehova ad Mosen, Usque
quo renuitis servare praecepta mea et leges meas?

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p22"></span>**29.** See, for that the Lord hath
given you the sabbath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day the
bread of two days: abide ye every man in his place; let no man go out of
his place on the seventh day.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p23"></span>**29.** Videte quod Jehova posuerit
vobis Sabbathum: ideo ipse dat vobis die sexto panem duorum dierum;
quisque apud se quiescat nec ullus egrediatur e loco suo die septimo.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p24"></span>**30.** So the people rested on the
seventh day.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p25"></span>**30.** Quievit itaque populus die
septimo.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p26"></span><span id="iv.xvi.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p27"></span>**19.** *And Moses said, Let no man.*
Moses here recounts that, when he had commanded them all not to take
more than enough for their daily food, and to gather a double portion
the day before the Sabbath, some were disobedient on both points. As to
the former, since God would supply their food to them just as the breast
is given to babes, it was a sign of perverse unbelief that they would
not depend on God’s providence, but sought for a provision which would
last them many days. It was also a proof of their obstinacy that they
would give credit to no warnings until they were convinced by experience
that they laid up in their houses nothing’ but a mass of corruption; for
they were not induced to cease from their insatiable greediness till
they had received their just punishment. Now, although the case of the
manna and the food of our ordinary nourishment is not; altogether
similar, yet the comparison holds to a certain extent, for it is so far
lawful to keep our corn and wine laid up in granaries and cellars, as
that all should still ask truly their daily bread of God. And this will
be, if the rich do not greedily swallow up whatsoever they can get
together; if they do not avariciously scrape up here and there; if they
do not gorge themselves upon the hunger of the poor; if they do not, as
far as in them lies, withhold the blessing of God; in a word, if they do
not immoderately accumulate large possessions, but: are liberal out of
their present abundance, are not too anxious as to the future, and are
not troubled, if needs be, that their wealth should suffer diminution;
nay, if they are ready to endure poverty, and glory not in their
abundance, but repose upon the paternal bounty of God. And surely we
often see that what misers collect by theft, rapine, fraud, cruelty,
trickery, or meanness, is often turned into corruption. When he adds
that, after they saw that their intemperate ardor profited them nothing,
they submitted to the command, he implies that their obedience was not
voluntary, but extorted from them, for fools are never wise except after
adversity.  <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) The melting of the
manna when the sun waxed hot was a stimulus to correct their idleness or
laziness; for, if the manna had remained entire during the whole day,
they would not have been so intent upon their duty. Wherefore, by giving
them only a short time for its collection, God urged them to diligence.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p29"></span><span id="iv.xvi.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p30"></span>**22.** *And it came to pass on the
sixth day.* The violation of the Sabbath is not yet recounted, but only
the stupidity or dense ignorance of their rulers is set forth, for
although they had heard from the mouth of Moses that God would on that
day give what would be sufficient for two days’ provision, still they
marvel, and tell it to Moses as if it were something strange and
incredible. It is plain enough that they obeyed the command, and did not
spare their labor in gathering the double quantity; but their unbelief
and folly betrays itself in their astonishment when they see that God
has really performed what he promised. We may conjecture that they
accurately observed what awakened in them so much astonishment; so that
it follows that they refused to credit God’s word until its truth was
effectively proved. It came to pass, then, in God’s admirable wisdom,
that their wicked and perverse doubting availed both for the
confirmation of the miracle and the observation of the Sabbath. Hence
occasion was given to Moses again to enjoin upon them what otherwise,
perhaps, they would have neglected, viz., that they should honor the
seventh day by a holy rest.

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p31"></span><span id="iv.xvi.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p32"></span>**27.** *And it came to pass.* This is
the second transgression, that by going out on the seventh day they
trenched upon its religious observance; and this monstrous greediness
arose from their not believing to be true what we have just heard Moses
saying, for he had plainly declared to them that they would not find the
manna. They, therefore, accuse him of falsehood, refusing’ to believe
anything but their own eyes. Meanwhile the obligation of the Sabbath was
set at naught by them, nay, they sought to profane the day which God had
hallowed, so that it should in no wise differ from other days. Therefore
does God justly inveigh against them with much bitterness, for,
addressing Moses, in his person He arraigns the obstinate wickedness of
the whole people. Assuredly Moses was not of the number of those who had
refused to obey God’s laws, but by this general charge, the multitude,
who had transgressed, were more severely rebuked, and a greater
obligation is laid on Moses to chastise the people, when a part of the
blame is transferred to himself. By the expression “How long?” God
implies the intolerableness of their perversity, because there is no end
of their offenses, but, by thus provoking greater vengeance by new
crimes, they prove themselves to be incorrigible.

<span id="iv.xvi.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
16:31-36](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#031)<span
id="iv.xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p2"></span>**31.** And the house of Israel called
the name thereof Manna: and it was like coriander-seed, white; and the
taste of it was like wafers made with honey.

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p3"></span>**31.** Appellavit autem domus Israel
nomen illius man: et erat quasi semen coriandri album, et gustus ejus
quasi placenta mellita.

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p4"></span>**32.** And Moses said, This is the thing
which the Lord commandeth, Fill an omer of it, to be kept for your
generations; that they may see the bread wherewith I have fed you in the
wilderness, when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p5"></span>**32.** Et dixit Moses, Hoc est verbum
quod mandavit Jehova, Imple homer ex eo quod servetur in aetates
vestras, ut videant panem quo cibavi vos in deserto, quando eduxi vos e
terra AEgypti.

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p6"></span>**33.** And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a
pot, and put an omer full of manna therein, and lay it up before the
Lord, to be kept for your generations.

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p7"></span>**33.** Et ait Moses ad Aharon, Tolle
urnam unam, et pone in ea homer integrum man, et repone illud coram
Jehova in custodiam in aetates vestras.

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p8"></span>**34.** As the Lord commanded Moses, so
Aaron laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept.

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p9"></span>**34.** Sicut praeceperat Jehova Mosi,
reposuit illud Aharon coram testimenio in custodiam.

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p10"></span>**35.** And the children of Israel did
eat manna forty years, until they came to a land inhabited: they did eat
manna until they came unto the borders of the land of Canaan.

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p11"></span>**35.** Et comederunt filii Israel man
quadraginta annis, donec venissent in terram habitandam: man ipsum
comederunt, donec venissent ad terminum terrae Chanaan.

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p12"></span>**36.** Now an omer is the tenth *part*
of an ephah.

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p13"></span>**36.** Porro homer est decima pars
epha.

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p14"></span><span id="iv.xvi.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p15"></span>**31.** *And the house of Israel
called.* It is not without reason that Moses repeats what he had said
before, that the name of Manna was given to the new kind of food which
God had supplied, in order that they might be brought under condemnation
for their stubborn impiety, who shall dare to raise a question on so
manifest a point, since the conspicuous nature of the thing had extorted
this name from people otherwise malicious and ungrateful. Its form is
mentioned to prove the certainty of the miracle, viz., that its grains
were round and like coriander-seed, because nothing like it had been
seen before. Its taste reproves the people’s ingratitude in rejecting a
food which was not only appropriate and wholesome, but also very sweet
in savor.

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p16"></span><span id="iv.xvi.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p17"></span>**32.** *And Moses said.* Moses does not
proceed with the history in order, but by interposing these
circumstances by anticipation, he the more confirms the fact that this
food was then created for the people by God’s special bounty, because He
desired an omer of it to be preserved as a memorial, which, undergoing
no putrefaction, handed down to posterity the gloriousness of the
miracle. And first, he propounds generally God’s command, and then, in
the next verse, describes the manner in which it was done, viz., that
Aaron put it in a bottle or pot, and laid it up by the Ark of the
Covenant. Whence, too, it appears how high importance God would have
attached to this His bounty, since he wished its memorial to exist in
the sanctuary together with the tables of His covenant. The two
expressions, conveying the same meaning, “before the Lord,” and “before
the Testimony,” are used in commendation of the worship of the Law, that
the people might know God’s power to be near them in the sanctuary, not
as if he were shut up in that place, or wished their minds to be fixed
upon the visible sign, but, desiring to provide against their weakness,
He in a manner descends to them, when he testified to the presence of
His power by external images. He descends to them, therefore, not  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) to occupy their minds with a gross
superstition, but to raise them up by degrees to spiritual worship.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc03019.htm#fr_170) <span
id="iv.xvi.i-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p24"></span> “Some refer this probation or trial to
that particular law and precept of gathering but a certain portion of
manna every day. So *Vatablus, Borrha, Galas*.*, Tostat*.*, Rupert*.
Some understand it as well of that precept, as of the other, not to
gather any upon the Sabbath. — *Simler*. Some will have it taken more
largely of all the precepts, and commandments touching manna, which were
eight in all. — *Lyranus*. But it is better to take it in a more general
sense. The Lord, as he had tried them before with crosses and
adversities, so now he would prove them by His benefits, to see whether
they will afterward walk in His fear, and in obedience before Him. So
*Ferus*, *Calvin*, *Osiand*., *Pelarg*. And thus by this particular
benefit God would prepare them to the obedience of His law, which should
be given afterwards. — *Oleaster*.” — *Willet’s Hexapla in loco.*

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc03019.htm#fr_171) <span
id="iv.xvi.i-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p29"></span> “Qui resemblent a Moyse.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc03019.htm#fr_172) <span
id="iv.xvi.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.i-p30"></span> “Et sont a rejetter comme pipeurs, veu
qu’ils n’ont qu’une fausse masque pour la verite;” and must be rejected
as deceivers, since they have only a false masque instead of the truth.
— *Fr*.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc03019.htm#fr_173) <span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p26"></span> Had spoken. — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc03019.htm#fr_174) <span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p27"></span> J’ai mis le mot *Car*, pource que ceste
sentence rend la raison du precedent. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc03019.htm#fr_175) <span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p32"></span> “And even now in all that place this
manna comes down in rain, according to what Moses then obtained of God,
to send it the people for their sustenance.” — *Josephus. Antiq*., 3: 1.
6. Burekhardt identifies it with a substance called manna, obtained
still by the Arabs from the *tarfa* or tamarisk; and Rosenmuller speaks
of it as being obtained from various trees in different countries. We
can well understand the name having been given to any substance, which
in some respects resembled it; but there does not appear to be any real
correspondence in those which the critics mention.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc03019.htm#fr_176) <span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p33"></span> This is from *S. M*., who says that
Aben-Ezra has affirmed man to be an Arabic noun. — *W*.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc03019.htm#fr_177) <span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p36"></span> <span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p36.1"></span>מן<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p36.2"></span>,
*Man*<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p36.3"></span>. If this word be referred to the
root <span id="iv.xvi.ii-p36.4"></span>מנן<span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p36.5"></span>, it may mean a prepared thing; if to the
root <span id="iv.xvi.ii-p36.6"></span>מנה<span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p36.7"></span>, it would mean an assigned portion; but in
Syriac and Chaldee *man*<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p36.8"></span> is
incontestably what, and the LXX. bear testimony to the existence of the
same monosyllabic relative in Hebrew by so rendering it here, to which
the *V.*<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p36.9"></span> adds its authority, by
saying, Man hu? Quod significat, Quid est hoc? *C*<span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p36.10"></span>. found the two first interpretations in
the notes of *S. M*<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p36.11"></span>., who makes no
allusion to this last rendering. — *W.*

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc03019.htm#fr_178) <span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p36.12"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p37"></span> See margin *A. V.*

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc03019.htm#fr_179) <span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p40"></span> The rule is here prescribed — the
exception does not occur till verse 23.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc03019.htm#fr_180) <span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p41"></span> See <span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p41.1"></span>[Ex
16:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#036)<span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p41.1"></span>. “In Josephus’s time it contained 43 1/5
eggshells, (for the Jews, like many of Oriental nations, reckoned their
measures by the contents of middle-sized hens eggs.) But it is by no
means probable t at during the 1500 years which elapsed from the time of
Moses to that of Josephus, the measures of the Hebrews remained the
same, there being nothing more liable to change.” — *Rosenmuller*.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc03019.htm#fr_181) <span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p44"></span> Per anagogen. — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc03019.htm#fr_182) <span
id="iv.xvi.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.ii-p45"></span> “Pour nourrir les hommes en amitie et
paix;” for sustaining men in friendship and peace. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc03019.htm#fr_183) <span
id="iv.xvi.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.iii-p28"></span> “Sinon apres avoir este bien batus;”
except after being well beaten. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc03019.htm#fr_184) <span
id="iv.xvi.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvi.iv-p18"></span> “Non pas pour plonger leurs pensees en
terre, qui eust ete une lourde superstition:” not to plunge their
thoughts in earth, which would have been a gross superstition. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 17](cc03020)
