[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03032)  [Next](cc03034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p1"></span><span id="v.viii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
4:32-40](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#032)<span id="v.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p2"></span>**32.** For ask now of the days that are
past, which were before thee, since the day that God created man upon
the earth; and *ask* from the one side of heaven unto the other, whether
there hath been *any such thing* as this great tiling *is,* or hath been
heard like it?

<span id="v.viii-p3"></span>**32.** Interroga agedum de diebus antiquis,
qui fuerunt ante re, ex quo die creavit Deus hominem super terram, et ab
extremo coeli, usque ad extremum coeli, an acciderit unquam aliquid
secundum hanc rem magnam, vel auditum fuerit simile.

<span id="v.viii-p4"></span>**33.** Did *ever* people hear the voice of
God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and live?

<span id="v.viii-p5"></span>**33.** An audierit populus vocem Dei
loquentis e medio ignis, sicut tu audisti, et fuerit superstes.

<span id="v.viii-p6"></span>**34.** Or hath God assayed to go *and* take
him a nation from the midst of *another* nation, by temptations, by
signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by a
stretched-out arm, and by great terrors, according to all that the Lord
your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes?

<span id="v.viii-p7"></span>**34.** Vel an tentaverit Deus ut veniret ad
gentem sibi assumendam e medio gentis, per probationes, signa et
prodigia, praelia, manum fortem, brachium extentum, et visiones magnas,
secundum omnia quae vobiscum egit Jehova Deus vester in Aegypto coram
oculis vestris.

<span id="v.viii-p8"></span>**35.** Unto thee it was shewed, that thou
mightest know that the Lord he *is* God; *there is* none else beside
him.

<span id="v.viii-p9"></span>**35.** Tibi ostensum est ut cognosceres
quod Jehova ipse est Dens, nec ullus praeter ipsum.

<span id="v.viii-p10"></span>**36.** Out of heaven he made thee to hear
his voice, that he might instruct thee; and upon earth he shewed thee
his great fire; and thou heardest his words out of the midst of the
fire.

<span id="v.viii-p11"></span>**36.** E coelis audire to fecit vocem
suam, ut erudiret to: et in terra ostendit tibi ignem suum magnum, et
verba ejus audisti e medio ignis.

<span id="v.viii-p12"></span>**37.** And because he loved thy fathers,
therefore he chose their seed after them, and brought thee out in his
sight with his mighty power out of Egypt;

<span id="v.viii-p13"></span>**37.** Et quia dilexit patres tuos, elegit
semen eorum post eos, et eduxit te coram facie sua, in virtute sua magna
ex Egypto.

<span id="v.viii-p14"></span>**38.** To drive out nations from before
thee greater and mightier than thou *art,* to bring thee in, to give
thee their land *for* an inheritance, as *it is* this day.

<span id="v.viii-p15"></span>**38.** Ut expelleret gentes magnas a facie
tua, et robustiores te, ac te introduceret ad dandam tibi terram earum
in haereditatem, sicut dies haec demonstrat.

<span id="v.viii-p16"></span>**39.** Know therefore this day, and
consider *it* in thine heart, that the Lord he *is* God in heaven above,
and upon the earth beneath: *there* is none else.

<span id="v.viii-p17"></span>**39.** ltaque scito hodie, et reduc ad cor
tuum, quod Jehova est Deus in coelis sursum, et super terram deorsum,
nec alius ultra.

<span id="v.viii-p18"></span>**40.** Thou shalt keep therefore his
statutes, and his commandments, which I command thee this day, that it
may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee, and that thou
mayest prolong *thy* days upon the earth, which the Lord thy God giveth
thee, for ever.

<span id="v.viii-p19"></span>**40.** Proinde observabis statuta ejus, et
praecepta ejus, quae mando tibi hodie, ut bene sit tibi et filiis tuis
post te, utque prolonges dies super terram quam Jehova Deus tuus dat
tibi omnibus diebus.

<span id="v.viii-p20"></span><span id="v.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p21"></span>**32.** *For ask now.* Moses here more
forcibly extols and pronounces magnificent praises upon the miracles
which he had before more simply related to have taken place at the
promulgation of the Law, his object being to produce a fuller conviction
of its dignity. He magnifies, too, by comparison, the testimonies
whereby its authority had been ratified, viz., because nothing like it
had ever occurred; for if any such instance had previously taken place,
some portion of its preciousness or honor would have been taken from it.
But since from the beginning of the world only one such illustrious
manifestation of His power had been given by God, it afforded the
greater sanction to the Law. He adds, too, that if they were to search
over the whole world they would nowhere find anything similar. For I do
not approve of the more refined exposition which some give of this
clause, as if he said that all creatures above and below were witnesses
that God’s might had never been manifested by so many and such
illustrious miracles; as also the sense appears too restricted which
others give, understanding “the days that are past” to mean annals or
chronicles; for I make no question that Moses simply desires them to
inquire and to examine whether from the creation of the world, or in any
most remote region, any such thing had come to pass.

<span id="v.viii-p22"></span><span id="v.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p23"></span>**33.** *Did ever people hear?* He points
out more openly the greatness and extraordinary transcendency of the
matter which he has just mentioned, viz., that they heard the voice of
God speaking out of the fire. It is true, indeed, that the superstitions
of the Gentiles had been confirmed of old by many apparitions, yet
amongst the portents which wretched men have imagined for their willing
self-deception, there is nothing approaching to this miracle. Many have
individually lied, and their false and foolish tales have been rashly
believed; but here we have not to do with unfounded and scattered
rumors, nor with the dreams of some single person, but Moses produces
more than 700,000 witnesses, to whom God’s glory had clearly and
certainly appeared; he subjoins, therefore, that God had never assayed
to do the same, but had afforded this solitary instance to render His
Law illustrious in all ages.  <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227)
Yet in this verse he not only alludes to the promulgation of the Law,
but to the whole course of their deliverance, since he names in general
His “temptations and signs.” He says that God “took him a nation from
the midst of *another* nation,” for by His incomparable power He rescued
the descendants of Abraham, who, though dispersed through Egypt, and, as
it were, enclosed in its bowels, were yet an obscure and ignoble part of
a most famous nation; whereof no similar example is to be found.  <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228)

<span id="v.viii-p26"></span><span id="v.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p27"></span>**35.** *Unto thee it was shewed.* He first
says that God had so proved His divinity by miracles and prodigies, that
the Israelites might know certainly that He was God. Whence, too, he
concludes that He is the only God; for although God’s holy name be torn
in pieces by various opinions, whilst each one manufactures his own gods
for himself, yet is it still sure that the power and dominion of God
cannot be withdrawn from Him, but reside in a single *subject,* as the
logicians say. Therefore the essence of the one God overthrows and
annihilates all the other deities which we foolishly invent for
ourselves. And this we must carefully remark, for this has been the
common error of all ages, to seek for a mixture of many gods, whereas
all these imaginations should vanish before the brightness of the true
God. In the following verse he confirms this declaration, because God
instructed His people out of heaven, and in the fire. Is it, however,
asked how these two points accord which seem to be opposed to each
other, that God’s voice was heard from heaven and from the midst of the
fire? I reply, that Moses simply means that the voice which flowed out
of the fire into the people’s ears was distinguished by plain
indications which proved it to be heavenly.

<span id="v.viii-p28"></span><span id="v.viii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p29"></span>**37.** *And because he loved.* These words
admit of two meanings; for the copulative conjunction stands at the
beginning of the verse, — “*And* because he loved thy fathers,” and also
before the next clause, “and he chose their seed;” the reasons here
assigned might, therefore, be taken in connection with the previous
sentence, viz., that so many miracles were wrought because God had
chosen Abraham and his seed. Others understand it differently, that this
people was honored with so many blessings by God because He loved their
fathers. In this case they omit the *copula* in the middle of the verse,
as must be often done. In the main, there is little discrepancy; for
Moses desires to shew that whatever good things God has conferred upon
His people are gratuitous, by which circumstance he commends God’s grace
the more. He had said that by unusual favor this nation was taken from
the midst of another; and he now adds that this was done on no other
account but because God had embraced Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob with His
love, and persevered in the same love towards their posterity. But we
must remark that by the word *“love”* is expressed that favor which
springs of mere generosity, so as to exclude all worthiness in the
person beloved, as may be more clearly gathered from other passages,
viz., <span id="v.viii-p29.1"></span>[De
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#008)<span id="v.viii-p29.1"></span>,
and <span id="v.viii-p29.2"></span>[Ps
78:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#068)<span id="v.viii-p29.2"></span>,
and as is pretty plain from the context here, wherein he attributes the
election of the people to the love with which God had honored their
fathers. If any object that God’s election is eternal, the objection is
readily solved, for the seed of Abraham was separated from all nations,
because God had gratuitously adopted their father. We now understand the
meaning of Moses, that the deliverance of the people was only to be
ascribed to God’s goodness. He thus amplifies this blessing by another
circumstance, viz., that God had preferred to great and mighty nations
this ignoble people, whose own proper worthiness could not have acquired
His favor.

<span id="v.viii-p30"></span><span id="v.viii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p31"></span>**39.** *Know therefore this day.* He again
inculcates what we have lately spoken of, that the glory of the one true
God was proved by the miracles, but he does so by way of exhortation.
For he desires them carefully and attentively to consider what God had
shewn them, because in so plain a matter there would be no excuse for
error or ignorance. He therefore infers from what had gone before, that
the people must beware of shutting their eyes against the clear
revelation of God’s power, and therefore urges them to keep it in
memory, because man’s ingratitude is but too prone to forgetfulness. He
afterwards reminds them wherefore God would be known, viz., that they
might keep His Law and obey His statutes. The sum is, that they would be
inexcusable if they did not obediently receive the Law, which they knew
to have come from God; for they must needs be worse than stupid if the
majesty of God, known and understood by so many proofs, did not awaken
them to reverence. And lest they should undervalue the doctrine as
proceeding from a mortal man, he expressly confesses, indeed, that he is
the minister, and yet that he had set before them nothing which he had
not received from God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc03033.htm#fr_227) <span
id="v.viii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p24"></span> Ce chef-d’-oeuvre unique. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc03033.htm#fr_228) <span
id="v.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p25"></span> Addition in the *Fr.,* “Si quelqu’un aime
mieux prendre le nombre singulier pour le pluriel, lors le sens sera
tel: Combien que tous peuples fussent pareils, ou d’estat indifferent
quant a leur nature, neantmoins que Dieu en a pris un d’entre tousles
autres;” if any should prefer taking the singular number instead of the
plural, then the sense will be, Although all people were equal, or of
the same condition by nature, nevertheless God chose out one of them
from amongst all the others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 7:6-8](cc03034)
