[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03048)  [Next](cc03050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxiv"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="v.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#000)<span id="v.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p2"></span><span id="v.xxiv-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
29:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#002)<span id="v.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p3"></span>**2.** And Moses called unto all Israel, and
said unto them, Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in
the land of Egypt unto Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all
his land;

<span id="v.xxiv-p4"></span>**2.** Vocavitque Moses universum Israelem,
et dixit eis, Vos ipsi vidistis omnia quae fecit Jehova in oculis
vestris in terra Aegypti Pharaoni et omnibus servis ejus, et universae
terrae ejus.

<span id="v.xxiv-p5"></span>**3.** The great temptations which thine
eyes have seen, the signs, and those great miracles;

<span id="v.xxiv-p6"></span>**3.** Probationes magnas quas viderunt
oculi tui, signa et portenta ilia magna.

<span id="v.xxiv-p7"></span>**4.** Yet the Lord hath not given you an
heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day.

<span id="v.xxiv-p8"></span>**4.** Neque dedit vobis Jehova cor ad
intelligendum, et oculos ad ridendum, et aures ad audiendum usque in
hunc diem.

<span id="v.xxiv-p9"></span>**5.** And I have led you forty years in the
wilderness: your clothes are not waxen old upon you, and thy shoe is not
waxen old upon thy foot.

<span id="v.xxiv-p10"></span>**5.** Et deduxi vos quadraginta annis per
desertum: non inveteraverunt vestimenta vestra super vos, nec
calceamentum vestrum veteravit super pedem vestrum.

<span id="v.xxiv-p11"></span>**6.** Ye have not eaten bread, neither
have ye drunk wine or strong drink; that ye might know that I am the
Lord your God.

<span id="v.xxiv-p12"></span>**6.** Panem non comedistis, neque vinum et
siceram bibistis: ut intelligatis quod ego Jehova Deus vester.

<span id="v.xxiv-p13"></span>**7.** And when ye came unto this place,
Sihon the king of Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, came out against
us unto battle, and we smote them:

<span id="v.xxiv-p14"></span>**7.** Venistis tandem ad locum istum:
egressusque est Sehon rex Esbon, et Og rex Basan in occursum nostrum ad
praelium, et percussimus eos;

<span id="v.xxiv-p15"></span>**8.** And we took their land, and gave it
for an inheritance unto the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the
half-tribe of Manasseh.

<span id="v.xxiv-p16"></span>**8.** Et abstulimus terram ipsorum,
tradidimusque in haereditatem Rubenitis, et Gadiris, et dimidiae tribui
Manasse.

<span id="v.xxiv-p17"></span>**9.** Keep therefore the words of this
covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do.

<span id="v.xxiv-p18"></span>**9.** Custodiatis ergo verba pacti hujus
et facite ea, ut *(vel,* intelligatis) prospere agatis in omnibus quae
facturi estis.

<span id="v.xxiv-p19"></span><span id="v.xxiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p20"></span>**2.** *And Moses called unto all Israel.*
This passage also may be fitly referred to the preface of the Law, since
its tendency is to recommend it, and to instruct and prepare the
people’s minds to be teachable. It takes its commencement from the
divine blessings, which they had experienced as well in their exodus as
in their forty years’ wanderings; for it would have been the height of
baseness and ingratitude not to devote themselves to a Deliverer who had
dealt so graciously with them. And surely it was an inestimable sign of
His paternal love towards them, that He should have arrayed Himself
against so very powerful a king for His servants’ sake. Finally, lest
there should be any question as to their deliverance*,* he enlarges upon
the power which God displayed therein, in magnificent terms of praise
according with its dignity.

<span id="v.xxiv-p21"></span><span id="v.xxiv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p22"></span>**4.** *Yet the Lord hath not given.* By
reproaching them with their past stupidity, he stirs up their desire for
a better understanding, as if he had said, that they had been too long
indifferent to so many miracles, and therefore they should no longer
delay to rouse themselves, etc., to give greater heed to God; not
because they had been so senseless that His acts had altogether escaped
their notice, but because all acknowledgment of them had immediately
come to an end. For, just as the drunken man, or one suffering from
lethargy, when he hears a cry, raises his head for a moment, and opens
his eyes, and then relapses into a state of torpor, so the people had
never seriously applied their minds to consider God’s works; and when
they had been aroused by some miracle, had immediately sunk back into
forgetfulness, wherefore there is good cause why Moses should seek to
awaken them from their dulness and stupidity by various methods. But he
does not merely condemn their senselessness, and blindness, and
deafness, but declares that they were thus senseless, and blind, and
deaf, because they were not inspired with grace from above to profit
duly by so many lessons. Thence we learn that a clear and powerful
understanding is a special gift of the Spirit, since men are ever blind
even in the brightest light, until they have been enlightened by God.
What Moses relates of the Israelites, is unquestionably common to us
all. He declares, then, that they were not induced by the conspicuous
glory of God to fear and worship Him, because He had not given them
either mind, or eyes, or ears. It is true that at man’s creation He had
naturally bestowed upon him a mind, and ears, and eyes; but Moses means,
that whatever innate light we have, is either hidden or lost, so that,
as far as regards the highest point of wisdom, all our senses lie
useless. True that in nature’s corruption, *the light* still *shineth in
darkness,* but it is light which is soon obscured; therefore, the entire
understanding and faculty of reason, in which men glory and pique
themselves, is nought but smoke and darkness. Well then may David ask
that his eyes may be opened to behold the secrets of the Law.  <span
id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) (<span id="v.xxiv-p23.6"></span>[Ps
119:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#018)<span
id="v.xxiv-p23.6"></span>.) Still this defect by no means frees us from
blame; because (as we are told) none have wisdom, but those to whom it
is given by the Father of lights; for we are ignorant  <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) through our own fault. Besides, every
one is sufficiently, and more than sufficiently convicted by his own
conscience*,* that his ignorance is closely connected with pride and
indolence, and is therefore voluntary. The word *heart* is not here used
for the seat of the affections, but for the mind itself, which is the
intellectual faculty of the soul.

<span id="v.xxiv-p25"></span><span id="v.xxiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p26"></span>**5.** *And I have led you.* He descends to
the blessings with which He had continually visited His people during
the course of forty years. Yet he does not recount them all, but
contents himself with a few of the most remarkable instances, viz., that
their clothes had not been worn out by age, and that they had been fed
from heaven, when no sustenance was to be obtained from the fruits of
the earth. He reminds them that God’s glory had been manifested by these
testimonies, in order that they might submit themselves to His rule.

<span id="v.xxiv-p27"></span><span id="v.xxiv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p28"></span>**7.** *And when ye came unto this place.*
<span id="v.xxiv-p28.1"></span>This, a third instance (of God’s
goodness), because He had smitten the first enemies, who encountered
them to impede their passage, and thus had already begun to bring them
into a place of rest. For inasmuch as the two tribes and a half had here
chosen their home, they might behold as in a mirror that the possession
of the promised land awaited them. Hence, then, Moses concludes that
they were under obligation to keep the law, and exhorts them to shew
their gratitude by faithful and sincere obedience. The object,
therefore, of the recital is, to procure reverent attention to his
doctrine; since the word <span id="v.xxiv-p28.2"></span>שכל*,*  <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) *shakal,* <span
id="v.xxiv-p29.11"></span>in *Hiphil,* <span
id="v.xxiv-p29.12"></span>means to act successfully as well as
prudently. I have set down both readings, since they are alike suitable
to the sense. For we have seen in chapter 4, that this was the people’s
only wisdom to obey God’s statutes; nor was their prosperity to be
expected from any other source except God’s blessing, which is
everywhere promised to the Israelites, if they keep the law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc03049.htm#fr_258) <span
id="v.xxiv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p23"></span> The references here are to <span
id="v.xxiv-p23.2"></span>[Psalm
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#013)<span id="v.xxiv-p23.2"></span>,
and 18:24, (in the *Fr.* 14.) There may be *allusion* to 19:12, and
18:28. See *Calvin’s* comments on these passages.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc03049.htm#fr_259) <span
id="v.xxiv-p23.7"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p24"></span> *“Desipimus.”* — *Lat.* “Ainsi hebetez, et
desprouvez de sens.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc03049.htm#fr_260) <span
id="v.xxiv-p28.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p29"></span> <span id="v.xxiv-p29.1"></span>תשכילו<span
id="v.xxiv-p29.2"></span>; *A. V.,*<span id="v.xxiv-p29.3"></span> that
ye may prosper. *S.M.,*<span id="v.xxiv-p29.4"></span> ut prudenter
agatis; but he adds, the Hebrews, explain this word by <span
id="v.xxiv-p29.5"></span>הצליחו<span id="v.xxiv-p29.6"></span>, “that ye
may prosper.” The Hiphil of <span id="v.xxiv-p29.7"></span>שכל<span
id="v.xxiv-p29.8"></span>, says Simon’s Lexicon, is *to act prudently,*
<span id="v.xxiv-p29.9"></span>and by a metonymy of the antecedent for
the consequent, *to proceed prosperously.* <span
id="v.xxiv-p29.10"></span>— *W.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 8:7-10; 11:10-12](cc03050)
