[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03010)  [Next](cc03012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii-p1"></span>EXODUS 8

<span id="iv.viii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.viii.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
8:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#001)<span id="iv.viii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the Lord spake unto Moses, Go
unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Let my people go,
that they may serve me.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Dixit autem Jehova ad Mosen, Vade
ad Pharaonem, et dic ad eum, Sic dicit Jehova, Dimitte populum meum ut
serviant mihi.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And if thou refuse to let *them*
go, behold, I will smite all thy borders with frogs:

<span id="iv.viii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Quod si tu renuis dimittere, ecce,
ego percutio omnes terminos tuos ranis.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And the river shall bring forth
frogs abundantly, which shall go up, and come into thine house, and into
thy bed-chamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants,
and upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy
kneading-troughs:

<span id="iv.viii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et scatebit flumen ranis, quae
ascendent, et intrabunt domum tuam, et conclave cubilis tui, et super
lectum tuum, et in domum servorum tuorum, et in populum tuum, et in
furnos tuos, et in panaria tua. (Heb. farinas tuas.)

<span id="iv.viii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And the frogs shall come up both
on thee, and upon thy people, and upon all thy servants.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Itaque in te, et in populum tuum,
et in omnes servos ascendent ranae.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thine hand with thy rod over the streams,
over the rivers, and over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the
land of Egypt.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et ait Jehova ad Mosen, Dic ad
Aharon, Extende manum tuam cum virga tua super fluvios, super rivos, et
super stagna, ut adducas ranas super terram Aegypti.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Aaron stretched out his hand
over the waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up, and covered the land of
Egypt.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et extendit Aharon manum suam
super aquas Aegypti, et ascenderunt ranae, operueruntque terram Aegypti.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And the magicians did so with
their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et sic fecerunt magi
incantationibus suis: nempe adducendo ranas super terram Aegypti.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.viii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i-p17"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake.* Again, as
if the matter were only now begun, God demands of Pharaoh His own
peculiar right, viz., that His people should serve Him, but out of the
land of Egypt, that His worship might be separate and pure from all
defilement, for He desired (as was before said) by this separation of
His people to condemn the superstitions of the Egyptians. Meanwhile
there was no excuse for the tyrant, when, with sacrilegious boldness, he
presumed to deprive God of His just honor. Therefore, in refusing to let
them go, he was declared not only to be cruel, but also a despiser of
God. Threatening is also added, that at least he may, however
unwillingly, be driven to obey; for thus must the stubborn be dealt
with, who never are brought to duty except when forced by fear or
punishment. Indeed, God sometimes also threatens His own servants, in
order to stimulate their laziness; but especially is He more severe
towards the perverse and disobedient. Thus is it said, (<span
id="iv.viii.i-p17.1"></span>[Ps
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026)<span
id="iv.viii.i-p17.1"></span>,)

<span id="iv.viii.i-p18"></span>“With the pure thou wilt shew thyself
pure; and with the froward thou wilt shew thyself froward.”

<span id="iv.viii.i-p19"></span>This is the reason why He sanctions His
command with threats  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) when He
addresses Pharaoh. In this second plague there are, besides, two things
to be remarked by us; for, *first*, God shews that the Egyptians had
hitherto held their lives by a precarious tenure, as it were, because He
had protected them from the incursion of frogs by His special mercy. We
know that Egypt, on account of its many marshes, and the sluggish and
almost stagnant Nile, was full of frogs and venomous animals; now, when
great multitudes of them come forth suddenly, cover the surface of the
fields, penetrate even to the houses and bed-chambers, and finally
ascend even into the royal palace, it plainly appears that they were
before only restrained by God’s hand, and thus that the God of the
Hebrews was the guardian and keeper of that kingdom. *Secondly*, God
chose not only to inflict a punishment upon the Egyptians, but to expose
them to mockery by its ignominious nature; nor can we doubt but that
their pain must have been much embittered by this contumely, when they
saw that they were thus evil-entreated not by some victorious army, but
by filthy reptiles; and besides this, that their calamity had its origin
in the Nile, which enriched their country with so many advantages. But
let us learn from this history that there are many deaths mixed up with
our life, and that it is not otherwise lengthened out to us, except as
God restrains the dangers which everywhere beset us; and again, although
He may not openly strike us with lightning from heaven, nor arm his
angels for the destruction of men, still, at His slightest nod, all
creatures are ready to execute this judgments; and, therefore, we must
ascribe it to His kindness and long-suffering, if the wicked do not
perish at each moment. Finally, if we are ever galled by ignominy or
disgrace, let us remember that this happens designedly, that the shame
itself may mortify our pride.

<span id="iv.viii.i-p21"></span><span id="iv.viii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i-p22"></span>**5.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses,
Say unto Aaron.* It is questionable whether God thus enjoined Moses in a
continuous address, or whether He waited until Pharaoh contumaciously
despised His command. It is probable, indeed, that after Pharaoh had
paid no attention to the threats, the execution of the punishment was
commanded. Meantime, we must recollect what I before said, that Moses
moved not even a finger; but, as he had been commanded, transferred the
active measures to his inferior minister, that thus Pharaoh might be
treated more contemptuously. It was thus that he overwhelmed the whole
land, as it were, by a breath. But although in this way God cast down
the fierce tyrant in his swelling pride to be trampled beneath their
feet, still the wickedness of the magicians did not rest. Thus was it
requisite that the servants of God should be exercised by constant
contests one after another.

<span id="iv.viii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.viii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
8:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#008)<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p2"></span>**8.** Then Pharaoh called for Moses and
Aaron, and said, Entreat the Lord, that he may take away the frogs from
me, and from my people; and I will let the people go, that they may do
sacrifice unto the Lord.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p3"></span>**8.** Tunc vocavit Pharao Mosen et
Aharon, ac dixit, Precamini Jehovam ut auferat ranas a me et a populo
meo: et dimittam populum, ut sacrificent Jehovae.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p4"></span>**9.** And Moses said unto Pharaoh,
Glory over me: when shall I entreat for thee, and for thy servants, and
for thy people, to destroy the frogs from thee and thy houses, *that*
they may remain in the river only?

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p5"></span>**9.** Et dixit Moses Pharaoni, Gloriare
super me quando orabo pro te, et pro servis tuis et pro populo tuo, ut
exscindantur ranae a te, et a domibus tuis: tantum in flumine residuae
sint.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p6"></span>**10.** And he said, Tomorrow. And he
said, *Be it* according to thy word; that thou mayest know that *there
is* none like unto the Lord our God.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p7"></span>**10.** Et ait, Cras. Tunc ille dixit,
Secundum sermonem tuum, ut scias quod nullus sit sicut Jehova Deus
noster.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p8"></span>**11.** And the frogs shall depart from
thee, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people;
they shall remain in the river only.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p9"></span>**11.** Recedent igitur ranae abs te et
a domibus tuis, eta servis tuis, et a populo tuo: tantum in flumine
residuae erunt.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p10"></span>**12.** And Moses and Aaron went out
from Pharaoh; and Moses cried unto the Lord because of the frogs which
he had brought against Pharaoh.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p11"></span>**12.** Tunc egressus est Moses et
Aharon a Pharaone. Et clamavit Moses ad Jehovam super causa ranarum,
quas immiserat Pharaoni.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p12"></span>**13.** And the Lord did according to
the word of Moses; and the frogs died out of the houses, out of the
villages, and out of the fields.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p13"></span>**13.** Et fecit Jehova secundum
sermonem Mosis. Itaque mortuae sunt ranae ex domibus, ex atriis, et ex
agris.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p14"></span>**14.** And they gathered them together
upon heaps; and the land stank.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p15"></span>**14.** Et coacervarunt eas turmatim:
et computruit terra.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p16"></span>**15.** But when Pharaoh saw that there
was respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the
Lord had said.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p17"></span>**15.** Videns autem Pharao quod esset
relaxatio, aggravavit cor suum: neque audivit eos, sicuti loquutus erat
Jehova.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p18"></span><span id="iv.viii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p19"></span>**8.** *Then Pharaoh called for Moses.*
Pharaoh at last appears to be softened, and to lay aside some of his
fierceness; but it will soon appear that he was not really tamed. It may
indeed have been that, seized with terror, he seriously took refuge in
cries for pardon; but that he lied to God, and to himself, is plain from
his very inconstancy; because, as soon as a reprieve was granted, he
returned to his natural disposition, nay, he effectively manifested that
his malice was only repressed by fear, since it presently began to vent
itself again. Thus do hypocrites, when they are beneath God’s afflicting
hand, or tremble under the apprehension of His chastenings, humbly and
submissively implore His mercy; but when the evil has been withdrawn for
a little while, this short truce puffs up their hearts, as if they had
attained an eternal peace. The Prophet complains in the psalm, that thus
also it happened with the Jews,

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p20"></span>“When he slew them, then they sought
him; and they returned and inquired early after God; and they remembered
that God was their rock, and the high God their redeemer; nevertheless,
they did but flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with
their tongues; for their heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his covenant.” (<span id="iv.viii.ii-p20.1"></span>[Ps
78:34-37](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#034)<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p20.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p21"></span>In fine, this is a disease common to
all hypocrites, that, having found by experience their frowardness to be
destructive to them, they feign penitence for the sake of obtaining
pardon, because they cannot escape the judgments of God; but, when they
fancy themselves escaped, they hasten back to the same pride, they kick
against God, and even wantonly insult him; in a word, it is only their
trouble that humbles them and that only for a short time. But although
Pharaoh’s fear extorted this from him, that he sought for Moses to
entreat for him, and was anxious to appease God, yet was it a token of
his deceitful and double mind, that he made it, as it were, a bargain,
that the frogs should be taken away before he let the people go. His
impiety, therefore, lay concealed in his heart, so long as he thought
that he could not defy God with impunity; but, relying confidently on
impunity, he manifested his deceit and perfidy. Although it was not with
any sincere feeling of repentance that he now humbly speaks of Jehovah
by name, yet it shews that the stoutness of his spirit was broken, of
which mention was made before, when he inquired in mockery, “Who is the
Lord?”

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p22"></span><span id="iv.viii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p23"></span>**9.** *And Moses said unto Pharaoh.*
<span id="iv.viii.ii-p23.1"></span>Commentators differ as to the meaning
of this passage. They are too speculative who expound it, that this
honor was granted to Pharaoh, that he should fix the time in which Moses
was to pray. Again, there is a flatness in the exposition, that Pharaoh
might glory because the frogs were to die. Those who expound it, that
Pharaoh should be freed from the frogs, so that he might glory in
safety, express part of the meaning, but not the whole. It rather
appears to me that there is an implied *antithesis* <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p23.2"></span>between the perverse boasting, wherewith
Pharaoh had exulted, and that pious glowing which he ought to seek for
in the mercy of God; as if Moses had said, “Thus far you have exalted
yourself improperly, trusting in your power, and afterwards when
bewitched by the enchantments; now rather glory, because you have an
*intercessor* <span id="iv.viii.ii-p23.3"></span>and patron to plead for
you to God.” For it was needful that the arrogance, which had so falsely
elevated him, that he dared to contend with God, should be crushed, and
that no hope should be left him, save in the mercy of God. But to “glory
<span id="iv.viii.ii-p23.4"></span>over” Moses, means that he should
seek his glory in the advocacy of Moses, and should account it a very
great happiness that he should deign to interpose for his reconciliation
with God. For <span id="iv.viii.ii-p23.5"></span>the *particle* <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p23.6"></span>על<span id="iv.viii.ii-p23.7"></span>,
 <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p24.21"></span>is often so taken. Yet Moses by no means
wished to detract at all from the glory of God; but (as I have lately
said) desiring to humble the pride of the haughty king, he told him that
nothing would be better and more glorious for him than to have a good
hope of pardon, when he had obtained as his advocate the servant of the
living God, whom he so cordially hated. He only affirms that the frogs
should “remain <span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.22"></span>in the river;” as
much as to say that they should be content with their ordinary
habitation and bounds; for we know that frogs, although they sometimes
jump out on the bank, still do not go far from the water, because they
are nourished by humidity. Thus he hints that they were let loose by
God’s command to cover the ground, and that it was still in His power,
if He chose, that they should invade the fields and houses again in new
multitudes; and that it must be ascribed to His blessing, if they kept
themselves in the waters, and did not make incursions beyond their own
boundaries.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p25"></span><span id="iv.viii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p26"></span>**10.** *And he said, Tomorrow.* If you
refer this to Moses, there is ambiguity in the sense; but, it being
probable that they were Pharaoh’s words, I think that he is asking for a
respite till tomorrow, before he lets the people go. For they fall into
an absurdity, who think that he asked Moses to drive away the frogs by
his prayers on the morrow, as if Pharaoh went quietly to sleep, and put
off the remedy of the evil. There is, then, no pretence for
understanding it, that Pharaoh, as if his mind were quite tranquil and
unmoved, desired to have his land delivered from the frogs on the
following day: but rather it means, that if he be released from this
difficulty, he promises the discharge of the people, but yet suspends it
till the next day, for the purpose of deceit. For there was no other
reason for this procrastination, except that, having obtained what he
wanted, he might depart from his engagement, as he actually did; but
Moses, satisfied with this promise, undertakes to bring it about that
God should disperse the frogs; and this, I doubt not, was performed on
the same day. For this was the cause of the tyrant’s changing his
determination, that, by the interposition of the night, his fear
departed. And, certainly, it is gathered from the following words, that
the frogs were soon after removed; for it is said that Moses and Aaron
prayed after they had gone out; which would be but little in accordance
with the notion, that the next day was waited for. It is not by any rash
or presumptuous impulse that Moses affirms that Pharaoh should obtain
his desire; because it appears from his success that he was assured of
its being God’s will. Thus often are the prophets, although no spoken
revelation may intervene, directed nevertheless by the secret
inspiration of the Spirit. In this confidence, also, Moses declares that
Pharaoh should know that there is none other God to be compared with the
God of Israel. This, moreover, is the true knowledge of God, when
whatsoever lifts itself up to obscure His glory, is reduced to its
proper level, and every high thing yields or is cast down, so that He
alone may be exalted.

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p27"></span><span id="iv.viii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p28"></span>**15.** *Blot when Pharaoh saw.* Hence
it appears that the wretched tyrant, like a winding serpent, twisted and
turned his mind to crooked counsels; for when he was trembling beneath
the present feeling of God’s power, he dared not obstinately resist any
longer; he only sought a little breathing time; now, being freed from
fear, he returns to his former contumacy. But this is a sign of a
perverse and crooked disposition, not to submit willingly, but to pay
only a temporary deference, when necessity is more than usually urgent.
God foreknew, and had foretold to Moses, that this perfidy was hidden in
the recesses of his heart; but he was willing to bring it to light, and
therefore remitted the punishment; and hence was the opportunity for
dissembling.

<span id="iv.viii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.viii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
8:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#016)<span
id="iv.viii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p2"></span>**16.** And the Lord said unto Moses,
Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the land,
that it may become lice throughout all the land of Egypt.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p3"></span>**16.** Tunc dixit Jehova ad Mosen,
Loquere ad Aharon, Extende virgam tuam, et percute pulverem terrae, ut
sit in pediculos per totam terram Aegypti.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p4"></span>**17.** And they did so: for Aaron
stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the dust of the earth,
and it became lice in man and in beast: all the dust of the land became
lice throughout all the land of Egypt.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p5"></span>**17.** Et fecerunt sic: et extendit
Aharon manum suam cum virga sua, et percussit pulverem terrae: ut fuit
in pediculos in homine et jumento, totus pulvis terrae fuit in pediculos
per universam terram Aegypti.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p6"></span>**18.** And the magicians did so with
their enchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not: so there
were lice upon man and upon beast.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p7"></span>**18.** Et sic fecerunt magi
incantationibus suis ut producerent pediculos: sed non potuerunt.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p8"></span>**19.** Then the magicians said unto
Pharaoh, This is the finger of God: and Pharaoh’s heart was hardened,
and he hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had said.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p9"></span>**19.** Tunc dixerunt magi ad
Pharaonem, Digitus Dei est hic. Et roboratum fuit cor Pharaonis, nec
audivit eos, sicut loquutus erat Jehova.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p10"></span><span id="iv.viii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p11"></span>**16.** *And the Lord said unto
Moses.* <span id="iv.viii.iii-p11.1"></span>In this place again, as
before, Aaron is commanded to act as the inferior of Moses in punishing
the tyrant; and this as being more ignominious than as if Moses alone
had been employed. The nature of this third plague is very remarkable.
God troubles Egypt not only with frogs, but with lice; for although the
Hebrews are not entirely agreed as to the <span
id="iv.viii.iii-p11.2"></span>כנם<span id="iv.viii.iii-p11.3"></span>,
*kinim*<span id="iv.viii.iii-p11.4"></span>, <span
id="iv.viii.iii-p11.5"></span>yet they admit that they were little
animals or insects, which produced shame together with annoyance even to
the meanest of men. We see then how magnificently God trampled upon the
pride of Egypt, by inflicting a punishment full of affront and disgrace;
for although it would have been painful to sink under a powerful and
warlike enemy, yet was it far more sad to be basely destroyed by lice.
Nor can we doubt that God prepared such an army as this, principally
that He might openly manifest how easily He can bring to nought in
derision all earthly strength and power. And surely, unless the
Egyptians had been something more than stupid and beside themselves,
this calculation would have come into their minds; what would hereafter
happen, if the Maker of heaven and earth should apply Himself to their
destruction with all His might, when they perceived themselves to be
wasted away in this almost ludicrous contest with Him? But let us learn
from this history, that all creatures are ready at God’s lightest
command, whenever He chooses to make use of them to chastise His
enemies; and again, that no animal is so vile and contemptible as not to
have the power of doing injury when God employs it; and, finally, that
reprobates obtain this at last by their proud doings, viz., that they
are, with the greatest infamy, made to yield to the worms themselves, or
to lice.

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p12"></span><span id="iv.viii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p13"></span>**18.** *And the magicians did so.*
They “did” is here put for “they tried to do;” for they did not succeed,
as presently appears. They are therefore said to have done, what they in
vain attempted, or what they essayed, but without success. And in this
way God took away from Pharaoh whatever excuse remained, under pretext
of being deceived; for although he had previously himself sought for
these deceptions, still his obstinacy was not without color of excuse,
as long as the magicians rivaled Moses in the contention; but when he
sees their art fail, he professedly sets himself in opposition to God.
Although it was not with reference to him alone that God restrained
these impostors, but He exposes them to the ridicule of all, in order to
assert altogether for Himself alone the glory of perfect power. Hence we
gather how well, according to His inestimable wisdom, He represses
whatever license He for a time permits to the ministers of Satan; for
when, by bearing with their audacity, He has sufficiently proved the
faith of His people, He compels them to stop abruptly, as it were, that
they may sink in confusion, and “proceed no further,” as Paul says, when
recounting this history. (<span id="iv.viii.iii-p13.1"></span>[2Ti
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#009)<span
id="iv.viii.iii-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p14"></span><span id="iv.viii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p15"></span>**19.** *Then the magicians said unto
Pharaoh.* It is probable that they were reproved harshly, because they
had come to a stop in their rivalry with the servants of God; wherefore
they excuse themselves by saying, that there is no more room for their
wisdom and magical arts. We gather from hence that they had so been able
to delude by their sorceries, that they thought themselves very good and
praiseworthy artificers of deception. For on no other account had the
people accounted them wise than because they had themselves first
attained this confidence; therefore they oppose the finger of God to
their subtlety and skill, as much as to say, that there is no longer any
question as to the excellence of their art, but that whatever could be
required from astrologers and masters of juggling, was now brought to
nought by the extraordinary power of God. They do indeed contradict
themselves; because what could have been their object in contending with
Moses and Aaron, except they had boasted that God was on their side? But
if they had been acting under the auspices of God, how ridiculous was it
to confess that those, whom they had before opposed, were their
superiors, and to accord them the praise of the victory, because they
were endued with power from God? We see then how infatuated they were
with all their cunning. But in the meantime we must recollect what I
have lately glanced at, that they not only led others into error, but
were also deceived, because they thought there was some science in the
deceptions of their magic; as now-a-days we see that the fortune-tellers
and other impostors, who call themselves judicial astrologers, so pride
themselves in their follies, as to have no hesitation in taking the
first rank amongst the learned. Besides, ambition itself impelled the
magicians to say, that God wrought by the hand of Moses; for they were
ashamed to confess that any human being excelled them in wisdom. But the
confession was extorted from them, that they might greatly magnify the
glory of the one true God, and at the same time bear witness to the
legitimate vocation of Moses; for if the power of God is manifested
conspicuously in Moses, it follows that he is a true and divine Prophet.
But, because He does not equally work in them, but brings their efforts
to confusion, it may thence be concluded that they are enemies of God.
That they should have contended unsuccessfully, and have been foiled in
the midst of their attempts, was sufficient to restrain their vanity;
but this was much worse, that they should make out God to be the enemy
of their art. It is true that they spoke this inconsiderately, because
they only wished to consult their own fame, and to defend the false
honors of their learning; but it pleased God thus to convict them, so
that Pharaoh should perceive that he had entered into contention with
the living God, and not with two ordinary men. As to the form of
expression, it is clearly metaphorical; for in Luke’s Gospel the Spirit
is called “the finger of God,” (<span id="iv.viii.iii-p15.1"></span>[Lu
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#020)<span
id="iv.viii.iii-p15.1"></span>;) as likewise, in many passages, the same
Spirit is intended by “the hand of God.” Still, we must mark the reason,
lest any unlearned person should take it literally, as if the Spirit,
who truly is Eternal God, were but some portion of the Divinity.  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) But since the magicians were compelled at
length to recognise God’s power in the miracle, our folly will be worse
than base if this same consideration does not obtain with us. Although
it becomes us to acknowledge the hand of God in two ways; for neither
when He acts by means, (as it is called,) does He detract from Himself
at all; and, therefore, His hand may be seen with the eyes of faith in
the whole course of nature; but, since He stirs up our indifference by
miracles, therein it shines forth more conspicuously. Because, however,
we shall soon see that the magicians did not therefore repent of their
folly, let us learn sincerely and cordially to humble ourselves beneath
God’s powerful hand, as soon as it appears. That Pharaoh, when deserted
by the magicians, did not cease at all from his obstinacy, is a proof to
us that, however wickedness may seek for its support in different
directions, still the corruption is implanted within, which is of itself
at enmity with God.

<span id="iv.viii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iv.viii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
8:20-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#020)<span
id="iv.viii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p2"></span>**20.** And the Lord said unto Moses,
Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh, (lo, he cometh
forth to the water,) and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Let my
people go, that they may serve me:

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p3"></span>**20.** Tunc dixit Jehova ad Mosen,
Surge mane, ac te siste in conspectum Pharaonis: Ecce egredietur ad
aquas: et dices ad eum, Sic ait Jehova, Dimitte populum meum ut serviant
mihi.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p4"></span>**21.** Else, if thou wilt not let my
people go, behold, I will send swarms *of flies* upon thee, and upon thy
servants, and upon thy people, and into thy houses: and the houses of
the Egyptians shall be full of swarms *of flies*, and also the ground
whereon they *are*

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p5"></span>**21.** Quod si tu non dimiseris populum
meum, ecce emittam in te, et in servos tuos, et in populum tuum, et in
domos tuas examen insectorum: et replebuntur domus Aegyptiorum
insectorum examine, atque etiam terra super quam illa extiterint.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p6"></span>**22.** And I will sever in that day the
land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms *of flies*
shall be there: to the end thou mayest know that I am the Lord in the
midst of the earth.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p7"></span>**22.** Et separabo in die illa terram
Gosen, in qua populus meus habitat, ne sit illic examen insectorum, ut
scias quod ego sum Jehova in medio terrae.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p8"></span>**23.** And I will put a division
between my people and thy people: tomorrow shall this sign be.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p9"></span>**23.** Et ponam redemptionem inter
populum meum, et inter populum tuum: Cras erit signum hoc.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p10"></span>**24.** And the Lord did so: and there
came a grievous swarm *of flies* into the house of Pharaoh, and *into*
his servants’ houses, and into all the land of Egypt: the land was
corrupted by reason of the swarm *of flies*

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p11"></span>**24.** Et fecit Jehova sic: et venit
examen insectorum grave in domum Pharaonis, et domum servorum ejus, et
totam terram Aegypti: corrupta fuit terra propter examen insectorum.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p12"></span>**25.** And Pharaoh called for Moses
and for Aaron, and said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p13"></span>**25.** Tunc vocavit Pharao Mosen et
Aharon, et ait, Ite, sacrificate Deo vestro in hac terra.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p14"></span>**26.** And Moses said, It is not meet
so to do; for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the
Lord our God: lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians
before their eyes, and will they not stone us?

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p15"></span>**26.** Et dixit Moses, Non convenit
facere sic: quia abominationem Aegypti sacrificaremus Jehovae Deo
nostro. Ecce, si sacrificaremus abominationem Aegyptiorum coram oculos
eorum, annon lapidarent nos?

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p16"></span>**27.** We will go three days’ journey
into the wilderness, and sacrifice to the Lord our God, as he shall
command us.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p17"></span>**27.** Viam trium dierum progrediemur
in desertum, et sacrificabimus Jehovae Deo nostro, quemadmodum praecepit
nobis.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p18"></span><span id="iv.viii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p19"></span>**20.** *And the Lord said unto Moses,
Rise up early.* <span id="iv.viii.iv-p19.1"></span>As <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p19.2"></span>Pharaoh advances in daring rashness, so
does God on the other hand proceed to restrain his impetuosity by
opposing impediments. This is what the wicked at length obtain by long
and multiplied contention, that having received many wounds they perish
by various torments. With respect to the command that Moses should meet
Pharaoh, when he shall go down in the morning to the river-side for his
pleasure, it is uncertain whether God would have the tyrant encountered
in public, because the palace was difficult of access; although it seems
probable to me, that a place was chosen in which the proceeding would be
more manifest, and where the voice of His messenger would be more
clearly heard. Therefore, that nothing might be done secretly, Moses
proclaims in open day, before the whole multitude, that judgment of God,
which immediately afterwards took effect. But here no mention is made of
the rod, as in the former plagues; because God sometimes makes use of
external instruments, that we may know that all creatures are in His
hand, and are wielded according to His will; but sometimes acts
independently of them, that we may know that He needs no such
assistance. This varied mode of action demonstrates that He subjects all
things to His empire as He pleases, and yet that He is contented with
His own power. This plague has some affinity to the two previous ones,
inasmuch as its infliction is attended with ignominy, which may put the
tyrant to shame. The Hebrew word <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p19.3"></span>ערב<span id="iv.viii.iv-p19.4"></span>,
 <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p20.9"></span> g*narob*<span
id="iv.viii.iv-p20.10"></span>, <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p20.11"></span>means the same as the Latin “*examen*
*insectorum*<span id="iv.viii.iv-p20.12"></span>,” <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p20.13"></span>a swarm of insects. Many interpreters
think that there was a mixture of various kinds; and this I do not
reject, since it is probable that their foul odour was multiplied, so as
almost to suffocate the tyrant. Those who explain it as describing
bears, lions, tigers, wolves, and other wild beasts, depart without any
reason from the genuine meaning of the word.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p21"></span><span id="iv.viii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p22"></span>**22.** *And I will sever.* <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p22.1"></span>Although this had not been expressly
declared <span id="iv.viii.iv-p22.2"></span>as yet, still it must be
extended to the other plagues; for it is certain, that when God
inflicted punishment on the Egyptians, He did not proceed promiscuously
against all men; and, therefore, that His chosen people, in whose behalf
He acted, were free from all inconvenience. But now perhaps for the
first time this distinction is made more evident to Pharaoh, whereas
before the peculiar grace of God had not been known to him. From hence,
however, it was more than plain, that mercies and punishments were in
the power of the one God of Israel, so that He might spare His own
people, and treat them kindly and paternally, whilst, on the other hand,
He exercised <span id="iv.viii.iv-p22.3"></span>vengeance against His
enemies. Wherefore He adds, “to the end thou mayest know that I am the
Lord God in the midst of the earth.” There is all implied *antithesis*
<span id="iv.viii.iv-p22.4"></span>here, which casts down all idols, and
exalts the God of Israel alone. But although “the earth” may be here
taken for the whole habitable globe, it will be properly confined to
Egypt, as if God affirmed that He was supreme in the midst of Egypt, or
everywhere throughout all Egypt, which means the same. The expression
which follows, although somewhat harsh, yet contains no ambiguity. God
is said to have “put a redemption between his people and the Egyptians;
 <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p23.1"></span> because, as if He had erected barriers, or
set up a fence to preserve one corner in safety, He had withholden His
favor from the whole surrounding district. Moreover, because the word
<span id="iv.viii.iv-p23.2"></span>פלה<span
id="iv.viii.iv-p23.3"></span>,  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)
*phelo*<span id="iv.viii.iv-p24.17"></span>, <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p24.18"></span>signifies to be admirable, or to be
concealed, some interpreters translate it, “I will render admirable
 <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p25.1"></span> the land of Goshen;” but I have preferred
following the more usual rendering which appears to be most appropriate.
Lastly, it is to be observed that time for repentance is again given to
Pharaoh, so that, if he were curable, he might prevent the punishment
denounced against him: for God might have sent the insects at the
moment; but He assigns the morrow, to prove the wickedness of the
tyrant.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p26"></span><span id="iv.viii.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p27"></span>**25.** *And Pharaoh called for Moses.*
Pharaoh imagines that he is granting a great thing, if the Israelites
are permitted to offer sacrifice to God in Egypt. He and all his people
should have humbly embraced the worship of God, and casting away their
superstitions should have sought to Moses as their instructor in sincere
piety. He departs from none of their common vices; he does not renounce
his idols nor forsake his former errors; but only permits God to be
worshipped in one part of his kingdom. But this is customary with the
reprobate, to think that they have sufficiently done their duty, when
they yield ever so little to God. Hence it arises, that when they are
conquered and compelled, still they would not hesitate to detract
somewhat from the rights of God; nay, if they might do so with impunity,
they would willingly rob Him of all. And in fact as long as fortune
 <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) is propitious, and they enjoy a
state of prosperity and safety, they deprive God, as much as may be, of
all His glory; but when the power of resisting fails them, they so
descend to submission as to defraud Him of half His due honor. God had
commanded a free departure to be conceded to His people; Pharaoh does
not obey this command, but endeavors to satisfy God in another way,
viz., by not forbidding them to offer sacrifice in Egypt. This sin,
which was common in all ages, is now-a-days too clearly manifest. Our
Pharaohs would altogether extinguish God’s glory, and this they madly
set themselves to compass; but when reduced to extremities, if there be
no further use in professedly contending with Him, they maim and
mutilate His worship by a fictitious course, which they call a
reformation. Hence arose that mixture of light and darkness, which was
named “the Interim”  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) Nor do the
enemies of the truth cease to obtrude thus ridiculously upon God their
empty and unreal expiation’s.

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p30"></span><span id="iv.viii.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p31"></span>**26.** *And Moses said.* <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p31.1"></span>The word <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p31.2"></span>כון<span id="iv.viii.iv-p31.3"></span>,
 <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) *kon,* <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p32.1"></span>which Moses here uses, has a wide
signification; for the Hebrews say of whatever they do not approve, that
it is not right (*rectum.*<span id="iv.viii.iv-p32.2"></span>) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p32.3"></span>Therefore almost all the interpreters agree
in this, that Pharaoh demanded what was by no means equitable, because
he would have exposed the Israelites to be stoned by his people. If this
opinion be admitted, we must read the passage connectedly, that it was
not in accordance with reason, that the Israelites should sacrifice in
Egypt in a strange manner, because the novelty would not be tolerated.
There are two clauses in the sentence; one, that it was not right for
them to offer in Egypt a sacrifice to God, which was abominable to the
inhabitants themselves, or to offer a profane sacrifice of the
abominations of the heathen; the other, that there was a danger of the
Israelites being stoned, if they provoked the Egyptians by a ceremony,
which was detestable to them. As to the second clause, there is no doubt
that “the abomination of the Egyptians” is taken actively for the
sacrifices which they abominate. The same seems to be the meaning of the
first clause; for it would be harsh to interpret the same forms of
expression differently within a few words of each other; except that the
name of Jehovah, put in opposition as it is to “the abomination,” seems
to require a passive signification. For Moses says emphatically, that
“it is not right to sacrifice the abomination of Egypt to Jehovah the
God of Israel.” If this view be adopted, “the abomination” will be the
profanation of true and pure worship, wherewith the sacred ceremonies of
the Egyptians were defiled; as much as to say, that it was unlawful to
mix up the worship of the true God with such sacrilege. And, in fact,
Moses seems to contend with a twofold argument; first, that it was not
right, secondly, that it was not expedient. Take this, then, as the
first reason, that a sacrifice which should. be polluted by the
abominations of Egypt, would neither be lawful nor pleasing to God; the
second will follow after, that the Egyptians would not tolerate it;
because they would conceive both themselves and their gods to be
grievously insulted, if their accustomed mode of sacrificing should be
violated. This interpretation is fuller, and contains fuller doctrine,
if Moses, first of all, was solicitous as to the honor of God, and did
not regard the advantage of the people only; and in this sentiment, that
the true God could not be duly worshipped unless when separated from all
idols, there is nothing forced. But, since in the same verse “the
abomination of the Egyptians” is taken actively, it will be well, in
order that the construction may be more easy, to expound it thus in both
places. Then the sense of the first clause will be, it is not consistent
to expose the worship of our God to the reproaches and sneers of the
Gentiles; which would be the case, if the Egyptians should see us
honoring a sacrificial ceremony which they abominate. I do not, indeed,
assent to their opinion, who will not admit the passage to consist of
two clauses, but read it connectedly thus — that it was not right to do
this, because the Egyptians would stone the Israelites. For Moses not
only had regard to what was best for the people, but primarily to what
would please God, viz., that His holy name should not be profaned. I see
no foundation in reason for restraining, as is usually done, the word
“abomination” to the animals of sacrifice; and, therefore, I extend it
to the whole operation of sacrificing.  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101)

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p34"></span><span id="iv.viii.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p35"></span>**27.** *We will go three days’
journey.* This is the conclusion that no change must be made in God’s
command, but that His injunction must be obeyed simply, and without
exception. Nor is there little praise due to the firmness of Moses, who
so boldly and unreservedly rejected the pretended moderation of the
tyrant, because it would have somewhat interfered with the will of God.
He therefore declares that the Israelites would do no otherwise than as
God had prescribed.

<span id="iv.viii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.viii.v-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
8:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#028)<span
id="iv.viii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v-p2"></span>**28.** And Pharaoh said, I will let you
go, that ye may sacrifice to the Lord your God in the wilderness; only
ye shall not go very far away: entreat for me.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p3"></span>**28.** Tunc dixit Pharao, Ego dimittam
vos ut sacrificetis Jehovae Deo vestro: veruntamen non longius pergetis
eundo: orate pro me.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p4"></span>**29.** And Moses said, Behold, I go out
from thee, and I will entreat the Lord that the swarms *of flies* may
depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, tomorrow:
but let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people
go to sacrifice to the Lord.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p5"></span>**29.** Et dixit Moses, Ecce, ego
egrediar a te, et rogabo Jehovam ut recedat examen insectorum a
Pharaone, et a servis ejus, et a populo ejus eras. Veruntamen non
adjiciat Pharao agere fallaciter, non dimittendo populum ut sacrificet
Jehovae.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p6"></span>**30.** And Moses went out from Pharaoh,
and entreated the Lord.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p7"></span>**30.** Tunc egressus est Moses a
Pharaone, et oravit ad Jehovae.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p8"></span>**31.** And the Lord did according to the
word of Moses; and he removed the swarms *of flies* from Pharaoh, from
his servants, and from his people: there remained not one.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p9"></span>**31.** Et fecit Jehova secundum verbum
Mosis, et recessit mixtura insectorum a Pharaone, et a populo ejus: non
unum fuit residuum.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p10"></span>**32.** And Pharaoh hardened his heart
at this time also, neither would he let the people go.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p11"></span>**32.** Et aggravavit Pharao cor suum
etiam hac vice, nec dimisit populum.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p12"></span><span id="iv.viii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v-p13"></span>**28.** *And Pharaoh said, I will let
you go.* When he sees that his delays and shifts avail him nothing, he
professes entire obedience; not that he then proposed to deceive and
lie, because he was prevented by fear; but only, because overwhelmed
with a present sense of his calamity, he dared not raise his crest
against God. Therefore (as I said before) he did not so much wish
designedly to conciliate and frustrate Moses by falsehood, as he
deceived himself. For we must observe that (like one who has a wolf by
the ears) he was constrained to promise the dismissal of the people,
whom he retained to his own great injury. And this is why he commends
himself to their prayers, for necessity urged him to implore God’s
pardon and peace: although it might have been that he desired craftily
to engage their affection to himself under the pretext of religion. For
by this anxious precaution for himself, he betrays his want of
confidence. Finally, by requesting their prayers, he, as it were, throws
out a rope by which he may draw them back to himself when the sacrifice
was over.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p14"></span><span id="iv.viii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v-p15"></span>**29.** *And Moses said, Behold I go out
from thee.* Moses does not reply to this demand, because he knew that
the design of God was otherwise; and God had justly left him in
ignorance as to what He did not yet wish him to know. There is, then, no
reason why Moses should be accused of bad faith when he faithfully
fulfilled the charge committed to him; although he was silent as to what
he was not ordered to declare, even as to that which God wished to be
concealed from the tyrant. But the holy Prophet, aroused to pious
indignation by the king’s perfidy, does not immediately remove the
plague, but waits till the morrow; and moreover, denounces with severity
that, if he should persist in deceit, its punishment awaited him. This
great magnanimity he had derived from the miracles, for, having
experienced in them the unconquerable power of God, he had no cause for
fear. For it was an act of extraordinary boldness openly and before the
tyrant’s face to reproach him for his falsehoods, and at the same time
to threaten him with punishment unless he desisted from them. But we
said before that Moses had not acted from the workings of his own mind,
when he promised Pharaoh what he asked, but that he had spoken thus
confidently from special impulse. For the general promise in which God
affirms that He will grant the prayers of His servants, must not be
applied to particular cases, so that they should expect to obtain this
or that in a specified manner, unless they have some peculiar testimony
from the word or the Spirit of God.

<span id="iv.viii.v-p16"></span><span id="iv.viii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.v-p17"></span>**31.** *And the Lord did according to
the word of Moses.* “The word” here may be expounded either of the
answer, or the prayer, of Moses. The former pleases me best, viz., that
by the result God proved that He ratified what Moses had said, whom He
had made the proclaimer of His judgment; but if any one prefer to refer
it to his prayer, let him retain his opinion. When he adds that the
“heart of the king was hardened at this time also,” he aggravates the
crime of his obstinacy, since there was no bound to his rebellion under
such a series of punishments, by which even an iron heart should have
been corrected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc03011.htm#fr_91) <span
id="iv.viii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.i-p20"></span> In the *Fr*. the word here used is
*miracles*, probably a misprint for *menaces*.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc03011.htm#fr_92) <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p23.8"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ii-p24"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p24.1"></span>על<span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.2"></span>.
Instances in which this particle has the meaning attributed to it by
*C*<span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.3"></span>., <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p24.4"></span>may be seen in <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p24.5"></span>[Ps
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004)<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p24.5"></span><span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.6"></span>, first
clause; and in <span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.7"></span>[Job
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#010)<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p24.7"></span><span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.8"></span>.
Noldius has also observed that <span
id="iv.viii.ii-p24.9"></span>עלי<span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.10"></span>,
the form in which it here occurs, has the meaning of mihi curae, mihi
incumbit, in <span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.11"></span>[Jud
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#020)<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p24.11"></span><span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.12"></span>,
<span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.13"></span>[Ps
116:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#012)<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p24.13"></span><span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.14"></span>,
<span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.15"></span>[Pr
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#014)<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p24.15"></span><span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.16"></span>, and
<span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.17"></span>[2Sa
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#011)<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p24.17"></span><span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.18"></span>.
Concord. particularum, <span id="iv.viii.ii-p24.19"></span>על<span
id="iv.viii.ii-p24.20"></span>, 34. — *W*

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc03011.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iv.viii.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iii-p16"></span> In the *Fr*. there is the following
addition: — “C’est dont selon nostre infirmite que la vertu essentielle
de Dieu est appellee sa main ou son doigt;” it is then in reference to
our infirmity that the essential virtue of God is called His hand, or
this finger.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc03011.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p19.5"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p20"></span><span id="iv.viii.iv-p20.1"></span> The
root <span id="iv.viii.iv-p20.2"></span>ערב<span
id="iv.viii.iv-p20.3"></span>, means *commingling*<span
id="iv.viii.iv-p20.4"></span>, <span id="iv.viii.iv-p20.5"></span>and
the producing of confusion thereby. Hence evening is called <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p20.6"></span>ערב<span id="iv.viii.iv-p20.7"></span>,
from the mingling together of day and night; and the same name is given
to a mixed crowd; and possibly to a confused swarm of insects. The LXX.
have taken it for the name of some particular kind of fly in this
instance; whilst *S* *M*<span id="iv.viii.iv-p20.8"></span>. has
mentioned certain Rabbies, as affirming that it here means a mingled
crowd of wild beasts. — *W*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc03011.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p22.5"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p23"></span> Verse 23, “And I will put a division,”
*marg*., “redemption.” — *A*.*V*.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc03011.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p23.4"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p24"></span> <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p24.1"></span>פלה<span id="iv.viii.iv-p24.2"></span>, is
*to separate*<span id="iv.viii.iv-p24.3"></span>, *to distinguish by
marks of* <span id="iv.viii.iv-p24.4"></span>favor, <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p24.5"></span>פלא<span id="iv.viii.iv-p24.6"></span>, to
be *wonderful*<span id="iv.viii.iv-p24.7"></span>, <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p24.8"></span>or *inscrutable* <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p24.9"></span>The derivatives from these kindred roots
are, however, not always.distinguishable; and in this instance *S*
*M*<span id="iv.viii.iv-p24.10"></span>. and the *V*<span
id="iv.viii.iv-p24.11"></span>. have rendered <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p24.12"></span>הפליתי<span
id="iv.viii.iv-p24.13"></span>, as *C*<span
id="iv.viii.iv-p24.14"></span>. mentions, assuming it to be irregularly
formed from <span id="iv.viii.iv-p24.15"></span>פלא<span
id="iv.viii.iv-p24.16"></span>. — *W*

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc03011.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p24.19"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p25"></span> *French*, “miraculeuse.”

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc03011.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p28"></span> Ils ont vent en pouppe, — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc03011.htm#fr_99) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p29"></span> The document called the *Interim,*
drawn up at the suggestion of Charles V., and published at the Diet of
Augsburg in 1548, was professedly a measure of mutual concession,
prescribing what was to be believed in the *interim,* “until all could
be established by a general council.” In reality, however, it was
opposed to the Reformation on all the main points of dispute; and
conceded nothing but that married priests should retain their cures, and
that, where the cup had been again given to the laity, it might be
continued. It is printed at length in *Osiander,* Ecc. Hist., cent. 16,
lib. 2 c. 72; and a copious summary of its contents is given by
*F1eury,* 54:145. See *Robertson’s* Charles V., and *Stokes’s*
continuation *of Milner.* See also *Calvin’s Tracts,* Calv. Soc., vol.
3, on the Adultero-German *Interim.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc03011.htm#fr_100) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p31.4"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p32"></span> C. adopts the translation of *S. M.,*
instead of that found in the *V.*, and gives his readers the short note
of *S.M.*, “Non convenit, sive non est rectum.” — *W.*

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc03011.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iv.viii.iv-p32.4"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.iv-p33"></span> “For the Egyptians worshipped divers
beasts, as the ox, the sheep, and such like, which the Israelites
offered in sacrifice; which things the Egyptians abhorred to see.” —
*Geneva Version, in loco.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 9](cc03012)
