[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc03043)  [Next](cc03045.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xix"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p1"></span>DEUTERONOMY 6

<span id="v.xix-p2"></span>deuteronomy 6:10-12

<span id="v.xix-p3"></span>**10.** And it shall be, when the Lord thy
God shall have brought thee into the land which he sware unto thy
fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee great and
goodly cities, which thou buildedst not;

<span id="v.xix-p4"></span>**10.** Erit autem quum introduxerit to
Jehova Deus tuus in terram de qua juravit patribus tuis, Abraham, Isaac
et Jacob, se daturum tibi eam, et urbes magnas et pulchras quasnon
aedificasti:

<span id="v.xix-p5"></span>**11.** And houses full of all good *things,*
which thou filledst not; and wells digged, which thou diggedst not;
vineyards and olive-trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt
have eaten, and be full;

<span id="v.xix-p6"></span>**11.** Et domus plenas omni bono, quas non
replesti, et cisternas effossas, quas non effodisti: vineas et oliveta,
quae non plantasti: et comederis, et saturatus fueris:

<span id="v.xix-p7"></span>**12.** *Then* beware lest thou forget the
Lord, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house
of bondage.

<span id="v.xix-p8"></span>**12.** Cave tibi ne obliviscaris Jehovae,
qui eduxit te e terra Aegyptie domo servorum.

<span id="v.xix-p9"></span><span id="v.xix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p10"></span>**10.** *And it shall be, when the Lord thy
God.* Since wealth and prosperity for the most part blind men’s minds,
so that they do not sufficiently attend to modesty and moderation, but
rather grow wanton in their lusts, and intoxicate themselves with
pleasures, God prescribes against this error by anticipation. For not
without cause does he admonish them to beware lest they forget God, when
they shall have been liberally and luxuriously treated by Him, but
because he knew this to be a common vice, for abundance to beget
arrogance; as afterwards he will say in his song,

<span id="v.xix-p11"></span>“Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked: thou art
waxen fat, etc., then he forsook God which made him, and lightly
esteemed the Rock of his salvation.” (<span id="v.xix-p11.1"></span>[De
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span id="v.xix-p11.1"></span>..md)

<span id="v.xix-p12"></span>First of all, he shews how base and unworthy
would be their ingratitude, if, when loaded with so many excellent
benefits by God, they should cast away the recollection of Him; for, as
His goodness was inestimable, in giving them cities built by the hands
of others, and in transferring to them whatever others had prepared by
their great labor and industry, so would their impiety be the more
detestable in neglecting Him, when He daily set Himself before them in
this abundant store of blessing. Let us learn, therefore, from this
passage, that we are invited by God’s liberality to honor Him, and that
whenever He deals kindly by us, He places His glory before our eyes;
but, on the other hand, we should remember, that what ought to be as it
were vehicles, to lift up our minds on high, are, by our own fault,
converted into obstacles and clogs, and that therefore we ought to be
the more upon our guard. At the end of verse 12, he reproves their folly
by another argument, if being thus suddenly enriched, they should give
way to intemperance; as if he had said, that their absurdity would be
insupportable, if, when uplifted by God’s bounty, they should not
remember their origin; for nothing should have served more to incline
them to humility than that wretched state of servitude from whence they
had been rescued. Therefore he contrasts with that ample dominion to
which God had exalted them, the house of bondmen,”  <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244.md) in order that the recollection of
their former lot may restrain all frowardness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc03044.htm#fr_244.md) <span
id="v.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p13"></span> Margin of *A. V.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 9:1-6](cc03045.md)
