[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03063)  [Next](cc03065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p1"></span>Another Supplement

<span id="vi.v-p2"></span>respecting the Payment of Tribute

<span id="vi.v-p3"></span><span id="vi.v-p3.1"></span>[Exodus
30](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#000)<span id="vi.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.i"></span>

<span id="vi.v.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.v.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
30:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#011)<span
id="vi.v.i-p1.1"></span>, 15, 16

<span id="vi.v.i-p2"></span>**11.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="vi.v.i-p3"></span>**11.** Loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo,

<span id="vi.v.i-p4"></span>**12.** When thou takest the sum of the
children of Israel, after their number, then shall they give every man a
ransom for his soul unto the Lord, when thou numberest them; that there
be no plague among them, when *thou* numberest them.

<span id="vi.v.i-p5"></span>**12.** Subduces summam filiorum Israel,
prout numerati fuerint inter eos: dabunt singuli redemptionem animae
suae Jehovae quum numeraveris eos, et non erit in eis plaga quum
numeraveris eos.

<span id="vi.v.i-p6"></span>**13.** This they shall give, every one that
passeth among them that are numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of
the sanctuary: (a shekel *is* twenty gerahs:) an half shekel *shall be*
the offering of the Lord.

<span id="vi.v.i-p7"></span>**13.** Hoc dabunt quisque transiens inter
numeratos, dimidium sicli secundum siclum sanctuarii. Viginti obolorum
est siclus, dimidium sicli erit oblatio Jehovae.

<span id="vi.v.i-p8"></span>**15.** The rich shall not give more, and
the poor shall not give less, than half a shekel, when *they* give an
offering unto the Lord, to make an atonement for your souls.

<span id="vi.v.i-p9"></span>**15.** Dives non augebit, et pauper non
diminuet ex dimidio sicli, dando oblationem Jehovae ad expiandas animas
vestras.

<span id="vi.v.i-p10"></span>**16.** And thou shalt take the
atonement-money of the children of Israel, and shalt appoint it for the
service of the tabernacle of the congregation; that it may be a memorial
unto the children of Israel before the Lord, to make an atonement for
your souls.

<span id="vi.v.i-p11"></span>**16.** Accipiesque pecuniam expiationum a
filiis Israel, et dabis eam in opus tabcrnaculi testimonii: eritque
filiis Israel in memoriale coram Jehova, ad expiandas animas vestras.

<span id="vi.v.i-p12"></span><span id="vi.v.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v.i-p13"></span>**12.** *When thou takest the sum of the
children of Israel.* The tribute which God here demands at the taking of
the census, is very fitly annexed to the First Commandment; for God, in
making them tributary to Himself, shews that they were under His
jurisdiction and power; and because He had purchased them to Himself, He
willed that this voluntary gift of acknowledgment should be paid to Him.
Princes, in numbering their subjects, make an estimate of their power;
but God, who needs not the aid and assistance of men, would have the
Israelites testify, at least by some sign, that they live in subjection
to Him by whom they were redeemed. Therefore, when David numbered the
people, (<span id="vi.v.i-p13.2"></span>[2Sa
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#002)<span id="vi.v.i-p13.2"></span>,)
it was a kind of emancipation of them from their subjection to God; and
hence this pride, or temerity, or ingratitude, was so severely punished.
But because it was useful and right that the people should be numbered,
it is permitted upon this condition, that by paying a *ransom* for every
individual, they should acknowledge God as their sole King. The word is
not badly rendered by some an *atonement* or *expiation,* because,
whilst they confessed that they owed their life to God, He was appeased
towards them on the score of this testimony of their gratitude. But it
may be derived from a word meaning *to cover;* for when they voluntarily
subjected themselves to God, and fled beneath the shelter of his wings,
they were protected and secure, under this *covering.* Therefore it is
said below, that this gift was offered to God as “an atonement for their
souls;” and this is expressed in other words, that there should “be no
plague” or destruction among them, because their safety rested in God’s
protection alone, that they should not be exposed to any evils. And
since they had been Pharaoh’s servants, their freedom would have been
unlawful unless God had authorized and maintained it. Wherefore it was
just. that they should ascribe their deliverance by a solemn rite to
God, lest they should suffer the punishment of fugitive slaves. But He
appointed the same sum for all, that every one, of whatever rank, from
the least, to the greatest, might know that they were altogether His.
Nor need we wonder, that since this was a personal due, (as it is
commonly phrased,) their condition was not taken into account, so that
the rich should pay more than the poor, but that the same price should
be paid for every soul. The shekel  <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) of the sanctuary was equivalent to an
Attic *tetra-drachma,* which Budaeus estimates at 14 sols French, or
thereabouts; for the *didrachma* amounts to seven sols, and the common
*drachma* to three and a half sols, *minus a denier Tournois.* This is
the didrachma of which mention is made in <span
id="vi.v.i-p14.1"></span>[Mt
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024)<span id="vi.v.i-p14.1"></span>;
for when the Jews were conquered by the Romans, it is probable that, in
order to make their yoke more galling, this right of tribute was
transferred to their conquerors. For this divinely prescribed offering
being the symbol of their freedom, exempted the Jews from all heathen
dominion, as if free or only belonging to God. But. since by their own
rebellion they had shaken off God’s yoke, He purposely suffered them to
be despoiled of their right, in order to subject them to the tyranny of
strangers. And this occurred just before Christ’s coming, that this new
and unwonted oppression might increase their longing for Him. But
inasmuch as this tribute was paid by command of the Law, the Jews were
reminded that they were a people consecrated to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](cc03064.htm#fr_329) <span
id="vi.v.i-p13.4"></span>

<span id="vi.v.i-p14"></span> I am indebted to an anonymous writer in
that useful little publication, “Notes and Queries,” vol. 5, p. 325, for
the following note. Having given a translation almost identical with
that in the text, he adds, “which is as much as to say, that the sickle
(or shekel) equalled 14 solidi, less four deniers; or 13.67 solidi. But
owing to the rapid declension in the value of French coin after the
tenth century, it is manifestly impossible to assign a value to these
solidi, unless the precise date of their coinage were known. A writer
may, of course, allude to coin indefinitely precedent to his own time.
In the present ease, however, we may, as a matter of curiosity,
*analytically* approximate to a result in this way: — The drachm, is now
known to have contained about 65 grains of pure silver, consequently the
tetradrachma contained 260 grains. The present franc contains about 70
grains of pure silver, and consequently the sol, or 20th part, is 3.5
grains. This last multiplied by 13.67 produces about 48 grains. But the
weight of the tetradrachma is 260 grains; therefore the sol with which
the comparison was made, must have contained upwards of fivefold its
present value in pure silver. Now, according to the depreciation tables
of M. Dennis, this condition obtained in 1483, under Charles VIII., at
which time Budaeus was actually living, having been born in 1467; but
from other circumstances I am induced to believe that the solidus
Gallicus mentioned by him was coined by Louis XII. in 1498, at which
time the quantity of pure silver was fourfold and a half that of the
present day.” Dean Prideaux, *Connexion* 1:3, says, “Every Jew annually
paid a half shekel, *i.e.,* about eighteenpence of our money.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Vow of the Nazarites](cc03065)
