[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc03004)  [Next](cc03006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span>EXODUS 2

<span id="iv.ii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
2:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And there went a man of the house of
Levi, and took *to wife* a daughter of Levi.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Abierat autem vir ex domo Levi, et
acceperat filiam Levi.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And the woman conceived, and bare a
son: and when she saw him that he *was a* goodly *child*, she hid him
three months.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Concepit autem mulier illa, et
peperit filium; vidensque eum esse pulchrum, abscondit tribus mensibus.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And when she could not longer hide
him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and
with pitch, and put the child therein; and she laid *it* in the flags by
the river’s brink.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et quia illum abscondere amplius non
poterat, accepit ei arcam arundineam, et oblevit eam bitumine et pice,
et reposuit in ca infantulum: exposuitque in carecto, juxta ripam
fluminis.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And his sister stood afar off, to
wit what would be done to him.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Stetit vero soror ejus eminus, ut
cognosceret quid ei fieret.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And the daughter of Pharaoh came
down to wash *herself* at the river; and her maidens walked along by the
river’s side: and when she saw the ark among the flag’s, she sent her
maid to fetch it.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Porro descendit filia Pharaonis ut
lavaret se in flumine: (deambulabant autem puellae ejus secus ripam
fluminis:) et videns arculam in medio carecti misit ancillam suam quae
illam tolleret.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And when she had opened *it*, she
saw the child: and, behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on
him, and said, This *is one* of the Hebrews’ children.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Quumque aperuisset, vidit ipsum
infantulum: et ecce, puer flebat: et miserta illius dixit, Hic ex pueris
Hebraeorum est.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p14"></span>**7.** Then said his sister to Pharaoh’s
daughter, Shall I go and call to thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that
she may nurse the child for thee?

<span id="iv.ii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Tunc dixit soror ejus ad fili am
Pharaonis, Ibone ut vocem tibi mulierem nutricem ex Hebraeis quae tibi
lactet infantulum?

<span id="iv.ii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And Pharaoh’s daughter said to her,
Go. And the maid went and called the child’s mother.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Respondit ei filia Pharaonis, Vade.
Profecta est igitur puella, et vocavit matrem pueri.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And Pharaoh’s daughter said unto
her, Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give *thee*
thy wages. And the woman took the child, and nursed it.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Cui filia Pharaonis dixit, Tolle
infantulum hunc, et lacta eum mihi, et ego dabo tibi mercedem. Tunc
accepit mulier infantulum, et lactavit eum.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And the child grew, and she
brought him unto Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her son. And she
called his name Moses: and she said, Because I drew him out of the
water.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Crevit autem infantulus, et
adduxit eum ad filiam Pharaonis, cui factus in filium, et vocavit nomen
ejus Moseh, dicens, Quoniam ex aquis extraxi eum.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p22"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p23"></span>**1.** *And there went.* <span
id="iv.ii.i-p23.1"></span>I have preferred rendering the verb in the
pluperfect tense (abierat, “there had gone”) to prevent all ambiguity;
for unless we say that Miriam and Aaron were the children of another
mother, it would not be probable otherwise that this marriage was
contracted after the passing of the edict. Aaron was three years old
when Moses was born; and we may easily conjecture that he was brought up
openly and securely. But there is no doubt but that the cruelty was
greatest at its commencement. Therefore, if they were uterine brothers,
there is no other explanation except to say that, by the figure called
<span id="iv.ii.i-p23.2"></span>ὕστερον πρότερον<span
id="iv.ii.i-p23.3"></span>, he now relates what had happened before. But
mention is only made of Moses, because it then first began to be
criminal to breed up male infants. The Hebrews use the word for going or
departing, to signify the undertaking of any serious or momentous
matter, or when they put any proposal into operation. Nor is it
superfluous for Moses to say that his father married a wife of his own
tribe, because this double tie of kindred should have confirmed them in
their attempt to preserve their offspring. But soon afterwards we shall
see how timidly they acted. They hide the child for a short time, rather
from the transient impulse of love than from firm affection. When three
months had elapsed, and that impulse had passed away, they almost
abandon the child, in order to escape from danger. For although the
mother would have probably come next day, if he had passed the night
there, to give him the breast, yet had she exposed him as an outcast to
innumerable risks. By this example, we perceive what terror had taken
possession of every mind, when a man and his wife, united to each other
by close natural relationship, prefer exposing their common offspring,
whose beauty moved them to pity, to peril of wild beasts, of the
atmosphere, of the water, and of every kind, rather than that they
should perish with him. But on this point different opinions are
maintained: whether or not it would have been better to discharge
themselves of the care of their child, or to await whatever danger
attended its secret preservation. I confess, indeed, that whilst it is
difficult in such perplexities to come to a right conclusion, so also
our conclusions are apt to be variously judged; still I affirm that the
timidity of the parents of Moses, by which they were induced to forget
their duty, cannot advisedly be excused.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p24"></span>We see that God has implanted even in wild
and brute beasts so great instinctive anxiety for the protection and
cherishing of their young, that the dam often despises her own life in
their defense. Wherefore it is the more base, that men, created in the
divine image, should be driven by fear to such a pitch of inhumanity as
to desert the children who are intrusted to their fidelity and
protection. The reply of those who assert that there was no better
course in their desperate circumstances than to repose on the providence
of God, has something in it, but is not complete. It is the chief
consolation of believers to cast their cares on the bosom of God;
provided that, in the meantime, they perform their own duties, overpass
not the bounds of their vocation, and turn not away from the path set
before them; but it is a perversion to make the providence of God an
excuse for negligence and sloth. The parents of Moses ought rather to
have looked forward with hope that God would be the safeguard of
themselves and their child. His mother made the ark with great pains,
and daubed it; but for what purpose? Was it not to bury her child in it?
I allow that she always seemed anxious for him, yet in such a way that
her proceedings would have been ridiculous and ineffectual, unless God
had unexpectedly appeared from heaven as the author of their
preservation, of which she herself despaired. Nevertheless, we must not
judge either the father or mother as if they had lived in quiet times;
for it is easy to conceive with what bitter grief they compassed the
death of their child; nay, to speak more correctly, we can scarcely
conceive what terrible agonies they suffered. Therefore, when Moses
relates how his mother made and prepared an ark, he hints that the
father was so overwhelmed with sorrow as to be incapable of doing
anything. Thus the power of the Lord more clearly manifested itself,
when the mother, her husband being entirely disheartened, took the whole
burden on herself. For, if they had acted in concert, Moses would not
have assigned the whole praise to his mother. The Apostle, indeed,
(<span id="iv.ii.i-p24.1"></span>[Heb
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.ii.i-p24.1"></span>,) gives a share of the praise to the husband,
and not undeservedly, since it is probable that the child was not hidden
without his cognizance and approval. But God, who generally “chooses the
weak things of the world,” strengthened with the power of his Spirit a
woman rather than a man, to stand foremost in the matter. And the same
reasoning applies to his sister, into whose hands his mother resigned
the last and most important act, so that while Miriam, who, on account
of her tender age, appeared to be exempt from danger, is appointed to
watch over her brother’s life, both parents appear to have neglected
their duty.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p25"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p26"></span>**2.** *And when she saw that he was a
goodly child.* There is no doubt but that God had adorned him with this
beauty, in order the more to influence his parents to preserve him; as
it sometimes happens that, when God sees his people slow in the
performance of their duty, he spurs on their inactivity by allurements;
although it appears from the testimony of the Apostle, that this was not
their only motive to have pity on him, but that it was the prop, as it
were, of their weak faith; for he tells us (<span
id="iv.ii.i-p26.1"></span>[Heb
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#023)<span id="iv.ii.i-p26.1"></span>.md)
that “by faith Moses was hid three months of his parents.” If any object
that faith and regard for beauty are things not only very different but
almost contrary to each other, I reply, that by the wonderful compassion
of God, it comes to pass that the very impediment which might darken
faith becomes its assistant, though it ought indeed to rest upon the
promises alone. Therefore, if faith had shone purely and brightly in
their hearts, they would have cared nothing for his beauty; on the other
hand, unless the promise had had its power, nay, unless it had occupied
the first place, there was no such efficacy in the goodliness of his
appearance as would have led them willingly to hazard their lives. We
conclude, then, that, since they had good hopes of the deliverance
promised to them, their courage was increased by the additional motive
of his beauty, and that they were so attracted to pity, that all
obstacles were overcome. Thus does God ordinarily work, leading his
people in their darkness like the blind, when they are wavering through
ignorance and weakness of heart. In fine, the love which his beauty
awakened was so far from being a part of faith, that it deservedly
detracts from its praise; but God, who, in his wonderful wisdom, makes
all things to work for the good of his chosen ones, sustained and
strengthened their tottering faith by this support.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p27"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p28"></span>**4.** *And his sister stood afar off.* It
is probable that this was Miriam.  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md)
By the fact of her standing to watch what became of him, it appears that
his parents had some hope remaining, though it was but small. For it is
scarcely doubtful but that whatever Egyptian had come that way would
have been his executioner, as well from the command of the king as from
the general hatred of the nation against the Hebrews. It seems, then,
that Miriam was set by her parents to watch, rather to witness her
brother’s murder, than to provide for the safety of the child. But,
since we have just seen that, in the darkness of sorrow and despair,
some sparks of faith still survived, the mother, exposing her little one
on the river’s side, did not abandon all care of him, but desired to
commend him to the mercy of any passer-by, and therefore stationed her
daughter afar off to act as circumstances arose. For, if she had heard
that the child still lay there at night, she would have come secretly to
give him the breast. This determination, however, as is often the case
in times of perplexity and trouble, was vain, though God miraculously
stretched forth his hand for the child’s preservation. For there can be
no question but that his secret providence brought the king’s daughter
to the river, who had the courage to take up the child and to have it
nursed; and that he, too, influenced her mind to the kind act of saving
its life, — in a word, that he controlled the whole matter. Indeed, all
pious persons will confess that he was the author of her great and
uninquisitive kindness in not taking more pains to learn who were the
child’s parents, and why a nurse offered herself so immediately, which
circumstance might have naturally awakened suspicion. Thus it did not
happen without many miracles that the child escaped safely from the ark.
Scoffers would say that all occurred accidentally; because perverse
delusion has possession of their minds, so that they are blind to the
manifest works of God, and think that the human race is governed by mere
chance. But we must hold fast to the principle, that whilst God rules
all men by his providence, he honors his elect with his peculiar care,
and is watchful for their deliverance and support; and if we carefully
weigh all the circumstances, reason will easily assure us that all
things which led to the preservation of Moses, were disposed by his
guidance, and under his auspices, and by the secret inspiration of his
Spirit. For to ascribe to fortune such an harmonious combination of
various and manifold means, is no less absurd than to imagine with
Epicurus that the world was created by the fortuitous conjunction of
atoms.  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) Assuredly he drew out
Moses, who was to be the future redeemer of his people, as from the
grave, in order that he might prove that the beginning of the safety of
his Church was like a creation out of nothing. And this was the crowning
act of his divine mercy, not only that he was given to his mother to be
nursed, but that she received wages for it.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p31"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p32"></span>**10.** *And the child grew.* Here,
however, their grief is renewed, when his parents are again obliged to
give up Moses, and he is torn as it were from their bowels. For, on this
condition, he passed over to the Egyptian nation, not only that he
should be alienated from his own race, but that he should increase the
number of their enemies in his own person. And certainly it is scarcely
credible that he could be long tolerated in the tyrant’s court, and
amongst the most cruel enemies of Israel, unless he professed to be a
partaker of their hatred. We know of what corrupting influences courts
are full; it is well known, too, how great was the pride of the
Egyptians, whilst experience teaches us how prone even the best natures
are to yield to the temptations of pleasure, wherefore we must wonder
the more that, when Moses was engulfed in these whirlpools, he still
retained his uprightness and integrity. Certainly the hope of their
redemption might seem here again to suffer an eclipse, the course of
circumstances being all against it; but thus the providence of God, the
more circuitously it appears to flow, shines forth all the more
wonderfully in the end, since it never really wanders from its direct
object, or fails of its effect, when its due time is come. Nevertheless
God, as with an outstretched hand, drew back his servant to himself and
to the body of his Church, by suggesting in his name the recollection of
his origin; for the king’s daughter did not give him this name without
the preventing Spirit of God, that Moses might know that he was drawn
out of the river when he was about to perish. As often, then, as he
heard his name, he must needs remember of what people he sprang; and the
power of this stimulus must have been all the greater, because the fact
was known to everybody. The daughter of the king, indeed, could have by
no means intended this, and would have rather wished the memory of his
origin to be lost; but God, who put words in the mouth of Balaam’s ass,
influenced also the tongue of this woman to bear loud and public
testimony to the very thing which she would have preferred to conceal;
and although she desired to keep Moses with herself, became his
directress and guide in returning to his own nation. But should any be
surprised that she did not fear her father’s anger in thus publicly
recording the violation of his command, it may readily be replied that
there was no cause of offense given to the tyrant, who would have
willingly allowed any number of slaves to be born to him, so that the
name of Israel were abolished. For why did he spare the lives of the
female infants, but in order that Egyptian slaves might be born of them?
And, regarding Moses in this light, he did not conceive that the act of
his daughter had violated his command, nay, he rather rejoiced that the
Israelitish nation was thus diminished, and the Egyptian nation
numerically increased. One question only remains, viz., how it occurred
to the mind of Pharaoh’s daughter to give Moses an Hebrew name,  <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) when it is certain from <span
id="iv.ii.i-p33.1"></span>[Ps
81:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ii.i-p33.1"></span>,
that there was a great difference between the two languages: “he went
out through the land of Egypt, where I heard a language that I
understood not?” And again, we know that Joseph made use of an
interpreter with his brethren when he pretended to be an Egyptian.
(<span id="iv.ii.i-p33.2"></span>[Ge
42:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.ii.i-p33.2"></span>.) We may probably conjecture that she asked
the mother of Moses the word which expressed this signification, or we
may prefer supposing that he had an Egyptian name, which was interpreted
by his Hebrew one, and this I am most inclined to think was the case.
When Moses subsequently fled, he again took the name his mother gave
him.

<span id="iv.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
2:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p2"></span>**11.** And it came to pass in those days,
when Moses was grown, that he went out unto his brethren, and looked on
their burdens: and he spied an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one of his
brethren.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p3"></span>**11.** Factum autem est diebus illis,
quum adolevisset Moses, ut egrederetur ad fratres suos, et vidit onera
ipsorum, viditque virum Aegyptium percutientem quendam Hebraeum ex
fratribus suis.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p4"></span>**12.** And he looked this way and that
way, and when he saw that *there was* no man, he slew the Egyptian, and
hid him in the sand.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p5"></span>**12.** Tunc respexit hue et illuc, et
videns quod nemo adesset, percussit Aegyptium, atque abscondit in arena.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p6"></span>**13.** And when he went out the second
day, behold, two men of the Hebrews strove together: and he said to him
that did the wrong, Wherefore smitest thou thy follow?

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p7"></span>**13.** Et quum egressus esset postridie,
ecce, duo viri Hebraei rixabantur: tunc dixit malefico, Quare percutis
propinquum tuum?

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p8"></span>**14.** And he said, Who made thee a
prince and a judge over us? Intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst
the Egyptian? and Moses feared, and said, Surely this thing is known.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p9"></span>**14.** Qui respondit, Quis te constituit
principem, et judicem super nos? an ut me occidas tu loqueris, sicut
occidisti Aegyptium? Itaque timuit Moses, ac dixit, Certe innotuit haec
res.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p10"></span>**15.** Now when Pharaoh heard this
thing, he sought to slay Moses. But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh,
and dwelt in the land of Midian: and he sat down by a well.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p11"></span>**15.** Pharao etiam audito hoc sermone,
quaerebat interficere Mosen. Et fugiens Moses a facie Pharaonis mansit
in Madian, seditque juxta puteum.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p12"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p13"></span>**11.** *And it came to pass in those
days, when Moses was grown.* Now did that faith which the Apostle
celebrates begin to shew itself, when Moses, despising the pleasures and
riches of the Court, chose rather to suffer the reproach of Christ, than
to be accounted happy apart from companionship with the chosen people.
Nor was it only love for his nation, but faith in the promises, which
induced him to undertake this charge, by which he knew that he should
incur the hatred of all the Egyptians. For although he did not
immediately resign his wealth, and honorable station, and influence, and
power, this was, as it were, the preparation for divesting himself of
all these deceitful allurements. Whence the Apostle says,

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p14"></span>“he refused to be called the son of
Pharaoh’s daughter.”  
(<span id="iv.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>[Heb
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p15"></span>There is certainly no doubt but that he
avowed his desire to return to his true and natural kindred, from whom
he had been separated: for we gather from the context, that he did not
come to see his brethren only to pity their estate, but to bring them
some consolation, and even to share their lot. Nor was the Court so near
that he could daily visit them in his ordinary walk. And it is said that
“he went out the second day.” Therefore, he privately withdrew himself
from the Court, or, having asked permission, preferred to expose himself
to enmity, rather than not discover his affectionate regard to his
people. But he relates that he looked on their burdens, or troubles, so
that their unjust oppression must have naturally aroused him to give
them help. He adds, too, another motive, that he “saw an Egyptian
smiting an Hebrew.” It is probable that they were harshly treated by
their taskmasters if they were slow in their work, and since they were
given over to the will of wicked men, that every one might exercise the
same cruelty upon them with impunity.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p16"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p17"></span>**12.** *And he looked this way and that
way.* Hence it more evidently appears that Moses came with the design of
succouring his unhappy brethren, and of relieving and aiding them with
his help, since, by killing the Egyptian, he avenged the injury done
indeed to an individual, but having a bearing on the whole nation. But
although he was inspired by the Holy Spirit with special courage for the
performance of this act, still it was accompanied with an infirmity,
which shews that he did not undertake without hesitation what he yet,
knew to be his vocation. For Stephen (<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>[Ac
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#025)<span id="iv.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>.md)
bears witness that Moses was not impelled by a rash zeal to stay the
Egyptian, but because he knew that he was divinely appointed to be the
avenger and deliverer of his nation. Still he looked about to see
whether any one saw him, and dared not punish the wrong-doer, except by
a secret blow. Thus we perceive that he was not altogether so bold as he
should have been, and that he had to strive against his timidity. Again,
we gather from his hesitation that his faith was weak, so that we must
not suppose that it was thus praised by the Apostle because it was
absolutely perfect. In the first place, then, let us conclude that Moses
did not rashly have recourse to the sword, but that he was armed by
God’s command, and, conscious of his legitimate vocation, rightly and
judiciously assumed that character which God assigned to him. Thence it
follows, that private persons would act improperly, and would be by no
means countenanced by his example, if they sought to repress wrong by
force and arms. Thus far we should imitate Moses in rendering aid to the
suffering and oppressed, as far as our means go, and in caring not to
incur the ill-will of the wicked, when we oppose ourselves to their
oppressions; but we must leave it to the judges, who are invested with
public authority, to draw the sword of vengeance. If these do not afford
their aid to the innocent when they are unjustly treated, all we can do
is to murmur; as not even Moses would have been allowed to proceed
further, unless he had been the appointed avenger and deliverer of the
people. As to the fear, by which he betrayed his pusillanimity and his
present unpreparedness for fulfilling his office, let us learn that the
obedience of the saints, which is stained by sin, is still sometimes
acceptable with God through mercy; and therefore, although the weakness
of the flesh is a draw-back to us in the performance of our duty, still
let us cease not to struggle against it; for our assurance of this ought
to have no small effect in animating us, when we are persuaded that
there is pardon ready for our hesitation, if we do not yield to it.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p18"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p19"></span>**13.** *Behold, two men of the Hebrews.*
This perseverance shews that Moses was firm and determined in his design
of returning to his brethren, and abandoning the Court; and that he had
advisedly renounced its splendor, its wealth, and comforts, although he
was by no means ignorant of the miseries to which he exposed himself,
and how painful and disagreeable, nay, how ignominious a condition
awaited him. Wherefore we need not wonder if the Apostle says, that he
chose

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p20"></span>“rather to endure the reproach of
Christ,” “and to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season.” (<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>[Heb.
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#025.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#026)<span id="iv.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p21"></span>Besides, the sad sight of the tyrant’s
violence and of the burdens by which his brethren were oppressed, was
anything but an obstacle to his proceeding, because, being prepared by
the hope of future recompense to bear the cross, he was superior to
present fear. But he does not assume, as before, the character of a
judge; but performs a duty, which the law of charity demands of every
one, addressing the men who strove together as a peace-maker, and
exhorting them both to be reconciled, though he especially blames the
wrongdoer. This was not peculiar to Moses, but the common duty of all
believers, when the innocent are harshly treated, to take their part,
and as far as possible to interpose, lest the stronger should prevail.
It can scarcely be done without exasperating those who are disposed to
evil; but nothing ought to allow us to be silent, while justice is
violated by their forwardness. For in this ease, silence is a kind of
consent. Yet Moses reproves moderately, and in kind terms, the man who
had assaulted his brother; because he does not so much wish to reproach
him with the greatness of his fault, as to find the means of calming his
ferocity.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p22"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p23"></span>**14.** *Who made thee a prince?* No
wonder if the headstrong and wicked man repels angrily this mild
admonition; for thus are those, who are disposed to injustice,
accustomed to rage as soon as they are reproved, and to drive away good
advisers with contumely. And certainly it is an uncommon virtue to
acknowledge our faults, and patiently to submit to correction. For in
proportion to a man’s evil disposition, and to the greatness of his
offense, is his rage under admonition, and his violence in altercation;
wherefore, whoever undertakes to restrain the wicked must expect to meet
with these indignities. Still, we may understand from the petulance of
this individual how perverse were the minds of the whole nation. On this
account Stephen says that Moses was refused by his own nation, and
accuses them all of ingratitude. (<span id="iv.ii.ii-p23.1"></span>[Ac
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#035.md)<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p23.1"></span>.) But, without being too hard on this
people, we learn from this example how rude is the nature of those whom
God has not tamed; for their perverseness as firmly repels correction,
as an anvil repels the blow of a hammer. When, therefore, they are so
stubborn that though ten times reproved they are still hardened, no
wonder if God deals with them more roughly, as he declares he will do by
the mouth of David. (<span id="iv.ii.ii-p23.2"></span>[Ps
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p23.2"></span>.) Lest we should experience this, let us
submit to his rod in time; and since this is not given to all, let us
entreat him to make us truly teachable. For what shall we gain by
kicking against the pricks? Moreover, a kind of brutal fierceness
accompanies this perverseness, as is again seen in this instance. The
vile and abject slave asks Moses, Who made him a judge over the Hebrews?
as if he, and all his race, were not exposed to universal contumely. If
the lowest of the Egyptian rabble had struck him a blow, he would not
have dared to murmur; yet he rages as imperiously against this mild
admonition, as if he were free from all subjection. What follows is even
worse, “Intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian?” He
ought to have received Moses as if he had been an angel of God, on
account of such a proof of his zeal and piety; but, turning the benefit
into an accusation, he not only hatefully taunts him with what it would
have been just to praise, but even threatens him. Meantime, we cannot
doubt but that the holy man must have been racked by a sore temptation,
when he finds such barbarity in his nation. He knew, indeed, that the
Egyptians would have been his professed enemies, if the matter had got
abroad; but he never could have expected such an unworthy return from
his brethren, whose misery he desired to relieve; and therefore it was a
proof of incredible strength of purpose to surmount such an obstacle.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p24"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p25"></span>**15.** *Now when Pharaoh heard.* Moses
acknowledges his fear, though it was not sufficient to withdraw him from
the work to which he was called. We said before, that his zeal was
mingled with infirmity, but yet prevailed; so that he performed the duty
entrusted to him manfully, yet at the same time timidly. But this is
another proof of his firmness, that he is not ashamed of what he had
done, so as to endeavor to appease the king, but he betakes himself to
exile; nor is he so alarmed in this critical time as to sink down in
helplessness or despair, but he departs into the land of Midian, and
prefers wandering in the Desert, to a reconciliation with the enemies of
the chosen people. But although God appears by this circuitous course to
decline from his purpose of delivering them, yet he marvelously carries
on His work. We have already sufficiently perceived that Moses was
certainly not yet ripe for the arduous contests which awaited him; that,
having been brought up delicately and luxuriously in the Court, he was
not yet accustomed to the great and continual anxieties of which the
sequel of the history will shew him the conqueror. Therefore God in a
manner withdrew him, that he might gradually render him fit and equal to
undertake so difficult a task. For the experience of forty years in such
a laborious and ascetic mode of life, did not a little avail to prepare
him for enduring any hardships; so that the Desert may well be called
the school in which he was taught, until he was invited to his more
difficult charge. As to his “sitting down by a well,” I interpret it,
that he sat down there to rest from his fatigue about sunset, that he
might ask for hospitality from the people, who he hoped would come at
eventide to draw water. From this unprosperous beginning he might
conjecture what an uncomfortable reception he had to expect.

<span id="iv.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
2:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p2"></span>**16.** Now the priest of Midian had
seven daughters: and they came and drew *water*, and filled the troughs
to water their father's flock.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p3"></span>**16.** Erant autem sacerdoti Madian
septem filiae, quae venerunt, et hauserunt, impleveruntque canales, ut
potarent oves patris sui.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p4"></span>**17.** And the shepherds came and drove
them away: but Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p5"></span>**17**. Et venerunt pastores qui
repulerunt eas: et surgens Moses auxiliatus er ipsis, potavique oves
illarum.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p6"></span>**18.** And when they came to Reuel their
father, he said, How *is it that* ye are come so soon to-day?

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p7"></span>**18.** Et quum venissent ad Bethuel
patrem suum, dixit ille, Quare hodie tam cito rediistis?

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p8"></span>**19.** And they said, An Egyptian
delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew *water*
enough for us, and watered the flock.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p9"></span>**19.** Responderunt, vir Aegyptius
liberavit nos e manu pastorum, atque etiam hauriendo hausit nobis, et
praebuit potum ovibus.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p10"></span>**20.** And he said unto his daughters,
And where *is* he? why *is* it *that* ye have left the man? call him,
that he may eat bread.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p11"></span>**20.** Dixit ille ad filias suas, Et
ubi est ille? Quare sic dereliquistis virum? Convocate eum ut comedat
paneum.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p12"></span>**21.** And Moses was content to dwell
with the man: and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p13"></span>**21.** Et consensit Moses habitare cum
viro illo, qui dedit Sephoram filiam suam Mosi.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p14"></span>**22.** And she bare *him* a son, and he
called his name Gershom: for he said, I have been a stranger in a
strange land.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p15"></span>**22.** Quae quum peperisset filium,
vocavit nomen ejus Gerson, dicens, Peregrinus sum in terra aliena.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p16"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p17"></span>**16.** *Now the priest of Midian.*
<span id="iv.ii.iii-p17.1"></span>The profane would attribute this
meeting to good fortune, whereas God affords us in it a striking picture
of his providence, in thus with an outstretched hand directing the steps
of his servant. Those damsels were in the habit of coming daily to the
well; and Moses sat down to ask for hospitality at the waterside,
whither in a dry country the inhabitants were likely to flock in the
evening. But it was by no means due to chance that he came so
opportunely to render assistance to the damsels, and that Jethro so
hospitably invited him; but God was the guide of his wandering servant’s
way, not only to obtain for him a resting-place for a day, but a
comfortable habitation even to the close of his exile. For Jethro (whose
title shews that he was of some dignity amongst his people) not only
engaged his services, but chose him for his son-in-law. Although the
occupation of a shepherd was a humble one, yet there was no little
consolation in this high connection. All are not agreed about the word
<span id="iv.ii.iii-p17.2"></span>כהן<span id="iv.ii.iii-p17.3"></span>,
*cohen*  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p18.3"></span>The Chaldee paraphrast badly translates it
“Prince,” because it does not accord with the fact that the shepherds of
the country were at variance with his daughters. Nor is it more probable
that a rich and chief man would have been without servants, so as to be
obliged to expose his daughters daily to the insults and quarrels of the
shepherds. I think, then, that he was a priest (*sacrificum*<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p18.4"></span>,) <span id="iv.ii.iii-p18.5"></span>which
is the opinion most generally received. But the question is, whether he
worshipped false gods, or the one true God? and certainly many probable
reasons lead us to conclude, that he did not sacrifice to idols; because
Moses could scarcely have been persuaded, not merely to live in a house
which was defiled by foul unrighteousness, but even to marry into it.
Besides, hereafter, many indications of piety will appear in the
language of Jethro. Although, as almost the whole world had then fallen
into many corrupt practices, it seems likely to me that his priesthood
was in some measure corrupted. In the time of Abraham, Melehizedek was
the only priest of the living God. Abraham himself was extricated from a
deep abyss of idolatry into which his family was plunged. It was, then,
hardly possible that the Midianites should have retained the pure
worship; and indeed it is plain from other passages, that they were
joined to idols. After duly weighing all these points, nothing occurs to
me as more probable, than that under the priesthood of Jethro the true
God was worshipped, according as tradition had revealed Him, but not
purely; because religion was at that time everywhere contaminated by
diverse superstitions. But there is some difference between idolatry and
the impure worship of God, corrupted in some respects. I say, then, that
they were worshippers of the true God, because they had not entirely
departed from the principles of His religion, although they had
contracted some defilement from the stinking puddles of error which had
gradually crept in. There is also another question among interpreters as
to the name “Jethro.” <span id="iv.ii.iii-p18.6"></span>Those who think
*Bethuel*  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p19.2"></span>was a different person from Jethro, are
easily refuted; for it is quite evident, that Moses in the next chapter
speaks of the same person, though under another name. Nor would it agree
with the mention of his marriage, that the name of the father should be
altogether omitted; and it is a forced construction to suppose, that in
such immediate connection two persons should be spoken of as in the same
degree of relationship. Again, if Jethro was the son of *Bethuel*<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p19.3"></span>, <span id="iv.ii.iii-p19.4"></span>living
in the same house, he would have been a member of the family, but not
its head, and therefore Moses would not be said to have fed *his* <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p19.5"></span>flock. Besides, it is probable that Hobab
(who will be afterwards called the son of *Bethuel*<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p19.6"></span>, <span id="iv.ii.iii-p19.7"></span>[Nu
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p19.7"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p19.8"></span>) was the
brother-in-law of Moses, *i* *e*<span id="iv.ii.iii-p19.9"></span>.,
<span id="iv.ii.iii-p19.10"></span>the brother of his wife; from whence
we collect, that Jethro, as is not unusual, had two names. For it is
absurd to think that it is Hobab whom Moses here calls Jethro, and an
unreasonable invention. We shall hereafter see that Jethro came into the
Desert to congratulate Moses; but it is related in the same place that
he “let him depart;” <span id="iv.ii.iii-p19.11"></span>and certainly it
would not have been kind to press a man bowed down by age to accompany
him on his long journey. For if he was older than Moses, he was scarcely
less than ninety; and what sense would there have been in promising a
decrepit old man the reward of his labor, after they should reach the
land of Canaan?

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p20"></span>But the whole controversy is put an end
to in one word; because Moses writes that Jethro returned home, but that
Hobab was persuaded to listen to his earnest requests, and to remain
with him. Nothing can be more probable than that the old man *Bethuel*,
who was unequal to bear the fatigue of a long journey, returned straight
home, having left his son behind with Moses, to be to him “instead of
eyes,” and to guide them on their way.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p21"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p22"></span>**18.** *And when they came to Reuel*
 <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.21"></span>I do not think any blame attaches to the
daughters of *Bethuel* <span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.22"></span>for not
offering hospitality to Moses, because young women should be modest, and
it would have been an act of too great forwardness to invite an unknown
foreigner, without acquainting their father. But God inspires the heart
of their father with gratitude, so that he desires him to be sent for.
Moses, therefore, is brought from the well, and finds a home in which he
may live comfortably, and is treated with kindness on account of his
matrimonial alliance. And certainly there was need of some alleviation
for his manifold cares and sorrows; since it was a hard trial, which
would not only pain him greatly, but would have altogether overwhelmed
him in despair unless the holy man had been supported in some way in
enduring his forty years’ exile. We may easily conjecture from our own
feelings how great must have been the weariness of so tedious a delay,
especially when he saw that the flower of his age was past, and that his
strength was failing, so that he would be afterwards but little fitted
for activity. It was, therefore, difficult for him to be intent on that
vocation, which might seem to be obsolete, and abrogated in this period
of forty years. These heavy troubles and anxieties are in some degree
mitigated, but yet not so completely as to prevent the recurrence of
many opposing thoughts. Wherefore God’s grace is more astonishing, which
kept him peaceful and calm in the midst of so many cares, so that, in
expectation of the unknown time, he should be content with his mean and
humble lot, and stand in daily preparation to perform the part of a
deliverer. As to the word <span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.23"></span>יאל<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.24"></span>,  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md)
*yal*<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.25"></span>, <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.26"></span>the Jews themselves are not agreed: many
think that it merely expresses consent; others take it to mean “to <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.27"></span>swear.” And perhaps *Bethuel* <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.28"></span>was unwilling to give his daughter to an
unknown guest, unless he bound himself by an oath to live there, as
otherwise it might be feared that Moses might take away his wife
elsewhere. Thus the marriage-vow was a promise to remain. Thence we see
the integrity of that age, that the sanction of an oath, through
reverence to the name of God, was so strong, that both were contented
with this bond.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p26"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p27"></span>**22.** *He called his name Gershom.* I
do not approve of their view who think this was a name of congratulation
to alleviate the pain of banishment, but rather imagine that Moses gave
this name to his son, as well to remind himself as his father-in-law and
his wife, that he sought a country elsewhere, and that there he was but
a sojourner. Nor is there any objection in his promise to his
father-in-law to remain, because he did not so bind himself as to shake
off or break the yoke of his divine vocation. It was only a provision to
this effect, that Moses should not lightly forsake the home where he was
so kindly welcomed. It is not credible that he was silent as to the
cause of his exile: in the first place, to avert the suspicion of
wrong-doing, and in witness of his innocence; and secondly, that he
might proclaim the peculiar favor with which God had honored the people
of Israel. Wherefore, in the name of his son, he would set before
himself an unceasing memorial, by which he might be kept, alive to the
hope of redemption; for he declares that land, in which he had found
apparently a peaceful resting-place, and a pleasant home, to be
“strange” to him. Nor does he compare Midian with Egypt, for he was but
a sojourner in either land; but wherever he may dwell, he declares
himself a stranger, until he should obtain the inheritance which God has
promised. And, indeed, it would have been absurd to call that land,
where he had found a settled home, a foreign land, in reference to
Egypt, especially since the Apostle bears testimony that he had left
that land under the influence of faith. (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p27.1"></span>[Heb
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p27.1"></span>.) In fine, we see that he sought for a
means of cherishing and at the same time of testifying his faith, when
he professed that he was a sojourner in a foreign land.

<span id="iv.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
2:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p2"></span>**23.** And it came to pass in process of
time, that the king of Egypt died: and the children of Israel sighed by
reason of the bondage, and they cried; and their cry came up unto God,
by reason of the bondage.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p3"></span>**23.** Accidit autem diebus illis multis,
mortuus est rex Aegypti: et suspiraverunt filii Israel propter opus, et
vociferati sunt: ascenditque clamor eorum, ad Deum propter opus.  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p5"></span>**24.** And God heard their groaning, and
God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p6"></span>**24.** Et audivit Deus clamorem eorum,
recordatusque est Deus pacti sui cum Abraham, Isaac, et Jacob.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p7"></span>**25.** And God looked upon the children
of Israel, and God had respect unto *them*

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p8"></span>**25.** Viditque Deus filios Israel, et
cognovit Deus.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p9"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p10"></span>**23.** *And it came to pass in process
of time.*  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md) He uses the
demonstrative pronoun to mark the forty years in which God kept his
servant in suspense, as if he had forsaken him. By adding “many,” he
expresses the approaching end of the interval. When, therefore, he had
reached his eightieth year, and had married and grown old in the land of
Midian, the intolerable cruelty of their tyrannical masters extorted new
sighings and cries from the children of Israel; not that they began then
first to grieve and lament, but because they became more alive to their
woes, and their duration made them to be felt more acutely. We know that
the hope of a happier issue is soothing to our woes; and the hope that
some one more kind would succeed the dead tyrant, in some measure
softened the misery of the afflicted people. But when the change of
kings in no wise lightened their oppression, their sorrow was increased,
and forced them to cry out more loudly than before. Thus, then, I
understand the words of Moses, that when the tyrant was dead, the
children of Israel were not treated more humanely, and therefore cried
out more vehemently. Although it is not likely, I think, that the
Pharaoh who had at first afflicted them with burdens and taxes, and had
commanded their children to be killed, lived till this time; because in
that case he would have reigned more than eighty years, which is not
usual. Before the birth of Moses, the Israelites had already been sorely
oppressed for many years. Nor had (the king) proceeded at once to so
great an atrocity as to command all the males to be killed; but when he
found that his cruel edicts availed nothing, he advanced to this
extremity. From the birth of Moses until the time here spoken of, about
eighty years had passed; and hence we may suppose that, before their
deliverance drew near, there had been one or more successive kings. When
these various changes of circumstances left the condition of the people
unchanged, or even made it worse, extreme necessity drew forth this
unwonted lamentation, and despair itself drove them to pray, not that
there had been an entire neglect of supplication to God before, but
because they looked also in other directions, until all earthly means
being entirely cut off, they were forcibly drawn to seek in earnest for
help from above. From this example we learn that, although the pressure
of our tribulations weighs us down with sorrow and pain, yet that our
prayers are not straightway directed to God, and that much is required
to stimulate our sluggish hearts. Moses also infers that it was no
wonder if God’s assistance was not earlier afforded, since the children
of Israel were stupified in their misery. Let this example, then, teach
us to flee to God at once, in order that he may make haste to bestow his
grace.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p12"></span>*And their cry came up.* Moses magnifies
the mercy of God by this circumstance, that he took not vengeance on
their slowness, as it deserved, but graciously inclined to their tardy
cries. In fact, we may observe in this history what is described in
<span id="iv.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>[Ps
106](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>,
that the most stubborn and hard-hearted in their extremity turn their
prayers at length to God, rather from the exceeding greatness of their
trouble than from the well-regulated exercise of faith. He says, “by
reason of the bondage;” because it is the attribute of God to succor the
oppressed, to deliver the captives, and to raise up them that are
brought low; and this office he constantly performs. As to what is
added, that “God remembered his covenant,” it is the explanation of the
cause why he heard their groaning, viz., that he might ratify his
gratuitous promise made to Abraham and his descendants. He expressly
mentions the three patriarchs, because God lodged his covenant with
them, that it might continue firm for perpetual generations. And,
indeed, since God is inclined towards us to help us of his own free
mercy, so he offers himself, and invites us voluntarily; and therefore
confidence in prayer must only be sought for in his promises. Thus the
*copula* here should be resolved into the *illative particle*, that “God
heard their groaning, *because* he remembered his covenant.” How far
remembrance is possible with God, we must learn from its contrary. God
is said to forget when he does not really and openly appear, and stretch
forth his hand to help; therefore, when we say he “remembers,” we mark
our *apprehension* of his aid; and both expressions have relation to
effect. In the same way he is said “to behold,” and its opposite, “to
turn his back,” because we then *perceive* that he beholds us when he
actually succours us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc03005.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p29"></span> “De laquelle il sera ci apres parle plus
a plein;” who will presently be more fully spoken of. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc03005.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p30"></span> “De ce qui apparoist en l’air comme
poussiere, quand le soleil luist, sans que Dieu s’en soit mesle;” of
that which appears in the air, like dust, when the sun shines, without
the interposition of God. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc03005.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p33"></span> Calvin seems altogether to ignore the
opinion of Philo, Clemens Alex., etc., that Moses was an Egyptian name,
from Mo, or Moys, *water*, and Is, or Ises, or Hyse, *preserved*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc03005.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p18"></span> <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p18.1"></span>כהן<span id="iv.ii.iii-p18.2"></span>. This
verb does not occur in Hebrew in its primary conjugation (kal), but is
found in Arabic, where it signifies to draw nigh. Hence the noun, being
of the form of the present participle, means in strictness one who draws
nigh; and in usage a priest who draws nigh to God; a prince who draws
nigh to the sovereign; or, sometimes the sovereign’s guards, ministers,
or near kinsmen.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc03005.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p18.7"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p19"></span> See note on ver. 18. In the French
version he is always called *Raguel*.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc03005.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p23"></span> <span id="iv.ii.iii-p23.2"></span>In
the Latin Geneva editions of 1573 and 1617, this name is printed,
through the whole commentary on the chapter, *Bethuel*<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p23.3"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.iii-p23.4"></span>but in
the commentary on <span id="iv.ii.iii-p23.5"></span>[Nu
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p23.5"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p23.6"></span>,
*Reuel*<span id="iv.ii.iii-p23.7"></span>; <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p23.8"></span>whilst *A* *V*<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p23.9"></span>. has *Reuel* <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p23.10"></span>here, and *Raguel* <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p23.11"></span>in Numbers. In Hebrew, the name in both
cases is Reuel; but the Hebrew <span id="iv.ii.iii-p23.12"></span>ע<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p23.13"></span> having no equivalent in either the Greek,
Latin, or English alphabet, its occurrence has occasioned a dissimilar
orthography of several proper names in different translations, or
sometimes in the same translation, according as the translator happened
to substitute for it *a* <span id="iv.ii.iii-p23.14"></span>or *o*<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p23.15"></span>, <span id="iv.ii.iii-p23.16"></span>or to
omit it altogether. The LXX. seems to have been induced by mere
similarity of shape to substitute <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p23.17"></span>γ<span id="iv.ii.iii-p23.18"></span> for it
in the middle of words, where a consonant seemed desirable.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p24"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.1"></span>As to
the person here spoken of, the relation of each to Moses is designated
by the same word <span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.2"></span>חתן<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.3"></span>; viz., Jethro in <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.4"></span>[Exod.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.4"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.5"></span>; Hobab in
<span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.6"></span>[Jud
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.6"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.7"></span>; and
Reuel (probably) in <span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.8"></span>[Nu
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.8"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.9"></span>; whilst
Zipporah uses the same word, rendered *husband* <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.10"></span>in <span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.11"></span>[Ex
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.11"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.12"></span>, <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.13"></span>26;. The radical verb, in this case also,
is one which does not occur in Hebrew in its primary conjugation, but is
found in Arabic, where it signifies to *provide a nuptial feast*<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.14"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.15"></span>and
hence the noun came to signify any relative by marriage, though most
commonly a *father-in-law* <span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.16"></span>In <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.17"></span>[Nu
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.17"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.18"></span>, and
<span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.19"></span>[Jud
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.19"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p24.20"></span>, Jerome
has rendered it simply kinsman. This being premised, it will appear
probable that Reuel was the grandfather, Jethro the father, and Hobab
the brother, of Zipporah. Hence, after forty years, Reuel is no more
spoken of, except to notice descent from him. — *W*

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc03005.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p24.25"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25"></span> <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.1"></span>יואל<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.2"></span>, *A*
*V*<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.3"></span>., *was content* *C* <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.4"></span>states the question about the meaning of
this word nearly as he found it stated in *S* *M*<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.5"></span>.; who had said, “Radix verbi <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.6"></span>יאל<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.7"></span> idem
significat quod <span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.8"></span>רצה<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.9"></span>, voluit, complacuit, consensit. Sunt tamen
inter Hebraeos qui etiam <span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.10"></span>אלה<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.11"></span> et <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.12"></span>נשבע<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.13"></span>, id
est juravit, exponunt.” They who would interpret it *he sware*<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.14"></span>, <span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.15"></span>must
suppose <span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.16"></span>יואל<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.17"></span> to be irregularly formed out of the verb
<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.18"></span>אלה<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.19"></span>; whilst there is no irregularity of
formation assumed by those who accept it as a part of the verb <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.20"></span>יאל<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.21"></span>, and
consequently translate it *consented*<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p25.22"></span>, <span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.23"></span>or
*was content* <span id="iv.ii.iii-p25.24"></span>— *W*

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc03005.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p4"></span> *Vel*, a servitute.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc03005.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p11"></span> The Commentary here refers to Calvin’s
Latin Translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 3](cc03006.md)
