[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc03066)  [Next](cc03068.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p1"></span>Another Supplement

<span id="vi.viii-p2"></span>as to the Purification of Women  
after their Confinement

<span id="vi.viii-p3"></span>(Heading from the French, “Autre dependence
de purifier  
les femmes apres leur enfantement.”)

<span id="vi.viii.i"></span>

<span id="vi.viii.i-p1"></span><span
id="vi.viii.i-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
12](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#000.md)<span id="vi.viii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii.i-p2"></span><span
id="vi.viii.i-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
12:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.viii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii.i-p3"></span>**1.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="vi.viii.i-p4"></span>**1.** Et loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="vi.viii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Speak unto the children of Israel,
saying, If a woman have conceived seed, and born a man-child: then she
shall be unclean seven days; according to the days of the separation for
her infirmity shall she be unclean.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p6"></span>**2.** Loquere ad filios Israel, dicendo,
Muller si misso semine conceperit, et pepererit masculum, immunda erit
septem diebus: juxta dies separationis morbi sui immunda erit.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p7"></span>**3.** And in the eighth day the flesh of
his foreskin shall be circumcised.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p8"></span>**3.** Porro die octavo circuncidetur
caro praeputii ejus.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p9"></span>**4.** And she shall then continue in the
blood of her purifying three and thirty days: she shall touch no
hallowed thing, nor come into the sanctuary, until the days of her
purifying be fulfilled.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p10"></span>**4.** Et triginta tribus diebus sedebit
in sanguine purificationis: nullam rem sacram tanget, et ad sanctuarium
non veniet, donec completi fuerint dies purificationis suae.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p11"></span>**5.** But if she bear a maid-child,
then she shall be unclean two weeks, as in her separation; and she shall
continue in the blood of her purifying threescore and six days.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p12"></span>**5.** Quod si foeminam pepererit,
immunda erit duabus hebdomadibus, secundum separationem suam, et
sexaginta sex diebus sedebit in sanguine purificationis suae.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p13"></span>**6.** And when the days of her
purifying are fulfilled, for a son, or for a daughter, she shall bring a
lamb of the first year for a burnt-offering, and a young pigeon, or a
turtle-dove, for a sin-offering, unto the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, unto the priest:

<span id="vi.viii.i-p14"></span>**6.** Postquam autem impleti fuetint
dies purificationis suae pro filio vel pro filia, afferet agnum
anniculum in holocaustum, et pullum columbae, aut turturem, in
oblationem pro peccato, ad ostium tabernaculi conventionis ad
sacerdotem.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Who shall offer it before the
Lord, and make an atonement for her; and she shall be cleansed from the
issue of her blood. This *is* the law for her that hath born a male or a
female.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p16"></span>**7.** Et offeret ipsum coram Jehova: et
expiabit earn, et mundabitur a vena sanguinis sui. Haec est lex
parientis masculum vel foeminam.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p17"></span>**8.** And if she be not able to bring a
lamb, then she shall bring two turtles, or two young pigeons; the one
for the burnt-offering, and the other for a sin-offering: and the priest
shall make an atonement for her, and she shall be clean.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p18"></span>**8.** Quod si non potuerit offerre
agnum, tune accipiet duos turtures, aut duos pullos columbae, unum in
holocaustum, et alterum ad oblationem pro peccato: expiabitque eam
sacerdos, et mundabitur.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p19"></span><span id="vi.viii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii.i-p20"></span>**2.** *If a woman have conceived seed.*
<span id="vi.viii.i-p20.1"></span>This ceremony had reference to two
points; for, first, the Jews were reminded by it of the common
corruption of our nature; and *secondly,* <span
id="vi.viii.i-p20.2"></span>the remedy of the evil was set before them.
There is little difficulty in understanding why a woman who has
conceived and given birth to a child, should be pronounced unclean;
viz., because the whole race of Adam is polluted and defiled, so that
the woman already contracts uncleanness from the offspring which she
bears in the womb, and is further contaminated by giving it birth. Hence
it appears how foul and disgusting in God’s sight is our condition,
since at our birth, and even before it, we infect our mothers. It has
been almost universally, but very absurdly, considered that nothing is
here condemned but libidinous intercourse between male and female;
whereas the purification is not required except there be offspring; and
to this the word <span id="vi.viii.i-p20.3"></span>תזריע<span
id="vi.viii.i-p20.4"></span>, *thazriang,* <span
id="vi.viii.i-p20.5"></span>refers, which can only be properly
translated by *insemination,* <span id="vi.viii.i-p20.6"></span>and
therefore it must be carefully observed that impurity in intercourse is
not generally condemned here, but in generation. For the cohabitation of
man and woman in itself, without reference to offspring, is a matter of
shame and indecency; but here the procreation of children, which should
remove this indecency, is accounted the cause of pollution, because the
whole race of Adam is full of contagion. Hence the error of Pelagius
 <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340.md) <span
id="vi.viii.i-p21.1"></span> is clearly refuted, who denied that the sin
of Adam was propagated among his descendants, and pretended that we
contracted sin from our parents not by origin, but by imitation. For the
mother would not be unclean if the children were pure and free from all
defilement. Therefore God would by this rite teach His ancient, people
that all men are born accursed, and bring into the world with them an
hereditary corruption which pollutes their very mothers. If any object
that holy matrimony is thus brought into disgrace and disrepute, the
reply is easy, that if the marriage couch is free from stain, it is due
to the indulgence of God. When therefore the husband and wife procreate
children in lawful wedlock, it is not to be considered simply permitted,
as if the generation were altogether without impurity, but by special
privilege and indulgence; because the sanctity of marriage covers what
otherwise might be imputed to blame, and purifies the very defilements
of our guilty nature. Whence it is plain that marriage, through which
the procreation of children becomes <span
id="vi.viii.i-p21.2"></span>lawful, has nothing disgraceful about it.
Yet it does not follow that the children who are thus engendered are
holy and free from stain; for those who are born to unbelievers, remain
under the guilt of the curse; and those who owe their birth to
believers, are delivered from the common perdition by supernatural
grace, and special adoption. And this God desired openly and distinctly
to testify, by requiring a sacrifice for their purification. For
although Moses seems only to speak of the mother, St. Luke,  <span
id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341.md) <span id="vi.viii.i-p22.2"></span> his
faithful interpreter, includes also the infant. If it be asked whether
circumcision would not suffice to remove the stain of corrupt nature, I
reply that hence it more clearly appears how great is our impurity,
since God was not content with one symbol for its expurgation, but in
order that He might exercise His people in continual meditation upon it,
added another subsidiary sign, and did this especially because <span
id="vi.viii.i-p22.3"></span>He knew how profound is men’s hypocrisy,
with what self-complacency they flatter themselves in vice, how
difficult it is to humble their pride, and, when they are forced to
acknowledge their miseries, how easily forgetfulness creeps over them.
Wherefore, when circumcision is expressly mentioned here, I presume it
is by anticipation, lest the Israelites should object that circumcision
was given them for the very purpose of altogether removing the curse;
and therefore God signifies that, although circumcision should precede
<span id="vi.viii.i-p22.4"></span>it, still the purification which He
here enjoins would not be superfluous. The foolish comments of the
Rabbins on this passage respecting seed, are both ridiculous in
themselves, and unfitted by their filthiness for modest ears; since, as
we have said, the simple intention of Moses was that the woman should
undergo purification, if offspring should follow her intercourse. Now,
since the Son of God, although He was not only pure, but purity itself,
still was the representative of the human race, He subjected himself to
the Law; and (as Paul teaches) submitted Himself to the Law, “to <span
id="vi.viii.i-p22.5"></span>redeem them that were under the Law.” (<span
id="vi.viii.i-p22.6"></span>[Gal.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013.md), [Gal.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005.md)<span
id="vi.viii.i-p22.6"></span><span id="vi.viii.i-p22.7"></span>) And, by
this His voluntary submission to it, He abrogated the old rite; so that
it is not now necessary to bring infants to the visible tabernacle with
the sacrifices, but all purity is to be sought in Himself.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p23"></span><span id="vi.viii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii.i-p24"></span>**4.** *And she shall then continue.*
The uncleanness of seven days in the case of a male, and fourteen days
for a female, has reference to the hemorrhage, as we shall also see
elsewhere of the menstrual discharge. For the remainder of the time she
is forbidden to take part in religious services, and to approach the
sanctuary, (by which word the court is here meant,) and thus is
accounted unholy, not only that she should herself lament her condition,
but that her husband also, admonished by the sight, should learn to
abhor and detest original sin. For this was a serious exhortation to
repentance, when they acknowledged that they were contaminated in their
offspring, wherein otherwise God’s blessing manifests itself. The
question now arises, why the time of purification is double for a female
child? Some ascribe this to a natural cause, viz., because the
hemorrhage is then of longer continuance; and in truth it was a part of
chastity and continence, that husbands should not then come near their
wives. But inasmuch as the object of this ceremony was different, viz.,
as an indication of the curse on the whole human race, we must look more
attentively in this direction. I know not whether the view is sound
which some take, that the mother is more defiled by female offspring,
because there is more disposition to vice in this sex. Perhaps, it is
more probable, as some think, that it was because the woman was the
beginning of the rebellion, when, being deceived by the serpent, she
destroyed her husband with her, and drew her posterity into the same
ruin. But it seems more correct to me that the punishment in regard to
males was lightened and diminished by circumcision. For although in that
symbol God consecrated both sexes, yet He honored males with special
favor, by engraving His covenant on their flesh.

<span id="vi.viii.i-p25"></span>Wherefore, also, He expressly mentions
their circumcision, whereby a dignity was imparted to them, which
rendered them superior to females. At the end of the chapter; regard is
had to the poor, lest, being burdened by too great an expense, they
might be rendered less ready to obey the Law: whence we gather that God
has no care for outward pomp and wealth, since the humble sacrifice of
the poor, according to the measure of their poverty, is no less grateful
to Him than the more valuable one of the rich.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc03067.htm#fr_340.md) <span
id="vi.viii.i-p20.7"></span>

<span id="vi.viii.i-p21"></span> Une heretique ancien nomme Pelage. —
*Fr.*

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc03067.htm#fr_341.md) <span
id="vi.viii.i-p21.3"></span>

<span id="vi.viii.i-p22"></span> The allusion is, I suppose, to <span
id="vi.viii.i-p22.1"></span>[Lu
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#023.md)<span
id="vi.viii.i-p22.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc03068.md)
