[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc03015)  [Next](cc03017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii-p1"></span>EXODUS 13

<span id="iv.xiii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.xiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
13:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.xiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p2"></span>**17.** And it came to pass, when Pharaoh
had let the people go, that God led them not through the way of the land
of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said, Lest
peradventure the people repent when they see war, and they return to
Egypt:

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p3"></span>**17.** Factum est autem quum emitteret
Pharao populum, ut non duceret eos Deus per viam terrae Philistim, quia
propinqua erat. Nam dixit Deus, Ne forte poeniteat populum quum viderint
praelium et revertantur in AEgyptum.

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p4"></span>**18.** But God led the people about,
through the way of the wilderness of the Red sea. And the children of
Israel went up harnessed out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p5"></span>**19.** And Moses took the bones of
Joseph with him: for he had straitly sworn the children of Israel,
saying, God will surely visit you; and ye shall carry up my bones away
hence with you.

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p6"></span>**18.** Circunduxit ergo Deus populum per
viam deserti, per Mare Rubrum: et dispositi ascenderunt filii Israel e
terra AEgypti.

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p7"></span>**19.** Et tulit Moses ossa Joseph secum.
Adjurando enim adjuraverat filios Israel, dicendo, Visitando visitabit
vos Deus, et tolletis ossa mea hinc vobiscum.

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p8"></span>**20.** And they took their journey from
Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wilderness.

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p9"></span>**20.** Itaque profecti sunt e Suchoth,
et castrametati sunt in Ethan, in extremitate deserti.

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p10"></span>**21.** And the Lord went before them by
day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a
pillar of fire, to give them light, to go by day and night.

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p11"></span>**21.** Jehova autem praecedebat eos
interdiu in columna nubis, ut deduceret eos per viam; noctu vero in
columna ignis, ut luceret eis, ut ambularent die et noctu.

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p12"></span>**22.** He took not away the pillar of
the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, *from* before the
people.

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p13"></span>**22.** Non abstulit columnam nubis
interdiu, neque columnam ignis noctu a facie populi.

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p14"></span><span id="iv.xiii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p15"></span>**17.** *And it came to pass when
Pharaoh.* Moses here assigns the reason why God did not immediately lead
His people by the more direct way into the land of Canaan, which would
have been just as easy to Him, but preferred to bring them round through
the desert, by a long and difficult and dangerous journey; viz., lest,
if perhaps they had met with enemies to contend against, a ready means
of return would have encouraged them to go back into Egypt. We know how
great was the supineness and cowardice of this people, as soon as any
difficulty presented itself; and how quick they were to revolt from the
divine government, as often as a heavier burden than they liked was
imposed upon them. We know how often they repented of having followed
God as their leader, and thus were prepared to throw away by their
ingratitude the grace offered to them. When, therefore, they were
powerless in the use of arms, and were altogether without experience of
military tactics, with what courage would they have engaged with an
enemy, if any should have advanced against them within a few days of
their coming out? Assuredly they would not have borne up against a
single assault, but would have been willing rather to submit themselves
to the Egyptians, with humble supplications for forgiveness. Lest, then,
any desire of return should steal over their hearts, God was willing to
set up a barrier behind them in the difficulty of the journey. Besides,
if in their departure from Egypt they had immediately encountered the
inhabitants of the land of Canaan in war, greater troubles would have
awaited them; for the Egyptians would by no means let them alone, but.,
being aided by the subsidies and forces of so many peoples, would have
endeavored to avenge themselves, and, having entered into alliances on
every side, would have hemmed in the unhappy Israelites. Wherefore, God
provided excellently for them, by leading them through inaccessible
paths, and by their very weariness shutting the door against their ever
desiring to return into Egypt; while afterwards He gradually restored
their’ confidence, before they came to fight, and had to sustain the
attacks of their enemies. I admit, indeed, that God might have otherwise
obviated all these evils; but since He is often wont to deal with His
people on human principles, He chose to adopt the method which was most
suited to their infirmity. Moses now commends this His admirable design,
in order that we may know that nothing was omitted by Him which was for
the safety and advantage of His people. For this “God said,” which he
mentions, refers to His providence; as much as to say, that the easier
and more ordinary passage was not undesignedly rejected, but that
because God knew it to be more expedient, He thus advisedly obviated the
temptation.

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.xiii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p17"></span>**18.** *The children of Israel went up
harnessed.* <span id="iv.xiii.i-p17.1"></span>The word <span
id="iv.xiii.i-p17.2"></span>חמשים<span id="iv.xiii.i-p17.3"></span>,
 <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md) *chemishim,* <span
id="iv.xiii.i-p18.7"></span>is derived from “Five,” from whence some
have explained it, that they were furnished with five kinds of arms, but
this is too absurd. The Hebrews, because they could conjecture nothing
better or more probable, almost with one consent would understand it,
that they were armed under the fifth rib. But whence were there so many
military corselets ready for the Israelites? But I reject so forced and
improbable a meaning, and doubt not that the word is one of number; as
though Moses had said, that they went out in ranks of five; because, if
each individual in so great a multitude had tried to advance, they would
have been in each other’s way. I have therefore thought fit to translate
it “dispositi,” (in ranks.) The idea of the Greeks about “the fifth
generation,” is very foreign to the present narrative. But in the sense
I have given it, there is nothing obscure or doubtful; for it readily
appears that God’s favor is celebrated also in this particular, because
He led forth His people in order. For, although they came out confusedly
and hastily, still He restrained there, as it were, under His banner,
and in companies, lest any disturbance should occur.

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p19"></span><span id="iv.xiii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p20"></span>**19.** *And Moses took the bones of
Joseph with him.* Hence it appears, that even in their adversity the
memory of their promised deliverance had never departed from the people,
for had not the adjuration of Joseph been currently spoken of in common
conversation, Moses would never have been able to imagine it; but he
expressly states that he acted in obedience to the holy patriarch in
carrying away his bones. It is, therefore, probable that they were so
deposited, that the hope of the people might be kept alive by seeing
daily the urn or coffer which contained them, as if the holy man even
after death uplifted from his tomb a sign of their deliverance; for
although by this symbolical act he cherished his own faith, when he
desired that, though dead, he might enter on the possession of the
promised land, yet there is no doubt that he had more regard to his
brethren and the whole posterity of the holy race.  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) For, having known by experience their
apathy and the weakness of their faith, he naturally feared lest in a
longer lapse of time they should grow more and more indifferent, and at
length should despise the proraise, and give themselves up altogether to
listlessness about it. And certainly it must have been this mistrust of
them which urged him not to be contented with a simple injunction, but
to bind their minds more strongly by an oath. In <span
id="iv.xiii.i-p21.1"></span>[Ac
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.xiii.i-p21.1"></span>, Stephen seems to assert that the other
eleven sons of Jacob were also buried in Sichem; and it may be probably
conjectured, that they were led piously to emulate the example of their
brother Joseph. Assuredly the faith of the departed Joseph, even in his
dry bones, preached loudly to his descendants of the promised
deliverance, lest they should grow careless from the long delay; and
when at length the Israelites were led forth, the bones or ashes of the
twelve Patriarchs were like so many standard-bearers, going before the
several tribes to encourage their confidence. Wherefore the cowardice of
the people was still more detestable, so often basely turning their
backs upon their journey, when they had in sight so eminent a ground for
confidence. The words of Joseph, which Moses reports, “God will surely
visit you,” etc., confirm the expression of the Apostle, (<span
id="iv.xiii.i-p21.2"></span>[Heb
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.xiii.i-p21.2"></span>,) that “by faith — he gave commandment
concerning his bones,” because he thus takes upon himself the character
and office of their surety, to exhort his nation to embrace the promise.
How far the silly superstition of the Papists in worshipping the relics
of saints differs from this object we may gather from hence without
difficulty, viz., that they studiously catch at every means whereby they
may be withdrawn further from the word of God.

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p22"></span><span id="iv.xiii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p23"></span>**21.** *And the Lord went before them.*
Moses here proclaims another of God’s mercies, that, having redeemed His
people, He was their constant leader and guide; as the Prophet also in
the Psalms distinctly makes reference to both. (<span
id="iv.xiii.i-p23.1"></span>[Ps
77:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.xiii.i-p23.1"></span>; and <span id="iv.xiii.i-p23.2"></span>[Ps
78:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.xiii.i-p23.2"></span>.) It was indeed a marvelous act of
loving-kindness that, accommodating Himself to their ignorance, he
familiarly presented Himself before their eyes. He might, indeed, have
protected them in some other way from the heat of the sun, and directed
them in the darkness of the night; but, in order that His power might be
more manifest, He chose to add also His visible presence, to remove all
room for doubt. But, although the words of Moses seem in some measure to
include the Lord in the cloud, we must observe the sacramental mode of
speaking, wherein God transfers His name to visible figures; not to
affix to them His essence, or to circumscribe His infinity, but only to
show that He does not deceitfully expose the signs of His presence to
men’s eyes, but that the exhibition of the thing signified is at the
same time truly conjoined with them. Therefore, although Moses states
that God was in the cloud and in the pillar of fire, yet does he not
wish to draw Him down from heaven, nor to subject His infinite glory to
visible signs, with which His truth may consist without His local
presence.  <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md) But execrable is the
mad notion of Servetus, who pretended that this cloud was uncreated, as
though it were the Deity of Christ, for he substituted this One Person
for the Three, as if there had then been a corporeal Deity, which he
calls the “figurative Son,” who was afterwards made flesh; not that He
put on flesh, but because He appeared as man, compounded of three
uncreated elements, and of the seed of David. But, soon after, Moses
calls this same being an Angel, to which he now assigns the name of the
eternal God. And with good reason, because our heavenly Father then led
the Israelites only by the hand of His only-begotten Son. Now, since He
is the eternal guardian of His Church, Christ is not less truly present
with us now by His power than he was formerly manifest to the fathers.
When, therefore, Isaiah prophesies His coming, he recounts amongst
others this divine blessing, that “the Lord will create upon every
dwelling-place of Mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke
by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night,” — that there might
be

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p25"></span>“a tabernacle for a shadow in the
day-time from the heat, and for a place of refuge and for a covert from
storm and from rain,”  
(<span id="iv.xiii.i-p25.2"></span>[Isa.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#006)<span id="iv.xiii.i-p25.2"></span>;.md)

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p26"></span>as if he had said, that He would really
and substantially fulfill what then was seen under a figurative symbol.
And surely that promise, —

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p27"></span>“The sun shall not smite thee by day,
nor the moon by night,” (<span id="iv.xiii.i-p27.1"></span>[Ps
121:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.xiii.i-p27.1"></span>,)

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p28"></span>refers not to a single day, but to all
ages. The statement of Moses, then, that “He took not away the pillar of
the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night,” is a blessing which
God extends to us, as well as to them, except only the visible symbol,
which was temporary, on account of the infirmity of the people. As to
his saying’ that God always appeared to them, that they might march by
night as well as by day, he does not mean that they went on continually
without any rest, since he had just before mentioned that their first
station was in Succoth, from whence they encamped in Etham, but merely
informs us that the flow of God’s grace was continual, since the token
of His favor and protection shone forth no less amidst the darkness of
the night than at midday itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc03016.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="iv.xiii.i-p17.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p18"></span> <span
id="iv.xiii.i-p18.1"></span>חמשים<span id="iv.xiii.i-p18.2"></span>.
Fives. The Rabbinical notions here mentioned are thus briefly stated in
*S* *M* *,* <span id="iv.xiii.i-p18.3"></span>“Exponitur a Kimchi sic,
Et accincti armis in quinta costa. Alii autem sic exponunt, Et accincti
quinque armorum generibus.” In speaking of what the Greeks had imagined,
*C.*<span id="iv.xiii.i-p18.4"></span> alludes to the LXX., who entirely
depart from the Hebrew, by rendering this clause, <span
id="iv.xiii.i-p18.5"></span>πέμπτὟ δὲ γενεᾷ, κ. τ. λ.<span
id="iv.xiii.i-p18.6"></span>. “And in the fifth generation, the children
of Israel went up,” etc. — *W.*

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc03016.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="iv.xiii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p21"></span> D’Abraham. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc03016.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="iv.xiii.i-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xiii.i-p24"></span> “Sans qu’il y soit requis une presence
de lieu;” without a local presence being required. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 14](cc03017.md)
