[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03053)  [Next](cc03055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxix"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p1"></span><span id="v.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#000)<span id="v.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p2"></span><span id="v.xxix-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029)<span id="v.xxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p3"></span>**29.** The secret *things belong* unto the
Lord our God; but those *things which are* revealed *belong* unto us and
to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this law.

<span id="v.xxix-p4"></span>**29.** Secreta sunt Jehovae Deo nostro:
revelata autem nobis et filiis nostris usque in saeculum, ut faciamus
omnia verba Legis hujus.

<span id="v.xxix-p5"></span><span id="v.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p6"></span>**29.** *The secret things belong.* <span
id="v.xxix-p6.1"></span>The conciseness and brevity of this passage has
rendered its meaning ambiguous; still there is no necessity for
discussing the various expositions of it. I will only shortly touch upon
those most generally accepted, lest they should lead to error. The
meaning is forced which some of the Hebrews  <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) <span id="v.xxix-p7.7"></span> give
it, viz., that God is the sole avenger of hidden crimes, whilst those
transgressions, which come to the knowledge of men, should be punished
by earthly judges; for here the execution of punishment is not the
subject in discussion, but Moses is simply commending the use of the
doctrine of the Law. The opinion of those who conceive that the
excellency of the Law is maintained, because God has manifested by it
His secret things, would be more probable, if the rules of grammar did
not oppose it; for the words are not to be read connectedly.” The <span
id="v.xxix-p7.8"></span>secret things of God are revealed unto us,”
<span id="v.xxix-p7.9"></span>since the <span
id="v.xxix-p7.10"></span>ה<span id="v.xxix-p7.11"></span>, or
demonstrative pronoun,  <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) <span
id="v.xxix-p8.13"></span> which is adjoined to both, does not permit
this any more than the copula which stands between them. To me there
appears no doubt that, by *antithesis,* <span
id="v.xxix-p8.14"></span>there is a comparison here made between the
doctrine openly set forth in the Law, and the hidden and
incomprehensible counsel of God, concerning which it is not lawful to
inquire. In my opinion, therefore, the copula is used for the
adversative particle; as though it were said, “God indeed retains to
Himself secret things, which it neither concerns nor profits us to know,
and which surpass our comprehension; but these things, which He has
declared to us, belong to us and to our children.” It is a remarkable
passage, and especially deserving of our observation, for by it audacity
and excessive curiosity are condemned, whilst pious minds are aroused to
be zealous in seeking instruction. We <span
id="v.xxix-p8.15"></span>know how anxious men are to understand things,
the knowledge of which is altogether unprofitable, and even the
investigation of them injurious. All of them would desire to be God’s
counsellors, and to penetrate into the deepest recesses of heaven, nay,
they would search into its very cabinets. Hence a heathen poet truly
says, —

<span id="v.xxix-p9"></span>*“Nil mortalibus arduum est:  
Coelum ipsum petimus stultitia.”* — *Hor. Od. 1: 3-37.*

<span id="v.xxix-p10"></span>“Nought for mortals is too high;  
Our folly reaches to the sky.”

<span id="v.xxix-p11"></span>On the other hand, what God plainly sets
before us, and would have familiarly known, is either neglected, or
turned from in disgust, or put far away from us, as if it were too
obscure. In the first clause, then, Moses briefly reproves and restrains
that temerity which leaps beyond the bounds imposed by God; and in the
latter, exhorts us to embrace the doctrine of the Law, in which God’s
will is declared to us, as if He were openly speaking to us; and thus he
encounters the folly of those who fly from the light presented to them,
and wrongfully accuse of obscurity that doctrine, wherein God has let
Himself down to the measure of our understanding. In sum, he declares
that God is the best master to all who come to Him as disciples, because
He faithfully and clearly explains to them all that it is useful for
them to knew. The perpetuity of the doctrine is also asserted, and that
it never is to be let go, or to become obsolete by the lapse of ages.
How far the Law is perpetual I have more fully discussed in the Second
Book of the Institutes, chap. 11. The rule of just and pious living even
now retains its force, although we are delivered from the yoke of
bondage and from the curse; but the coming of Christ has put an end to
its ceremonies in such a way as to prove more certainly that they were
not mere vain and empty shadows. Lastly, Moses requires obedience of the
people, and reminds them that the Law was not only given that the
Israelites might know what was right, but that they might do all that
God taught. True is it indeed that all His precepts cannot be fully
obeyed; but the perfection which is required, compels those to ask for
pardon who otherwise feel themselves to be exposed to God’s judgment, as
will be hereafter explained. Besides, we must observe that the doctrine
that we must keep the whole Law has this object, that men should not
separate one commandment from the others, and think that they have done
their duty by performing only a part of it; since God admits no such
divorce, having forbidden us to steal no less than to kill (<span
id="v.xxix-p11.1"></span>[Jas
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011)<span id="v.xxix-p11.1"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc03054.htm#fr_272) <span
id="v.xxix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p7"></span> *S.M.*<span id="v.xxix-p7.1"></span> quotes
Aben-Ezra as saying, “The secret things done by men belong to God, that
he may punish them. But the things which become manifest, or are
publicly done, belong to us, and such things we are bound to punish.”
Where the <span id="v.xxix-p7.2"></span>ה<span id="v.xxix-p7.3"></span>
demonstrative is repeated with the conjunction, as noticed by *C.,*<span
id="v.xxix-p7.4"></span> our *A. V.*<span id="v.xxix-p7.5"></span> has
properly *but those.* <span id="v.xxix-p7.6"></span>— *W.*

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc03054.htm#fr_273) <span
id="v.xxix-p7.12"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p8"></span><span id="v.xxix-p8.1"></span> In *C.’s*
<span id="v.xxix-p8.2"></span>Latin “<span
id="v.xxix-p8.3"></span>ה<span id="v.xxix-p8.4"></span> agedia,” <span
id="v.xxix-p8.5"></span>or as spelt in Buxtorf’s Thesaurus Gram. Ling.
Sanctae, Lib. 2, c. 5, “<span id="v.xxix-p8.6"></span>ה<span
id="v.xxix-p8.7"></span> hajediha, that is <span
id="v.xxix-p8.8"></span>הידיעה<span id="v.xxix-p8.9"></span>,
translatable *which maketh known,* <span id="v.xxix-p8.10"></span>is the
name given to the prefix <span id="v.xxix-p8.11"></span>ה<span
id="v.xxix-p8.12"></span>, when its effect is demonstrative” — *W*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 30:11-14](cc03055)
