[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc03009)  [Next](cc03011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii-p1"></span>EXODUS 7

<span id="iv.vii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
7:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the Lord said unto Moses, See,
I have made thee a god to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thy
prophet.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et dixit Jehova ad Mosen, Ecce,
dedi te Deum Pharaoni, eritque Aharon frater tuus Propbeta tuus

<span id="iv.vii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Thou shalt speak all that I command
thee; and Aaron thy brother shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he send the
children of Israel out of his land.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Tu loqueris omnia quae mandavero
tibi, et Aharon frater loquetur ad Pharaonem, ut dimittat filios Israel
e terra sua.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And I will harden Pharaoh’s heart,
and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Ego autem indurabo cor Pharaonis,
et multiplicabo signa mea, atque portenta mea in terra Aegypti.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p8"></span>**4.** But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto
you, that I may lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring forth mine armies,
*and* my people the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt, by
great judgments.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et non audiet vos Pharao: sed
extendam manum meam super Aegyptum, et educam exercitus meos, et populum
meum filios Israel e terra Aegypti in judiciis magnis.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And the Egyptians shall know that
I *am* the Lord, when I stretch forth mine hand upon Egypt, and bring
out the children of Israel from among them.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et cognoscent Aegyptii quod ego
sim Jehova, quum extendero manum meam super Aegyptum, et eduxero filios
Israel e medio eorum.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Moses and Aaron did as the
Lord commanded them, so did they.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Fecit ergo Moses et Aharon: sicuti
praeceperat Jehova ipsis, sic fecerunt.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And Moses *was* fourscore years
old, and Aaron fourscore and three years old, when they spoke unto
Pharaoh.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Moses autem filius octoginta
annorum fuit, et Aharon filius octoginta trium annorum, quum loquerentur
ad Pharaonem.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.vii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p17"></span>**1.** *And the Lord said unto Moses.*
Moses again repeats, that consolation was afforded him in his anxiety,
and a remedy given for his want of faith; since he was both armed
himself with divine authority, and Aaron was appointed as his companion
and assistant. For that he was “made a god to Pharaoh,” means that he
was furnished with supreme authority and power, whereby he should cast
down the tyrant’s pride.  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76.md) Nor did
God take away anything from Himself in order to transfer it to Moses;
since He so communicates to His servants what is peculiar to Himself as
to remain Himself in His completeness. Nay, whenever He seems to resign
a part of His glory to His ministers, He only teaches that the virtue
and efficacy of His Spirit will be joined with their labors, that they
may not be fruitless. Moses, therefore, was a god to Pharaoh; because in
him God exerted His power, that he should be superior to the greatness
of the king. It is a common figure of the Hebrews, to give the title of
God to all things excellent, since He alone reigns over heaven and
earth, and exalts or casts down angels, as well as men, according to His
will. By this consolation, as I have said, the weakness of Moses was
supported, so that, relying on God’s authority, he might fearlessly
despise the fierceness of the king. A reinforcement is also given him in
the person of his brother, lest his stammering should be any hinderance
to him. It has been already remarked, that it was brought about by the
ingratitude of Moses, that half the honor should be transferred to his
brother; although God, in giving him as his companion, so far lessened
his dignity as to put the younger before the first-born. The name of
“Prophet” is here used for an interpreter; because the prophetical
office proceeds from God alone. But, because God delivered through one
to the other what He wished to be said or done, Aaron is made subject to
Moses, just as if he had been God; since it is fit that they should be
listened to without contradiction who are the representatives of God.
And this is made clearer in the second verse, where God restricts the
power given to Moses, and circumscribes it within its proper bounds;
for, when He directs him to speak whatever He commands, He ranks him as
His minister, and confines him under authority, without departing from
His own rights.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p19"></span><span id="iv.vii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p20"></span>**3.** *And I will harden.* As the
expression is somewhat harsh, many commentators, as I have before said,
take pains to soften it. Hence it is that some take the words in
connection, “I will harden Pharaoh’s heart by multiplying my signs;” as
if God were pointing out the external cause of his obstinacy. But Moses
has already declared, and will hereafter repeat it, that the king’s mind
was hardened by God in other ways besides His working miracles. As to
the meaning of the words, I have no doubt that, by the first clause, God
armed the heart of His servant with firmness, to resist boldly the
perversity of the tyrant; and then reminds him that he has the remedy in
his hand. Thus, then, I think this passage must be translated, “I indeed
will harden Pharaoh’s heart, but I will multiply my signs;” as though He
had said, his hardness will be no obstacle to you, for the miracles will
be sufficient to overcome it. In the same sense, He adds immediately
afterwards, “Although Pharaoh should not hear you, still I will lay on
my hand;” for thus, in my opinion, the conjunctions should be resolved
*adversatively* I do not altogether reject the interpretation of others;
“I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, that I may multiply my signs;” and, “He
 <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77.md) will not hearken unto you, that I
may lay on my hand.” And, in fact, God willed that Pharaoh should
pertinaciously resist Moses, in order that the deliverance of the people
might be more conspicuous. There is, however, no need of discussing at
length the manner in which God hardens reprobates, as often as this
expression occurs. Let us hold fast to what I have already observed,
that they are but poor speculators who refer it to a mere bare
permission; because if God, by blinding their minds, or hardening their
hearts, inflicts deserved punishment upon the reprobate, He not only
permits them to do what they themselves please, but actually executes a
judgment which He knows to be just. Whence also it follows, that He not
only withdraws the grace of His Spirit, but delivers to Satan those whom
he knows to be deserving of blindness of mind and obstinacy of heart.
Meanwhile, I admit that the blame of either evil rests with the men
themselves, who willfully blind themselves, and with a willfulness which
is like madness, are driven, or rather rush, into sin. I have also
briefly shewn what foul calumniators are they, who for the sake of
awakening ill-will against us, pretend that God is thus made to be the
author of sin; since it would be an act of too great absurdity to
estimate His secret and incomprehensible judgments by the little measure
of our own apprehension. The opponents of this doctrine foolishly and
inconsiderately mix together two different things, since the hardness of
heart is the sin of man, but the hardening of the heart is the judgment
of God. He again propounds in this place His great judgments, in order
that the Israelites may expect with anxious and attentive minds His
magnificent and wonderful mode of operation.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p22"></span><span id="iv.vii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p23"></span>**5.** *And the Egyptians shall know.*
This is a species of irony, viz., that the Egyptians, subdued by the
plagues, should at last begin to feel that their contention was against
God. The object, however, of God was to encourage Moses, lest he should
fail before the madness and fury of his enemies. Therefore, although the
Egyptians might be stupid n their rage, still God declares that in the
end they would know that they had fought to their own destruction when
they waged war against heaven; for there is an implied *antithesis*
between their tardy acknowledgment of this and their present slowness of
heart, which was at length forcibly removed when God thundered openly
against them from heaven. For we know how unconcernedly the wicked
oppose their  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78.md) iron obstinacy to the
Divine threatenings, until they are forced into a state of alarm by
violence; not because they are humbled beneath the hand of God, but
because they see that by all their raging and turbulence they cannot
escape from punishment; just as drunkards, awakened from their
intoxication, would willingly drown their senses in eternal sleep, and
even in annihilation; yet, whether they will or not, they must bear the
pains of their intemperance. Moreover, this acknowledgment which was to
be extorted from the unwilling, admonished Moses and others  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79.md) to attribute just praise to the power of
God, before they were experimentally convinced of it. It is true,
indeed, that the sincere worshippers of God also are sometimes
instructed by punishments, (to which reference is made, <span
id="iv.vii.i-p25.1"></span>[Isa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.vii.i-p25.1"></span>,
“when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will
learn righteousness;”) but a kind of “knowledge” is here pointed out
which so prostrates the reprobate that they cease not to lift up their
horns, as it were, against God; and thus it casts them down without
amending them. There was also an experimental knowledge for the elect
people, of which mention has been already made, (<span
id="iv.vii.i-p25.2"></span>[Isa
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007)<span id="iv.vii.i-p25.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="iv.vii.i-p26"></span>“ye shall know that I am the Lord your
God, after that I shall have brought you out from the land of Egypt;”

<span id="iv.vii.i-p27"></span>but this (properly speaking) is nothing
more than a confirmation of the faith which, before the event takes
place, is content with the simple word. Or, God certainly, by the event
itself, reproves the dullness of His people when He sees that their
confidence in His own word is not sufficiently strong. But the wicked so
know God, that, lost in shame and fear, they see not what they do see.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p28"></span><span id="iv.vii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p29"></span>**6.** *And Moses and Aaron did.* It is
not for the sake of boasting that Moses reports his own obedience; but
after having ingenuously confessed his hesitation, he now relates that
he and his brother were in better courage for the performance of their
office. In the meantime he shows that he, as well as his brother, was
God’s minister, and that he brought no industry, nor talent, nor
counsel, nor dexterity himself, but simply obeyed God. Still from their
example we must learn, that as we may not set about anything except what
God prescribes, so we ought obediently and without objection to pursue
whatever He commands. What follows as to their age is meant in
amplification; since it was no common case, considering the natural
coldness and heaviness of old age, that two octogenarians should have
actively engaged in so difficult a charge. For I do not assent to the
opinion of those who think that their dignity was enhanced by their age.
I admit that age is venerable; but Moses had far different views,
namely, that, excluding all human means, he might celebrate God’s glory,
who performed so mighty a work by men who were failing and decrepit with
age. For although their vigor was as yet unabated, their old age might
have made them timid, and might have also affected the people with
anxiety, when they beheld their leaders to be not only of advanced age,
but even naturally not far from the grave.

<span id="iv.vii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
7:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p2"></span>**8.** And the Lord spake unto Moses and
unto Aaron, saying,

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p3"></span>**8.** Et dixit Jehova ad Mosen et
Aharon, dicendo.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p4"></span>**9.** When Pharaoh shall speak unto you,
saying, Shew a miracle for you: then thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy
rod, and cast it before Pharaoh, and it shall become a serpent.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p5"></span>**9.** Si loquutus fuerit ad vos Pharao,
dicendo, Statuite vobis prodigium: tunc dices ad Aharon, Tolle virgam
tuam, et projice coram Pharaone, et fiet in serpentem.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p6"></span>**10.** And Moses and Aaron went in unto
Pharaoh, and they did so as the Lord had commanded: and Aaron cast down
his rod before Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it became a
serpent.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p7"></span>**10.** Venit ergo Moses et Aharon ad
Pharaonem, et ita fecerunt ut praeceperat Iehova. Et projecit Aharon
virgam suam coram Pharaone et coram servis ejus, et fuit in serpentem.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p8"></span>**11.** Then Pharaoh also called the wise
men and the sorcerers: now the magicians of Egypt, they also did in like
manner with their enchantments.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p9"></span>**11.** Tunc vocavit etiam Pharao
sapientes et incantatores, et fecerunt etiam ipsi magi Aegyptiorum hoc
modo suis incantationibus.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p10"></span>**12.** For they cast down every man his
rod, and they became serpents: but Aaron’s rod swallowed up their rods.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p11"></span>**12.** Projecerunt enim singuli virgas
suas, quae fuerunt in dracones. Devoravit tamen virga Aharon virgas
illorum.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p12"></span>**13.** And he hardened Pharaoh’s heart,
that he hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had said.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p13"></span>**13.** Et obduravit cor Pharaonis,
neque audivit illos, sicuti loquutus erat Jehova.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p14"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p15"></span>**8.** *And the Lord spake.* No wonder
that Moses often repeats the same thing, because he wrote for persons of
rude and dull minds. But it behooves us, lest we should be disgusted by
his simple and popular style, diligently to examine how little we are
inclined to be acute and earnest in our consideration of the works of
God. No doubt there is here related what we have already heard
respecting the change of the rod into a serpent, except that he now
tells us that the miracle which had before been performed in the
wilderness of Midian, and afterwards in Egypt, in the sight of the
people, was likewise performed once more before Pharaoh. Moreover, we
gather from hence that at the request of Pharaoh the servants of God had
proved and testified their vocation; and therefore that his pertinacity
was the less excusable, since he despised the power of God so manifestly
shewn forth. For this is usual with unbelievers, to demand proofs of
God’s power, which they may still discredit, — not that they professedly
scorn God, but because their secret impiety urges them to seek after
subterfuges. The message is disagreeable and full of what is annoying to
the proud king; and because he does not dare directly to refuse God, he
invents a plausible pretext for his refusal, by asking for a miracle;
and when this is performed, he seeks still deeper lurking places, as we
shall very soon perceive. Since, therefore, it was certain that he would
not pay a willing obedience to the divine command, and would not yield
before he had been miraculously convinced, God furnishes His servants
with a notable and sure testimony of His power. Moreover, the change of
the crook, or shepherd’s staff, into a serpent had this object, namely,
that the mean and rustic guise of Moses should not be despised. For
(since kings are wont to exalt themselves very highly) Pharaoh might
have laughed at the audacity of Moses and Aaron, who, forgetful, as it
seemed, of their condition, put themselves into conflict with the whole
power of Egypt; but Pharaoh knew, although they were not to be dreaded
for their splendid appearance, and had nothing magnificent about them,
that they were still not destitute of sure and strong help, when he saw
the serpent come forth from the rod. In a word, God bore witness that
His power is hidden beneath the infirmity of His servants, so that at
every season He might render formidable to the greatest monarchs those
who otherwise are like earthen vessels. It is not clear to me why Aaron
was commanded to cast down the rod rather than Moses, unless, perhaps,
because God would designedly humble the pride of the arrogant king, when
He did not deign to exert His power by the hand of His superior servant,
but only employed the inferior one. Therefore, with reference to this
ministration, the rod of God and of Moses is now called the rod of
Aaron. Thus Paul boasts of *his* gospel, the office of preaching which
he knew to be committed to him. (<span id="iv.vii.ii-p15.1"></span>[Ro
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p15.1"></span>, and <span id="iv.vii.ii-p15.2"></span>[2Ti
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p15.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p16"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p17"></span>**10.** *And Moses and Aaron went in.*
Although they were now fully conscious of their vocation; and knew that
they were endued with divine power for working miracles, yet would they
never have dared to approach the fierce and cruel tyrant, unless the
inward inspiration of the Spirit had armed them to persevere. Hence,
then, arose their magnanimity to overcome all terrors; because God
raised them by faith above everything that is lofty on earth, and
sustained them by this support. Therefore do they come to the conflict
with invincible strength, and confirm by a miracle their most hateful
mission. But as to the question which is ordinarily raised here, whether
the change of the rods was true and substantial, as they call it; with
respect to that of Moses, I am confidently persuaded that it was so; for
there is no more difficulty with God to change the forms of things, than
there was to create heaven and earth out of nothing. Philosophers are
not ignorant of the great variety of transmutations which occur in
nature, nay, it is patent even to the uninstructed; but, because the rod
was changed into a serpent in an extraordinary manner, and contrary to
the course of nature, we must form the same judgment of it as of the
change of Lot’s wife into a pillar of salt; except that the rod soon
after returned into its original nature. (<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p17.1"></span>[Ge
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p17.1"></span>.) There is more reason for doubt respecting
the rods of the magicians, since it is probable that the eyes of the
wicked king were deceived by their illusions. But there would be nothing
absurd in our saying, that such liberty was conceded to them by God, not
that they should create one body out of another, but that they should
set forth the work of God as being their own. For assuredly the potency
of error far surpasses the bounds of our comprehension. This Paul
affirms to be given to Satan for the punishment of unbelievers, “that
they should believe a lie,” because they will not obey the truth. (<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p17.2"></span>[2Th
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p17.2"></span>.) He says, indeed, that the coming of
Antichrist shall be with signs and lying wonders, but by adding the word
“power,” he shews that the deception or illusion shall not consist so
much in the external form of things, as in the perverse abuse of signs.
 <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80.md) Therefore Christ absolutely
pronounces that “false prophets shall shew great signs and wonders.”
(<span id="iv.vii.ii-p18.5"></span>[Mt
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p18.5"></span>.) It might be, then, that God in just
vengeance might choose the rods of the magicians to be changed into
serpents; as we shall hereafter see that the waters were changed by
their enchantments into blood, that the earth was covered with frogs and
lice, that the fields were smitten with hail, and the atmosphere
darkened.  <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81.md) Still we must be
assured, that not even a fly can be created except by God only; but that
Satan lays hold, for the purpose of his impostures, of things which are
done by the secret judgment of God.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p20"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p21"></span>**11.** *Then Pharaoh also called.*
<span id="iv.vii.ii-p21.2"></span>The impiety of the tyrant, which had
before lain hid in the recesses of his heart, now breaks forth; when he
does not hesitate to enter into the lists with God. For he was
sufficiently instructed in the wonderful power of God, had not his
iniquity urged him onwards into desperate madness. In asking for a sign,
he thought (as I before said) that he should have had just cause for
despising Moses; as the wicked trust that they may do anything with
impunity, unless God should openly appear from heaven to prohibit them;
but, because inflexible perversity altogether has possession of their
hearts, they do not hesitate to resist the manifest power of God. Thus
the wickedness of Pharaoh blinded his eyes, that, seeing the light, he
saw it not; but, though convinced, still he sought for darkness to hide
the sight of the light from him. He received, therefore, the just reward
of such impious and diabolical arrogance, when he was deceived by the
juggles of his own magicians. This is an example of great use, and well
worthy to be noted; by which we are, first of all, taught, that the
wicked, whatever disposition to be taught they may assume, still remain
inwardly rebellious and stubborn; and, moreover, that they are not only
inclined to error, but are eagerly borne towards it with all their
heart. This vice is not always conspicuous in every individual; but when
God brings His light nearer to them, it is easily detected, and betrays
itself. How many, now-a-days, among the Papists are followers of wicked
superstitions under the pretext of simplicity? As long as, under the
garb of ignorance, they deceive themselves and others, they seem to be
worthy of pity; but, as soon as the truth shines forth, they <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p21.3"></span>demonstrate their love for the impostures by
which they perish, and their delight in falsehoods. Assuredly (as Paul
says) they have “received not the love of the truth.” (<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p21.4"></span>[2Th
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p21.4"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p21.5"></span>.) Are we
surprised at Pharaoh calling for the magicians, in order to repel from
himself his sense of God’s power? As if there were not many at this
time, who hire for themselves certain impious brawlers,  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82.md) <span id="iv.vii.ii-p22.1"></span> by
whose fascinating and fair words they may become besotted in their
errors. It is remarkable, that they are honourably called “wise <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p22.2"></span>men” by courtesy, although they were but
inventors of deceit, and destitute of sound learning. For although
astronomy flourished among them, and the study of liberal arts was
cultivated, it yet appears from the context that they were devoted to
many foolish imaginations, nay, that all their degenerate science was
but vanity. For <span id="iv.vii.ii-p22.3"></span>מכשפים<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p22.4"></span>,  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83.md)
*makshephim*<span id="iv.vii.ii-p23.2"></span>, <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p23.3"></span>and <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p23.4"></span>חרתמים<span id="iv.vii.ii-p23.5"></span>,
*chartumim*<span id="iv.vii.ii-p23.6"></span>, <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p23.7"></span>are the names of superstitious arts; the
former signifying jugglers, or those who deceive the eyes and the senses
by their enchantments; but the latter is used for those who cast
nativities, telling people’s fortunes by the horoscope, and
prognosticating by the aspect of the stars. Therefore, although the
Egyptian magicians had departed from genuine philosophy, they still
retained the name of “wise men,” that they might obtain credit for their
delusions: as the devil, in order to appropriate God’s glory, or to
change himself into an angel of light, is wont to conceal his falsehoods
by specious titles. Doubtless Pharaoh sought, as in a case of
perplexity, to examine it more certainly by comparison; but yet for no
other reason than to conceal his impiety under a fresh covering. The
word <span id="iv.vii.ii-p23.8"></span>להט<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p23.9"></span>,  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84.md)
*lahat*<span id="iv.vii.ii-p24.12"></span>, <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p24.13"></span>although properly signifying the blade of a
sword, is here used for enchantment. I think, however, that they
mistake, who assign the reason for this to be, that they exercised their
sorceries by a sword, or some similar weapon. It rather designates
metaphorically the versatile motion, by which the magicians exhibit one
thing for another; for it properly signifies “a <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p24.14"></span>flame.” This severe and terrible vengeance
upon Pharaoh ought to inspire us with terror, lest, in our hatred of
truth, we should seek after deceptions. For this is intolerable
profaneness, if designedly we desire to pervert the distinction between
truth and falsehood. Therefore it is not to be wondered at, if God
plunges into the deepest darkness of error, those who shut their eyes
against the light presented to them; and if He hands those over to be
the disciples of Satan, who refuse to listen to Him as their master.

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p25"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p26"></span>**12.** *For they cast down every man.*
The number of the magicians is not expressed; and although Paul names
two, Jannes and Jambres,  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85.md) (<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p27.1"></span>[2Ti
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p27.1"></span>,) it is probable that they were not the
only ones, but the chief, and, as it were, the ringleaders. But I will
not dispute this questionable point. The admonition of Paul is more to
the purpose, that “as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses,” so also there
should always be false teachers, who would oppose Christ’s true
ministers, and indeed should “wax worse and worse.” (Verse 13.) It is an
awful fact that the reins were so given to these magicians, that they
contended with Moses in almost an equal contest. But the ingratitude of
the world is worthy of bearing the same punishment of blindness. God
elsewhere testifies that when He permits false prophets to work miracles
to deceive, it is to prove men’s hearts. (<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p27.2"></span>[De
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p27.2"></span>.) And truly, unless our own hypocrisy were
like a veil to take away the distinction between black and white, Satan
would avail nothing by such arts and deceptions; but we ourselves, as if
devoted to destruction, willingly cast ourselves into his nets; but
especially against the reprobate, who obstinately seek for occasions of
error, God casts this last thunderbolt, namely, He gives efficacy to the
delusion, and so deprives them of their senses at the same time, that
they do not guard themselves from manifest destruction. Many indeed
would excuse Pharaoh, because, being deceived by his magicians, he did
not disentangle himself from the error which he could not escape; for
what could he do when he saw the contest equally maintained? But it must
be thoroughly understood that none are so hurried away except those whom
God would resist; especially the spirit of confusion and mental
blindness seizes on those who have been obstinate in their wickedness.
Nor must the mark of distinction be overlooked, that the rod of Moses
swallowed up the rods of the magicians. How then was it that Pharaoh did
not perceive Moses to be victorious? how was it that he rather turned
aside to his own impostors? how was it, in fine, that he did not
acknowledge God’s servant who had been superior in the contest, except
that the wicked maliciously close their eyes against the manifested
power of God? Whosoever will aim at the right mark shall certainly never
be destitute of God as his guide. Therefore blame is justly thrown upon
Pharaoh, because through the hardness of his heart he would not attend.
Too frivolous is that cavil which the Papists advance, that the serpent
is called the rod of Moses, as the bread transubstantiated into the body
of Christ retains the name of bread;  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86.md) for they unskillfully confound two
altogether different things; because, in the mystery of the Lord’s
Supper, the analogy between the sign and the thing signified always
remains; in this miracle the case is entirely otherwise. Again, because
the change was only temporary, Moses properly called that a rod to which
its previous form was presently to be restored. Besides, in comparing
the true serpent with the fictitious ones, he was unwilling to make a
difference in names. But, to pass all this over, the Papists will
prevail nothing, until they have shewn that the bread is
transubstantiated into the body.  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87.md)
Nay, what they foolishly wrest against us, we may retort upon them,
namely, that the bread is called the body of Christ although it remains
bread, just as the serpent which then appeared is called the rod.

<span id="iv.vii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
7:14-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p2"></span>**14.** And the Lord said unto Moses,
Pharaoh’s heart *is* hardened, he refuseth to let the people go.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p3"></span>**14.** Tunc dixit Jehova ad Mosen,
Aggravatum est cor Pharaonis ne dimittat populum.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p4"></span>**15.** Get thee unto Pharaoh in the
morning: lo, he goeth out unto the water; and thou shalt stand by the
river’s brink against he come; and the rod which was turned to a serpent
shalt thou take in thine hand.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p5"></span>**15.** Vade ad Pharaonem mane: ecce,
egreditur ad aquas, et stes in occursum ejus super ripam fluminis: et
virgam quae versa fuit in serpentem tolles in manum tuam.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p6"></span>**16.** And thou shalt say unto him, The
Lord God of the Hebrews hath sent me unto thee, saying, Let my people
go, that they may serve me in the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou
wouldest not hear.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p7"></span>**16.** Et dices ad eum, Jehova Deus
Hebraeorum misit me ad te, dicens, Dimitte populum meum ut serviat mihi
in deserto: et ecce, non audisti huc usque.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p8"></span>**17.** Thus saith the Lord, In this
thou shalt know that I *am* the Lord: behold, I will smite with the rod
that *is* in mine hand upon the waters which *are* in the river, and
they shall be turned to blood.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p9"></span>**17.** Sic dixit Jehova, In hoc scies
quod ego sum Jehova: ecce, ego percurtaim virga quae in manu mea est
aquam quae est in flumine, et vertetur in sanguinem.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p10"></span>**18.** And the fish that is in the
river shall die, and the river shall stink; and the Egyptians shall
loathe to drink of the water of the river.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p11"></span>**18.** Pisces vero qui sunt in flumine
morientur: et foetebit flumen, et molestia afficientur Aegyptii, bibendo
aquas ex flumine.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p12"></span>**19.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
Say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch out thine hand upon the waters
of Egypt, upon their streams, upon their rivers, and upon their ponds,
and upon all their pools of water, that they may become blood; and
*that* there may be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in
*vessels* of wood, and in *vessels* of stone.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p13"></span>**19.** Et dixit Jehova ad Mosen, Dic
ad Aharon, Tolle virgam tuam, et extende manum tuam super aquas
­Aegypti, super flumina eorum, super rivos et stagna eorum, et super
omnem collectionem aquarum ipsorum: et fient sanguis, eritque sanguis
per totam terram Aegypti in vasis ligneis et lapideis.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p14"></span>**20.** And Moses and Aaron did so, as
the Lord commanded: and he lifted up the rod, and smote the waters that
were in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his
servants; and all the waters that were in the river were turned to
blood.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p15"></span>**20.** Et ita fecerunt Moses et Aharon
sicuti praeceperat Jehova. Et elevans baculum, percussit aquas quae
erant in flumine, coram oculis Pharaonis, et coram oculis servorum ejus.
Et versae sunt aqmaae omnes quae erant in flumine, in sanguinem.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p16"></span>**21.** And the fish that *was* in the
river died; and the river stank, and the Egyptians could not drink of
the water of the river: and there was blood throughout all the land of
Egypt.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p17"></span>**21.** Pisces etiam qui erant in
flumine mortui sunt: et computruit flumen, ut non possent Aegyptii
bibere aquas ex flumine: fuitque sanguis per totam terram ­Aegypti.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p18"></span>**22.** And the magicians of Egypt did
so with their enchantments: and Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, neither
did he hearken unto them; as the Lord had said.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p19"></span>**22.** Sic etiam fecerunt
praestigiatores Aegypti incantationibus suis: et obduruit cor Pharaonis,
sicut loquutus fuerat Jehova.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p20"></span>**23.** And Pharaoh turned and went
into his house, neither did he set his heart to this also.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p21"></span>**23.** Et revertens Pharao venit in
domum suara: neque adjecit cor suum etiam ad hoc.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p22"></span>**24.** And all the Egyptians digged
round about the river for water to drink; for they could not drink of
the water of the river.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p23"></span>**24.** Foderunt autem omnes Aegyp tii
per circuitum fluminis, ut aquas biberent, quia non poterant bibere ex
aquis fluminis.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p24"></span>**25.** And seven days were fulfilled,
after that the Lord had smitten the river.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p25"></span>**25.** Et completi sunt septem dies ex
quo percussit Jehova fluvium.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p26"></span><span id="iv.vii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p27"></span>**14.** *And the Lord said unto Moses.*
Moses now begins to relate the two plagues which were inflicted upon
Egypt before Pharaoh was induced to obey; and although there was
something prodigious in the madness which strove against God’s hand so
powerfully constraining him, yet in the person of this single reprobate,
the picture of human pride and rebellion, when it is not controlled by a
spirit of tractableness, is presented to our view. Let the faithful then
be admonished by this narrative diligently to beware, lest, by wantonly
rebelling against God, they provoke a similar vengeance upon themselves.
For the same Being who hardened Pharaoh’s heart is the constant avenger
of impiety, and, smiting His enemies with a spirit of confusion, renders
them as furious as they are senseless. Moreover, lest Moses, stumbling
against this obstacle, should desist from the course he had begun, God
encourages him to the combat, as much as to say, that he had to contend
with a very hard stone until it should be broken. Hearing that Pharaoh’s
heart was hardened, he might begin to waver, unless a hope of victory
were shewn him from elsewhere. But since the obstinacy of this beast is
indomitable, God arms His servant with new weapons, as much as to say,
that he must be worn down though he could not be broken. But although to
some the analogy may appear far-fetched, between the ten plagues and the
ten precepts of the law, yet, in my opinion, it is probable, and
agreeable to reason, that before God promulgated the law the wicked were
smitten with as many plagues as He was about to give precepts to His
people, that in this way He might confirm their authority. First,
however, He commands Moses to take up the rod, and reminds him of the
recent miracle that he may gird himself to the new conflict with greater
confidence. Then, after the Hebrew manner, He more fully lays open what
He had briefly touched upon; for, at first, no mention is made of Aaron,
but God only announces to Moses what He would have done; then He
explains that the hand of Aaron was to be interposed. Where God reminds
them that the rod was lately turned into a serpent, He shews that we
profit but little by His works, unless our faith gathers strength from
them. Besides, when God denounces to Pharaoh what He is going to do, He
renders him more inexcusable, because he is not awakened by threats to
repentance. God indeed knew that this would be without success; but
although he knows the disease to be incurable, He still ceases not to
apply the remedies — not indeed such as will restore health, but such as
will draw out the secret poison from the mind. Many are here at issue
(*litigant*) with God, because He not only speaks to the deaf, but even,
by admonishing or chastising them in vain, exasperates their malice more
and more. But it is for us, when any appearance of unreasonableness
perplexes us, reverently to adore the secret judgments of God and to be
soberly wise. Meanwhile the event shews that God’s threatenings do not
fall ineffectually, but that the contempt of them doubles both the crime
and the punishment.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p28"></span><span id="iv.vii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p29"></span>**19.** *And the Lord spake unto
Moses.* This is the more extended narrative of which I spoke; for Moses
mentions nothing different from what went before, but explains more
distinctly his mode of action in the performance of the miracle, namely,
that what God had commanded was completed by the instrumentality of
Aaron. There was a reason for commencing with this miracle, that the
Egyptians might know that there was no safeguard for them in the
resources upon which they prided themselves the most. We know what great
wealth, defense, and conveniences arose to them from the Nile; thence
came their abundant fisheries, thence the fertility of their whole
country, which it irrigated in its inundation, a thing that, in other
lands is injurious; its navigation was most advantageous for their
merchants, it was also a strong fortification to a good part of the
kingdom. Therefore, in order to cast down the Egyptians from their
principal dependence, He turns its waters into blood. Besides, because
water is one of the two elements of which man’s life consists, in
depriving the Egyptians of one part of their life, He used the best and
shortest method of humiliating their haughtiness, had they not been
altogether intractable. He might, indeed, by a single breath, have dried
up all the sources of water, and overwhelmed the whole nation by
drought; but this would have been commonly believed to have happened by
chance, or naturally, and therefore would have been a less apparent
prodigy, whilst it would have shut up the way for others. It would,
then, have been sufficient, by the terror of death it awakened, to turn
them to the fear of God, unless their madness had been desperate. Moses
enumerates, besides the river, the streams, and ponds, and pools of
water; because, in different parts of the country, as well artificially
as naturally, the Nile was so diffused, that scarcely any other country
is provided in all directions with such an abundance of water; as though
God should say, “It shall avail you nothing to possess such an immense
supply of water; because you shall thirst as much as if the Nile were
dry.” He adds, “both in vessels of wood and in vessels of stone;”
meaning, that in whatever kind of vessel they came to draw, they would
find nothing but blood.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p30"></span><span id="iv.vii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p31"></span>**20.** *And Moses and Aaron did so.*
He repeats that what God threatened as to the death of the fish, and the
stinking of the Nile, actually took place; that he may aggravate the sin
of the king, who was unaffected by the manifold power of God. Still he
immediately adds that his counsellors witnessed it also. Hence we may
conjecture, that the same infatuation had pervaded the whole court. It
was also proper that so memorable a circumstance should not only be
known generally, but that its author should be seen by many eyes. But it
was a sign of the reprobation of the whole nation, that there was none
of all that multitude who labored to correct the folly of the king.
Whence also it appears that God confounds the wisdom of the world; for
there was no nation which gloried more in its universal knowledge; even
as Isaiah reproaches them of their boast. (<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p31.1"></span>[Isa
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p31.1"></span>.) But we see in how shameful a manner, on
the one hand proud, and on the other amazed, they betrayed not a single
spark of sound intelligence.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p32"></span><span id="iv.vii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p33"></span>**22.** *And the magicians of Egypt did
so.* A question arises as to how the magicians could imitate Moses, when
the material to work upon no longer remained; for, if there were no
water left in Egypt, its transmutation was impossible. But I have no
doubt but that, for the purpose of their illusion, pure and clear waters
appeared for a little while, and then were changed into blood. For,
since the season for concluding the contests was not yet arrived,
doubtless God opened a way for Himself, until they reached their end.
The supposition of Augustine  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88.md) is a
forced one, that the magicians took the water, which remained pure and
unaltered among the habitations of the Israelites. I should more
willingly accept what he says, that, perhaps the waters were smitten by
them at the same instant, so that in one place the power of God shone
forth, in another their deception prevailed — although the solution I
have given is very sufficient. Whether the change were true or
imaginary, I dare not decide; except that it is more in accordance with
the delusions of Satan, that the eyes of the wicked were deceived. Nor
is there any necessity to philosophize more subtilely with Augustine,
 <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89.md) that there is a seminal principle
infused into all created things, so that one species may generate
another. We may rather take our stand on the teaching of Paul, that God
sends strong delusion to ensnare the unbelievers with lies, because they
refuse to embrace the truth, (<span id="iv.vii.iii-p35.1"></span>[2Th
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p35.1"></span>;) and I have already shewn from another
passage of Moses, that, by the just judgment of God, false prophets
perform signs and wonders. Moses, however, seems to hint that it was
only an illusion, where he adds, “the magicians did so *with their
enchantments*;” as if the flashes, as of lightning, dazzled the eyes of
the spectators; for this I have shewn to be the meaning of the word. Yet
I do not question but that God altogether preserved His people from this
calamity, so that these guests and strangers were supplied with the
water of Egypt, whilst not a drop was left for the natives of the land.
Thus was the king convicted of obstinacy, because he was not more
attentive to observe this distinction; nay, he must have been doubly mad
and foolish, to the destruction of himself and his kingdom, to set the
delusion of the magicians against the power of God. But this often
happens to the reprobate, that they rush eagerly as it were to their own
destruction, whilst they are borne away by satanic impulse in opposition
to God. Yet this was no slight temptation to God’s servants, to see the
ministers of Satan almost rivaling themselves. For, if God chose to bear
witness to their deliverance by miracles, — when they saw their enemies
endued with a similar power, how could their own vocation be ratified
and sure? And indeed it is probable that their faith was shaken by these
machinations; yet I count it certain that it did not yield and give way;
for, if Moses had been overcome by doubt, he would have confessed it, as
it was his custom to do. But God opened their eyes, so that they should
regard with contempt the tricks and deceptions of the magicians;
besides, the divine vision had shone upon them together with the word,
so that it was no marvel that, thus supported, they should repel, or
sustain, every assault with firmness.

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p36"></span><span id="iv.vii.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p37"></span>**23.** *And Pharaoh turned.* In this
word Moses teaches us that the hardness of heart, to which God had
devote Pharaoh, was voluntary; so that the sin rested in himself, nor
did the secret appointment of God avail anything to lessen his
culpability, for his folly is condemned, because he did not “set his
heart to this also.” Whence it follows that he was the author of his own
obstinacy, because, being blinded by pride and contempt, he took no
account of the glory of God. Thus the wicked, although as being vessels
of wrath, they are cast of God into a reprobate mind, still harden
themselves, because wittingly and willfully they run against God, and
thus their security, audacity, and perverseness take away from them the
excuse of ignorance or error. Wherefore this example warns us not to
slumber when God arouses us, but attentively to consider His works,
which may instruct us to reverence and fear Him. The statement that the
Egyptians dug wells for themselves increases the certainty of the
miracle, as does also what is added as to the seven days; for if the
corruption of the water had only been momentary, some suspicion of
delusion might have crept in, which was removed both by the continued
taste and appearance. Therefore it was said before, that the Egyptians
would suffer inconvenience and pain  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90.md) from the want of water; for thus I
explain it, that they should be sorrowful and afflicted, viz., because
they had nothing to drink.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc03010.htm#fr_76.md) <span
id="iv.vii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p18"></span> “The word *Elohim*, as the Hebrews
remark, whether applied to God, or to men, or to angels, signifies
judicial power.” — *Grotius in ­Pol*. *Syn*.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc03010.htm#fr_77.md) <span
id="iv.vii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p21"></span> It is thus translated in *A*.*V*.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc03010.htm#fr_78.md) <span
id="iv.vii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p24"></span> “Leur fierte, comme un bouclier de fer;”
their pride like an iron buckler. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc03010.htm#fr_79.md) <span
id="iv.vii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.i-p25"></span> Les autres fideles. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc03010.htm#fr_80.md) <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p18"></span> Calvin’s own comment on <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p18.2"></span>[2 Thessalonians
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.vii.ii-p18.2"></span>,
may explain this somewhat obscure passage, “He gives the names of
*miracles of falsehood* (lying wonders) not merely to such as are
falsely and deceptively contrived by cunning men with a view to impose
upon the simple — but takes falsehood as consisting in this, that Satan
draws to a contrary end works which otherwise are truly works of God,
and abuses miracles so as to obscure God’s glory. In the meantime,
however, there can be no doubt that he deceives by means of
enchantments, an example of which we have in Pharaoh’s magicians. (<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p18.3"></span>[Ex
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p18.3"></span>).” *Calvin Soc*. *Edition*, p. 337.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc03010.htm#fr_81.md) <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p18.6"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p19"></span> It does not appear that the magicians
performed the two latter miracles.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc03010.htm#fr_82.md) <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p21.6"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p22"></span> Des caphars, et causeurs effrontez, —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc03010.htm#fr_83.md) <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p22.5"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p23"></span> The explanation of those words must be
understood to be rather conjectural than gathered from any knowledge of
their etymology. In <span id="iv.vii.ii-p23.1"></span>[Daniel
2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.vii.ii-p23.1"></span>,
the same words are employed to designate the sorcerers and magicians of
Babylon. — *W*.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc03010.htm#fr_84.md) <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p23.10"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p24"></span> <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p24.1"></span>להט<span id="iv.vii.ii-p24.2"></span>,
*C*<span id="iv.vii.ii-p24.3"></span>. has here said that each of two
different significations is the proper one. As a verb, <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p24.4"></span>להט<span id="iv.vii.ii-p24.5"></span>, is to
burn with a flame; as a substantive it is a flame or flash; and hence
the flashing of a sword; and sometimes that rapid crossing of the
fingers which confuses the eye. But in <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p24.6"></span>[Ex
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p24.6"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p24.7"></span>, and in
<span id="iv.vii.ii-p24.8"></span>[Ex
8:3-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p24.8"></span><span id="iv.vii.ii-p24.9"></span>, the same
word occurs with the omission of the middle letter; and this omission
will justify its being regarded as belonging to the root <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p24.10"></span>לוט<span id="iv.vii.ii-p24.11"></span>,
which signifies hiding, involving in obscurity, practising deceitful
arts. — *W*

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc03010.htm#fr_85.md) <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p27"></span> *C*. has *Mambres*, the reading of the
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc03010.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p28"></span> “This is a metonymy,” says *Corn*. *a
Lapide in loco*, “for things are often called by the name of what they
were, or of that into which they are changed. So Philo, St. Augustine,
etc. For a similar or better reason, (however Calvin may here rail,) the
*flesh* of Christ in the holy Sacrament is called *bread*, (<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p28.1"></span>[1Co
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p28.1"></span>, and <span id="iv.vii.ii-p28.2"></span>[Joh
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.vii.ii-p28.2"></span>;) for the Jews call all sorts of food, and
even flesh, by the name of *bread*, especially since in the Eucharist
the accidents of bread and wine remain, and are seen; thus, judging as
men by their eyesight and senses, they rightly call it *bread*, because
they see and touch the *species* of bread.”

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p29"></span>The subject is somewhat more fully
discussed by *C*. himself — *Institutes*, Book 4., ch. 17. 15. — *C*.
*Soc*. *Transl*., Vol. 3, pp. 402, 403.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc03010.htm#fr_87.md) <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p30"></span> This clause is inverted in the *Fr*.,
“Que le corps est transubstantie au pain.”

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc03010.htm#fr_88.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p34"></span> Tom. 3., *pars prima*, p. 428;
Quaestiones in Exodum, 23; and tom. 2., p. 463; <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p34.1"></span>Ep. 143<span
id="iv.vii.iii-p34.1"></span>., in Marcellum, where he offers another
explanation also, viz., that their miracle might have been wrought upon
salt water.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc03010.htm#fr_89.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p35"></span> Vol. 3, pt. 1, p. 427, quaes. 21.
“Insunt enim corporeis rebus per omnia elementa mundi quaedam occultae
seminariae rationes, quibus, eum data fuerit opportunitas temporalis,
atque causalis, prorumpunt in species debitas suis modis, et finibus.”

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc03010.htm#fr_90.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii-p38"></span> He seems to allude to verse 18, which
he translates “et molestia afficientur Aegyptii, bibendo aquas ex
flumine.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 8](cc03011.md)
