[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc03008)  [Next](cc03010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p1"></span>EXODUS 6

<span id="iv.vi.i"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Then the Lord said unto Moses, Now
shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall
he let them go, and with a strong hand shall he drive them out of his
land.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et dixit Jehova ad Mosen, Nunc
videbis qued facturus sum Pharaoni: quia in manu robusta dimittet eos,
in manu *inquam* robusta ejiciet eos e terra sua.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And God spake unto Moses, and said
unto him, I am the Lord:

<span id="iv.vi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et loquutus est Deus ad Mosen,
dixitque illi, Ego Jehova.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p6"></span>**3.** And I appeared unto Abraham, unto
Isaac, and unto Jacob, by *the name of* God Almighty; but by my name
JEHOVAH was I not known to them.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Apparui quidem Abrahae, Isaac, et
Jacob in Deo onmipotente: in nomine tamen meo Jehova non sum cognitus
illis.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p8"></span>**4.** And I have also established my
covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their
pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Atque etiam erexi pactum meum cum
illis, ut darem illis terram Chanaan, terram peregrinationum eorum, in
qua peregrinati sunt.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p10"></span>**5.** And I have also heard the groaning
of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage; and I
have remembered my covenant.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Ideoque ego audivi gemitum filiorum
Israel, quos Aegyptii serviliter opprimunt: et recordatus sum foederis
mei.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p12"></span>**6.** Wherefore say unto the children of
Israel, I am the Lord, and I will bring you out from under the burdens
of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of their bondage; and I will
redeem you with a stretched-out arm, and with great judgments.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Propterea dic filiis Israel, Ego
Jehova, et educam vos ex oneribus Aegypti, et eruam vos e servitute
illorum, et redimam vos in brachio extento, et in judiciis magnis.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p14"></span>**7.** And I will take you to me for a
people, and I will be to you a God; and ye shall know that I *am* the
Lord your God, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the
Egyptians.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et assumam vos mihi in populum, et
ero vobis in Deum, et scietis quod ego sum Jehova Deus vester, dum vos
educo ex oneribus Aegypti.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p16"></span>**8.** And I will bring you in unto the
land concerning the which I did swear to give it to Abraham, to Isaac,
and to Jacob; and I will give it you for an heritage: I am the Lord.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et introducam vos in terram, de qua
levavi manum meam ut darem eam Abrahae, Isaac, et Jacob: daboque eam
vobis in possessionem. Ego Jehova.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p18"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p19"></span>**1.** *Then the Lord said unto Moses.*
Moses was indeed unworthy of receiving so kind and gentle a reply from
God; but the Father of all goodness of His infinite mercy pardoned both
the sins of Moses and of the people, that He might effect the
deliverance which he had determined. Yet He adduces nothing new, but
repeats and confirms His former declaration, that Pharaoh would not obey
until forcibly compelled to do so. The expression, “thou shalt see,” is
a tacit reproof of his immoderate impatience, in not waiting for the
result of the promise. The reason is then added why God is unwilling
that His people should be spontaneously dismissed by the tyrant, viz.,
because He wished the work of their liberation to be conspicuous. We
must remark the strength of the words “drive them out;” as if He had
said, that when Pharaoh had been subdued, and routed in the contest, he
would not only consent, but would consider it a great blessing, for the
people to depart as quickly as possible. The sum is, that he, who today
refuses to let you depart, will not only set you free, but will even
expel you from his kingdom.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p20"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p21"></span>**2.** *And God spake.* <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.1"></span>God pursues His address, that Moses may again
uplift the fainting courage of the people. Moreover, He rebukes their
distrust, by recalling the memory of His covenant; for if this had been
duly impressed upon their minds, they would have been much more firm in
their expectation of deliverance. He therefore shews that He has now
advanced nothing new; since they had heard long ago from the Patriarchs
that they were chosen by God as His peculiar people, and had almost
imbibed from their mother’s breasts the doctrine of his adoption of
them. Wherefore their stupidity is the more unpardonable, and more
manifest, when they thus factiously complain of Moses, as if he had
himself invented what he had promised them in the name of God. He also
stings them by an implied comparison; Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had
eagerly embraced the promise given them, and had quietly, and
perseveringly trusted in it; whilst they, who boasted of their descent
from that holy stock, disdainfully rejected it, because its fulfillment
did not immediately appear. And, in order to amplify their sin, he
reasons from the less to the greater: since a fuller and clearer
manifestation of it is presented to them than there had been to the
fathers, it follows that they ought to have been more ready to believe
it. Whence it is plain that their stupidity is inexcusable, since they
will not receive God, when he is so familiarly presenting himself to
them. Translators do not agree as to the epithet “Sadai.” Some derive it
from the word <span id="iv.vi.i-p21.2"></span>שדד<span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.3"></span>, *shadad*<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.4"></span>,
<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.5"></span>and imagine that the final letter <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.6"></span>י<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.7"></span>, *yod*<span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.8"></span>, <span id="iv.vi.i-p21.9"></span>is the
double <span id="iv.vi.i-p21.10"></span>ד<span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.11"></span>, *daleth* <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.12"></span>If we agree to this, it will mean the same as
“the Destroyer;” or at any rate will signify the awful majesty of God.
Others are rather of opinion that the root is <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.13"></span>שד<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.14"></span>,
*shad*<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.15"></span>, <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.16"></span>which means “a <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.17"></span>teat.” To others it appears to be a compound
word from the relative <span id="iv.vi.i-p21.18"></span>אשר<span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.19"></span>, *esher*<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.20"></span>,
<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.21"></span>or <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.22"></span>ש<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.23"></span>, and <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.24"></span>די<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.25"></span>,
*di*<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.26"></span>, <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.27"></span>which in Hebrew means “*sufficiency*<span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.28"></span>.” <span id="iv.vi.i-p21.29"></span>Thus he
will be called “Sadai,” who abounds with all good things. It is indeed
sure that they use this word in a good as well as a bad sense; for where
Isaiah threatens that God will be the avenger of sins, he calls him
“Sadai.” (<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.30"></span>[Isa
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.30"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p21.31"></span>.) So also
in <span id="iv.vi.i-p21.32"></span>[Job
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.32"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p21.33"></span>, <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.34"></span>“Sadai <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.35"></span>troubleth me.” In these and similar passages,
the terrible power of God is unquestionably expressed; but when He
promises to Abraham that He will be the God “Sadai,” He is engaging
himself to be merciful and bounteous. Here again, where He says that He
appeared to the Fathers as the God “Sadai,” <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.36"></span>He has not respect so much to His might in
exercising judgment, as to His abundant and perfect loving-kindness; as
though He had said, that He had manifested to Abraham and the other
Patriarchs how great was His efficiency in preserving and defending His
own people, and that they had known from experience how powerfully and
effectually He cherishes, sustains, and aids them that are His. But
although He declares what benefits He conferred upon them, He says that
He was not known to them by His name “Jehovah;” signifying thus that He
now more brightly manifested the glory of His divinity to their
descendants. It would be tedious to recount the various opinions as to
the name “Jehovah.” It is certainly a foul superstition of the Jews that
they dare not speak, or write it, but substitute the name “Adonai;”
<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.37"></span>nor do I any more approve of their
teaching, who say that it is *ineffable*<span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.38"></span>, <span id="iv.vi.i-p21.39"></span>because it
is not written according to grammatical rule. Without controversy, it is
derived from the word <span id="iv.vi.i-p21.40"></span>היה<span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.41"></span>, *hayah*<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.42"></span>,
<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.43"></span>or <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.44"></span>הוה<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.45"></span>,
*havah*<span id="iv.vi.i-p21.46"></span>, <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.47"></span>and therefore it is rightly said by learned
commentators to be the essential name of God, whereas others are, as it
were, epithets. Since, then, nothing is more peculiar to God than
eternity, He is called Jehovah, because He has existence from Himself,
and sustains all things by His secret inspiration. Nor do I agree with
the grammarians, who will not have it pronounced, because its inflection
is irregular; because its etymology, of which all confess that God is
the author, is more to me than an hundred rules.  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71.md) <span id="iv.vi.i-p22.1"></span>Nor does
God by “His name” in this passage mean syllables or letters, but the
knowledge of His glory and majesty, which shone out more fully and more
brightly in the redemption of His Church, than in the commencement of
the covenant. For Abraham and the other Patriarchs were content with a
smaller measure of light; whence it follows that the fault of their
descendants would be less excusable, if their faith was not answerable
to the increase of their grace. Meanwhile, Moses is awakened to activity
whilst God is setting before him a magnificent and singular means of
shewing forth His glory.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p23"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p24"></span>**4.** *And I have also established my
covenant.* <span id="iv.vi.i-p24.1"></span>The hope of the deliverance
which He had formerly promised, and which the Patriarchs had expected,
He confirms by alluding to the covenant, as I have just above said; and
the particle <span id="iv.vi.i-p24.2"></span>גם<span
id="iv.vi.i-p24.3"></span>, *gam*<span id="iv.vi.i-p24.4"></span>, <span
id="iv.vi.i-p24.5"></span>which is twice repeated, is, in the first
case, *causal*<span id="iv.vi.i-p24.6"></span>, <span
id="iv.vi.i-p24.7"></span>in the second, *illative*<span
id="iv.vi.i-p24.8"></span>, <span id="iv.vi.i-p24.9"></span>as much as
to say, “Since I covenanted with your fathers, therefore I have now
determined to bring you into the land of Canaan;” unless it be preferred
to resolve it thus, “I, <span id="iv.vi.i-p24.10"></span>the same who
established the covenant with your fathers, now also have heard your
groaning.” Moreover, because the covenant is founded on free grace, God
commands the redemption to be expected as much from His good pleasure as
from His steadfastness. But He again commends the faith of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, because they patiently consented to be strangers and
pilgrims in the land of Canaan, which by the covenant of God was their
own lawful inheritance. For it was a proof of their exemplary virtue, to
be wanderers all their lives, and not to have a single corner to put
their foot upon, unless what was granted them by sufferance for the
erection of their tents, being at the mercy of their neighbors; as
natives are always apt to despise strangers. And by this comparison the
slowness of heart and ingratitude of their posterity is the more
condemned, if they refuse to take possession of this land, which was so
earnestly desired by their holy fathers, and at the sight of which alone
they counted themselves blessed, although they were only sojourners
there.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p25"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p26"></span>**5.** *And I have also heard the
groaning.* He assigns the reason why He so long had delayed to fulfill
His promise, viz., because He would have His people sorely troubled,
that He might more openly succor them in their affliction; besides, He
chose that they should be unjustly oppressed by the Egyptians, in order
that He might more justly rescue them from their tyrannical masters, as
He had said to Abraham that He would avenge them after they had been
afflicted. (<span id="iv.vi.i-p26.1"></span>[Gen.
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#014)<span id="iv.vi.i-p26.1"></span>..md)
He therefore reminds them by this circumstance, that the due time for
helping them had come; because, if they had been always treated
humanely, and the laws of hospitality had been observed towards them,
there would have been no cause for shaking off the yoke; but now, after
that the Egyptians, regardless of all justice, had broken faith with
them, it was just that the groaning and cries of His cruelly afflicted
people should be heard by God. But He always expressly asserts that this
depended on the covenant, both that the Jews might acknowledge him to be
only bound to them by regard to His own free promise, and also that,
being persuaded that He is true to His promises, they might more surely
expect deliverance. The meaning of God’s “remembering” His promise I
have elsewhere said to be, that he shews His remembrance of it by what
He does.  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72.md) What follows in the next
verse, “Say unto the children of Israel, I am the Lord,” is intended to
remove their doubts. It was a thing as impossible to human apprehension,
to tear away this weak and unwarlike people from their cruel tyrants, as
to rescue sheep from the jaws of wolves, and to preserve them in safety
after they had been mangled and wounded by their teeth. Therefore God
begins by declaring his incomparable power, to shew that there is no
difficulty with Him in performing anything whatever, although
incredible. Therefore, he adds, that he would “redeem them with a
stretched-out arm, and with great judgments,” as much as to say, I will
give miraculous proofs of my mighty power, which shall surpass all human
apprehension. By “*judgments*,”  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73.md) He
means the manner of His dealing, which would at the same time testify
His justice. For with the Hebrews this word means any disposition,
method, order, or custom, and sometimes also measure. We say in French,
*facons notables ou estranges*, (notable or strange *fashions*.)

<span id="iv.vi.i-p29"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p30"></span>**7.** *And I will take you to me.* The
end of their liberation is here described in the continued tenor of His
grace. For it would have been little that the people should once be
redeemed from Egypt, unless, when redeemed, they had lived under the
defense and guardianship of God. As, therefore, He had long since
separated the holy seed of Abraham from the other nations by
circumcision, He now again sets it apart, (*sanctificat*,) and promises
that he will be their God. In these words, then, their peculiar
election, as well as its perpetuity, is asserted; since to be accounted
the people of God means the same as to be by especial privilege received
into his favor, and to be called by adoption to the hope of eternal
salvation. But the future tense shews that the benefit was not to be
merely temporal, when God with a stretched-out arm shall bring the
people out of Egypt, but that this should only be the beginning of
eternal protection. Moreover, we should observe the *anagoge* or
similitude between us and the Israelites, because God has once delivered
us by the hand of his only-begotten Son from the tyranny of Satan, to
this end, that he may always pursue us with his paternal love.
Afterwards he subjoins the possession of the land of Canaan as an
earnest or pledge, which was given to the Israelites, in order that God
might always dwell among them, protect them with his aid, and defend
them with his power. I have said that this was the earnest of their
adoption, because the faith of the fathers was not to be tied to earthly
blessings, but to tend to an higher object. Meanwhile, by this outward
sign God shewed them that they were his peculiar people, for whose
habitation he chose the land in which he would be worshipped. By saying
He “would lift up his hand,”  <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74.md) He
means in confirmation, because the promise was ratified by the addition
of an oath. It is indeed certain that there is enough and more than
enough steadfastness in the simple word of God; but He made this
concession to man’s weakness, and interposed His sacred name as a
pledge, that they might with fuller confidence be persuaded that nothing
was promised them in vain. To lift up the hand, means to swear; a
similitude taken from men, who, by this gesture, testify that they speak
in the sight of God, as if they would call Him down as a witness from
heaven. This is not applicable to God, who swears by Himself, because
there is none greater to whom He may lift His hand, (<span
id="iv.vi.i-p31.1"></span>[Heb
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013)<span id="iv.vi.i-p31.1"></span>;.md)
but, metaphorically, the custom of men is transferred to Him. As to the
insertion, that “they should know that He was the Lord,” after they had
been brought forth, it contains an indirect rebuke; since that knowledge
is too late which comes after the event. But at the same time, He
promises that He would cause them openly to experience how true He is in
all His sayings, that the Israelites may more constantly expect their
redemption. Repeating at the close that He is Jehovah, He magnifies (as
He had just before done) His invincible power, which easily surmounts
all impediments; whilst this expression also contains a testimony to His
truth, as if He had said that He alone can be safely trusted to, because
He is both faithful in His promises and possessed of infinite power.

<span id="iv.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
6:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p2"></span>**9.** And Moses spake so unto the
children of Israel: but they hearkened not unto Moses for anguish of
spirit, and for cruel bondage.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p3"></span>**9.** Et ita loquutus est Moses ad filios
Israel: sed non audierunt Mosen prae angustia spiritus, et prae dura
servitute.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p4"></span>**10.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p5"></span>**10.** Loquutus autem est Jehova ad
Mosen, dicens,

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p6"></span>**11.** Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of
Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p7"></span>**11.** Ingredere et Ioquere ad Pharaonem
regem Aegypti, ut dimittat filios Israel e terra sua.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p8"></span>**12.** And Moses spake before the Lord,
saying, Behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened unto me; how
then shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips?

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p9"></span>**12.** Tunc loquutus est Moses coram
Jehovah, dicendo, Ecce, filii Israel non audierunt me: et quomodo audiet
me Pharao qui sum incircumcisus labiis?

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p10"></span>**13.** And the Lord spake unto Moses and
unto Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and unto
Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land
of Egypt.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p11"></span>**13.** Loquutus autem fuerat Jehova ad
Mosen, et Aharon, dederatque eis mandata ad filios Israel et ad
Pharaonem regem Aegypti, ut emitteret filios Israel e terra Aegypti.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p12"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p13"></span>**9.** *And Moses spake so.* From this
verse it appears that Moses is referring to the second message which he
was commanded to bear. For they had before heard with great joy and
approbation, and had expressed their thankfulness to God, that the time
of their deliverance was come. Now Moses relates that their hearts were
shut against the announcement that he made to them of this grace. Thus
do the afflicted often, by closing their ears, shut the gate against the
promises of God, which is indeed a marvelous thing. For it is not to be
wondered at, if they who are full and intoxicated with prosperity,
reject the mercy of God; but it is contrary to nature that the sorrow
which ought to awaken the longings of those who are overwhelmed with
trouble, should be an obstacle to their receiving the comfort freely
offered them of God. But it is too common for people the more they are
respectively afflicted, to harden themselves against the reception of
God’s help. Moses relates that the children of Israel were affected by
this disease, when so kind an invitation of God was repulsed from their
deaf ears, because anguish had taken possession of their hearts. But
since it is natural for us to be thus straitened by pain and grief, let
us learn from this example to struggle that our minds should escape from
their sorrows, so far at least as to be able to receive the grace of
God; for there is no greater curse than to be rendered heavy and dull,
so as to be deaf to God’s promises.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p14"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p15"></span>**10.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.*
Moses more clearly sets forth how indulgently God bore with the
malevolent repulse of the people; the just reward of which would have
been, that He should have suffered them to rot a hundred times over in
their miseries, when they so obstinately rushed to their own
destruction. It is, therefore, of His extraordinary loving-kindness,
that He ceases not to aid those who are willing to perish. Moreover, it
must be observed, that Moses was strengthened by this new command, since
he had been himself shaken by the despair of the people. But; it was no
trifling sin to be so hardened and stupified by misfortune, as to reject
the remedy proposed to them. He might then reasonably conjecture, that
he was to proceed no further, lest he should be foolishly exposing
himself to so many anxieties at his own great peril, and with no
profitable result. But God meets this temptation, and commands him,
nevertheless, to contend perseveringly with the obstinacy of Pharaoh.
But the answer of Moses shews, that this legation had been again
enjoined upon the holy man, since the time that the anguish of the
people had closed the way of God’s grace. For when at first the people
were aroused by the first message to a cheerful hope of deliverance,
this happy commencement had encouraged Moses to extraordinary energy for
the performance of his task; and this might naturally fail him upon the
unprosperous event which had now taken place, until he had been animated
anew to perseverance. He therefore asks to be dismissed, lest his labor
should be in vain, and reasons from the less to the greater, since it
would be much more difficult to influence the mind of Pharaoh to give up
his claims against his will, than to persuade the afflicted (people) to
receive the aid proffered to them from on high. But he had now learnt
from experience, that the people’s hearts were as a door closed against
God; why then should he try to move the exceeding great rock from its
place? Although it was not his design to shake off the burden of the
vocation imposed upon him, yet he would have willingly withdrawn himself
indirectly, and turned his back upon it. Thus we sometimes see the
heartiest of God’s servants beginning to faint in the midst of their
course, especially when they encounter difficulties, and stumble upon
some path which is worse than they expected. Wherefore we must the more
earnestly entreat of God, that amidst the various trials against which
we have to struggle, He may never deprive us of the assistance of His
power, but rather continually inspire us with new strength in proportion
to the violence of our contests. But what hope of the deliverance now
survived, the minister of which was so down-hearted and depressed, and
which the people themselves had so openly despised, if God had not
accomplished all things by Himself? Nor is there any doubt that He
wished to shew, by this failure on the part of men, that His own hand
was sufficient for Him. That Moses should call himself “of uncircumcised
lips,” I refer to his stammering, which he had before alleged as an
obstacle; although, if any prefer to understand it otherwise, I make no
strong objection.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p16"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p17"></span>**13.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.*
I translate it, “the Lord had spoken unto Moses;” because reference is
here made to the commencement of his calling, and, therefore, the sense
will be more accurately rendered by the *perfect past* tense; for he
repeats, what he had already said, that he and Aaron his brother had not
acted rashly, but had been commissioned by the command of God. The drift
is, that however often the work might have been in some way interrupted,
the counsel of God still held firm for the liberation of the people. But
it is evident that he speaks of the first command, because he says that
he and his brother were sent as well to the children of Israel as to
Pharaoh.

<span id="iv.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
6:14-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p2"></span>**14.** These *be* the heads of their
fathers’ houses: The sons of Reuben, the first-born of Israel; Hanoch,
and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi: these *be* the families of Reuben.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p3"></span>**14.** Ista sunt capita domus patrum
suorum, filii Reuben primogeniti Israel, Henoch et Phallu, Hesron et
Charmi. Hae cognationes Reuben.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p4"></span>**15.** And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel,
and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a
Canaanitish woman: these *are* the families of Simeon.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p5"></span>**15.** Filii Simeon, Jemuel, et Jamin,
Ohad, et Jachin et Sohar, et Saul filius Chananaeae. Hae cognationes
Simeon.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p6"></span>**16.** And these *are* the names of the
sons of Levi, according to their generations; Gershon, and Kohath, and
Merari. And the years of the life of Levi *were* an hundred thirty and
seven years.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p7"></span>**16.** Et haec nomina filiorum Levi in
generationibus suis, Gerson et Kehath et Merari. Anni autem vitae Levi
triginta septem et centum anni.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p8"></span>**17.** The sons of Gershon; Libni and
Shimi, according to their families.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p9"></span>**17.** Filii Gerson, Libni et Simei
secundum cognationes suas.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p10"></span>**18.** And the sons of Kohath; Amram,
and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel. And the years of the life of Kohath
*were* an hundred thirty and three years.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p11"></span>**18.** Filii Kehath, Amram et Ishar,
Hebron et Uziel. Anni antem vitae Kehath triginta tres et centum anni.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p12"></span>**19.** And the sons of Merari; Mahli
and Mushi: these *are* the families of Levi, according to their
generations.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p13"></span>**19.** Filii vero Merari, Mahli, et
Musi. Hae familiae Levi secundum generationes suas.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p14"></span>**20.** And Amram took him Jochebed his
father’s sister to wife; and she bare him Aaron and Moses. And the years
of the life of Amram *were* an hundred and thirty and seven years.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p15"></span>**20.** Accepit autem Amram Jochebed
amitam suam in uxorem, quae genuit ei Aharon et Mosen. Porro anni vitae
Amram triginta septem et centum anni.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p16"></span>**21.** And the sons of Izhar; Korah,
and Nepheg, and Zichri.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p17"></span>**21.** Filii Ishar, Corah et Nepheg et
Zichri.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p18"></span>**22.** And the sons of Uzziel; Mishael,
and Elzaphan, and Zithri.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p19"></span>**22.** Et filii Uziel, Misael et
Elsaphan et Sithri.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p20"></span>**23.** And Aaron took him Elisheba,
daughter of Amminadab, sister of Naashon, to wife; and she bare him
Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p21"></span>**23.** Et accepit Aharon Eliseba filiam
Amminadab sororem Nahasson sibi in uxorem, quae peperit ei Nadab et
Abihu, et Eleazar et Ithamar.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p22"></span>**24.** And the sons of Korah; Assir,
and Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these *are* the families of the Korhites.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p23"></span>**24.** Filii Corah Assir et Elcanah et
Abiasaph. Hae familiae Corhitarum.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p24"></span>**25.** And Eleazar, Aaron’s son, took
him *one* of the daughters of Putiel to wife; and she bare him Phinehas:
these *are* the heads of the fathers of the Levites, according to their
families.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p25"></span>**25.** Eleazar autem filius Aharon
sumpsit sibi e filiabus Putiel in uxorem, quae peperit ei Pinhas. Haec
capita patrum Levitarum secundum cognationes suas.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p26"></span>**26.** These *are* that Aaron and
Moses, to whom the Lord said, Bring out the children of Israel from the
land of Egypt, according to their armies.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p27"></span>**26.** Hic est Aharon et Moses, ad quos
dixit Jehova, Educite filios Israel e terra Aegypti per exercitus suos.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p28"></span>**27.** These *are* they which spake to
Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt:
these *are* that Moses and Aaron.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p29"></span>**27.** Ipsi sunt qui loqunti suni ad
Pharaonem regem Aegypti, ut emitteret filios Israel ex Aegypto. Ipse est
Moses et Aharon.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p30"></span>**28.** And it came to pass, on the day
*when* the Lord spake unto Moses in the land of Egypt,

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p31"></span>**28.** Accidit autem quo die loquutus
est Jehova ad Mosen in terra Aegypti,

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p32"></span>**29.** That the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying, I *am* the Lord: speak thou unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that
I say unto thee.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p33"></span>**29.** Quo loquutus est Jehova ad
Mosen, dicendo: Ego Jehova: loquere ad Pharaonem regem Aegypti
quaecunque ego loquor ad te:

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p34"></span>**30.** And Moses said before the Lord,
Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto
me?

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p35"></span>**30.** Tunc ait Moses coram Jehova,
Ecce ego incircumcisus sum labiis, et quomodo audiet me Pharao?

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p36"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p37"></span>**14.** *These be the heads.* The object
of Moses here is to testify to all ages the origin of his race, that
none may doubt that, in the free departure of the people, the promise
given to Abraham was completed. For if the Israelites had gone forth
under any other leader, there might have been some question as to the
chief author of it; now, since Moses was chosen from that family, and
from the posterity of Abraham, it more dearly appears that the whole
matter was effected under the guidance of God. But although he
enumerates not only the tribe of Levi, but begins with Reuben the
first-born, and then subjoins Simeon, still it is easily seen that he
especially refers to the tribe of Levi; yet, because the families of
Reuben and Simeon came first in order, he fitly proceeds from them to
the third. He does not, however, recount the others at present, because
a more favorable opportunity would occur hereafter. This, then, is the
point to be observed, that the minister of their deliverance, by whose
hand God would ratify the truth of His promise, was chosen from the race
of Abraham. And certainly we see how Satan in opposition has obscured,
through profane writers, this memorable history with many fables, and
especially when he cunningly endeavors to bury the race of Abraham.
Moses, by divine wisdom, anticipates this subtlety, mentioning the heads
of the families by name, lest there should be any obscurity about the
origin of the nation.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p38"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p39"></span>**16.** *And these are the names of the
sons of Levi.* Because it was especially desirable to know the origin of
Moses and Aaron, he refers to it at greater length, and more distinctly
enmnerates the families which descended from the patriarch Levi; not to
attribute any peculiar dignity to his own race, but to make it appear
more dearly that the people was not brought out by any stranger, but
that he, who was to be the witness among his brethren of the power, and
grace, and truth of God, was divinely chosen from the genuine stock of
Abraham. And certainly it was right that this incomparable blessing of
God, if any, should not only be celebrated, but also proved, in order
that its certainty might be preserved, as well as its memory, in all
ages. But how remote from any ambitious feeling was the design of Moses
in this narrative, we may gather from a single part of it, where he says
that he was the offspring of his father’s aunt;  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75.md) for although the law had not yet
forbidden illicit marriages, yet did nature itself dictate, that it was
improper for a nephew to have connection with his aunt, who stands in
the degree of his mother. When, therefore, Moses does not hesitate to
confess that he sprang from an incestuous marriage, he does not only
fail to consult his own reputation, but ingenuously proclaims the
disgrace of his parents, for the sake of illustrating solely the glory
of God. Nor was ignorance excusable, although the law was as yet
unwritten, in neglecting the distinction between right and wrong, by the
violation of natural modesty. But because men are too apt to indulge in
such licentiousness, it was necessary to prohibit in express terms these
vile affections, which have almost always immoderately and extensively
prevailed amongst Orientals. Meanwhile, we may learn that the imitation
of the patriarchs is not safe, when we think that we may
indiscriminately adopt whatever they did. That in their long lives,
Levi, Kohath, and Amram begat so few children, viz., the first, three;
the second, four; the third, two; did not occur without the design on
the part of God, that, in the incredible fecundity which afterwards
ensued, the miracle of His grace might appear more clearly; for who
would have thought that it could happen that, in less than 200 years, so
immense a multitude could spring from so few persons? Nor did it happen
by human provision; but after God, according to His wont, had seemed to
mock them in their humble and contemptible beginnings, His power was
more brightly manifested by their sudden and unusual multiplication. I
pass over some points which seem to be of little or no importance.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p41"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p42"></span>**26.** *These are that Aaron and
Moses.* It is not without a cause that Moses so often reasserts that
their office was assigned to himself and his brother by the command of
God, both that the Israelites may perceive that they were rescued from
their deep abyss by divine grace, and that their minds may be recalled
to God’s ancient covenant, and may acknowledge that their Fathers’ hope
was not in vain; and, finally, that they may hereafter altogether devote
themselves to God. There seems, also, to be an indirect *antithesis*
between the armies of the people and two vile and abject men. For they
would have been far from being able to bear so weighty a burden, unless
God had exceeded all their hopes in working miraculously by their hands.
Therefore the Spirit magnifies elsewhere this grace, that God

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p43"></span>“led his people, like a flock, by the
hand of Moses and Aaron.” (<span id="iv.vi.iii-p43.1"></span>[Ps
77:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p43.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p44"></span>For what could be less probable than
that a great multitude, which would make up many nations, should obey
the commands of two men, should be ruled by their counsel, and gathered
into one place by their exertions, in order that they should migrate
into another land against the will of a very powerful king? For what was
their united authority to command twelve armies, separated in their
several battalions? What no earthly kings, with all their power and
wisdom, their terror and their threats, could effect, God performed by
means of two unwarlike men, neither experienced nor renowned; when Moses
himself, alarmed by the magnitude of the work, often deprecated the
commission entrusted to him. For, at the end of this chapter, he again
repeats his excuse, that he was not eloquent, but of hesitating and
embarrassed speech. This, then, is the point to which all tends, viz.,
to assign to God the praise of His loving-kindness, and to heighten His
glory. There is some ambiguity in verse 28, for it might be read
separately with this sense, that “God not only spoke in the wilderness
of Midian, to set Moses over the people in their deliverance, but also
in Egypt after some time had elapsed;” thus “on the day,” would mean,
“after some time,” but it seems better to me to read the three verses in
connection with each other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc03009.htm#fr_71.md) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.48"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p22"></span> “*A*. *Pfeiffer* in his *Dubia vexata*,
rightly observes upon this passage. The name Jehovah was not, strictly
and literally, unknown to the fathers, but it was so, in respect of the
perfect fulfillment of the promises implied in it; more especially, that
glorious one of the deliverance out of Egypt.” — *Rosenmuller in
Brightwell*. “Prior to that time, the name *Jehovah* had been often used
to describe the existence, the necessity, or the unchangeableness of
God; but now, to indicate His faithfulness, His truth and constancy, in
keeping and fulfilling His promises.” — *Dathe in loco*. *Holden*,
however, and others, would elude the difficulty by reading the clause
interrogatively. He says, “It is impossible to read the history of
Abraham, etc., without being convinced that both the name of *Jehovah*,
and the attributes implied by that name, were known to them. Our
*A*.*V*., therefore, must be erroneous. Now every difficulty will be
removed by reading it interrogatively, ‘And by my name Jehovah was I not
known to them?’ which is both agreeable to the Hebrew idiom, and to the
scope of the context.”

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc03009.htm#fr_72.md) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p27"></span> *Vide* Note on chap. 2. 24,
“demonstrationem effectus.” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc03009.htm#fr_73.md) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p28"></span> <span
id="iv.vi.i-p28.1"></span>שפטים<span id="iv.vi.i-p28.2"></span>,
*judicial inflictions* <span id="iv.vi.i-p28.3"></span>What *C*<span
id="iv.vi.i-p28.4"></span>. has said of the latitude of the meanings
assignable to this word, is rather true of the kindred noun, <span
id="iv.vi.i-p28.5"></span>סשפט<span id="iv.vi.i-p28.6"></span>. — *W*

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc03009.htm#fr_74.md) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p31"></span> *Vide* margin of *A*.*V*.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc03009.htm#fr_75.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p40"></span> Jeremy Taylor, on the Rule of
Conscience, Book 2., Rule 3, says, “Amram, the father of Moses, begat
him of his cousin-german Jochabed. That she was his aunt, is commonly
supposed; but the LXX., and the vulgar Latin, report her to be his
aunt’s daughter, though, by the style of the Hebrews, she was called his
aunt.” — Ed. Heber. 1839, vol. 12, p. 330. *Corn*. *a Lapide*, also, in
<span id="iv.vi.iii-p40.1"></span>[Ex
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.vi.iii-p40.1"></span>,
trusting to the same authorities, and the Chaldee Paraphrast, rejects
the scoff of *C*., as he calls it, in alleging that Moses sprang from an
incestuous marriage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 7](cc03010.md)
