[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03014)  [Next](cc03016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.xii-p1"></span>EXODUS 12

<span id="iv.xii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
12:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021)<span
id="iv.xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.i-p2"></span>**21.** Then Moses called for all the
elders of Israel, and said unto them, Draw out, and take you a lamb,
according to your families, and kill the passover.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p3"></span>**21.** Vocavit ergo Moses omnes seniores
Israel, et dixit ad eos, Extrahite et tollite vobis pecudem pro familiis
vestris, et macate Pesah.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p4"></span>**22.** And ye shall take a bunch of
hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is in the bason, and strike the
lintel and the two side-posts with the blood that is in the bason; and
none of you shall go out at the door of his house until the morning.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p5"></span>**22.** Accipietis quoque fasciculum
hyssopi, et intingetis in sanguine qui erit in pelvi, et projicietis in
superliminare et in utrunque postem de sanguine qui erit in vase. Vos
autem non egrediemini quisque ex hostio domus suae usque mane.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p6"></span>**23.** For the Lord will pass through to
smite the Egyptians; and when he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on
the two side-posts, the Lord will pass over the door, and will not
suffer the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p7"></span>**23.** Et transibit Jehova ad
percutiendam AEgyptum: ubi autem viderit sanguinem in superliminari et
in duobus postibus, tunc transiliet Jehova januam illam, neque permittet
vastatorem ingredi domos vestras ad percutiendum.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p8"></span>**24.** And ye shall observe this thing
for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p9"></span>**24.** Observabitis sermonem hunc in
edictum, tibi et filiis tuis usque in saeculum.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p10"></span>**25.** And it shall come to pass, when
ye be come to the land which the Lord will give you, according as he
hath promised, that ye shall keep this service.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p11"></span>**25.** Et quum ingressi fueritis terram
quam dabit Jehova vobis, sicut pollicitus est, tunc observabitis cultum
hunc.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p12"></span>**26.** And it shall come to pass, when
your children shall say unto you, What mean ye by this service?

<span id="iv.xii.i-p13"></span>**26.** Et erit quum dixerint vobis filii
vestri, Quis est cultus hic vester?

<span id="iv.xii.i-p14"></span>**27.** That ye shall say, It is the
sacrifice of the Lord’s passover, who passed over the houses of the
children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered
our houses. And the people bowed the head, and worshipped.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p15"></span>**27.** Tunc dicetis, Haec est oblatio
Pesah Jehovae, qui transivit domos filiorum Israel in AEgypto, quum
percuteret AEgyptum, et domos nostras liberavit. Et incurvavit se
populus, et adoravit.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p16"></span>**28.** And the children of Israel went
away, and did as the Lord had commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p17"></span>**28.** Ablerunt itaque et fecerunt filii
Israel sicut praeceperat Jehova Mosi et Aharon; sic, *inquam*, feterunt.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p18"></span><span id="iv.xii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.i-p19"></span><span id="iv.xii.i-p19.1"></span>I have
here omitted what Moses has related in the beginning of the chapter up
to this verse, because it pertains to the perpetual doctrine of the Law.
I shall hereafter insert it in its proper place. But., since here also
God gave precepts as to the observation of the Passover, I have thought
it right to interweave them with the history; because Moses does not
merely teach here what God would have observed by His people in all
ages, but relates what He required on a particular occasion. But my
readers are to be reminded that some precepts are temporary, and some
perpetual, like the Law itself. Of this we may see a clear and familiar
example in the chapter before us. For up to this place, Moses had
explained what; would be the due observation of the Passover year by
year for ever; but now he only relates historically, that, on the night
in which the people went forth, they celebrated the Passover according’
to God’s command. I shall, therefore, lightly touch upon what is here
repeated; since a more fitting place for a full exposition will be, when
we come to the doctrine of the law. The word <span
id="iv.xii.i-p19.2"></span>פסה<span id="iv.xii.i-p19.3"></span>,  <span
id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) *pesech,* <span
id="iv.xii.i-p20.6"></span>means a *passing-over,* <span
id="iv.xii.i-p20.7"></span>not of the people, (as many have falsely
thought,) but of God Himself, who passed over the houses of the
Israelites without harm, when He slew the first-born in all Egypt.
Since, then, the wrath of God, which then like a deluge covered the
whole of Egypt, left the Israelites untouched, He instituted a memorial
of His *passing-over,* <span id="iv.xii.i-p20.8"></span>whereby they had
been preserved in safety amidst the public destruction of the whole
land. He is also said to have passed-over the Egyptians, whom He
deprived of their first-born; but after a different manner, because He
spared His chosen ones, as if they had been far away, or protected in
places of sure refuge.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p21"></span>**21.** *Then Moses called for all the
elders.* His address is especially directed to the elders, that they
might afterwards repeat it to the multitude; for he could not have been
heard at the same time by so great a number of people. But, although the
disorganization of the people had been terrible under that severe
tyranny, still God willed that certain relics of order should be
preserved, and did not suffer those, whom He had adopted, to be deprived
of all government. This also had been an availing means of preserving
their unity, so that the chosen seed of Abraham should not be lost. But
Moses here only speaks of the sprinkling of the blood; because he had
already addressed them as to the eating of the lamb. He therefore
commands branches of hyssop to be dipped in the blood, which had been
caught in the basin, and every one’s lintel and two side-posts to be
sprinkled with this. By which sign God testified that He will preserve
His people from the common destruction, because they will be discerned
from the wicked by the mark of blood. For it was necessary that the
Israelites should first be reminded, that by the expiation of the
sacrifice, they were delivered from the plague, and their houses
preserved untouched; and, secondly, that the sacrifice would profit
them, only if its conspicuous sign existed among them. We elsewhere see
that the Paschal lamb was a type of Christ, who by His death propitiated
His Father, so that we should not perish with the rest of the world.
But, already of old time, He desired to bear witness to the ancients
under the Law, that He would not be reconciled to them otherwise than
through the sacrifice of a victim. And there is no doubt that by this
visible symbol He raised up their minds to that true and heavenly
Exemplar, whom it would be absurd and profane to separate from the
ceremonies of the law. For what could be more childish than to offer the
blood of an animal as a protection against the hand of God, or to seek
from thence a ground of safety? God, then, shows that He spares the
Israelites on no other condition but that of sacrifice; from whence it
follows, that the death of Christ was set before them in this ordinance,
which alone constituted the difference between them and the Egyptians.
But at the same time He taught that no advantage was to be expected from
the blood poured forth, without the sprinkling; not that the external
and visible sprinkling produced any good effect, but because by this
familiar rite it was useful that the ignorant should be brought to
perceive the truth, and that they might know that what was put before
them Visibly must be spiritually fulfilled. It is notorious from the
testimony of Peter, (<span id="iv.xii.i-p21.2"></span>[1Pe
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002)<span id="iv.xii.i-p21.2"></span>,)
that our souls are sprinkled with the blood of Christ by the Spirit.
This was typified by the bunch of hyssop,  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) which herb possesses great cleansing
power, and therefore, was often used in other sacrifices also, as we
shall hereafter see in the proper places.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p23"></span><span id="iv.xii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.i-p24"></span>**23.** *For the Lord will pass through.*
He forbids them to go out during the night, lest they should mix
themselves with the Egyptians, but commands them to keep quietly under
the protection of the blood. By this sign they were admonished that they
also were exposed to destruction, if they did not separate themselves
from the unbelievers under the safeguard of the blood. Afterwards the
promise: is added, that, provided this were done, the angel would pass
them over, and inflict no injury upon them, because God would
acknowledge the houses so marked as His own. Wherefore, it is again
repeated, that they should alone be safe by the blessing of the blood,
who should not neglect to sprinkle themselves with it; because faith
alone confers upon us the salvation which is obtained by the slaughter
of the victim. The angel, whom God had delegated for afflicting Egypt,
is here undoubtedly called “the destroyer;” and, although He often
executes His judgments by evil angels, it is to be gathered from other
passages that this was one of the elect angels, who also was the
minister of the people’s deliverance under Christ as the Head.

<span id="iv.xii.i-p25"></span><span id="iv.xii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.i-p26"></span>**25.** *When ye come into the land.*
<span id="iv.xii.i-p26.1"></span>He now adds that this rite must be
annually observed, in order that the memory of this extraordinary grace
might never perish. But since a commandment is given respecting the
continual observation  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) <span
id="iv.xii.i-p27.1"></span> of the Sabbath, I postpone its explanation
to a more appropriate place; except I would cursorily remark, that the
proclamation of the blessing is annexed to the sign; because otherwise
it would be an empty and unmeaning proceeding. God, therefore, would
have the fathers proclaim it unto their children, so that the knowledge
of their redemption, being handed down by tradition, may flourish in all
ages. The word <span id="iv.xii.i-p27.2"></span>עבד<span
id="iv.xii.i-p27.3"></span>,  <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142)
*gnebod,* <span id="iv.xii.i-p28.4"></span>some have improperly rendered
“work,” whereas it is rather used for “worship;” as in many passages to
serve God means the same as to worship Him. We too, in French, call
whatever relates to the exercises of piety “God’s service.” Finally,
Moses adds that the people professed their faith and obedience by solemn
adoration. This indeed they had already done from the beginning, but
with little constancy, because they had been so harassed by their
afflictions as to neglect their duty; but now they correct the fault of
ingratitude. Therefore, they not only declare their feelings of
seriousness by bowing the head, but give actual proof of them; for it is
expressly said, that they diligently performed whatever was commanded.

<span id="iv.xii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
12:29-39](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029)<span
id="iv.xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p2"></span>**29.** And it came to pass, that at
midnight the Lord smote all the first-born in the land of Egypt, from
the first-born of Pharaoh that sat on his throne, unto the first-born of
the captive that was in the dungeon; and all the first-born of cattle.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p3"></span>**29.** Et factum est in medio noctis ut
percuteret Jehova omne primogenitum in terra AEgypti, a primogenito
Pharaonis sedente super solium ejus, ad primogenitum captivi qui erat in
carcere: et omne primogenitum bestiae.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p4"></span>**30.** And Pharaoh rose up in the night,
he, and all his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great
cry in Egypt: for there was not a house where there was not one dead.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p5"></span>**30.** Surrexit ergo Pharao nocte, ipse
et omnes servi ejus, et omnes AEgyptii: fuitque clamor magnus in
AEgypto, quoniam nulla erat domus ubi non esset mortuus.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p6"></span>**31.** And he called for Moses and Aaron
by night, and said, Rise up, and get you forth from among my people,
both ye and the children of Israel; and go, serve the Lord, as ye have
said.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p7"></span>**31.** Vocavitque Mosen et Aharon nocte,
et ait, Surgite, et exite e medio populi mei tam vos quam filii Israel:
ite et servite Jehovae secundum sermonem vestrum.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p8"></span>**32.** Also take your flocks and your
herds, as ye have said, and be gone: and bless me also.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p9"></span>**32.** Etiam greges vestros, etiam
armenta vestra accipite: sicuti dixistis: et ite, ac benedicite etiam
mihi.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p10"></span>**33.** And the Egyptians were urgent
upon the people, that they might send them out of the land in haste; for
they said, We be all dead

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p11"></span>**33.** Et vehementer instabant AEgyptii
erga populum ut festinanter eos emitterent e terra: quia dicebant, Omnes
sumus mortui.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p12"></span>**34.** And the people took their dough
before it was leavened, their kneading-troughs being bound up in their
clothes upon their shoulders.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p13"></span>**34.** Tulit ergo populus conspersionem
suam antequam fermentaretur, cibos suos ligatos in vestibus super
humerum suum.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p14"></span>**35.** And the children of Israel did
according to the word of Moses; and they borrowed of the Egyptians
jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p15"></span>**35.** Fecerunt autem filii Israel
secundum sermonem Mosis, ut postulatent ab Aegyptiis vasa argentea, et
vasa aurea, et vestes.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p16"></span>**36.** And the Lord gave the people
favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent unto them such
things as they required: and they spoiled the Egyptians.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p17"></span>**36.** Et dedit Jehova gratiam populo
in oculis AEgyptiorum, et commodaverunt eis: itaque spoliaverunt
Aegyptios.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p18"></span>**37.** And the children of Israel
journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot
that were men, besides children.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p19"></span>**37.** Profectique sunt filii Israel e
Ramesses in Sucoth circiter sexcenta millia peditum et *quidem* virorum,
praeter parvulos.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p20"></span>**38.** And a mixed multitude went up
also with them; and flocks, and herds, even very much cattle.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p21"></span>**38.** Atque etiam mixtio multa
ascendit cum eis, et pecudes et boves, pecus copiosum valde.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p22"></span>**39.** And they baked unleavened cakes
of the dough which they brought forth out of Egypt, for it was not
leavened; because they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not tarry,
neither had they prepared for themselves any victual.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p23"></span>**39.** Et coxerunt conspersionem quam
extulerant ex AEgypto, placentas infermentatas, quia non erat
fermentatum, eo quod ejecti fuissent ex Aegypto, nec potuissent morari,
ideoque cibum non paraverant sibi.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p24"></span><span id="iv.xii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p25"></span>**29.** *And it came to pass, that at
midnight.* Lest the hand of God should be hidden in this miracle, as
well in the preservation of the people as in taking vengeance upon the
Egyptians, Moses sets forth its power by many circumstances. For he both
relates that the destruction took place at midnight, which was the time
prescribed by God, and then adds, that all the first-born of the land
were smitten, from the son of the king to the son of the captive in the
dungeon. It is thus that he indicates proverbially the most abject
persons, as he had said before, “unto the first-born of the maidservant
that is behind the mill.” For it could only be by an extraordinary
miracle that this calamity could affect every house without exception,
at the same hour, especially when it extended even to the beasts.
*Thirdly,* he recounts that all the Egyptians were aroused suddenly, and
manifestly convinced that the God of Israel was wroth with them.
*Fourthly,* that Pharaoh humbly prayed of Moses to lead forth the people
in haste; nay, that he even importunately thrust them out. Yet not even
by such clear and solid proofs has the dishonesty and impudence of some
been prevented from attempting to upset by their falsehoods this
memorable work of God. The calumnies are too well known which Josephus
refutes in his reply to Apion the Grammarian; and it appears from Justin
 <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) that they were generally
received. Nor can we wonder that the devil should have employed all
sorts of artifices, so that by the introduction of various fables he
might efface from men’s minds the redemption of the Church. But here
also was manifested the admirable wisdom of God, that the futility of
these absurdities refutes itself, without the use of any arguments
against them. Perhaps there was no intention to deceive on the part of
profane writers, when they reported these frivolous and silly stories
about the Jews; for doubtless Strabo  <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) desired to give the true history of
the origin of circumcision when he wrote his foolish and unfounded
fables. Nor did even Cornelius Tacitus,  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) although he wrote with malignant and
virulent feelings, intentionally put himself to shame; but when by the
impulse of Satan they obscured God’s glory, they were smitten with
blindness and folly, so that their ridiculous want of truth might be
discovered even by children; from whence, however, some sparks of fact
may still be elicited, because God would not suffer so memorable an
operation to be altogether forgotten, of which these blind men were the
proclaimers, when the devil was using their aid to obliterate its
memory.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p29"></span><span id="iv.xii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p30"></span>**31.** *And he called for Moses.* It is
not probable that God’s servants were recalled into the presence of
Pharaoh; but the sense of this passage must be sought for in the
prediction of Moses. Pharaoh, therefore, is said to have called them,
when, by sending to them his chief courtiers, he compelled their
departure. And this is sufficiently proved by the context, because it is
immediately added, that the Israelites were by the Egyptians compelled
to go out: in haste. Therefore, although Pharaoh never should have seen
Moses from the time that he threatened him with death if he came to him
again, there is nothing absurd in saying that he called for him when he
sent his nobles to him with his command. The perturbation of an alarmed
and anxious person is expressed to the life in these words, — “Rise up,
get you forth, both ye and your children; go, serve the Lord; also take
your flocks and your herds, as ye have said.” For he takes no less
precaution lest he should give any occasion for delay, than he had
before been diligent in bargaining. Whilst, then, he hastily cuts off
all objections, the change in the man betrays itself, for the same God
who had before hardened his iron heart has now broken it. Hence, too,
that cry — the signal of despair — “We be all dead men;” hence, too,
their readiness to give willingly of their substance, and to dress up in
spoils those whom they had pillaged before. Nor indeed does he without
reason repeat that this favor proceeded from divine inspiration, since
there would never have been such liberality in robbers as willingly to
proffer whatever precious things their houses possessed, and to give
them to the Israelites, now ready to depart, whom they knew to be justly
hostile to them on account of so many injuries. And that the children of
Israel should be so prompt to obey, who before had been either slow, or
inconstant, or sullen, or rebellious, was brought about by the guidance
of the Spirit, who turned their hearts in a moment; since God well knew
how to dispose opportunely all the springs of action.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p31"></span><span id="iv.xii.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p32"></span>**37.** *And the children of Israel
journeyed.* Although it is probable that they were more widely
dispersed, since that district could not have contained so great a
multitude, especially when the Egyptians occupied it together with them;
still because the recollection of the promise remained among them, from
whence some hope of their redemption always was preserved, it is not
wonderful that they should have preferred to be kept within narrow
bounds, to their great inconvenience, rather than, by seeking other
habitations, to separate from the main body. That this was the peculiar
abode of the nation is plain also from what has gone before, where Moses
related that they were forced to servile tasks in building those
fortified cities wherein they might be shut up, as in prison. In the
number of men which he reports, he commends the incredible miracle of
God’s favor in increasing and multiplying their race. Thus is the
effrontery of the impious refuted who think it a sufficient ground for
their sneers, that this great people could not in so short a time have
naturally proceeded from a single family; and therefore they burst out
into unrestrained and blasphemous laughter, as if Moses were simply
relating what had happened, and not rather extolling the extraordinary
power of God in the sudden increase of His Church. But we know that it
was no more a matter of difficulty for the Creator of the whole world to
exceed the ordinary course of nature, in the multiplication of a
particular nation, than at the beginning to produce speedily many people
from one man and woman; and again, after the deluge, to renew the human
race by a miraculous augmentation. Now, this is the peculiar character
of the Church, that in producing and preserving it, God exerts unusual
power, that it may be separated from the common condition of mankind;
for although it sojourns on earth, yet is its nature in a manner
heavenly, that the work of God may shine forth more brightly in it. No
wonder then if, contrary to usual custom, it should emerge, as it were,
from nothing, if it grows in the same way and makes continual progress.
Such an example does Paul set before us in <span
id="iv.xii.ii-p32.1"></span>[Romans
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#000)<span id="iv.xii.ii-p32.1"></span>.,
in the person of Abraham. But whilst the impious despisers of God betray
their stupidity in their wicked audacity, when they estimate this work
of God by their own senses and by common reason, so, too, do they
foolishly err who attempt to defend Moses by philosophical arguments;
for his intention was very different, viz., to show that the promises
were not unfulfilled, “I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven,
and as the sand which is upon the seashore,” (<span
id="iv.xii.ii-p32.2"></span>[Ge
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)<span
id="iv.xii.ii-p32.2"></span>, and <span id="iv.xii.ii-p32.3"></span>[Ge
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002)<span
id="iv.xii.ii-p32.3"></span>, and <span id="iv.xii.ii-p32.4"></span>[Ge
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005)<span
id="iv.xii.ii-p32.4"></span>,) the effect of which promises was beyond
human comprehension.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p33"></span><span id="iv.xii.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p34"></span>**38.** *And a mixed multitude.*
Although Abraham possessed many servants, yet is it scarcely probable
that in the famine Jacob maintained any other persons in his family
besides his own children, whom he could hardly so sustain as to preserve
them from dying of hunger. And since Moses, in relating their coming
into Egypt, does not mention any servants, we may conjecture that they
brought no great number, because necessity compelled them to be content
at any rate with a few. From hence we gather that the mixed multitude,
which united themselves with the Israelites, were either the offspring
of Egypt, or had migrated from the neighboring countries to take up
their habitation there; as fertile lands often attract many strangers to
them by the pleasures of abundance. The same expression is used in <span
id="iv.xii.ii-p34.1"></span>[Ne
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#003)<span
id="iv.xii.ii-p34.1"></span>, where it is said that “the mixed
multitude” was separated from the true Israelites, lest all should
promiscuously arrogate to themselves the same dignity, and, thus the
Church should be polluted by a confused admixture, But if any should
think it absurd that ungodly men, with no better hope before them, would
voluntarily forsake a rich and convenient habitation in order to seek a
new home as wanderers and pilgrims, let him recollect that Egypt had now
been afflicted by so many calamities that by its very poverty and
devastation it might easily have driven away its inhabitants. A great
part of the cattle had perished; all the fruits of the earth were
corrupted; the fields were ravaged and almost desert; we need not,
therefore, wonder if despair should have caused many sojourners to fly
away, and even some of the natives themselves. It may be also that,
having been inhumanly treated, they shook off the yoke of tyranny when a
way to liberty was opened to them.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p35"></span>But although God gave His people a ready
departure, still He did not choose to let them go out altogether without
any inconvenience; for they go not out satiated with food, nor having
delicately supped, but are compelled to carry in their bags unbaked
masses of dough, that they may eat bread burned or toasted on the embers
in their journey. By this example we are taught that God’s blessings are
always mingled with certain inconveniences, lest too great delight
should corrupt the minds of the godly.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p36"></span><span
id="iv.xii.ii-p36.1"></span>[Exodus
12:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040)<span
id="iv.xii.ii-p36.1"></span>, 50, 51

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p37"></span>**40.** Now the sojourning of the
children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty
years.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p38"></span>**40.** Habitatio autem filiorum Israel,
qua habitaverunt in AEgypto, triginta fuerunt anni et quadringenti anni.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p39"></span>**41.** And it came to pass, at the end
of the four hundred and thirty years, even the self-same day it came to
pass, that all the hosts of the Lord went out from the land of Egypt.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p40"></span>**41.** Factumque est a fine triginta et
quadringentorum annorum, ipsa eadem die egressi sunt omnes exercitus
Jehovae e terra AEgypti.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p41"></span>**42.** It is a night to be much
observed unto the Lord for bringing them out from the land of Egypt:
this is that night of the Lord to be observed of all the children of
Israel in their generations.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p42"></span>**42.** Nox observabilis (Hebrews
observantiarum, vel custodiarum) haec est Jehovae, qua eduxit eos e
terra Aegypti: nox *inquam* haec observanda est Jehovae apud omnes
filios Israel per aetates suas.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p43"></span>**50.** Thus did all the children of
Israel: as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p44"></span>**50.** Et fecerunt omnes filii Israel
sicuti praeceperat Jehova Mosi et Aaron, sic fecerunt.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p45"></span>**51.** And it came to pass the selfsame
day, that the Lord did bring the children of Israel out of the land of
Egypt by their armies.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p46"></span>**51.** Et factum est ut ipsa eadem die
educeret Jehova filios Israel e terra Aegypti per exercitus suos.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p47"></span><span id="iv.xii.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p48"></span>**40.** *Now the sojourning of the
children of Israel.* The beginning of this period is not reckoned from
the coming down of Jacob, for it is very clear from other passages,
that, from the time that Jacob entered into Egypt to the Exodus, not
more than 230 years at most had passed.  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) The Jews generally only reckon 210;
but Moses includes also the period during which Abraham and his children
were not in possession of the promised land. The meaning therefore is,
that from the time that the inheritance of the land of Canaan was given
to Abraham, the promise was suspended for 400, years before his
posterity enjoyed their right. For Paul also thus explains this
difficulty, (<span id="iv.xii.ii-p49.1"></span>[Ga
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)<span
id="iv.xii.ii-p49.1"></span>,) where he says, that God had confirmed his
covenant with Abraham 430 years before the law was promulgated. Moses,
therefore, dates the commencement of this period from the sojourning of
Abraham, when he was still the lord of the land of Canaan by the just
title of donation. With respect to the omission of the thirty years in
the 15th chapter of Genesis, in this there is no contradiction, because
the land had already been promised to Abraham some years previously,
though, so far from obtaining dominion over it, he had scarcely been
permitted to occupy it as “a stranger.” Therefore God apprizes him, that
400 years still remained before he would put his descendants into
possession of it; and, consequently, that the little time which had
elapsed was not sufficient for the trial of his patience, but that both
for himself and for his posterity there was need of extraordinary
endurance, lest they should faint under the weariness of the long delay.
Moreover, there is no departure from the usual manner of speaking, in
His not exactly reckoning the number of years. More than 400 years, some
twenty, or thereabouts, indeed, remained; but, since God had no other
object than to exhort His people to patience, He does not accurately
compute or define the exact number of years, because it was sufficient
to put before them 400 years in a round sum. In the same way, it is
added in the next verse, “at the end of 430 years,” viz., from the time
that Abraham had begun to be the legitimate lord of the land; for Moses
wished to show, that although God had long delayed the fulfillment of
His promise, still His truth and faithfulness were certainly proved, not
only because He had precisely performed what He had proraised, but
because He had observed the: foreappointed time. He calls the people,
weak as they were, by an honorable title, “the hosts of the Lord,” both
to enforce again the power of God’s blessing, and to give due honor to
His grace in ruling and marshalling so confused a band. Although
soldiers may be accustomed to obedience, and have learnt from exercise
to keep their ranks; although they may have generals, commandants, and
captains, and banners also under which to range themselves, still it is
a very difficult thing to march an army of 20,000, or 30,000 men by
night without. confusion, and in good order; how great a miracle was it,
then, for 600,000 men, with women and children, much baggage, herds, and
flocks, and other encumbrances, to pass by night through the midst of
enemies, and all to escape safely without a single exception! To the
same effect, Moses repeats in the last verse of this chapter, that “the
Lord did bring the children of Israel out — by their armies,” as much as
to say, that there was no confusion in that immense multitude; since God
performed the part of an incomparable Leader in His marvelous power.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p50"></span><span id="iv.xii.ii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p51"></span>**42.** *It is a night to be much
observed.* He shows that the Israelites have good cause for sacrificing
to God with a solemn ceremony year by year for ever, and for celebrating
the memory of that night; and that the Passover was instituted in token
of their gratitude. But this admonition was very useful, in order that
the Israelites should retain the legitimate use of this solemn
feast-day, and that it might not grow into a mere cold ceremony, as is
often the case; but that rather they might profitably, and to the
advancement of their piety, exercise themselves in this emblem of their
redemption. At the same time, he teaches that this so inestimable a
benefit was not to be celebrated in one, or two, or three generations,
but that as long as the people should remain it was worthy of eternal
remembrance, and that it might never be forgotten, the Passover was to
be sacredly observed.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p52"></span>Moreover we must remark, that the
generations of the ancient people were brought to an end by the coming
of Christ; because the shadows of the Law ceased when the state of the
Church was renewed, and the Gentiles were gathered into the same body.

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p53"></span><span id="iv.xii.ii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p54"></span>**50.** *Thus did all the children of
Israel.* This chiefly refers to the slaying of the Paschal lamb with its
adjuncts, although I do not deny that allusion is also made to the other
circumstances attending their sudden departure. But it is not so much
their promptitude and alacrity which are praised, as the wondrous power
of God in fashioning their hearts, and directing their hands, so that,
in the darkness of the night, amidst the greatest disturbances, in
precipitate haste, with nothing well prepared, they were so active and
dexterous. Meanwhile, Moses concludes, from the obedience of the people,
that nothing was done without the command and guidance of God; from
whence it is more clearly manifest that He was the sole author of their
deliverance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc03015.htm#fr_139) <span
id="iv.xii.i-p19.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.i-p20"></span> <span
id="iv.xii.i-p20.1"></span>פסח<span id="iv.xii.i-p20.2"></span>. So.
*Seb* <span id="iv.xii.i-p20.3"></span>M. A leaping, or passing-over. It
is well known that this version has been discussed and defended at
considerable length by Archbishop Magee, in No. 35 of the Illustrations
to his First Discourse on the Atonement. See Calvin’s farther
explanations, when he comments on verse 1<span
id="iv.xii.i-p20.5"></span> of this chapter. — *W*

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc03015.htm#fr_140) <span
id="iv.xii.i-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.i-p22"></span> There has been much discussion as to the
plant to which this name is given. “In no instance,” says the
Illustrated Commentary, “has any plant been suggested, that at the same
time had a sufficient length of stem, to answer the purpose of a wand or
pole, and such detergent qualities, as to render it a fit emblem of
purification.” The author himself has no question but. that it was of
the genus *Phytolacca*; which combines, in a remarkable manner, these
two qualities. Dr. Royle, however, considers it to have been the
caper-plant, (*Capparis spinosa*,), which possesses another important
condition wanting in the *Phytolacca*, viz., that it still grows in the
countries to which it is attributed in Scripture.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc03015.htm#fr_141) <span
id="iv.xii.i-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.i-p27"></span> The word “Sabbath,” which is not
translated in the French, is probably an accidental interpolation.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc03015.htm#fr_142) <span
id="iv.xii.i-p27.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.i-p28"></span> <span
id="iv.xii.i-p28.1"></span>עבדה<span id="iv.xii.i-p28.2"></span>. Est
servitus et ministerium. Hic vero accipitur pro ritu. *S* *M* <span
id="iv.xii.i-p28.3"></span>— *W*

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc03015.htm#fr_143) <span
id="iv.xii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p26"></span> *Vide* Justini Hist., lib. 36 cap. 2.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc03015.htm#fr_144) <span
id="iv.xii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p27"></span> *Vide* Strabonis Geog., lib. 17

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc03015.htm#fr_145) <span
id="iv.xii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p28"></span> C. Tacit. Hist., 5:3, 4.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc03015.htm#fr_146) <span
id="iv.xii.ii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xii.ii-p49"></span> This sentence is omitted in the French.
The Latin is, “Hebraei communiter tantum decem recensent.” A reference,
however, to R. Sal. Jarchi explains it, “you will find, (he says,) that
from the arrival of the Israelites in Egypt to the time of their
departure, was 210 years.” — *In loco*. Compare the LXX.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 13](cc03016)
