[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03019)  [Next](cc03021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p1"></span>EXODUS 17

<span id="iv.xvii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.xvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
17:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001)<span
id="iv.xvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And all the congregation of the
children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, after their
journeys, according to the commandment of the Lord, and pitched in
Rephidim: and *there was* no water for the people to drink.

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Deinde profectus est universus
coetus filiorum Israel e deserto Sin per turmas suas, secundum
praeceptum Jehova: et castrametati sunt in Raphidim, ubi non erat aqua
ut biberet populus.

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Wherefore the people did chide
with Moses, and said, Give us water that we may drink. And Moses said
unto them, Why chide ye with me? wherefore do ye tempt the Lord?

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et rixatus est populus cum Mose,
ac dixerunt, Date nobis aquam ut bibamus. Dixit autem illis Moses, Quid
rixamini mecum, quid tentatis Jehovam?

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And the people thirsted there for
water; and the people murmured against Moses, and said, Wherefore is
this that thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us, and our
children, and our cattle, with thirst?

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Sitivit ergo illic populus ab
aquis, et murmuravit populus contra Mosen, dicens, Quare sic nos
ascendere fecisti ex AEgypto, ut interficeres me, et filios meos, et
pecora mea, siti?

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And Moses cried unto the Lord,
saying, What shall I do unto this people? they be almost ready to stone
me.

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et clamavit Moses ad Jehovam,
dicendo, Quid faciam populo huic? Adhuc paululum, et lapidabunt me.

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And the Lord said unto Moses, Go
on before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel; and
thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine hand, and go.

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et ait Jehova ad Mosen, Transi
ante populum, et tolle tecum e senioribus Israel: virgam quoque tuam qua
percussisti fiuvium, tolle in manu tua, et incede.

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p12"></span>**6.** Behold, I will stand before thee
there upon the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt smite the rock, and there
shall come water out of it, that the people may drink. And Moses did so
in the sight of the elders of Israel.

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Ecce, ego stabo coram te illic
super petram quae est in Oreb, Et tu percuties petram, egredienturque
aquae ex ea, ut bibat populus. Et fecit sic Moses coram oculis seniorum
Israel.

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And he called the name of the
place Massah, and Meribah, because of the chiding of the children of
Israel, and because they tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord among us,
or not?

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Vocavitque nomen loci illius
Massa et Meriba, (*vel,* tentatio et rixa) propter rixam filiorum
Israel, et quia tentassent Jehovam, dicendo, Est ne in medio nostri, an
non?

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.xvii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p17"></span>**1.** *And all the congregation.*
Scarcely was the sedition of the people about the want of food set at
rest when they again rebel on the subject of drink. They ought, at
least, to have learnt from the manna, that as often as necessity pressed
upon them, they should have humbly implored in prayer and supplication
God’s help, in certain hope of relief. But such was their character,
that they were hurried by despair into secret murmurings and impetuous
cries. We have almost a precisely similar account in <span
id="iv.xvii.i-p17.1"></span>[Numbers
20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#000)<span id="iv.xvii.i-p17.1"></span>.
 <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) For the error of those who
think it one and the same, is easily refuted by the circumstances of the
time and place; and in <span id="iv.xvii.i-p18.1"></span>[Numbers
33](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#000)<span id="iv.xvii.i-p18.1"></span>,
it is very clearly shown how great a distance there was between the one
station and the other. Neither does the tradition of some of the Rabbins
appear probable, that this thirst did not arise from natural appetite,
because the manna was not only meat, but also served for drink. For
there is no reason why we should be compelled to imagine this; and we
gather from the text, that the commencement of their murmurings arose
from the fact that the water now began for the first time to fail them.
But it was God’s will in two ways, and at two different times, to try
the minds of the Israelites, that they might more plainly show their
natural intractability. If they had required bread and water at the same
time, they would have been more excusable; but after they had
experienced that a sweet and wholesome kind of food was bountifully
given them from heaven, because that country produced no corn, it was an
act of intolerable perversity immediately to murmur against God when
they had no supply of drink. Moreover, a double accusation is here
brought against them, for insulting God by quarrelling and chiding with
Him, and also for tempting Him. Both arose from unbelief, the cause of
which was ingratitude; for it was too vile of them so soon to bury in
willful forgetfulness what God had so recently given them. He had
brought them supplies when they were suffering from hunger; why do they
not fly to Him when they are oppressed by thirst? It is plain, then,
that the former favor was ill bestowed upon them, since it so directly
vanished in their insensibility. Hence, too, appears their unbelief,
because they neither expect nor ask anything of God; and with this, too,
pride is conjoined, because they dare to proceed to chiding. Indeed this
almost always happens, that those who neither depend on His providence
nor rest; on His promises, provoke God to contend with them, and rush
impetuously against Him; because the brutal violence of our passions
hurries us on to madness, unless we are persuaded that God will in due
time be our helper, and are, submissive to His will. In the beginning of
the chapter Moses briefly indicates that the Israelites journeyed
according to the commandment, or, as the Hebrew expresses it, “the
mouth”  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) of God, as if he would
praise their obedience. Whence we gather that, at the first outset, they
were sufficiently disposed to their duty, until a temptation occurred,
which interrupted them in the right way. By which example we are warned
that, whenever we undertake anything at God’s bidding, we should
carefully beware that nothing should hinder our perseverance; and that
none are fitted to act rightly but those who are well prepared to endure
the assaults of temptation.

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p20"></span><span id="iv.xvii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p21"></span>**2.** *Wherefore the people did chide
with Moses.* Here now displays itself both their impiety against God,
since neglecting and despising Him they make war against Moses, and also
their malice and unkindness, because, forgetful of so many benefits,
they wantonly insult Moses. They know that fountains and rivers cannot
be created by mortal man; wherefore, then, do they quarrel with him, and
not call directly upon God, in whose hand are the waters as well as all
other elements? Certainly, if there had been a spark of faith in them,
they would have had recourse to prayer. Rightly, then, does Moses
expostulate, that in chiding with him, they tempt God Himself. What
madness is there in their accusing Moses of cruelty in bringing them
with him out of Egypt, that he might kill them, and their children, and
cattle in the wilderness? But Moses chiefly reproves them on this
ground, because God Himself is affected by this rebellious chiding. But
the actual form of their tempting God is stated at the end, viz.,
because they had doubted “whether the Lord was among them or not?” Hence
it follows, that the root of the whole evil was their unbelief; because
they neither ascribed due honor to God’s power nor believed Him to be
true to his promises.: For He had taken charge of them, and had promised
that He would never fail them; why then, now, when circumstances demand
it, do they not assure themselves that He will assist them, except
because they wickedly detract both from His power and His truth?

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p22"></span><span id="iv.xvii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p23"></span>**4.** *And Moses cried.* <span
id="iv.xvii.i-p23.1"></span>This cry seems not to have been conformed to
the true model of prayer, but to have been mixed with confused
complaint, to which Moses was impelled by the deep perturbation of his
mind: for excessive earnestness sometimes carries away the godly, so
that they rather fret in their prayer than duly and moderately express
their requests. For there is something in these words which sounds angry
and obstreperous, “What shall I do unto this people?” as if Moses,
struck with indignation, complained that he was weighed down with a
heavy burden, which he would willingly shake off if he could obtain
permission and deliverance from God. Interpreters variously expound what
follows. Some thus render it, that “Unless God immediately came to his
help, or should He dissemble for ever so short a time, Moses must be
stoned.” Some, “It is but little that they will rush upon me to stone
me.” Some, too, read it in the past tense, but to this the particle
<span id="iv.xvii.i-p23.2"></span>עוד<span id="iv.xvii.i-p23.3"></span>,
 <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) *gnod*<span
id="iv.xvii.i-p24.1"></span>, which relates to the future, is an
objection. I am most pleased with this sense; that if God delay His
assistance but for a short time, the people’s rage could not be
restrained from stoning Moses.

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p25"></span><span id="iv.xvii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p26"></span>**5.** *And the Lord said unto Moses.*
He commands him to go out into the midst, as if He would expose him to
the danger of immediate death; but because Moses is persuaded that it is
in His power to calm the passion of men, however fierce, as well as the
waves and storms of the sea, he neither trembles nor retreats. But, thus
did God magnify His power, so as to brand them with ignominy whilst He
withheld the people from their previous attitude. In fact, Moses passes
before them all, but he only takes the elders with him, before whom to
bring the water from the rock, that they may be eye-witnesses of the
miracle. This middle course, whilst it does not permit the glory of
God’s bounty to be obscured, still shows the multitude that they are
unworthy of being admitted to behold His power. To remind him that his
rod would not be inefficient, He recalls to his memory what he had
already experienced; yet does he not recount all the miracles; but only
adduces what we saw at first, that, by its touch, the waters of the Nile
were turned into blood. The declaration of God, that he will stand upon
the rock, tends to remove all hesitation, lest Moses should be anxious
or doubtful as to the event; for otherwise the smiting of the rock would
be vain and illusory. Moses, therefore, is encouraged to be confident;
since God, whom he follows in the obedience of faith, will put forth His
power by his hand, so that he should undertake nothing vainly or
ineffectually. Meanwhile, although He employs the operation of His
servant, still He claims to Himself the honor of the work.

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p27"></span><span id="iv.xvii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p28"></span>**7.** *And he called the name of the
place.* The verb here might be taken indefinitely, as if it were said,
that this name was given to the place; but it is more probable that
Moses, at God’s command, so called the place, in order that the
Israelites might be more ready to acknowledge their crime, when thus it
was marked with double infamy. Although it was not only His intention to
impress this feeling upon their minds, but also to hand down the memory
of it to posterity. The same reproof is afterward repeated at Cades, as
we shall see; because the former notice had been buried in oblivion by
these foolish people. The very name of the place  <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) was as much as to say that the earth
itself cried out, that the people, in their perverse nature, were
rebellious, and given to unbelief. Now, temptation is the mother of
contentions; for as soon as anything occurs contrary to the wishes of
one who distrusts God, he has recourse to murmuring and dispute. When
Moses relates that the Israelites “tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord
among us or not?” he does not mean that they openly spoke rims; but that
this was the tendency of their cries, when on account of the want of
water they rose against Moses, and complained that they were deceived by
him, as though God had no power to help them. But though God branded the
people for their malignity and perversity, with a lasting mark of
ignominy, yet did He afford them an extraordinary proof of His goodness,
not only in bestowing on them the drink by which their bodies might be
refreshed, but by honoring their souls also with spiritual drink, as
Paul testifies, (<span id="iv.xvii.i-p29.1"></span>[1Co
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span
id="iv.xvii.i-p29.1"></span>,) “that rock was Christ,” and therefore he
compares the water which flowed from it to the cup of the holy supper.
So do we see how God’s immeasurable bounty surpasses all the wickedness
of man, and how, by turning their vices to salvation, He brings light
out of darkness; so far is He from giving them the reward of their
deservings, when He confers upon them what is profitable. But we must
remember the warning which is here interposed, that it availed many of
them nothing to drink of that spiritual drink, because they profaned by
their crimes that excellent gift.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
17:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008)<span
id="iv.xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p2"></span>**8.** Then came Amalek, and fought with
Israel in Rephidim.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p3"></span>**8.** Venit autem Amelec et pugnavit
cum Israel in Raphidim.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p4"></span>**9.** And Moses said unto Joshua,
Choose us out men, and go out, fight with Amalek: tomorrow I will stand
on the top of the hill, with the rod of God in mine hand.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p5"></span>**9.** Tunc ait Moses ad Josuah, Elige
nobis viros, et egrediens pugna contra Amalec: et cras ego stabo in
vertice collis, et baculus Dei erit in manu mea.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p6"></span>**10.** So Joshua did as Moses had said
to him, and fought with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron, and Hur, went up to
the top of the hill.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p7"></span>**10.** Et fecit Josuah sicut dixerat ei
Moses, pugnando cum Amalec, Moses autem et Aharon et Hur ascenderunt in
verticem collis.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p8"></span>**11.** And it came to pass, when Moses
held up his hand, that Israel prevailed; and when he let down his hand,
Amalek prevailed.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p9"></span>**11.** Et factum est, quum levaret
Moses manum suam, praevaluit Israel, et quum demitteret manum suam,
praevaluit Amalec.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p10"></span>**12.** But Moses’ hands *were* heavy;
and they took a stone, and put *it* under him, and he sat thereon; and
Aaron and Hut stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the
other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down
of the sun.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p11"></span>**12.** Manus autem Mosis erant graves:
itaque tulerunt lapidem et supposuerunt ei, et sedit super ilium, Aharon
vero et Hur sustentaverunt manus ejus, alter hinc et alter inde.
Mansitque manibus suis firmis usque ad occasum solis.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p12"></span>**13.** And Joshua discomfited Amalek
and his people with the edge of the sword.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p13"></span>**13.** Et fregit Josuah Amalec et
populum ejus in ore gladii.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p14"></span>**14.** And the Lord said unto Moses,
Write this for a memorial in a book, and rehearse it in the ears of
Joshua; for I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under
heaven.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p15"></span>**14.** Tunc dixit Jehova ad Mosen,
Scribe illud pro memoriali in libro, et trade auribus Josuah: quoniam
delendo delebo memoriam Amalec de sub coelo.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p16"></span>**15.** And Moses built an altar, and
called the name of it JEHOVAH-nissi:

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p17"></span>**15.** Et aedificavit Moses altare:
vocavitque nomen ejus Jehova miraculum meum, (*vel*, exaltatio mea.)

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p18"></span>**16.** For he said, Because the Lord
hath sworn, that the Lord will have war with Amalek from generation to
generation.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p19"></span>**16.** Et dixit, Certe manus super
solium Jehovae: praelium Jehovae cum Amalec a generatione in
generationem.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p20"></span><span id="iv.xvii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p21"></span>**8.** *Then came Amalek.* These were
the first enemies whom God arrayed against Israel, after having
delivered them from Egypt, and having kept them for some time in peace
and quietness. It was principally for two reasons that He chose them now
to be involved in war, either to punish them for their recent sin, or as
a correction of their idleness, lest it should ensnare them into
iniquity; for, as among soldiers sedition often arises from a cessation
of labor, so also the more God spared this people and indulged them, the
more did their forwardness increase. No wonder then that they were
awakened by war, when they had taken occasion from their state of
tranquillity to wax wanton. But some imagine that the Amalekites were
impelled to take arms with this design; first, to avenge  <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) the abdication of their ancestor; and
secondly, because they were unwilling that the posterity of Jacob should
enjoy the inheritance of which Esau, the grandfather of Amalek, the
founder of their nation, had been deprived. And, certainly, it is
probable that the recollection of the injury which had been inflicted on
their ancestor still remained, and that they were instigated by the
devil, in order that the promise of God, whereby the right of
primogeniture had been transferred from Esau to Jacob, should be
frustrated and fail of its effect. This might, indeed, have been their
reason for the war; but God had another object, viz., to render the
people more obedient to Him, by humbling their pride. Perhaps it was on
that account that He withdrew Moses from the leadership, and substituted
Joshua, as some token of His indignation; for although the assistance He
gave them was sufficiently manifest, and their victory was obtained by
His grace and the prayers of Moses, yet would He have them reminded, by
the absence of Moses, of their recent transgression, that, being
humiliated by their fear, they might submissively ask for pardon, and
fly more earnestly to Him for His aid. He orders chosen men to go forth,
partly to inspirit the whole people, and encourage them to hope for
victory, because He does not deign to employ the whole army to repel
their enemies; and partly in consideration of the cowardice of this
unwarlike mob, lest they should faint with terror if the enemies should
make an incursion into the midst of their camp. For Moses does nothing
of himself, but occupies the station appointed him by God on the top of
the hill, to contend with the enemy from afar, but he sends down the
others to fight hand to hand before him, since it had pleased God thus
to order the battle. It is plain that he did not avoid the fight to
spare himself, but because God had given him a different employment; and
this appears from his wielding the rod of God, like their general and
standard-bearer, and promising the successful issue of the battle, of
which he had been assured. For that single rod was of more avail than as
if they had gone into the field preceded by a thousand banners. I have
already observed that this is sometimes called the rod of God, sometimes
of Moses, sometimes of Aaron, according to circumstances; because God
used it as an instrument to exercise His power through His ministers. So
God does not detract from His own honor, when He works effectually by
His ministers. It is a prelude to Joshua’s future call, which we shall
notice in its place, that. he should be appointed commander of the
troops; for he had not yet reached the dignity of next in command to
Moses, unless an extraordinary commission had been given him by God.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p23"></span><span id="iv.xvii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p24"></span>**10.** *So Joshua did as.* Although
Joshua is by no means backward, but diligently executes what he knows to
be commanded him by God Himself, and it is probable that the soldiers
whom he had taken to accompany him did their duty properly, yet is it
expressly stated that they gained the victory by no care, or striving,
or courage of their own, but by the prayer of Moses, by whose support
their leader as well as the army was sustained. Yet does not Moses here
boastfully commend his own zeal in praying, but is rather the public
witness. and proclaimer of his weakness, that the glory might be
entirely attributed to the gratuitous favor of God. Nor is there any
question, that, conscious of the infirmity which he afterwards
confesses, he associated with him Aaron and Hur, who might assist him in
his task. There  <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) is more
acuteness than solidity in the notion which some have, that these two
men present a figure of the Old and New Testament, on which the prayers
of the saints must rest; and that the stone which they gave to Moses to
sit upon was offered him because our faith is only founded upon Christ.
I know how plausible such allegories are; but what I have just said is
enough for me, that because Moses mistrusted his own weakness, therefore
he sought these two assistants. And surely when they stayed his hands
they also lifted up their minds, and prayed together to God in common
supplications; but Moses speaks chiefly of himself, to show that this
charge was entrusted to him by God. For he did not only offer his
prayers as a work of charity, but because God had chosen him as
intercessor, to conquer the enemies from afar by the stretching forth of
the rod, and by his secret earnestness in prayer; and in this respect he
was a type of Christ; although the similitude does not hold in all its
parts. Doubtless his failure arose from his extreme earnestness, and the
extraordinary vehemence of his zeal, and, therefore, praise is mixed up
with blame, just as the saints, when they are stirred to make great
efforts in prayer, find that not only does their vigor grow cold, but
they fail from being almost consumed by their own ardor.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p26"></span><span id="iv.xvii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p27"></span>**13.** *And Joshua discomfited
Amalek.* The copula is here used instead of the *illative particle*; for
Moses here concludes that the Israelites overcame their enemies, because
he had continually persevered in prayer. There is, too, an implied
antithesis between the firmness of his hands and the weakness of the
enemy, that we may know that they were discomfited or conquered, not so
much by the sword as by the uplifting of the rod, and by the
intercession of the holy man.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p28"></span><span id="iv.xvii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p29"></span>**14.** *And the Lord said unto Moses.*
By this command God made it known that He had performed a work which not
only ought to be celebrated by word  <span
id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) of mouth, but which also was deserving
of eternal glory with posterity; for therefore did He command it to be
written in a book, that its memory might never perish. The dispute of
commentators respecting this book seems to me to be superfluous; for God
simply wills that the memorial of this circumstance should exist in all
ages; and this was effected by the narration of Moses, for he handed
down in writing even to the end of the world the praise of this favor,
together with the perpetual and immortal doctrine of the Law. Yet God
did not only wish the memorable event of this battle to be written down,
but also that Joshua should be reminded of it, lest he should faint
under the many difficulties which awaited him. For nothing could better
support him with invincible firmness than the recollection of this
history, from whence he might be assured that the people would ever be
victorious under the auspices of God. But although this promise was not
immediately fulfilled, yet the Amalekites were a long time afterwards
totally destroyed by Saul; but it was a great encouragement to Joshua
and the people to know that Amalek, who had first made war upon them,
was already condemned by the divine decree, and could not escape the
destruction to which he was devoted.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p31"></span><span id="iv.xvii.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p32"></span>**15.** *And Moses built an altar.*
<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p32.1"></span>The purpose of this was that not he
alone, but the whole people should testify, by solemn sacrifice, their
gratitude; which the very name of the altar proves. For neither did he
wish to erect a statue to God, nor to honor the altar by God’s name, but
he shows that this was the object he proposed to himself, that the
Israelites, being inflated by their good success, should not boast of
their own strength, but glory only in God. I see not why some should
translate it “miracle,” for the word <span
id="iv.xvii.ii-p32.2"></span>נס<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p32.3"></span>,
 <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) *nis*<span
id="iv.xvii.ii-p33.9"></span>, is undoubtedly always rendered “banner.”
Yet I do not deny that the word is here used metaphorically for
“exaltation;” as if Moses had said, that the God who had sustained His
people was worthy only to be exalted among them.

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p34"></span><span id="iv.xvii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p35"></span>**16.** *For he said, Because the
Lord.*  <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) He confirms by
repetition the same declaration which he had lately pronounced from the
mouth of God, viz., that God would be ever at war with the Amalekites,
until He should have utterly destroyed them. Translators do not agree as
to the meaning of the expression, “The hand is upon the throne of the
Lord.” Some imagine it to be a form of oath, as though God swore by His
throne. Others understand by His throne the Church, which is the rest of
God, in which he is said to sit. But I have no doubt but that what was
said as to destroying and extinguishing the memory of Amalek is
confirmed by this reason, viz., that as God is omnipotent He will
contend with this wicked nation. Therefore the hand is said to be upon
the throne of God, because he does not sit idly in heaven, (as the
Epicureans imagine,) but exercises His dominion in the government of the
world, as if he had said, that God, who rules in power, and who by His
hand and authority controls and moderates, sustains and overthrows all
things, as long as He shall reign upon His throne, endued with supreme
and formidable might, will never cease to pursue the Amalekites with His
just vengeance. And, indeed, it may have been the case, that He
inflicted divers punishments upon them, though their last great
overthrow was delayed till the days of Saul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc03020.htm#fr_185) <span
id="iv.xvii.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p18"></span> A brief but able reply to the arguments
of those who allege these similar passages against the authenticity of
the Pentateuch, will be found in Hengstenberg, (Ryland’s Translation,)
vol. 2, p. 310, etc.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc03020.htm#fr_186) <span
id="iv.xvii.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p19"></span> <span
id="iv.xvii.i-p19.1"></span>על-פי<span id="iv.xvii.i-p19.2"></span>.
Literally, ”*upon*<span id="iv.xvii.i-p19.3"></span> the mouth.” Noldius
cites, however, various texts, in which it is equivalent to no more than
*according to*<span id="iv.xvii.i-p19.4"></span>, though in this
instance, and in many others, he would render it “according to the
command.” — *Concord. Partic. Hebr.* <span id="iv.xvii.i-p19.5"></span>—
*W*

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc03020.htm#fr_187) <span
id="iv.xvii.i-p23.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p24"></span> Shortly. — *W*.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc03020.htm#fr_188) <span
id="iv.xvii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.i-p29"></span> *Massah*, *i.e.*, temptation.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc03020.htm#fr_189) <span
id="iv.xvii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p22"></span> Ut paternae abdicationis ultores
essent. — *Lat.* Pour venger l’opprobe de leur pere, de ce qu’il avait
ete desherite — *Fr.* This, *Willet in loco* paraphrases: “to revenge
their father Esau’s quarrel for the loss of the birthright.” The Jews
themselves appear to have recognized the double cause of this war, viz.,
the jealousy of Amalek, and the sin of Israel, referred to by Calvin.
“After they had passed through the sea, they murmured for waters: then
came against them Amalek, who hated them for the first birthright and
blessing which our father Jacob had taken from Esau; and he came and
fought against Israel, because they had violated the words of the law,”
etc. — *Targum* on <span id="iv.xvii.ii-p22.1"></span>[Song
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#015)<span
id="iv.xvii.ii-p22.1"></span>, quoted by Ainsworth *in loco.* For a
popular account of the origin of Amalek see *Illustrated Commentary* on
<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p22.2"></span>[1 Samuel
15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#000)<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p22.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc03020.htm#fr_190) <span
id="iv.xvii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p25"></span> “Divers allegories are made of this
place: as that Moses’ hands, *i.e.*, the precepts of the law are heavy,
but that by Aaron, who signifieth Christ, and Hur, *i.e*., the Holy
Ghost, they are made easy and light. — *Ferus*. Some, by Moses and Hur,
understand the two Testaments, upon the which our prayer must rely. Some
again thus allegorize: — Aaron, they say, signifieth *montanus*, hilly,
and Hur, *fire*, so two things support our prayer, high and heavenly
meditation, and fervent charity. — *Lyranus*,” etc. — *Willet in loco.*

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc03020.htm#fr_191) <span
id="iv.xvii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p30"></span> “Par la bouche de ceux qui vivoyent
alors;” by the mouth of those who were alive then. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc03020.htm#fr_192) <span
id="iv.xvii.ii-p32.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p33"></span><span id="iv.xvii.ii-p33.1"></span> It
was in *S* *M* *’s* <span id="iv.xvii.ii-p33.2"></span>version that
*C.*<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p33.3"></span> found this clause rendered
Dominus miraculum meum; and *Munster*<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p33.4"></span>
cites *Onkelos*<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p33.5"></span>, the Chaldee
paraphrast, as his authority for so translating the word <span
id="iv.xvii.ii-p33.6"></span>נסי<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p33.7"></span>; but
the text of that paraphrase, as given in *Elias Hutter’s
Heptateuch*<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p33.8"></span>, does not justify this
singular rendering. — *W*

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc03020.htm#fr_193) <span
id="iv.xvii.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii.ii-p36"></span> “Truly the hand is upon the throne of
Jehovah.” — *Lat.* Margin, *A. V*., “Because the hand of Amalek is
against the throne of the Lord, *therefore*,” etc. *Heb*.,” The hand
upon the throne of the Lord.” Holden agrees with Rosenmuller, and, as he
says, the most eminent Biblical critics, in preferring the explanation
of the margin, *A. V.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 18](cc03021)
