[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc03016)  [Next](cc03018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p1"></span>EXODUS 14

<span id="iv.xiv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
14:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p4"></span>**2.** Speak unto the children of Israel,
that they turn and encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the
sea, over against Baal-zephon: before it shall ye encamp by the sea.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Loquere ad filios Israel, ut
redeant, et maneant e regione Pi-hahiroth inter Migdol et inter mare, e
regione Baalsephon, contra ipsum castrametentur juxta mare.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p6"></span>**3.** For Pharaoh will say of the
children of Israel, They are entangled in the land, the wilderness hath
shut them in.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Dicet enim Pharao de filiis Israel,
Irretiti sunt in terra: conclusit illos desertum.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p8"></span>**4.** And I will harden Pharaoh’s heart,
that he shall follow after them; and I will be honored upon Pharaoh, and
upon all his host; that the Egyptians may know that I am, the Lord. And
they did so.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et roborabo cor Pharaonis, ut
persequatur eos: et glorificabor in Pharaone, et in universo exercitu
ejus: scientque AEgyptii quod ego Jehova. Et fecerunt sic.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p10"></span>**5.** And it was told the king of Egypt
that the people fled: and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was
turned against the people, and they said, Why have we done this, that we
have let Israel go from serving us?

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Nuntiatum est autem regi AEgypti
quod fugisset populus: Et versum est cor Pharaonis et servorum ejus in
populum, et dixerunt, Cur hoc fecimus ut dimitteremus Israel, ne
serviret nobis?

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p12"></span>**6.** And he made ready his chariot, and
took his people with him.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et aptato curru suo populum
assumpsit secum.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p14"></span>**7.** And he took six hundred chosen
chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over every one of
them.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Tulit itaque sexcentos currus
electos, omnes currus AEgypti, et duces super quenque illorum.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p16"></span>**8.** And the Lord hardened the heart of
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued after the children of Israel: and
the children of Israel went out with an high hand.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et roboravit Jehova cor Pharaonis
regis AEgypti, et persequutus est filios Israel. Filii autem Israel
egressi erant in manu excelsa.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p18"></span>**9.** But the Egyptians pursued after
them, (all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his
army,) and overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pi-hahiroth,
before Baal-zephon.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et persequuti sunt AEgyptii illos,
apprehenderuntque eos quum castra haberent juxta mare, omnis equitatus
curruum Pharaonis, et equites ejus, et exercitus ejus, juxta
Pi-hahiroth, e regione Baalsephon.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p20"></span><span id="iv.xiv.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p21"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spoke unto Moses.*
<span id="iv.xiv.i-p21.1"></span>God, by closing up all the ways by
which the Israelites might have escaped, now opens a course for His
wonderful power, and by bringing them for one moment to despair,
provided for the safety of His Church through a long period of time.
This final act, then, marvelously illustrated the grace of God, so that
the people, however ungrateful and disaffected they might be, should
still acknowledge God as their deliverer; besides, its consequence was,
that the forces of Egypt not only being broken, but the whole nation
being destroyed, or, at least, the flower of it extinguished, it brought
no further trouble upon the people until they were established in the
land of Canaan. If they had freely and peacefully gone forth, with the
king and the people of Egypt quiet, the former miracles would not have
sufficiently availed to testify their redemption; but when, being
everywhere shut in, they see nothing but death before them, whilst the
sea suddenly and unexpectedly affords them a passage, and overwhelms
their enemies pressing on them from behind, they are obliged to confess
that they were not only saved from death but from the deepest abysses by
the hand of God. But it appears that, when they were commanded by Moses
to cast themselves, and, as it were, to ingulf themselves in the narrow
passage, of which mention is made, they were astonished by the miracles,
and like them that dream, since they obeyed without hesitation, although
the very aspect of the place must have inspired them with horror. For,
if they had apprehended danger, their readiness to obey would not have
been so great, as we shall presently see. Wherefore it was the intention
of Moses not so much to praise them, as the providence of God. For it is
plain, that unless they had been amazed by the miracles, of which they
had seen so many, they scarcely could have been induced willingly to
throw themselves into. defiles from whence there was no retreat. From
the word <span id="iv.xiv.i-p21.2"></span>מגדל<span
id="iv.xiv.i-p21.3"></span>, *migdol,*<span id="iv.xiv.i-p21.4"></span>
we may conjecture that a fortress was built on the rock to prevent
access to it. I do not quite understand the meaning of <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p21.5"></span>החירת  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md) *hachiroth,* <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p22.5"></span>nor do I see why the Greeks should have
translated it “the mouth of the valley;” yet from the word signifying “a
mouth,” it may be probably conjectured that it was contracted by piles.
Because the word <span id="iv.xiv.i-p22.6"></span>חור<span
id="iv.xiv.i-p22.7"></span>, *chor,* <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p22.8"></span>signifies a cave or hole, I know not whether
the place might not have obtained its name, as the mouth of the holes or
caverns; for the letter <span id="iv.xiv.i-p22.9"></span>ו<span
id="iv.xiv.i-p22.10"></span>, *vau,* <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p22.11"></span>is often converted into <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p22.12"></span>י<span id="iv.xiv.i-p22.13"></span>, *yod,*
<span id="iv.xiv.i-p22.14"></span>and the change of the gender in the
plural number is frequent with the Hebrews. Or perhaps some may think it
more likely, that though it was written <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p22.15"></span>החירות<span id="iv.xiv.i-p22.16"></span>,
*hachiroth,* <span id="iv.xiv.i-p22.17"></span>the letter <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p22.18"></span>ח<span id="iv.xiv.i-p22.19"></span> crept in
in place of <span id="iv.xiv.i-p22.20"></span>ה <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p22.21"></span>from its similarity. If we so take it, the
feminine gender is put for the masculine, and it will be “the mouth of
the mountains.” But although we may be ignorant of the etymology of the
second word, the word “mouth” makes it certain that the defile was
inclosed by rocks, and of narrow access. Although, if I may tender my
own judgment in a doubtful matter, I rather consider that it is derived
from the word <span id="iv.xiv.i-p22.22"></span>חרת *charath,* <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p22.23"></span>which means to engrave, or to furrow,
because the rocks were cut as by a mallet. But on the opposite side, the
place was surrounded by the sea, as though the Israelites had been cast
into a sepulcher.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p23"></span><span id="iv.xiv.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p24"></span>**3.** *For Pharaoh will say.* <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p24.1"></span>God here explains to Hoses His design;
although, in His engagements with Pharaoh, he had so often gained
glorious victories, that the last act still remained to overwhelm him
and his army in the sea. He says that Pharaoh, then, will be caught in
riffs snare, so as to rush upon his destruction. For, if the people had
come into the land of Canaan by a direct course, they could not have
been so readily pursued; therefore God, for the sake, of magnifying His
glory, set a bait to catch the tyrant, just as fish are hooked. The word
here used <span id="iv.xiv.i-p24.2"></span>נבכים<span
id="iv.xiv.i-p24.3"></span>,  <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151.md)
*nebukim,* <span id="iv.xiv.i-p25.6"></span>some render “perplexed,”
others “entangled;” but it may be well explained, that they were to be
“confounded in the land,” because they would find no way of egress; as
being on all sides hemmed in in the narrow passage, with the sea behind
them. And where He speaks of the intentions of Pharaoh, He does not, as
men do, conceive a mere probability, but; He declares the secret mind of
the tryrant, as of a thing which He well knew, since it is His attribute
to discern our hearts. Afterwards He goes still further; for he
signifies not only that He foresaw what would happen, but again repeats
what we have so often observed before, that he would harden Pharaoh’s
heart, that he should follow after the people. Whence it follows, that
all this was directed by tits will and guidance. But He did not testify
this to Hoses only in private, but would have them all previously
admonished, lest, being terrified by the sudden assault of their
enemies, they should despair of safety. But this admonition was less
useful to them than it should have been; because, being soon after
surprised, they are not less alarmed than as if they had been brought
into danger through the error of God and the ignorance of Moses.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p26"></span><span id="iv.xiv.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p27"></span>**5.** *And it was told the king.* Moses
does not simply mean, that the king then first heard of the flight of
the people, which had been anything but secret; but that the
circumstances were reported to him, which stirred him up to make an
attack upon them. When, then, he hears that the people fled in haste, he
thinks that they may be retained by the slightest obstacle. Nor is he
alone influenced by this foolish thought, but all his courtiers blame
their own inertness for letting the people go. They inquire among
themselves, Why they have let the children of Israel depart? as if they
had not endeavored in every way to prevent their free exit — as if their
pertinacity had not been ten times divinely overcome — as if God had not
at length torn the people from them, in spite of their reluctance. But
this is the stupidity of the wicked, that they only dread God’s present
hand, and immediately forget all that they have seen. They were worn out
by the fierce and dreadful punishments; but now, as if nothing had
happened, they discuss why they had not resisted God even to the end,
when he had compelled them to submit with extreme reluctance, after they
had ten times found out that they struggled against Him in vain. But
such is the pride by which the reprobate must be blinded, that they may
be driven onwards to their own destruction, while they are persuaded
that there is nothing difficult to them, and fight against. God.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p28"></span><span id="iv.xiv.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p29"></span>**6.** *And he made ready his chariot.*
Moses briefly describes the warlike preparation of Pharaoh, not only to
magnify the greatness of God’s power in delivering the people, but also
to show with what violent and obstinate audacity the wicked go forwards,
when they give way to their depraved and criminal lusts. Just now the
Egyptians were almost frightened to death, and cried out that all was
over with them; scarcely has a day passed, when they collect a powerful
army as if their forces were uninjured. If any object that 600 chariots,
and even many more, although filled with armed men, were insufficient to
conquer 600,000 men: I reply, that, since they knew that the battle
would be with an unwarlike multitude, amongst which, too, women and
children were mingled, they relied on this consideration, and hoped that
they would have no difficulty in routing this enormous number, since it
was both inexperienced and undisciplined. Nor would their hope have been
disappointed, had not God been against them. But the event, proved how
truly Solomon says,

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p30"></span>“There is no wisdom, nor understanding,
nor counsel against the Lord,” (<span id="iv.xiv.i-p30.1"></span>[Pr
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.xiv.i-p30.1"></span>;)

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p31"></span>and how justly Isaiah defies the enemies
of the Church:

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p32"></span>“Associate yourselves, and ye shall be
broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces;
take counsel together, and it shall come to naught; speak the word, and
it shall not stand.” (<span id="iv.xiv.i-p32.1"></span>[Isa.
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#010)<span id="iv.xiv.i-p32.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p33"></span>For this presumption brings the wicked to
naught; and, whilst they rush forward with unbridled violence, they
conceive not that God has a secret bridle to restrain their lusts.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p34"></span><span id="iv.xiv.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p35"></span>**8.** *And the children of Israel went
out.*  <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152.md) Moses indirectly reproves
their too great security, which had freed them altogether from care and
fear; and whence even the desire of calling on God had grown cold in
them, as security always produces drowsiness and an idle spirit. Hence
it came to pass, that this great danger, which they had not expected.
produced the greater fear. But, on the other hand, Moses exalts God’s
grace, because he so opportunely and so critically came to the help of
the wretched Israelites exulting in their foolish joy; for otherwise,
being suddenly overtaken, they would have fallen at once into confusion
at the first shout of the enemy. Thus are we admonished by this example,
that, while we are safe under God’s protection, the dangers, which might
happen, are to be apprehended, not that we may be anxious and alarmed,
but that we may humbly repose under His wings, and not be uplifted with
inconsiderate joy. In the next verse Moses briefly relates, how
formidable a sight presented itself to the Israelites, when they saw
themselves shut in on one part by the sea, ingulfed, as it were, on both
sides by the jaws of the defile, and the army of Pharaoh at the same
time pressing upon them. He expressly mentions the strength of this
army, in order that the glory of the aid divinely afforded them might
more fully appear from the opposition.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p37"></span><span id="iv.xiv.i-p37.1"></span>[Exodus
14:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.xiv.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p38"></span>**10.** And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the
children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians
marched after them; and they were sore afraid: and the children of
Israel cried out unto the Lord.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p39"></span>**10.** Quumque applicuisset Pharao,
levaverunt filii Israel oculos suos, et ecce, AEgyptii iter faciebant
post eos. Itaque timuerunt valde, et clamaverunt filii Israel ad
Jehovam.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p40"></span>**11.** And they said unto Moses, Because
*there were* no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the
wilderness? wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to carry us forth
out of Egypt?

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p41"></span>**11.** Et dixerunt ad Mosen, Nunquid
(*vel,* An quia) quia non erant sepulchra in AEgypto, tulisti nos ut
moreremur in deserto? Quare sic fecisti nobis, ut educeres nos ex
AEgypto?

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p42"></span>**12.** *Is* not this the word that we
did tell thee in Egypt, saying, Let us alone, that we may serve the
Egyptians? For *it had been* better for us to serve the Egyptians, than
that we should die in the wilderness.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p43"></span>**12.** Nonne hoc est verbum quod diximus
tibi in AEgypto, dicentes, Dimitte nos, ut serviamus Aegyptiis. Melius
enim nobis erat servire AEgyptiis quam mori in deserto.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p44"></span>**13.** And Moses said unto the people,
Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he
will show to you today: for the Egyptians whom ye have seen today, ye
shall see them again no more for ever.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p45"></span>**13.** Et dixit Moses ad populum, Ne
timueritis: state et videte salutem Jehovae quam hodie faciet vobis. Nam
quos vidistis Aegyptios hodie, non estis visuri post hac in saeculum.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p46"></span>**14.** The Lord shall fight for you, and
ye shall hold your peace.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p47"></span>**14.** Jehova pugnabit pro vobis, et vos
quiescetis.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p48"></span>**15.** And the Lord said unto Moses,
Wherefore criest thou unto me? speak unto the children of Israel, that
they go forward:

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p49"></span>**15.** Dixerat autem Jehova ad Mosen,
Quid clamas ad me? Alloquere filios Israel ut proficiscantur.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p50"></span>**16.** But lift thou up thy rod, and
stretch out thine hand over the sea, and divide it; and the children of
Israel shall go on dry ground through the midst of the sea.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p51"></span>**16.** Tu vero attolle baculum tuum, et
extende manum tuam super mare, et scinde illud, et ingrediantur filii
Israel per medium maris in arida.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p52"></span>**17.** And I, behold, I will harden the
hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall follow them: and I will get me
honor upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his chariots, and upon
his horsemen.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p53"></span>**17.** Et ecce, ego roborabo cor
Aegyptiorum, ut sequantur illos, glorificaborque in Pharaone, et in toto
exercitu ejus, in curribus ejus, et in equitibus ejus.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p54"></span>**18.** And the Egyptians shall know that
I am the Lord, when I have gotten me honor upon Pharaoh, upon his
chariots, and upon his horsemen.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p55"></span>**18.** Et scient AEgyptii quod ego
Jehova, quum glorificatus fuero in Pharaone, in quadrigis ejus, et in
equitibus.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p56"></span><span id="iv.xiv.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p57"></span>**10.** *And when Pharaoh drew nigh.*
Moses implies that the alarm was greater from its suddenness, because no
messenger had preceded, so that a very short time indeed was given them
for preparation. There was, then, just ground for fear even in the
bravest hearts, unless there had been something very extraordinary about
them. But they sinned doubly; because both the hope of divine assistance
had abandoned their hearts together with the recollection of God’s
mercies; and they advanced to such an extent of ingratitude as to revolt
insolently against God and Moses. Although there is an appearance of two
contrary facts being here reported, viz., that they cried out unto the
Lord, and mutinied against His minister; yet we may easily gather that
this cry neither arose from faith nor from serious and! well-ordered
affections, but that it was extorted by a confused impulse; since the
natural sense impels all men, in their adversity, promiscuously to offer
their prayers to God, although they neither embrace His mercy nor rely
on His power. Thus David, in <span id="iv.xiv.i-p57.1"></span>[Ps
107](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.xiv.i-p57.1"></span>,
says that all the distressed have recourse to God when any trouble
oppresses them; because God, by the leadings of nature and by secret
instinct, draws them to Him in their danger, in order that the most
careless and most profane may be rendered more inexcusable. Yet in this
way do they not render due honor to God, although by the utterance of
their mouths they ask for safety from Him. It is, then, little to be
wondered at, that the Israelites being reduced to such sore anxiety
should have offered prayers and vows accompanied with God’s name;
especially since He had recently manifested Himself to them in so many
miracles, and they always had in sight the cloud, or the pillar of fire.
But their insane cries against Moses were plain proof that, as in
amazement, they had thoughtlessly hastened to call upon the name of God.
For the exposition  <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153.md) is
unreasonable which some give, that certain of them piously prayed to
God, whilst others of the multitude wickedly mutinied against Moses;
because these two statements are made in conjunction, and cannot be
referred to different persons.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p59"></span><span id="iv.xiv.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p60"></span>**11.** *Because there were no graves.*
This  <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154.md) is the more proper sense;
for the double negative is put for a single one. It is a bitter and
biting taunt; for, not contented with preferring the graves of Egypt to
the death which they feared, they scoffingly inquire how he could have
thought of bringing them into the wilderness, as if the land of Egypt
was not large enough to bury them in. But God had openly and clearly
proved Himself to be the leader of their departing; and, again, it was
basely insensible of them to forget that they were not long since like
dead men, and had been miraculously brought out of the grave. Their
madness is wilder still, when they daringly call to remembrance the
impious blasphemies which should have been a matter of shame and
detestation to themselves. For how sad was their ingratitude in
rejecting the proffered favor of deliverance, and in shutting the door
against the advances of God, in order that they might rot in their
misery! True, that God had pardoned this great depravity; but it was
their part unceasingly to mourn, and to be as it were overwhelmed with
shame, that their crime might be blotted out before God’s judgment-seat.
But now, as if God and Moses were accountable to them, they boastfully
and petulantly reproach them for not believing them, when they would
have prudently prevented the evil. Hence are we taught how far men’s
passions will carry them, when fear has extinguished their hopes, and
they wait not patiently for God’s aid.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p62"></span><span id="iv.xiv.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p63"></span>**13.** *And Moses said unto the people.*
Although with his characteristic kindness Moses courteously exhorts them
to be of good hope, yet it is not probable that he passed over in
silence those wicked cries with which he saw that God was atrociously
assailed. I conceive, then, that he discharged the duty of a faithful
teacher by freely chastising their insolence, which was intolerable; and
since he spoke under the inspiration of the preventing Spirit of God,
there is no doubt but that God himself severely reproved their
blasphemies, lest, by indulgence, they should grow worse. But Moses
omits the reproof, and only shows that God’s loving-kindness went beyond
the execrable impiety of the people, giving them consolation to assuage
their grief and to calm their troubled hearts. Moreover, by bidding them
not to fear, and “to stand still and see the salvation of the Lord,” he
implies that, as long as fear has possession of our minds, they are
blinded, and confounded in their stupidity so as not to receive the help
of God. By the expression, “stand still,” he means “keep quiet;” as much
as to say, that there was no occasion for any one to move a finger,
because God alone would preserve them, though they were quiet and
unmoved; and this he confirms in the next verse, where God promises to
conquer for them whilst they hold their peace. But, in my opinion, it is
not that he exhorts them to be quiet; but intimates that in God alone
there would be strength enough to prevail, although they might be torpid
like men entranced.: Now the Israelites, when, though preserved by God’s
hand, they reject as much as possible His proffered grace, are an
example to us how many repeated salvations are necessary for us, in
order that God may bring us to perfect salvation; because, by our
ingratitude, we nullify whatever He has given us, and thus should
willfully perish, if God did not correct our apathy by the power of His
Spirit.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p64"></span><span id="iv.xiv.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p65"></span>**15.** *And the Lord*  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155.md) *said* I have used the
praeter-pluperfect tense for the sake of avoiding ambiguity; for the
reason is here given why Moses so confidently reproved the hesitation of
the people, and promised that they should be safe under the present help
of God; viz., because he had already been assured by divine revelation
that God was willing to aid His people, and had in readiness a new means
for their preservation. For he could not have been the proclaimer and
witness of their safety if he had not received the promise. Therefore he
relieves his confidence from the imputation of rashness, since he
advanced nothing which he had not already heard from the mouth of God
himself. These words, “Wherefore criest thou unto me?” some interpreters
extend to the whole people, whose representative Moses was; but this
sense is too far-fetched, and I have recently observed, that the prayers
of the people were by no means directed to God. I doubt not., therefore,
that the holy man had prayed apart in the insurrection of the people.
Nor is this pious duty disapproved of in the passage; but rather shows
that he had not spent his labor in vain, nor poured forth his words into
the air. The sense, then, is, “Weary not yourself by crying any more;
the event will prove that you are heard. Lift up your rod, then, whereby
you may divide the sea, so that the children of Israel may go dry shod
through the midst of it.” This passage shows that they are guilty of
rashness who promise anything either to themselves or others, as to
particular blessings, without the special testimony of God.

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p67"></span><span id="iv.xiv.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p68"></span>**17.** *I will harden.* God once more
affirms, for the greater exaltation of His own power, that He will
harden the Egyptians, so that, as if devoted to destruction, they may
cast themselves into the midst of the sea; which they certainly would
never have done, unless He had guided their hearts by his secret
influence; because it could not have escaped them that a passage for the
Israelites was opened by His special gift, from whence they might gather
that the elements were at war with them. Therefore they would never have
dared to enter the sea, which they saw to be armed against them, unless
they had been blinded by God. Whence it appears how unworthy is the
imagination of those who pretend that there was but a bare permission
here, where God would make His power conspicuous. It would have been
enough that after the Israelites had passed over to the opposite shore
the sea should have returned to its place and prevented the Egyptians
from following; but God was willing, by a double miracle, to consult for
the security of His people for a long’ time to come. And this, indeed,
came to pass; for the flower of the whole nation being destroyed, the
Egyptians were unable to recruit their army; especially when the heir to
the throne had already been slain, and the king himself was now taken
away. On this account it is said, that the Egyptians should know that
the God of Israel was the Lord; because in this last act they found that
the power of rebellion was altogether taken from them.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
14:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p2"></span>**19.** And the angel of God, which went
before the camp of Israel, removed, and went behind them; and the pillar
of the cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p3"></span>**19.** Profectus est itaque angelus Dei
qui praecedebat castra Israel: coepitque ire a tergo ipsorum, et columna
nubis quae praecedebat eos, fuit illis a tergo.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p4"></span>**20.** And it came between the camp of
the Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness to
them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the one came not near
the other all the night.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p5"></span>**20.** Ac ingressus est inter castra
AEgyptiorum et inter castra Israel. Et fuit nubes et caligo: et
illuminavit noctem, nec appropinquavit alter alteri tota nocte.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p6"></span>**21.** And Moses stretched out his hand
over the sea; and the Lord caused the sea to go back by a strong east
wind all that night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were
divided.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p7"></span>**21.** Porro extendit Moses manum suam
super mare: et Jehova fecit mare abire per ventum orientalem vehementem
tota nocte; posuitque mare in siccitatem, quia divisae erant aquae.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p8"></span>**22.** And the children of Israel went
into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground and the waters were a wall
unto them on their right hand, and on their left.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p9"></span>**22.** Tunc ingressi sunt filii Israel
in medium maris in sicco: et aquae illis erant quasi murus a dextra et
sinistra eorum.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p10"></span>**23.** And the Egyptians pursued, and
went in after them to the midst of the sea, even all Pharaoh’s horses,
his chariots, and his horsemen.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p11"></span>**23.** Et insequuti sunt AEgyptii, et
venerunt post illos totus equitatus Pharaonis, currus ejus, et equites
ad medium maris.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p12"></span>**24.** And it came to pass, that, in
the morning watch the Lord looked unto the host of the Egyptians through
the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the
Egyptians.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p13"></span>**24.** Et factum est custodia matutina
ut respiceret Jehova ad castra Aegyptiorum in columna ignis et nube: et
turbavit castra AEgyptiorum.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p14"></span>**25.** And took off their
chariot-wheels, that they drave them heavily: so that the Egyptians
said, Let us flee from the face of Israel; for the Lord fighteth for
them against the Egyptians.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p15"></span>**25.** Et abstulit rotas curruum ejus,
et violenter vexit eum. Unde dixit AEgyptius, Fugiam a facie Israel:
quia Jehova pugnat pro eis contra AEgyptios.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p16"></span><span id="iv.xiv.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p17"></span>**19.** *And the angel of God.* A sudden
change which occurred to prevent a battle is here described; for the
angel:, who used to go before the Israelites to show the way: turned to
the other side, that he might be interposed between the two camps; and
this, in two respects, because the pillar of fire shone upon the
Israelites to dissipate the darkness of the night, whilst thick darkness
held the Egyptians as it were in captivity, so that they were unable to
proceed further. Thus did God both prevent them from advancing, and also
held out a torch for His people all night to light them on their way.
He, who has been called “Jehovah” hitherto, is now designated by Moses
“the Angel;” not only because the angels who represent God often borrow
His name, but because this Leader of the people was God’s only-begotten
Son, who afterwards was manifested in the flesh, as I have shown upon
the authority of Paul. (<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p17.1"></span>[1Co
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.xiv.ii-p17.1"></span>.) It may be remarked, also, that he is said
to have moved here and there, as He showed some token of His power and
assistance. Most clearly, too, does it appear, that the glory of God,
whilst it enlightens the faithful, overshadows the unbelievers, on the
other hand, with darkness. No wonder, then, if now-a-days the brightness
of the Gospel should blind the reprobate. But we should ask of God to
make us able to behold His glory.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p18"></span><span id="iv.xiv.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p19"></span>**21.** *And Moses stretched out.* We
have already said that the passage was free and convenient for the
Israelites by night, since the pillar of fire replenished their side
with light: and certainly so great a multitude could not reach the
opposite shore in an hour or two. The Israelites then passed over from
evening even till dawn; and then the Egyptians having discovered that
they were gone, hastened to follow that they might fall upon their rear.
Now, though Moses uses no ornaments of language in celebrating this
miracle, yet the bare recital ought to be sufficient; and, therefore, is
more emphatic to awaken our admiration than any rhetorical coloring and
magnificent eloquence. For who would desire sounding exclamations, in
order to be ravished to the highest admiration of the divine power, when
he is told simply and in a few words that the sea was divided by the rod
of Moses; that space enough for the passage of the people was dry; that
the mighty mass of waters stood like solid rocks on either side?
Designedly, then, has he set the whole matter before our eyes bare of
all verbal splendor; although it will both be celebrated soon after, in
accordance with its dignity, in the Canticle, and is everywhere more
splendidly magnified by the Prophets and in the Psalms. In this passage
let us learn, just as if Moses were leading us to the actual
circumstance, to fix our eyes on the prospect of God’s inestimable
power, which cannot be sufficiently expressed by any number or force of
words. But Moses is very careful not to arrogate more than enough for
himself, so as to detract from the praise of God. He had been before
commanded to divide the sea with his uplifted rod; he now changes the
form of expression, viz., that the waters went back by the command of
God. Thus, content with the character of a minister, he makes God alone,
as was fit, the author of the miracle. But although it was competent for
God to dispel the waters without any motion of the air, yet, that He
might show that all nature was obedient to Him, and governed at His
will, He was pleased to raise the strong east wind. Meanwhile it is to
be remembered, that the sea could not be dried by arty wind, however
strong, unless it had been effected by the secret power of the Spirit,
beyond the ordinary operation of nature. On which point see my previous
annotations on chap. 10:13 and 19.

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p20"></span><span id="iv.xiv.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p21"></span>**24.** *And it came to pass, that, in
the morning-watch.* In the morning the angel began to look upon the
Egyptians, not that they had escaped his sight before; but for the
purpose of destroying them by sudden submersion, though he had seemed
previously to forget them, when hidden by the cloud.  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156.md) And first, He opened their eyes, that
too late they might see whither their mad impetuosity had brought them;
and also that they might perceive how they were contending not with man
only, but with God; and that thus, being overwhelmed with sudden
astonishment, they might not be able to escape to the shore in time; for
they were on this account overtaken in the midst of the sea, because
terror had thrown them into utter confusion, when they perceived that
God was against them. They saw that there was no greater hope of safety
than to retreat, because God fought for Israel; but being in complete
disorder, they could make no way, and whilst they rather proved
hindrances to each other, the sea ingulfed them all.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
14:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p2"></span>**26.** And the Lord said unto Moses,
Stretch out thine hand over the sea, that the waters may come again upon
the Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p3"></span>**26.** Et ait Jehova ad Mosen, Extende
manum tuam super mare, ut revertantur aquae super AEgyptum, super currus
ejus et quires ejus.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p4"></span>**27.** And Moses stretched forth his
hand over the sea, and the sea returned to his strength when the morning
appeared, and the Egyptians fled against it; and the Lord overthrew the
Egyptians in the midst of the sea.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p5"></span>**27.** Et extendit Moses manum suam
super mare, et reversum est mare quum mane illuxisset, secundum vim
suam: fugeruntque AEgyptii ad occursum ejus. Et impulit Jehova AEgyptios
in medium maris.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p6"></span>**28.** And the waters returned, and
covered the chariots, and the horsemen, and all the host of Pharaoh that
came into the sea after them: there remained not so much as one of them.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p7"></span>**28.** Et redeuntes aquae operuerunt
quadrigas et equites in toto exercitu Pharaonis, qui ingressi erant
post. illos in mare: nec unus fuit ex ipsis residuus.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p8"></span>**29.** But the children of Israel
walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea; and the waters were a wall
unto them on their right hand, and on their left.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p9"></span>**29.** Filii autem Israel ambulaverunt
in sicco per medium maris: et aquae erant illis quasi murus a dextra
eorum et a sinistra eorum.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p10"></span>**30.** Thus the Lord saved Israel that
day out of the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead
upon the seashore.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p11"></span>**30.** Liberavit ergo Jehova in die
illa Israelem a manu AEgyptii. Et vidit Israel AEgyptium mortuum super
littus maris.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p12"></span>**31.** And Israel saw that great work
which the Lord did upon the Egyptians: and the people feared the Lord,
and believed the Lord, and his servant Moses.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p13"></span>**31.** Et vidit Israel potentiam
magnam quam fecit Jehova contra AEgyptios. Et timuit populus Jehovam, et
crediderunt Jehovae et Mosi servo ejus.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p14"></span><span id="iv.xiv.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p15"></span>**26.** *And the Lord said unto Moses.*
Moses here relates how the sea, in destroying the Egyptians, had no less
obeyed God’s command than when it lately afforded a passage for His
people, for it. was by the uplifting of the rod of Moses that the waters
came again into their place, as they had been before gathered into
heaps. The Egyptians now repented of their precipitate madness, and
determined, as conquered by God’s power, to leave the children of
Israel, and to return home; but God, who willed their destruction, shut
up the way of escape at this very crisis. But, that we may know how
evident a miracle was here, Moses now adds the circumstance of time, for
he says that the morning then appeared, so that the broad daylight might
show the whole transaction to the eyes of the spectators. The waters,
indeed, were heaped up in the night; but the pillar of fire, which shone
on the Egyptians, and pointed out their way, did not allow God’s
blessing to be hidden from them. The case of the Egyptians was
otherwise: therefore it behooved that they should perish by day, and
that the sun itself should render their destruction visible. This also
tends to prove God’s power, because, whilst they were endeavoring to
fly, He openly urged them on, as if they were intentionally drowning
themselves.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p16"></span><span id="iv.xiv.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p17"></span>**28.** *And the waters returned.* In
these two verses also Moses continues the same relation. It plainly
appears from Josephus and Eusebius what silly tales Manetho  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157.md) and others have invented about the
Exodus of the people; for although Satan has attempted by their
falsehoods to overshadow the truth of sacred history, so foolish and
trifling are their accounts that they need not refutation. The time
itself, which they indicate, sufficiently convicts them of ignorance.
But God has admirably provided for our sakes, in choosing Moses His
servant, who was the minister of their deliverance, to be also the
witness and historian of it; and this, too, amongst those who had seen
all with their own eyes, and who, in their peculiar frowardness, would
never have suffered one, who was so severe a reprover of them, to make
any false statements of fact. Since, then, his authority is sure and
unquestionable, let us only observe what his method was, viz., briefly
to relate in this place how there was not one left of Pharaoh’s mighty
army; that the Israelites all to a man passed over in safety and
dry-shod; that, by the rod of Moses, the nature of the waters was
changed, so that they stood like solid walls; that by the same rod they
were afterwards made liquid, so as suddenly to overwhelm the Egyptians.
This enumeration plainly shows an extraordinary work of God to have been
here, for as to the trifling of certain profane writers  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158.md) about the ebb and flow of the Arabian
Gulf, it falls to nothing of itself. From these things, therefore, he at
last justly infers, that the Israelites had seen the powerful hand of
God then and there exerted.

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p20"></span><span id="iv.xiv.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p21"></span>**31.** *And Israel saw.* After he has
said that the Israelites saw the dead bodies spread upon the seashore,
he now adds that in this spectacle God’s hand,  <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159.md) i.e., His power, appeared, because
there was no difficulty in distinguishing between God’s wrath and His
fatherly love, in preserving so miraculously an unwarlike multitude, and
in destroying in the depths of the sea an army formidable on every
account. Moses, therefore, does not unreasonably conclude here that the
Divine power was conspicuous in the deliverance of the people. He
afterwards adds, that, not without their profit, did the Israelites see
God’s hand; because they feared Him, and believed Him, and His servant
Moses. “Fear” is here used for that reverence which kept the people in
the way of duty, for they were not only affected by dread, but also
attracted to devote themselves to God, whose goodness they had so
sweetly and delightfully experienced. But although this pious feeling
was not durable, at any rate with the greater number of them, it is
still probable that it rooted itself in some few of them, because some
seed ever remained, nor was the recollection of this blessing entirely
destroyed. By the word “believed,” I think that the principal part of
fear is marked, and I understand it to be added expositively, as if it
were said, “that they reverenced God, and testified this by faithfully
embracing His doctrine and obediently submitting themselves to Moses.” I
understand it that they were all generally thus affected, because the
recognition of God’s hand bowed them to obedience, that they should be
more tractable and docile, and more inclined to follow God. But this
ardor soon passed away from the greater number of them, as (hypocrites
 <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) .md) are wont to be only
influenced by what is visible and present; although I hold to what I
have just said, that, in some small number, the fear of God, which they
had once conceived from a sense of His grace, still abode in rigor.
Meanwhile, let us learn from this passage that God is never truly and
duly worshipped without faith, because incredulity betrays gross
contempt of Him; and although hypocrites boast of their heaping all
kinds of honor upon God, still they inflict the greatest insult upon
Him, by refusing to believe His revelations. But Moses, who had been
chosen God’s minister for governing the people, is not unreasonably here
united with Him, for although God’s majesty manifested itself by
conspicuous signs, still Moses was the mediator, out of whose mouth God
willed that His words should be heard, so that the holy man could not be
despised without God’s own authority being rejected. A profitable
doctrine is gathered from hence, that whenever God propounds His word to
us by men, those who faithfully deliver His commands must be as much
attended to as if He himself openly descended from heaven. This
recommendation of the ministry ought to be more than sufficient to
refute their folly, who set at naught the outward preaching of the word.
Let us, then, hold fast this principle, that only those obey God who
receive the prophets sent from Him, because it is not lawful to put
asunder what He has joined together. Christ has more clearly expressed
this in the words, —

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p24"></span>“He that heareth you, heareth me; and
he that despiseth you, despiseth me.” (<span
id="iv.xiv.iii-p24.1"></span>[Mt
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040.md)<span
id="iv.xiv.iii-p24.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p25"></span>But it is more than absurd, that the
Pope, with his filthy clergy, should take this to himself, as if he was
to be heard when he puts forward God’s name; for (to pass over many
other reasons which I could mention) it will be, first of all, necessary
that he should prove himself to be God’s servant, from whence I wish he
was not so far removed. For here the obedience of the people is praised
on no other grounds but because they “believed the Lord,” and, together
with Him, “His servant Moses.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc03017.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p21.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p22"></span> <span id="iv.xiv.i-p22.1"></span>פיהחירת
*C.*<span id="iv.xiv.i-p22.2"></span> has not borrowed anything from
*S.M.*<span id="iv.xiv.i-p22.3"></span> here. In Dr. Wilson’s “Lands of
the Bible,” vol. 1, chap. 5, he has observed that if Pi-hahiroth is to
be supposed to be a name given to the place, in the Hebrew tongue, it is
well fitted to describe *the mouth of the defiles,* <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p22.4"></span>on emerging from which, the traveler comes in
sight of the Red Sea, and enters on ground shut in between mountain
barriers and that sea; but he also mentions that Gesenius has said, on
the authority of Tablonski, that these syllables form the Egyptian name
for a place where sedges grow. — *W.*

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc03017.htm#fr_151.md) <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p24.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p25"></span> <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p25.1"></span>נבכים<span id="iv.xiv.i-p25.2"></span>.
Calvin adopts the explanation given by *S. M.*<span
id="iv.xiv.i-p25.3"></span>, on the authority of Aben-Ezra, “Passivum
est a verbo <span id="iv.xiv.i-p25.4"></span>בוך<span
id="iv.xiv.i-p25.5"></span>, quod significat animo perplexum esse, ut
nescias quo te vertas.” — *W.*

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc03017.htm#fr_152.md) <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p36"></span> Exierant. — *Dathe*.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc03017.htm#fr_153.md) <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p58"></span> The interpretation only noticed to be
set aside is found in *S. M.* — *W.*

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc03017.htm#fr_154.md) <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p61"></span> This sentence is omitted in the French.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc03017.htm#fr_155.md) <span
id="iv.xiv.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.i-p66"></span> Had said. — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc03017.htm#fr_156.md) <span
id="iv.xiv.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.ii-p22"></span> La nuit. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc03017.htm#fr_157.md) <span
id="iv.xiv.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p18"></span> Les ennemis de Dieu. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc03017.htm#fr_158.md) <span
id="iv.xiv.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p19"></span> “Artapanus, an ancient heathen
historian, informs us that this was what the more ignorant Menophites,
who lived at a great distance, pretended, though he confesses that the
more learned Heliopolitans, who lived much nearer, owned the destruction
of the Egyptians and the deliverance of the Israelites to have been
miraculous.” — *Whiston’s Josephus, Notes on Jew. Ant.*, 2:16. “At an
early period, historians (particularly in Egypt) hostile to the Jews,
asserted that Moses, well acquainted with the tides of the Red Sea, took
advantage of the ebb, and passed over his army, while the incautious
Egyptians, attempting to follow, were surprised by the flood and
perished. Yet, after every concession, it seems quite evident that,
without one particular wind, the ebb-tide, even in the narrowest part of
the channel, could not be kept back long enough to allow a number of
people to cross in safety. We have thus the alternative of supposing
that a man of the consummate prudence and sagacity, and the local
knowledge attributed to Moses, altered, suspended, or at least did not
hasten his march, and thus deliberately involved the people whom he had
rescued at so much pains and risk, in the danger of being overtaken by
the enemy, led back as slaves, or massacred, on the chance that an
unusually strong wind would blow at a particular hour, for a given time,
so as to keep back the flood, then die away, and allow the tide to
return at the precise instant when the Egyptians were in the middle of
the passage.” — *Milman’s Hist. of the Jews*, b. 2. Dr. Kitto says that,
in those regions, the blowing of an easterly wind would be in itself a
miracle.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc03017.htm#fr_159.md) <span
id="iv.xiv.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p22"></span> So in margin, *A.V.*

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc03017.htm#fr_160.md) <span
id="iv.xiv.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv.iii-p23"></span> This word, added in the *Fr.*, seems
necessary to complete the sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 15](cc03018.md)
