[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc03062)  [Next](cc03064.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span>Another Supplement  
(to the First Commandment)

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span>respecting the Sanctifying  
of the First-born

<span id="vi.iv-p3"></span><span id="vi.iv-p3.1"></span>[Exodus
13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#000.md)<span id="vi.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Exod.
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011.md)<span id="vi.iv.i-p1.1"></span>-16

<span id="vi.iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="vi.iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="vi.iv.i-p4"></span>**2.** Sanctify unto me all the first-born,
whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of Israel, *both* of man
and of beast: it *is* mine.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Sanctifica mihi primogenitum:
quicquid apetit vulvam in filiis Israel, tam in hominibus quaIn in
jumentis, meum est.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p6"></span>**11.** And it shall be, when the Lord
shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, as he sware unto thee
and to thy fathers, and shall give it thee,

<span id="vi.iv.i-p7"></span>**11.** Quumque introduxerit to Jehova in
terram Chananaeorum, quemadmodum juravit tibi et patribus tuis, et
dederit eam tibi.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p8"></span>**12.** That thou shalt set apart unto the
Lord all that openeth the matrix, and every firstling that cometh of a
beast which thou hast; the males *shall be* the Lord’s.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p9"></span>**12.** Tunc transferes omnem apertionem
vulvae ad Jehovam: omnem apertionem, emissionem (vel, foetum, vel,
primogenitum) jumenti quod tuum erit: mascula, Jehovae erunt.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p10"></span>**13.** And every firstling of an ass thou
shalt redeem with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou
shalt break his neck: and all the first-born of man among thy children
shalt thou redeem.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p11"></span>**13.** Omne autem primogenitum asini
redimes hoedo: quod si non redemeris*,* cervicem franges ei: omne quoque
primogenitum hominis in filiis tuis redimes.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p12"></span>**14.** And it shall be, when thy son
asketh thee in time to come, saying, What *is* this? that thou shalt say
unto him, By strength of hand the Lord brought us out from Egypt, from
the house of bondage:

<span id="vi.iv.i-p13"></span>**14.** Quum autem interrogaverit to
filius tuus eras, dicendo, Quid hoc? Tum dices ad eum, in fortitudine
marius eduxit nos Jehova ex Aegypto e domo servorum.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p14"></span>**15.** And it came to pass, when Pharaoh
would hardly let us go, that the Lord slew all the first-born in the
land of Egypt, both the first-born of man, and the first-born of beast:
therefore I sacrifice to the Lord all that openeth the matrix, being
males; but all the first-born of my children I redeem.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p15"></span>**15.** Et fuit quum indurasset se Pharao
quominus dimitteret nos, occidit Jehova omne primogeniture in terra
Aegypti, a primogenito hominis usque ad primogenitum animalis: idcirco
ego sacrifico Jehovae omnem apertionem vulvae sexus masculini, omne
autem primogeniture filiorum meorum redimo.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p16"></span>**16.** And it shall be for a token upon
thine hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes: for by strength of
hand the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p17"></span>**16.** Et erit in signum super manum
tuam, et in frontalia inter oculos tuos: quid in fortitndine manus
eduxit nos Dominns ex Aegypto.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p18"></span><span id="vi.iv.i-p18.1"></span>[Exodus
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#000.md)<span id="vi.iv.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i-p19"></span><span id="vi.iv.i-p19.1"></span>[Exod.
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029.md),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#030.md)<span id="vi.iv.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i-p20"></span>**29.** The first-born of thy sons shalt
thou give unto me.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p21"></span>**29.** Primogeniture filiorum tuorum
dabis mihi.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p22"></span>**30.** Likewise shalt thou do with thine
oxen, *and* with thy sheep: seven days it shall be with his dam; on the
eighth day thou shalt give it me.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p23"></span>**30.** Sic facies de bore tuo, et de
pecude tua: septem diebus erit cum matre sua, die autem octavo dabis eum
mihi.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p24"></span><span id="vi.iv.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i-p25"></span>**2.** *Sanctify unto me all the
first-born.* This also refers to the First Commandment, because God
asserts His right over the first-born, lest the recollection of their
redemption should ever be lost. For thus were the Israelites admonished
that they must honor that God by whose grace they had escaped in safety
from the common destruction of Egypt, and, moreover, that they were
rescued by His special blessing, in order that they should consecrate
themselves to God their Deliverer. For the offering which He here
requires, was a mark of separation between them and the heathen nations.
 <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327.md) The first-born is called the
opening of the womb, because it is the beginning of generation. The
expression, “among the children of Israel,” when he is speaking of
brutes, as well as of their own offspring and children, is meant to
distinguish the wild beasts from the tame and domestic animals. But
although He commands only the first-born of the race of Abraham to be
offered to Him, still this must undoubtedly be extended to the
sanctification of the whole people; for whilst He says, that the
first-born were His, because they especially owed their preservation to
His mercy, yet for the same reason he signifies that all were His own.

<span id="vi.iv.i-p27"></span><span id="vi.iv.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i-p28"></span>**11.** *And it shall be when the Lord
shall bring thee.* He proceeds with what had been glanced at in the
beginning of the chapter with respect to the consecration of the
first-born, that in this way they should bear witness to the special
blessing of God which preserved them when He destroyed the first-born of
the Egyptians. But He commands the animals to  <span
id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328.md) be brought to Him, in order that they
should be slain in the tabernacle. It is a common figure of speech to
say, that the faithful and their gifts were placed in God’s sight when
they entered the tabernacle. I conceive that they were ordered, in <span
id="vi.iv.i-p29.1"></span>[Ex
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#030.md)<span id="vi.iv.i-p29.1"></span>,
to keep the first-born seven days, in order to prevent deceptions,
because if the young had been earlier torn from the teats of their dams,
and immediately delivered to the priests, the offering would have been
useless. Yet I doubt not that the eighth day was chosen because it was
the one prescribed for circumcision. An exception is added, that a price
should be paid for an ass, the offering of which would have been
unclean. With regard to their children, it was requisite that they
should be redeemed, because they could not be offered in sacrifice, nor
made priests.

<span id="vi.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
34](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#000.md)<span id="vi.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p2"></span><span id="vi.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>[Exod.
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#020.md)<span id="vi.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p3"></span>**19.** All that openeth the matrix is
mine; and every firstling among thy cattle, *whether* ox or sheep, *that
is male.*

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p4"></span>**19.** Quicquid aperit vulvam, meum est,
et omne pecus tuum quod memorabitur inter primogenita boum et ovium.

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p5"></span>**20.** But the firstling of an ass thou
shalt redeem with a lamb: and if thou redeem *him* not, then shalt thou
break his neck. All the first-born of thy sons thou shalt redeem; and
none shall appear before me empty.

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p6"></span>**20.** At primogenitum asini redimes ove:
quod si non redemeris, tunc cervicem praecides illi: omne primogenitum
filiorum redimes.

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p7"></span><span id="vi.iv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.ii-p8"></span>**19.** *All that openeth the matrix is
mine.* He here defines what the offering was to be, viz., that they
should redeem their children as well as the unclean animals at a price;
but that they should bring into the tabernacle whatsoever could be
offered in sacrifice. But God would not have their own sons consecrated
to Him, because He had chosen the tribe of Levi, as we shall see
elsewhere; they were therefore to remain free and in their own power
after a pecuniary compensation. In the same way, unclean animals might
be applied to domestic purposes, viz., after God’s price had been paid,
since to Him they belonged, and He claimed them for Himself. But if any
should not put so high a value on an ass or other unclean animal, the
Law commanded that its neck should be broken; for otherwise it would
have been sacrilege to reap profit from God’s property, or, what is the
same, to transfer to their private use what God had adjudged to Himself.

<span id="vi.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p1"></span><span
id="vi.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
27](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#000.md)<span id="vi.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p2"></span><span
id="vi.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#026.md)<span id="vi.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p3"></span>**26.** Only the firstling of the beasts,
which should be the Lord’s firstling, no man shall sanctify it: whether
*it be* ox or sheep, it *is* the Lord’s.

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p4"></span>**26.** Veruntamen primogeniture quod
jure primogeniturae debetur Jehovae inter animalia, nemo consecrabit:
sive bos, sive ovis, Jehovae est.

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p5"></span><span id="vi.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iii-p6"></span>**26.** *Only the firstling of the
beasts.* Here a caution is interposed, that none should offer what is
already the property of God. For since men are so greatly given to
ostentation, and therefore in testifying their piety *whitewash two
walls,* as the saying is, *out of the same pot,* God provides against
this sin by forbidding the first-born to be offered to Him, since that
would be to present stolen goods to Him. The sum is, that they should
not, by consecrating to God what is already due to Him, steal from Him
in their fictitious liberality what is consecrated and not their own.
Nor let us be surprised at this law, because this ambition is almost
natural to us all, to desire to lay God under obligation by the empty
appearance of liberality, and therefore to seek for various grounds of
boasting of religious duties, which, after all, are nought. And,
undoubtedly, if this restraint had not been put upon the Jews, they
would have aimed at the reputation of double zeal by this deceitful
oblation, nor would they have scrupled, under the pretext of offering,
to deprive God of what was His own.

<span id="vi.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p1"></span><span
id="vi.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#000.md)<span id="vi.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p2"></span><span id="vi.iv.iv-p2.1"></span>[Deut.
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#020.md)<span id="vi.iv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p3"></span>**19.** All the firstling males that come
of thy herd, and of thy flock, thou shalt sanctify unto the Lord thy
God: thou shalt do no work with the firstling of thy bullock, nor shear
the firstling of thy sheep:

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p4"></span>**19.** Omne primogenitum quod nascetur in
armento, aut in grege tuo, masculum sanctificabis Jehovae Deo tuo: non
uteris opera primogeniti bovis tui, neque tondebis primogenita gregis
tui.

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p5"></span>**20.** Thou shalt eat it before the Lord
thy God year by year, in the place which the Lord shall choose, thou and
thy household.

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p6"></span>**20.** Coram Jehova Deo tuo comedes eum
annuatim in loco quem elegerit Jehova, tu et familia tua.

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p7"></span><span id="vi.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.iv-p8"></span>**19.** *All the firstling males.* Another
caution is added, that they should make no profit of the first-born; for
they might have used the labor of the ox in plowing, or as a beast of
burden; they might also have sheared the lambs, and have afterwards
brought a deteriorated animal into the tabernacle. God commands,
therefore, that what was due to Him should be honestly and absolutely
paid. But, if good laws sprang from evil habits, it hence appears with
what audacious greediness men have ever been led away to wicked gains,
since it was necessary that they should be prohibited by an express
edict from seeking to enrich themselves at God’s expense. Wherefore, it
is not to be wondered at that men are acute and sagacious in cheating
each other, since they by no means hesitate to deceive God by wicked
artifices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc03063.htm#fr_327.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i-p26"></span> Omitted in *Fr*.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc03063.htm#fr_328.md) <span
id="vi.iv.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv.i-p29"></span> Observe *A. V*., “thou shalt set apart;”
*margin*, “cause to pass over;” *Lat.,* “transferes.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Respecting the Payment of tribute](cc03064.md)
