[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc03037)  [Next](cc03039.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p1"></span>DEUTERONOMY 6

<span id="v.xiii-p2"></span>deuteronomy 6:20-25

<span id="v.xiii-p3"></span>**20.** *And* when thy son asketh thee in
time to come, saying, What *mean* the testimonies, and the statutes, and
the judgments, which the Lord our God hath commanded you?

<span id="v.xiii-p4"></span>**20.** Quum interrogaverit to filius tuus
cras, dicendo, Quid sibi volunt testimonia et statuta et judicia, quae
praecepit Jehova Deus noster vobis.

<span id="v.xiii-p5"></span>**21.** Then thou shalt say unto thy son, We
were Pharaoh’s bond-men in Egypt, and the Lord brought us out of Egypt
with a mighty hand:

<span id="v.xiii-p6"></span>**21.** Tune dices filio tuo, Servi fuimus
Pharaonis in Aegypto, et eduxit nos Jehova ex Aegypto in manu forti.

<span id="v.xiii-p7"></span>**22.** And the Lord shewed signs and
wonders, great and sore, upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his
household, before our eyes:

<span id="v.xiii-p8"></span>**22.** Deditque Jehova signa et portenta
magna et pessima in Aegypto in Pharaonem, et in totam domum ejus, in
oculis nostris.

<span id="v.xiii-p9"></span>**23.** And he brought us out from thence,
that he might bring us in, to give us the land which he sware unto our
fathers.

<span id="v.xiii-p10"></span>**23.** Atque nos eduxit inde, ut
introduceret nos, ac darer nobis terram de qua juravit patribus nostris.

<span id="v.xiii-p11"></span>**24.** And the Lord commanded us to do all
these statutes, to fear the Lord our God, for our good always, that he
might preserve us alive, as *it is* at this day.

<span id="v.xiii-p12"></span>**24.** Itaque praecepit Jehova ut faciamus
omnia statuta ista, ut timeamus Jehovam Deum nostrum in bonum nostrum
omnibus diebus, ut conservaret nos in vita, ut in hac die.

<span id="v.xiii-p13"></span>**25.** And it shall be our righteousness,
if we observe to do all these commandments before the Lord our God, as
he hath commanded us.

<span id="v.xiii-p14"></span>**25.** Et justitia erit nobis quum
custodierimus ut faciamus omne praeceptum istud coram Jehova Deo nostro,
quemadmodum praecepit nobis.

<span id="v.xiii-p15"></span><span id="v.xiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p16"></span>**20.** *And when thy son asketh thee.* The
sole point which Moses urges in these verses is, that the people should
testify their gratitude by obeying the Law, and that the same religion,
 <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231.md) which he commands the fathers
to teach, should descend to their posterity. The sum is, that there was
good reason why all the precepts of the Law should be observed, since by
them it was that God desired His people, after their deliverance, to
shew forth their sense of His loving-kindness. Again, therefore, in this
passage, he commends the Law by reminding them of their redemption, that
the people might more willingly and more earnestly reverence it; for its
authority has stronger claims upon them, because it was not imposed
before God had laid them under obligation to Himself; and it would have
been too base and absurd in them to refuse God as their Lawgiver, when
they knew that by Him they had been purchased to Himself. In the next
place He reminds them that for the same object they had been constituted
the heirs of the land of Canaan, that they should honor God as the
author of this special favor; thus he concludes that they are bound by a
two-fold tie, for God had devoted them to Himself not once only, but had
confirmed His dominion over them by their continued possession of the
land. But there is nothing inconsistent in his saying that the land was
promised by oath to their fathers before the Law was given; for,
although God bestowed this gift gratuitously, yet did He justly claim
the testimony of their gratitude; just as now-a-days, although He
invites us to the hope of an eternal inheritance of His own free bounty,
yet the end of our calling is, that we on our part should celebrate His
glory all our life long. When in verse 24 he uses the words “to fear the
Lord our God,” he briefly defines the sum of the Law; for it would not
suffice for us to perform whatever is there commanded, unless our
obedience had reference to the fear and worship of God. Integrity and
uprightness, indeed, give God delight; but none will say that men’s life
is duly ordered, if, whilst they exercise equity one towards another,
they defraud God of His right. But it is well known that legitimate
honor and worship are comprehended under the name of fear. Just
afterwards, he commends the Law on account of its profitableness; for
God provided for their own good, in delivering to them the rule of a
just and pious life. In these words he intimates that they would be
doubly ungrateful if they rejected what God meant for their own
advantage. For this expression, “for our good,” is equivalent to saying
that God not only had respect and care for His own rights in enacting
the Law, but at the same time regarded what would be useful to them; and
this he more clearly states in the next verse, where he says that “this
shall be their righteousness if they observe” the Law; otherwise, that
the rule of a righteous life, which would please God, was prescribed to
them, than which nothing better could be desired. But it will be
elsewhere shewn at greater length how the keeping of the Law is in
itself righteousness, and yet that no man is justified by the Law; for,
that the Law brings only wrath and condemnation, does not arise from any
defect or faultiness in its doctrine, but must be imputed to our own
guilt, as being far removed, nay, aliens from the righteousness  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232.md) which it contains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc03038.htm#fr_231.md) <span
id="v.xiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p17"></span> Addition in *Fr.,* “qu’il a apprinse de
Dieu;” which they have learnt of God.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc03038.htm#fr_232.md) <span
id="v.xiii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p18"></span> La doctrine. — Fr.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 15:37-41; Exodus 23:13](cc03039.md)
