[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03036)  [Next](cc03038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xii"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p1"></span>DEUTERONOMY 26

<span id="v.xii-p2"></span><span id="v.xii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
26:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#016)<span id="v.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p3"></span>**16.** This day the Lord thy God hath
commanded thee to do these statutes and judgments: thou shalt therefore
keep and do them with all thine heart, and with all thy soul.

<span id="v.xii-p4"></span>**16.** Hodie Jehova Deus tuus praecepit tibi
ut facias statuta haec et judicia: custodias ergo et facias ea toto
corde tuo, et tota anima tua.

<span id="v.xii-p5"></span>**17.** Thou hast avouched the Lord this day
to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and
his commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken unto his voice:

<span id="v.xii-p6"></span>**17.** Jehovam exaltasti hodie, quod, tibi
sit in Deum, et ambules in viis ejus, et custodias statuta ejus, et
paecepta ejus, et judicia ejus: et obedias voci ejus.

<span id="v.xii-p7"></span>**18.** And the Lord hath avouched thee this
day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised thee, and that *thou*
shouldest keep all his commandments;

<span id="v.xii-p8"></span>**18.** Jehova quoque exaltavit to hodie quod
sis ei in populum peculiarem, quemadmodum loquutus est tibi, et quod
custodias onmia praecepta eius.

<span id="v.xii-p9"></span>**19.** And to make thee high above all
nations which he hath made, in praise, and in name, and in honor; and
that thou mayest be an holy people unto the Lord thy God, as he hath
spoken.

<span id="v.xii-p10"></span>**19.** Et panat to superiorem omnibus
gentibus quas fecit, ad laudem, et nomen, et gloriam: et ut sis populus
sanctus Jehovae Deo tuo, quemadmodum dixit.

<span id="v.xii-p11"></span><span id="v.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p12"></span>**16.** *This day the Lord thy God.* He
again reminds them that God is the author of the Law, in order that His
majesty should the more impress them; and not only so, but that, since
the Law was specially delivered to them, its observation was the more
enjoined upon them. Hence he exhorts them earnestly to apply their
hearts to those things which God had enjoined them to keep, because men
grow careless in their duties, unless they are often stirred up. For,
undoubtedly, God indirectly rebukes the people’s indifference, by so
often calling them to obedience. By the words “with all thy soul” is
meant serious apprehension, and carefulness*,* as well as sincerity,
free from all disguise and deceit. For nothing is more displeasing to
God than hypocrisy, because He seeth the heart. If any object that it
was vain to demand of them what no mortal can perform, viz., to keep the
Law with all their heart, I reply, that *all* the heart is opposed to a
double or divided heart, and is equivalent to entire, or altogether
without deceit, although (as we shall hereafter see) it is not absurd to
propose to believers an object, at which they are to aim, although they
may not attain to it as long as the weakness of the flesh hinders them.

<span id="v.xii-p13"></span><span id="v.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p14"></span>**17.** *Thou hast avouched the Lord*  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) He shews them from the consequence
that nothing can be better or more desirable for them than to embrace
God’s Law; for nothing can be more honorable to ourselves than to give
to God His due honor, and to exalt His glory to its due preeminence.
Moses declares that, if the Israelites submit themselves to the Law,
this will be, as it were, to place Him in His rightful dignity; and he
promises that the fruit of it will return to them, for that God, on his
part, will exalt them, so that they shall far excel all other nations;
as it is said in Isaiah, (<span id="v.xii-p15.1"></span>[Isa.
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014)<span id="v.xii-p15.1"></span>,)
“Sanctify the Lord of hosts — and he shall be for a sanctuary.” For no
otherwise does He desire to be glorified by us, than to make us in turn
partakers of His glory; and thus Moses gently entices them to receive
the Law, because their solid happiness consists in this pious duty, if
they altogether devote themselves to obedience. But this excellency of
the Church, although it shines forth in the world, is still hidden from
the blind, and, since it is spiritual, only obtains its praise before
God and the angels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc03037.htm#fr_230) <span
id="v.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p15"></span> Thou hast exalted, etc — *Lat.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 6:20-25](cc03038)
