[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03023)  [Next](cc03025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi-p1"></span>DEUTERONOMY 5

<span id="iv.xxi-p2"></span>THE REPETITION OF THE SAME HISTORY

<span id="iv.xxi.i"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p1"></span><span
id="iv.xxi.i-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
5:22-31](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#022)<span
id="iv.xxi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p2"></span>**22.** These words the Lord spoke unto
all your assembly in the mount, out of the midst of the fire, of the
cloud, and of the thick darkness, with a great voice; and he added no
more: and he wrote them in two tables of stone, and delivered them unto
me.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p3"></span>**22.** Verba haec loquutus est Jehova ad
cunctam congregationem vestram in monte e medio ignis nubis et
caliginis, voce magna, et non addidit: scripsitque illa in duabus
tabulis lapideis, et dedit ills mihi.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p4"></span>**23.** And it came to pass, when ye heard
the voice out of the midst of the darkness, (for the mountain did burn
with fire,) that ye came near unto me, even all the heads of your
tribes, and your elders;

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p5"></span>**23.** Fuit autem quum audivissetis vocem
e medio tenebrarum, (mons enim ardebat igne,) accessistis ad me omnes
duces tribuum vestrarum, et seniores vestri.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p6"></span>**24.** And ye said, Behold, the Lord our
God hath showed us his glory, and his greatness, and we have heard his
voice out of the midst of the fire: we have seen this day that God doth
talk with man, and he liveth.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p7"></span>**24.** Et dixistis, En ostendit nobis
Jehova Deus noster gloriam suam, et magnitudinem suam, et vocem ejus
audivimus e medio ignis: hodie vidimus quod loquutus est Deus cum
homine, et vixit.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p8"></span>**25.** Now therefore why should we die?
for this great fire will consume us. If we hear the voice of the Lord
our God any more, then we shall die.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p9"></span>**25.** Nunc igitur quare moriemur?
consumet enim nos ignis magnus iste: si iterum audierimus vocem Dei
nostri, moriemur.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p10"></span>**26.** For who is there of all flesh,
that hath heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of
the fire, as we have, and lived?

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p11"></span>**26.** Nam quae ulla fuit caro, ut
audiat vocem Dei viventis, loquentis e medio ignis, sicut nos, et vivat?

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p12"></span>**27.** Go thou near, and hear all that
the Lord our God shall say; and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our
God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it, and do it.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p13"></span>**27.** Accede tu, et audi omnia quae
dixerit Jehova Deus noster: tu autem loqueris ad nos quaecunque dixerit
Jehova Deus noster tibi, et audiemus atque faciemus.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p14"></span>**28.** And the Lord heard the voice of
your words, when ye spoke unto me; and the Lord said unto me, I have
heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken unto
thee: they have well said all that they have spoken.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p15"></span>**28.** Audivitque Jehova vocem verborum
vestrorum quum loqueremini ad me. Et dixit Jehova mihi, Audivi vocem
verborum populi hujus quae dixerunt tibi: bene dixerunt quaecunque
loquuti sunt.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p16"></span>**29.** Oh that there were such an heart
in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always,
that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever!

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p17"></span>**29.** Quis det ut sit cor eorum istud
illis, ut timeant me, et custodiant omnia praecepta mea omnibus diebus,
ut bene sit illis et filiis eorum in saeculum?

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p18"></span>**30.** Go say to them, Get you into your
tents again.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p19"></span>**30.** Vade, dic eis, Revertimini in
tabernacula vestra.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p20"></span>**31.** But as for thee, stand thou here
by me, and I will speak unto thee all the commandments, and the
statutes, and the judgments, which thou shalt teach them, that they may
do them in the land which I give them to possess it.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p21"></span>**31.** Tu vero hic sta apud me, et
proferam tibi omnia praecepta et statuta et judicia quae illos docebis,
ut faciant in terra quam ego do illis possidendam.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p22"></span><span id="iv.xxi.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p23"></span>**22.** *These words the Lord spoke.*
That there may be no doubt about the authority of the law, and that it
may not be depreciated by the people, Moses recalls to their memory that
the presence of God, as He spoke it, was manifested by sure tokens; for
this was the object of the fire, the clouds, and the darkness, whereby
God’s voice was signalized, lest its source might be obscure. He adds,
that it was “a great voice,” i.e., a voice which had, in an unwonted
manner, penetrated far and wide. Nor are the witnesses few, whom he
cites, but all that vast multitude, which for the most part would have
been more disposed to extinguish the glory of God, unless it had been
there made known by manifest proofs. The sum is, that there is no
question as to who was the Lawgiver, whose majesty was then proclaimed
by tremendous prodigies, and presented before the eyes of an immense
multitude. It will be more convenient to speak elsewhere of the two
tables. When Moses states that God “added no more,” he signifies that a
perfect rule of life is contained in the ten commandments, and that,
when their instruction is fully received, the whole body of wisdom is
attained to, so that the people need seek to know no more; when God,
then, made an end of speaking, he Himself laid down the bounds of
legitimate inquiry.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p24"></span><span id="iv.xxi.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p25"></span>**23.** *And it came to pass, when ye
heard.* Lest the Israelites should undervalue his teaching, because he
had been put between them by God as their minister, Moses meets the
objection, (by reminding them) that it was done at their petition and
request. We know how proudly they were wont to reject him; as if they
saw in him nothing but what was earthly and human; it was needful, then,
that God Himself should speak to rescue His servant from the contempt of
posterity. For the people themselves, being convicted of their foolish
and preposterous request, could never afterwards have any pretext for
rejecting Moses, as if he had not evidenced the truth of his calling.
And here their astonishing perverseness betrayed itself, in not being
ashamed to refuse credit to the holy Prophet, after he had been approved
by so many miracles. Assuredly, if they had been just and honest judges,
it would have been sufficiently notorious, and certain to them, that
Moses did not speak of himself, or of his own impulse, but that he was
the organ of the Spirit; yet the doctrine of God was scorned by these
proud, and perverse, and fretful beings, because it was brought to them
by the hands of a mortal man. They, therefore, by their importunate
desires, draw down God from heaven, to speak Himself; but immediately
terror seizes on their minds, so that they flee from His voice. Thus
experience taught them that there was nothing better for them than to
hear God speaking to them by the mouth of Moses; and they were
instructed by the just reward of their temerity to choose and prefer
that mode of teaching which they had spurned; for, if in future they
refused to give credit to Moses, whom they had themselves chosen as
their mediator with God, they brought themselves in guilty of gross and
wicked contumacy; and this is what he now reproaches them with. It would
have been worse than unseemly in them, when God had yielded to their
prayers, to reject that blessing which they had besought of Him. On this
account he reminds them, that, after they had been eye-witnesses of
God’s fearful power, they had voluntarily asked that He should not speak
to them any more; and, lest they should object that this was done only
by a few, or inconsiderately, or in tumult, he expressly testifies that
these requests were presented by the heads of their tribes, and their
elders.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p26"></span><span id="iv.xxi.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p27"></span>**24.** *Behold, the Lord our God hath
showed us.* They are urged by their own confession no more to dare
oppose themselves to the ministry of Moses. For, when they confess that
they saw the glory and the greatness of God, they oblige themselves to
the necessity of obedience, unless they choose avowedly to make war
against God. At the end of the verse, where they say that “God doth talk
with man,” etc., not only do they mean that there are men surviving on
earth who have heard with their ears the voice of God come down from
heaven, but they express their astonishment at what was scarcely to be
believed. For, although it was sufficiently notorious to them that God
had formerly spoken with their fathers; yet, because a long period had
elapsed since these revelations had ceased, they are amazed as at a new
thing. We see, too, a long time afterwards, that as often as God
appeared to His servants, they were overwhelmed with the fear of death,
and it was like a proverb with them, “We shall die, because we have seen
God.” (<span id="iv.xxi.i-p27.1"></span>[Jud
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#022)<span
id="iv.xxi.i-p27.1"></span>.) Good reason, then, is there why they
should celebrate this extraordinary privilege, that they had not been
swallowed up by the glory of God; for, if at the sight of Him the
mountains melt, and all that is most durable is annihilated, and all
that is strongest is broken to pieces, how should man stand than whom
nothing is more frail or perishable? If by His secret will the troubled
air causes not only animals but trees and rocks to tremble; how shall it
be when God displays His might not in the elements alone, but when
descending from heaven He speaks by the voice of His mouth? It is not
unreasonable, then, that the Israelites should account it miraculous
that they had heard God’s voice, and were not brought to annihilation.
Herein they indirectly rebuke their own folly, because, by their
inconsiderate desire, they would have drawn destruction upon themselves,
if they had not been aided by God’s mercy. The two following verses
appear to contradict each other; for, when they had experienced that
those to whom God manifests Himself, are not always destroyed and
perish, why do they say that they shall die if He continues to speak to
them? They seem, indeed, in so saying to show some inconsistency; yet is
there cause for them to fear for the future that danger from which they
had escaped by the marvelous indulgence of God. It is, then, as if they
had said, It is more than enough for us once to have provoked God
against us; it is of His inestimable loving-kindness that He has thus
far pardoned us; meanwhile, we must beware lest our perversity bring
upon us heavier punishment, unless we speedily correct our folly. Hence
may a useful admonition be drawn; for, although the voice of God has not
sounded in our ears, yet the experience of His ancient people ought to
be sufficient to persuade us assuredly that, when God sets teachers over
us, He makes the best provision for our salvation; because, if He
Himself should thunder from heaven, His majesty would be intolerable to
us. And this should avail to repress their destructive itching, who
desire God daily to descend from heaven, or at least to send His
revelations by angels; and who thus despise the ministers of mortal race
whom He employs. In a word, this history is an illustrious proof that
God governs His Church by the external preaching of the word, because
this is most expedient for us.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p28"></span><span id="iv.xxi.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p29"></span>**26.** *For who is there of all. flesh?*
The word “flesh” is used in contempt, as often elsewhere, for the human
race; for, although we consist of body and soul, yet when the frailty of
men, and their perishing and transitory condition is referred to,
Scripture calls them “flesh.” In this sense Zechariah calls upon “all
flesh to be silent before the Lord,” (<span
id="iv.xxi.i-p29.1"></span>[Zec
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.xxi.i-p29.1"></span>,) and Isaiah says that “all flesh is grass,”
(<span id="iv.xxi.i-p29.2"></span>[Isa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)<span
id="iv.xxi.i-p29.2"></span>,) and elsewhere, that “the horses of the
Egyptians are flesh, and not spirit,” (<span
id="iv.xxi.i-p29.3"></span>[Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003)<span
id="iv.xxi.i-p29.3"></span>.) In these words, then, the reason is given
why the Israelites should wonder that they were not killed and consumed
after hearing God’s voice. Still they were not ignorant that God had
formerly spoken in the burning bush; but in their agony of fear they do
not reflect on what had previously happened, but only express their own
feeling that God’s voice is deadly to the flesh, unless it is softened
by some interposing remedy. For the notion of the Rabbins, that the
Prophets are not to be counted amongst men, is a foolish fancy, except
in so far as God supports and strengthens them by His Spirit, that they
may be equal to the reception of visions. The Israelites were fully
aware that Moses also was himself a mere mortal; yet, because they knew
that he was God’s chosen interpreter, they do not doubt but that he will
be inspired with power from heaven, to endure the speaking of God. Nor
is there any question that this confession was forced from them, that
they may at length learn to fall back to their proper place, and to
submit themselves to Moses, against whom they had been so often
rebellious. Now, therefore, they willingly subscribe to that
distinction, which before they would not bear. Their promise, that they
would do all things which God should command, undoubtedly proceeded from
the fervor of their zeal; and therefore, God soon afterwards praises
their answer. Their words were to the same effect., as if they had said
that they would value whatever Moses might set before them, as if God
Himself should thunder from heaven. Meanwhile: as to themselves, their
levity and inconsistency was soon discovered. Thus do men often hastily
and rashly consent to promise what they are not able to perform,
although they do not intentionally desire to deceive, from neglecting to
examine their own powers. God, therefore, pronounces what they said to
be right, viz., that they would be obedient to Moses, and content with
his teaching. And this sentiment has reference to us also, who are
commanded to hear Moses and the Prophets, but especially God’s only Son;
lest our vague speculations should hurry us away further than becomes
us.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p30"></span><span id="iv.xxi.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p31"></span>**29.** *O that there were such an heart
in them.* God signifies that they would not be so firm and faithful in
keeping their promises, as they were ready and willing to make them; and
thus that hypocrisy was not altogether banished, or purged from their
minds. Moreover, He figuratively (improprie) assumes a human feeling,
because it would be vain and absurd for Him to desire what it was in His
power to confer. Certainly He has the power of bending and directing
men’s hearts whithersoever He pleases. Why, then, does He wish that it
were given to the people from some other quarter, that they should be
always kept in the path of duty, except that, speaking in the character
of a man, He shows that it was rather to be wished than hoped that the
people would constantly persevere in their fidelity? Wherefore this and
similar passages have been ignorantly abused by some, to establish man’s
free will.  <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) They understand this
passage, as if man’s will were capable of bending either way, and that
he possessed the power of doing right, whilst God without interfering
looked on at the event; as if God’s secret counsel, and not rather the
end and use of external teaching, were referred to here. But we, taught
by innumerable testimonies of Scripture, maintain, that it is the
attribute of God alone to give what He here requires. So also
immediately afterwards He says, that he wishes it may be well with the
Israelites and their children, viz., because it is certain that it
depends on men whether they are happy or not, as often as God invites
them, when they refuse the grace offered to them; yet does it not
therefore follow, that it depends on every man’s free will to attain
happiness for himself. But here we must consider God’s will as it is set
before us in His word, not as it is hidden in Himself; for, while by His
word He invites all promiscuously to (eternal  <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) ) life, He only quickens by His secret
inspiration those whom He has elected. In sum, although God approves of
the people’s answer, he says that there will be too much difficulty in
the performance of it, for the event to accord with it.

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p34"></span><span id="iv.xxi.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p35"></span>**30.** *Go say to them.* He more plainly
subjoins God’s consent to the people’s prayer; as much as to say, that
what they had asked was ratified by God’s decree; whence it follows
that, if they refuse to obey Moses, they will not be only guilty of
perverseness and levity, but will violate a divine decree. I have before
shown why God honors the doctrines of the law by various titles, viz.,
that the Israelites may more willingly acquiesce in them. But, lest they
should think that what was enjoined them was only to remain in force,
and to be observed for a short time, He expressly refers to the
perpetuity of the Law; for this is the import of the words, in which He
declares Himself to teach them what they were to do in the land which He
should give them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc03024.htm#fr_219) <span
id="iv.xxi.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p32"></span> Tels docteurs cornus. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc03024.htm#fr_220) <span
id="iv.xxi.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxi.i-p33"></span> Added from the French.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to the Law](cc03025)
