[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc03049)  [Next](cc03051.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxv"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p1"></span><span id="v.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#000.md)<span id="v.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p2"></span><span id="v.xxv-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
8:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#007.md)<span id="v.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p3"></span>**7.** For the Lord thy God bringeth thee
into a good land; a land of brooks of water, of fountains, and depths
that spring out of valleys and hills;

<span id="v.xxv-p4"></span>**7.** Quia Jehova Deus tuus introducit to in
terram bonam, terram ubi torrentes, aquarum fontes, et abyssi erumpentes
per valles et colles.

<span id="v.xxv-p5"></span>**8.** A land of wheat, and barley, and
vines, and fig-trees, and pomegranates; a land of oil-olive and honey;

<span id="v.xxv-p6"></span>**8.** Terram frumenti, et hordei, vitis et
ficus, et malogranati: terram oleae oliviferae, et mellis.

<span id="v.xxv-p7"></span>**9.** A land wherein thou shalt eat bread
without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any *thing* in it; a land whose
stones *are* iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass.

<span id="v.xxv-p8"></span>**9.** Terram in qua non comedes panem in
penuria, nee ulla re indigebis: terram cujus lapides sunt ferrum, et e
cujus montibus effodies aes.

<span id="v.xxv-p9"></span>**10.** When thou hast eaten and art full,
then thou shalt bless the Lord thy God for the good land which he hath
given thee.

<span id="v.xxv-p10"></span>**10.** Comedes igitur, et satiaberis: et
tunc benedices Jehovae Deo tuo in terra illa quam dedit tibi.

<span id="v.xxv-p11"></span>DEUTERONOMY 11

<span id="v.xxv-p12"></span>A REPETITION OF THE SAME DECLARATION

<span id="v.xxv-p13"></span><span id="v.xxv-p13.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
11:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#010.md)<span id="v.xxv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p14"></span>**10.** For the land, whither thou goest in
to possess it, *is* not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out,
where thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst *it* with thy foot, as a
garden of herbs:

<span id="v.xxv-p15"></span>**10.** Terra enim quam tu ingrederis ut
possideas eam, non est sicut terra Aegypti, ex qua egressi estis, in qua
seminabas semen tuum, et irrigabas pede tuo, ut hortum oleris.

<span id="v.xxv-p16"></span>**11.** But the land, whither ye go to
possess it, *is* a land of hills and valleys, *and* drinketh water of
the rain of heaven:

<span id="v.xxv-p17"></span>**11.** At terra ad quam vos transibitis ut
possideatis eam, terra montium et vallium est: de pluvia coeli bibes
aquam.

<span id="v.xxv-p18"></span>**12.** A land which the Lord thy God careth
for: the eyes of the Lord thy God *are* always upon it, from the
beginning of the year, even unto the end of the year.

<span id="v.xxv-p19"></span>**12.** Est terra quam Jehova Deus tuus
requirit: semper sunt oculi Jehovae Dei tui in ca, a principio anni
usque ad extremum anni.

<span id="v.xxv-p20"></span><span id="v.xxv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p21"></span>**7.** *For the Lord thy God.* We may
shortly sum up the words and the matter. He almost sets before their
eyes a habitation full of wealth and various advantages, in order that
they there may worship God more cheerfully, and study to repay by their
gratitude so signal a benefit. In chapter 8 he commends the goodness of
the land, because it is watered by the streams which flow through its
valleys and mountains, and because it produces all kinds of fruits to
supply them with nourishment; and not only so, but because it contains
also mines of iron and brass. In chapter 11 he expresses the same thing
more plainly and in greater detail, by the addition of a comparison with
the land of Egypt; the fruitfulness of which, although it is marvellous
from the yearly inundation of the Nile, and is renowned as an
extraordinary miracle, yet requires much labor and cultivation, since it
is irrigated by means of drains by the hand and industry of men. But the
land of Canaan depends on God’s blessing, and waits for the rain from
heaven. Moreover Moses extols in glowing words the peculiar privilege of
the land, saying, that it is ever looked upon by God, in order that, on
their part, the Israelites might attentively, and constantly also, look
to Him. For this is the force of the words, “always, from the beginning
of the year, even unto the end of the year;” as if he had said, that
they would be ungrateful to God, unless they constantly and zealously
directed their regards to Him, since He never ceased daily to look on
them. It is true, indeed, that there is no corner of the earth which
does not experience God’s blessing, witness the fact that the Nile
fertilizes the whole of Egypt; but, because that only happens once a
year, and since its waters are conducted hither and thither by drains
artificially made by man, Moses, therefore, not improperly makes it the
ground of his exhortation that they should constantly give themselves to
meditation on the Law; for not only at a particular season of the year,
but almost at every moment, their necessity would compel them to ask for
God’s aid, when they saw that the land was ever requiring from Him the
remedy of its dryness. The question however arises, how Moses could
declare in such magnificent terms the richness of the land of Canaan,
when now-a-days it is scarcely counted among those that are fertile; and
thus  <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261.md) the ungodly wantonly
deride him, since all whom business or any other cause have taken there
contradict his encomiums. Yet I do not doubt that it was always
distinguished by the abundance of its various fruits, as we shall
presently see in its proper place, where its fertility was proved by the
bunch of grapes; but, at the same time, it is to be observed that its
abundance was increased in a new and unwonted manner by the arrival of
the people, that God might shew that He had blessed that country above
all others for the liberal supply of His children. As long, therefore,
as that land was granted as the inheritance of the race of Abraham, it
was remarkable for that fertility which God had promised by Moses. But
now, so far from wondering that it is to a great extent desert and
barren, we ought rather to be surprised that some small vestiges of its
ancient fruitfulness exist; since what God Himself had so often
threatened against it must needs be fulfilled. The barrenness,
therefore, of the land as it now appears, instead of derogating from the
testimony of Moses, rather gives ocular demonstration of the judgment of
God, which, as we shall see elsewhere, was denounced against it. In sum,
as God for His people’s sake still further enriched a land already
fruitful, so, for the punishment of the sins of this same people, He
sowed it with salt, that it might afford a sad spectacle of His curse.

<span id="v.xxv-p23"></span><span id="v.xxv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p24"></span>**10.** *When thou hast eaten and art full.*
In these words he admonishes them that they would be too senseless,
unless God’s great bounty should attract them to obedience, since
nothing is more unreasonable, than, when we have eaten and are full, not
to acknowledge from whence our food has come. Fitly, then, does Moses
require gratitude from the people, when they shall enjoy both the land
promised to them and an abundance of all good things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc03050.htm#fr_261.md) <span
id="v.xxv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p22"></span> “Des esprits phrenetiques, and profanes.” —
*Fr.* This ancient scoff, repeated by Voltaire and other modern
infidels, is well met by Dr. Keith, “Evidences of Prophecy, (Art.
Judaea,)” by quotations not only from Tacitus, Ammianus Marcellinus,
Florus, and Pliny the Elder, but from Volney and Gibbon themselves, as
well as more friendly witnesses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 6:1-3,17-19](cc03051.md)
