[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03064)  [Next](cc03066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p1"></span>Another Supplement

<span id="vi.vi-p2"></span>as to the Vow of the Nazarites

<span id="vi.vi-p3"></span>(Heading from the French,  
“Autre dependence du Voeu des Nazariens.”)

<span id="vi.vi-p4"></span><span id="vi.vi-p4.1"></span>[Numbers
6](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#000)<span id="vi.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
6:1-21](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#001)<span id="vi.vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="vi.vi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo,

<span id="vi.vi.i-p4"></span>**2.** Speak unto the children of Israel,
and say unto them, When either man or woman shall separate *themselves*
to vow a vow of a Nazarite, to separate *themselves* unto the Lord;

<span id="vi.vi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Alloquere filios Israel, et dic eis,
Vir aut mulier quum separaverit se vovendo votum Nazaraei, ad separandum
se Jehovae:

<span id="vi.vi.i-p6"></span>**3.** He shall separate *himself* from
wine and strong drink, and shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of
strong drink, neither shall he drink any liquor of grapes, nor eat moist
grapes, or dried.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p7"></span>**3.** A vino et sicera separabit se,
acetum vini, et acetum sicerae non bibet, neque ullum liquorem uvarum
bibet, nec uvas recentes et siccas comedet.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p8"></span>**4.** All the days of his separation shall
he eat nothing that is made of the vine-tree, from the kernels even to
the husk.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Omnibus diebus separationis suds, ex
omni quod confieitur ex vite vinifera, ab acinis usque ad corticem, non
comedet.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p10"></span>**5.** All the days of the vow of his
separation there shall no razor come upon his head; until the days be
fulfilled, in the which he separateth *himself* unto the Lord he shall
be holy, *and* shall let the locks of the hair of his head grow.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Omnibus diebus voti separationis
suae novacula non transibit super caput ejus, donec impleti fuerint dies
quibus separabit se Jehovah, sanctus erit, crescere sinet cresariem
capitis sui.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p12"></span>**6.** All the days that he separateth
*himself* unto the Lord he shall come at no dead body.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Omnibus diebus quibus separabit se
Jehovae ad animam mortui non ingredietur.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p14"></span>**7.** He shall not make himself unclean
for his father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for his sister,
when they die; because the consecration of his God *is* upon his head.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Super patre suo aut super matte
sua, super fratre suo aut super sorore sua, non polluet sese illis quum
mortui fuerint: quia consecratio Dei sui est super caput ejus.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p16"></span>**8.** All the days of his separation he
*is* holy unto the Lord.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Omnibus diebus separationis suae
sanctus erit Jehovae.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p18"></span>**9.** And if any man die very suddenly by
him, and he hath defiled the head of his consecration; then he shall
shave his head in the day of his cleansing, on the seventh day shall he
shave it.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Si autem mortuus fuetit mortuus
juxta eum statim mox, et polluerit caput separationis ejus: radet caput
suum die purificationis suae, die septimo radet illud.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p20"></span>**10.** And on the eighth day he shall
bring two turtles, or two young pigeons, to the priest, to the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation;

<span id="vi.vi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Die autem octavo afferet duos
turtures, vel duos pullos columbae ad sacerdotem, ad ostium tabernaculi
conventionis.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p22"></span>**11.** And the priest shall offer the one
for a sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering, and make an
atonement for him, for that he sinned by the dead, and shall hallow his
head that same day.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et faciet sacerdos unum pro
peccato, et alterum in holocaustum: expiabitque ilium de eo quod
peccavit super cadavere, et sanctifiedbit caput ejus die illa.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p24"></span>**12.** And he shall consecrate unto the
Lord the days of his separation, and shall bring a lamb of the first
year for a trespass-offering: but the days that were before shall be
lost, because his separation was defiled.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et separabit Jehovae dies
separationis suae, afferetque agnum anniculum pro delicto: et dies
priores erunt irriti, quoniam polluta fuit separatio ejus.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p26"></span>**13.** And this *is* the law of the
Nazarite: When the days of his separation are fulfilled, he shall be
brought unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation;

<span id="vi.vi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Haec autem est lex Nazaraei, die
quo completi fuerint dies separationis eius, conferet se ad ostium
tabernaculi conventionis.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p28"></span>**14.** And he shall offer his offering
unto the Lord, one he-lamb of the first year without blemish for a
burnt-offering, and one ewe-lamb of the first year without blemish for a
sin-offering, and one ram without blemish for peace-offerings,

<span id="vi.vi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Offeretque oblationem suam
Jehovae, agnum anniculum perfectum unum in holocaustum, et agnam unam
anniculam perfectam in sacrificium pro petcato, et arietem unum
perfectum in hostiam prosperitatum.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p30"></span>**15.** And a basket of unleavened bread,
cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, and wafers of unleavened bread
anointed with oil, and their meat-offering, and their drink-offerings.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p31"></span>**15.** Canistrum praeterea *panum*
infermentatorum, similam placentarum conspersarum oleo, et lagana
infermentata uncta oleo, et minham eorum, et libamina eorum.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p32"></span>**16.** And the priest shall bring *them*
before the Lord, and shall offer his sin-offering, and his
burnt-offering.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et offeret *illa* sacerdos coram
Jehova, facietque sacrificium pro peccato illius, et holocaustum illius.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p34"></span>**17.** And he shall offer the ram *for* a
sacrifice of peace-offerings unto the Lord, with the basket of
unleavened bread: the priest shall offer also his meat-offering, and his
drink-offering.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p35"></span>**17.** Arietem quoque faciet sacrificium
prosperitatum Jehovae, una cum canistro infermentatorum: faciet item
sacerdos minham ejus, et libamen ejus.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p36"></span>**18.** And the Nazarite shall shave the
head of his separation *at* the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation; and shall take the hair of the head of his separation, and
put *it* in the fire which *is* under the sacrifice of the
peace-offerings.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p37"></span>**18.** Tum radet Nazaraeus ad ostium
tabernaculi conventionis caput separationis suae, capietque caesariem
capitis separationis suae, et ponet super ignem qui est subter
sacrificium prosperitatum.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p38"></span>**19.** And the priest shall take the
sodden shoulder of the ram, and one unleavened cake out of the basket,
and one unleavened wafer, and shall put *them* upon the hands of the
Nazarite, after *the hair of* the separation is shaven.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p39"></span>**19.** Capiet prteterea sacerdos ar-mum
coctum de ariete illo, et pla-centam infermentatam unam e canistro, et
laganum infermentatum unum, et ponet super manus Nazaraei, postquam rasa
ruetit separatio ejus.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p40"></span>**20.** And the priest shall wave them
*for* a wave-offering before the Lord: this *is* holy for the priest,
with the wave-breast and heave-shoulder: and after that the Nazarite may
drink wine.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et elevabit ea sacerdos elevatione
coram Jehova: sanetitas est sacerdotii ultra pectusculum elevationis, et
ultra armum exaltationis, et postea bibat Nazaraeus vinum.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p42"></span>**21.** This *is* the law of the Nazarite
who hath vowed, *and of* his offering unto the Lord for his separation,
besides *that* that his hand shall get: according to the vow which he
vowed, so he must do after the law of his separation.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p43"></span>**21.** Haec est lex Nazaraei qui voverit,
et oblationis ejus Jehovae pro separatione sua, praeter id quod attinget
manus ejus: secundum votum suum quod voverit, sic faciet secundum legem
separationis suae.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p44"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p45"></span>**2** *When either man, or woman shall
separate themselves.* God recently appointed a tribute for every soul,
whereby the Israelites were to acknowledge that they were His children.
By that profession, then, he bound them all to Himself from the least to
the greatest. A closer tie of obligation is now treated of, when any
should voluntarily devote himself to God for a season. These were called
Nazarites, which is equivalent to *separate* or *select,* because there
was greater dignity or excellence in them than in the common people. For
they were as ornaments to the Church, and God willed that His peculiar
glory should shine brightly in them. When, therefore, Amos expostulates
with them (<span id="vi.vi.i-p45.1"></span>[Am
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#011)<span id="vi.vi.i-p45.1"></span>)
because they had prevented the prophets from exercising their office,
and had corrupted the Nazarites with wine, he says, in amplification of
their crime, that they bad been honored with a special blessing, when
God had created of their sons Nazarites and prophets. And when Jeremiah
deplores the desolation of the Church, he insists on this corruption,
that their Nazarites no longer appeared as of old, “purer than snow,”
etc. (<span id="vi.vi.i-p45.2"></span>[La
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#007)<span id="vi.vi.i-p45.2"></span>.)
Nor is it to be doubted, that when Jacob distinguished Joseph his son by
the title of a Nazarite  <span id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) among
his brethren, (<span id="vi.vi.i-p46.10"></span>[Ge
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026)<span
id="vi.vi.i-p46.10"></span>,) he alluded in the spirit of prophecy to
that degree of honor in which afterwards, under the Law, they stood who
separated themselves unto God, as the lights of the Church. Therefore,
although this consecration pertained not to the whole people, yet it
should be deservedly reckoned amongst the exercises of piety, because
the Nazarites were like standard-bearers to shew others the way; and
though they did not attract all to follow their example, yet the ardor
of their zeal was of no little advantage to the weak and inexperienced,
exciting them forwards according to their capacity.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p47"></span>Now, because God abominates all fictitious
worship, he put a restraint on their licentiousness, by giving them a
clear and certain rule. And, from the testimony of Amos which I have
just quoted, it is gathered that God alone was the appointer of the
Nazarite vow. We must remember, then, that the Nazarites shone among the
people of God like precious jewels, and although few imitated them, yet
that they were as standard-bearers and leaders to awaken zeal amongst
the multitude for the service of God. We must observe, by the way, that
Samson was a Nazarite of another kind, because he did not take the vow
upon him only for a season, but was sanctified from the womb for his
whole life, and separated from the rest of the people; in which respect,
too, he was a type of Christ, and represented Him, as it were. And
surely whatever is here taught should be referred to the sole Fountain
of sanctity, as if the image of Christ had been set before the eyes of
the Jews in a mirror. For the nearer any one under the Law approached to
God, the more did Christ shine forth in him. We know that the whole
priesthood of the Law was nothing but His image. The same may be said of
the Nazarites, whose purity and abstinence ornamented them with peculiar
dignity.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p48"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p49"></span>**3.** *He shall separate himself from
wine.* The first injunction is, that they should not only abstain from
wine, but that they should not even taste grapes or anything connected
with wine. The simple observance was, that they should not drink wine or
anything inebriating; but, because men are crafty in inventing
subterfuges, it was necessary to express specifically the means whereby
the Law might be defrauded. Thus, in abstaining from wine, they would
not have deprived themselves of luxuries, either by indulging in fresh
or dried grapes, or by mixing water with grapes and expressing their
juice, or by imitating the sweetness of wine by other delicate
preparations. Hence it appears how many secret recesses and
lurking-places are possessed by man’s hypocrisy, whilst it shamelessly
imagines stupid means of deception for cheating God himself. But, at the
same time, we must remark that this subtlety was intolerable to God, who
is pleased by nothing so much as sincerity. We shall also see elsewhere
that the priests, when they were executing their office by turns in the
Temple, were forbidden the use of wine. This similarity proves what I
have already said, that the Nazarites were thus separated from the
multitude, that they might approach to the honor of the priesthood. But
abstinence from wine was enjoined not only that they might avoid
drunkenness, but that their whole mode of living might be more temperate
and frugal; for the drinking of wine is well known to be among the chief
pleasures of the table, and those who are not abstentious will rather
content themselves with moderate and common food than bear to be
deprived of wine. We may, then, learn from hence, that a sober use of
wine is a most important part of temperate living; and in all gluttony
and intemperance, this is most to be condemned, when men have too great
a love of excess in wine-drinking. It is then astonishing that when the
monks under the Papacy boast of their angelical perfection, they should
with one accord refuse to abstain from wine. With many  <span
id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) it is sinful to touch during their
whole life a bit of beef or pork, and they would glory in being martyrs,
if they obstinately preferred to die rather than to eat meat in a case
of necessity; but their temperance is so inconsistent, that this
austerity as to food acquires for them the greater license in drinking,
as if they purposely avenged themselves in this way.  <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) Wherefore nothing can be more
insufferable than their boasting, since this abstinence in eating alone
is a mere mockery of God.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p52"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p53"></span>**5.** *There shall no razor come upon his
head.* <span id="vi.vi.i-p53.1"></span>It cannot be certainly determined
why God would have the Nazarites let their hair grow, except that by
this present mark of their consecration, they might be more and more
reminded of their vow. Some think that it was a mark of honor, as if
they wore a crown on their heads. In this the Popish clergy are more
than ridiculous, comparing themselves to the Nazarites by their circular
tonsure.  <span id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p54.1"></span> But this reason satisfies myself, that God
would constantly exercise them in the faithful performance of their vow
by this visible sign. It is a mark of manhood to cut the hair, and this,
as Paul says, a natural feeling dictates. (<span
id="vi.vi.i-p54.2"></span>[1Co
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014)<span
id="vi.vi.i-p54.2"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p54.3"></span>.) Therefore,
the dedication of the Nazarites was shewn conspicuously by their heads,
lest they should fail in their own vows through carelessness or
forgetfulness. A question arises respecting the women, for whom this
command appears superfluous; but this is easily answered, that they were
thus bound to let their hair grow, so as to have it long not only from
custom, but in accordance with their vow. Yet there will be nothing
absurd in the *synecdoche,* <span id="vi.vi.i-p54.4"></span>whereby that
is spoken of both the sexes which applies only to the males. Here also
the devil formerly played his game, when he persuaded certain monks, as
Augustine relates,  <span id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p55.1"></span> to make a shew of sanctity by wearing long
hair; for, in order that the celibacy which they had vowed might be more
conspicuous, they would not allow themselves to be men, having “made
themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven’s sake;” <span
id="vi.vi.i-p55.2"></span>(<span id="vi.vi.i-p55.3"></span>[Mt
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012)<span
id="vi.vi.i-p55.3"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p55.4"></span>;) and,
therefore, their long hair was a sign of their virginity. This example
teaches us to beware of the wiles of Satan, lest our <span
id="vi.vi.i-p55.5"></span>κακοζηλία <span id="vi.vi.i-p55.6"></span>make
us rather the apes than the imitators of the ancients.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p56"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p57"></span>**6.** *He shall come at no dead body.*
This, too, they had in common with the high-priest, that they were not
even to mourn for their relations. Although Moses enjoins two things,
that the Nazarites should make themselves unclean neither by entering
the house of mourning, nor by mourning themselves, it was indeed a duty
of humanity to bury the dead; but if any of the people had touched a
dead body, or had come near a death-bed or bier, they were polluted. But
God demands more of the Nazarites, lest, they should contract
uncleanness; for it was not sufficient for them (as will be seen again
presently) to purify themselves according to the accustomed means, but
it behoved them to be far removed from all things that would pollute
them. But why the touch of a dead body was a pollution, we shall
consider more at large in its proper place. Now it must be briefly
concluded, that because by death is represented God’s curse, the wages
of sin, the Israelites were thus admonished to beware of dead works.
 <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335) As to the mourning, the reason
of the prohibition was different, viz., that those who professed the
special service of God, should set, an example to others of magnanimity
and submission. If it were sinful to weep and lament when our friends
are taken from us, Christ would not, have wept. at the tomb of Lazarus;
but because perturbation is always associated with grief, and men in
their mourning are too apt to give way to ambition and pomp, and
voluntarily and purposely provoke themselves to excess, as though nature
did not already carry them further than is right, the Nazarites could
not give an example of moderation, if they had mixed themselves with
mourners. Wherefore, as they were before restrained from daintiness, so
now a remedy is applied to the opposite disease, viz., to sorrow. But,
although all ought, to seek to indulge it moderately, yet something more
is prescribed to the Nazarites, that, as if disentangled and stripped
from earthly affections, they should go further than the rest of the
people; as we shall see hereafter with respect to the priests.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p59"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p60"></span>**9.** *And if any man die very suddenly.*
Here is prescribed what must be done, if a defilement should have been
contracted which no precaution could have prevented. If a Nazarite
should have willingly and knowingly entered a house of mourning, or
should have come near a dead body, his consecration would have been
violated not without, sin; but, in the case of a sudden death, the error
was excusable, though God commands that it should be expiated; for
whatever time of the vow had passed He counts for nothing, nor will it
be taken into account. This was no light punishment, that he, who had
been guilty of no fault, should begin to pay his vow altogether afresh.
Besides the loss of the time, a sacrifice is also added, whereby he who
was polluted should prepare himself for a new consecration. But, because
this consecration was voluntary, none could complain of the immoderate
rigor to which he had subjected himself of his own accord. Meanwhile, it
was shewn how precious to God is the purity of His worship.  <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336) Two Hebrew words from different roots,
though they are of kindred signification, are used, by which mode of
speaking Moses wished more fully to express the unexpected nature of the
death. For, in my opinion, it is puerile of the Jews to understand the
first of a bloody murder, the other of a sudden death.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p62"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p63"></span>**13.** *And this is the law of the
Nazarites.* Moses now shews at last how, after the full period of the
vow, the Nazarites must return to their common life. And, first, he
commands them to place themselves at the door of the tabernacle; then,
to offer there a lamb without spot for a burnt-offering, a ewe-lamb for
a sin-offering, and a ram for peace-offerings, with cakes of fine flour
mingled with oil, wafers, and unleavened bread, and meat-offering, and
drink-offerings. As to the peace-offering, because it was presented in
thanksgiving, it was by no means inappropriate; nor the burnt-offering
either, because they might justly congratulate themselves, and celebrate
God’s goodness, when they had discharged their pious duty, since God had
vouchsafed them no ordinary honor. But what was meant by the
sin-offering may be questioned, since expiation was needless for the
pure and holy. Here we clearly perceive, that however cheerfully and
earnestly men endeavor to offer themselves altogether to God, yet they
never attain to the goal of perfection, nor arrive at what they desire,
but are always exposed to God’s judgment, unless He should pardon their
sins. Whence it appears how base is the Papists’ folly, when they dream
of appeasing God by works of supererogation. For, if ever any
supererogation were pleasing to God, the holiness of the Nazarites,
being testified to by the Law, was worthy of this honor; yet God, when
the work is complete, commands them to confess their guilt, and suffers
not this service to intrude into the place of merit, but requires of
them a sacrifice, that they may borrow from elsewhere what belongs not
to themselves, though they appear to be the most perfect of all men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_330"></span>[331](cc03065.htm#fr_330) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p45.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p46"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p46.1"></span> The
Hebrew word rendered *separate* <span id="vi.vi.i-p46.2"></span>in the
*A. V* <span id="vi.vi.i-p46.3"></span>of <span
id="vi.vi.i-p46.4"></span>[Ge
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026)<span
id="vi.vi.i-p46.4"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p46.5"></span>, <span
id="vi.vi.i-p46.6"></span>is <span id="vi.vi.i-p46.7"></span>נזיר*,
Nazir.* <span id="vi.vi.i-p46.8"></span>— *W.* <span
id="vi.vi.i-p46.9"></span>Vide *C. in loco.*

<span id="fn_331"></span>[332](cc03065.htm#fr_331) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p50"></span> “Aux Chartreux;” with the Carthusian
monks. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](cc03065.htm#fr_332) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p51"></span> Addition *Fr*. — Sur le gobelet.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](cc03065.htm#fr_333) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p54"></span> “Sous l’ombre de la couronne, qu’ils
appellent, quand ils ne sont pas rasez par les bors;” with reference to
the *crown,* as they call it, when their heads are not shaved round the
edges — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_334"></span>[335](cc03065.htm#fr_334) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p54.5"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p55"></span> De opere Monachorum, 40. (Edit. Benedict.
t. 6:501.) “Jam illud, si dici potest, quam luctuose ridiculum est, quod
rursus invenerunt ad defensionem crinium suorum. Virum, inquiunt,
prohibuit Apostolus habere comam; qui autem se ipsos castraverunt
propter regnum coelorum, jam non sunt viri. O dementiam singularem!
etc.”

<span id="fn_335"></span>[336](cc03065.htm#fr_335) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p58"></span> “Comme l’Apostre les nomme;” as the
Apostle calls them. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_336"></span>[337](cc03065.htm#fr_336) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p61"></span> <span id="vi.vi.i-p61.1"></span>פתע
פתאם<span id="vi.vi.i-p61.2"></span> Each means *suddenly. A. V., very
suddenly.* <span id="vi.vi.i-p61.3"></span>It is a rule of Hebrew
Grammar that the use of two synonymous words is to be considered as a
mode of expressing a superlative. — *W.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Offering of First Fruits](cc03066)
