[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03042)  [Next](cc03044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xviii"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p1"></span>DEUTERONOMY 31

<span id="v.xviii-p2"></span>deuteronomy 31:10-13

<span id="v.xviii-p3"></span>**10.** And Moses commanded them, saying,
At the end of *every* seven years, in the solemnity of the year of
release, in the feast of tabernacles,

<span id="v.xviii-p4"></span>**10.** Et praecepit Levitis Moses,
dicendo, Septimo quoque anno, tempore anni remissionis, in solennitate
tabernaculorum,

<span id="v.xviii-p5"></span>**11.** When all Israel is come to appear
before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt
read this law before all Israel in their hearing.

<span id="v.xviii-p6"></span>**11.** Quum venerit universus Israel ut
appareat coram Jehova Deo, in loco quem elegerit, leges Legem istam
coram universo Israele in auribus eorum.

<span id="v.xviii-p7"></span>**12.** Gather the people together, men,
and women, and children, and thy stranger that *is* within thy gates,
that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the Lord your God,
and observe to do all the words of this law;

<span id="v.xviii-p8"></span>**12.** Congregando populum, viros, et
mulieres, parvulos et peregrinos qui sunt intra portas tuas, ut audiant,
et discant, timeantque Jehovam Deum vestrum, et custodiant faciendo
omnia verba legis hujus.

<span id="v.xviii-p9"></span>**13.** And *that* their children, which
have not known *any thing,* may hear, and learn to fear the Lord your
God, as long as ye live in the land whither ye go over Jordan to possess
it.

<span id="v.xviii-p10"></span>**13.** Et filii eorum qui non noverunt
audiant, et discant timere Jehovam Deum vestrum, omnibus diebus quibus
victuri estis super terram, ad quam transmisso Jordane pergitis ut
possideatis.

<span id="v.xviii-p11"></span><span id="v.xviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p12"></span>**10.** *And Moses commanded them.* The
object of this precept is the same as that of the foregoing. He would
have (the Law  <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) ) represented,
and constantly kept before their eyes; now He commands that it should
also be recited every seventh year, lest the knowledge of it should ever
depart. But let us follow the order of the words. First of all, Moses
says that “he wrote” the Law. Before this, the doctrines of religion had
only been expressed by word of mouth, for their fathers had handed down
traditionally to their children whatever had been declared to them from
heaven. Thus the religion and faith of the people in Egypt was only
founded on ancient revelations *(oraculis)* and the traditions of their
fathers. But, forasmuch as nothing is more easy than for men’s minds, in
their vanity, speedily to forget true doctrine, and to involve
themselves in manifold errors, God, willing to provide against this
evil, consigned the rule of piety to public records,  <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) so that there might be no pretense of
ignorance if their posterity should decline from it. Behold, then, the
reason why the Law was written down, that God’s truth might be witnessed
in the continued lapse of ages. He does not mean that the Law was so
“delivered” to the Levites, that they should suppress it, or should be
its only keepers; but if he had exhorted them all indifferently to read
it, scarcely any would have applied themselves to its study; for so it
is wont to happen, that individuals neglect what is enjoined generally
upon all. Wherefore the Levites are appointed to be the guardians of the
Law *(nomophylaces),* to watch diligently, amidst the neglect and
contempt of others, lest the knowledge of God should fail. Nor is there
any question that the Law was therefore entrusted to their hands, that
they might be its interpreters. And to this that passage of Malachi
refers, (<span id="v.xviii-p14.1"></span>[Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="v.xviii-p14.1"></span>,)
“For the priest’s lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the
Law at his mouth; for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.” For
what is added immediately afterwards, that they should read over the Law
every seventh year, cannot properly be taken, as if, during the rest of
the time, it should remain hidden among themselves; for God would have
them to teach daily, and constantly to remind the people of their duty.
But lest this practice should become obsolete, either by the aversion of
the people or the laziness of the priests, this solemn rite was added,
that every seventh year when the most numerous assembly of the people
took place, the promulgation of the Law should be renewed. Whence it
appears that nothing is too sacred nor too abundantly fortified by
precautions to escape violation and infraction from man’s wickedness;
for when the recitation of the Law was thus precisely enjoined upon the
Levites, it was surely astonishing and detestable that it should be, as
it were, discovered in the time of Josiah, and that all were aroused by
its novelty, as if they had never heard of it before. (<span
id="v.xviii-p14.2"></span>[2Ki
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#003)<span id="v.xviii-p14.2"></span>,
etc.) Exactly the same thing did not occur under the Papacy; but when
its scarecrow  <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) bishops desired
to domineer and tyrannize, they used the artifice of declaring it
unlawful to inquire into the mysteries of Scripture. Hence it was
brought about that they might securely addict themselves to their
ridiculous follies, and that the monks, their emissaries, might vent
with impunity whatever fables came into their heads. But, in fine, the
intention of God was that every seventh year the people should be
reminded to meditate diligently on the law.

<span id="v.xviii-p16"></span><span id="v.xviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p17"></span>**12.** *Gather the people together.*
 <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) Literally, “to gather,”  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) etc., in the infinitive mood; and
although this is sometimes taken for the imperative, yet, in this
passage some improperly translate it “Gather,” etc., as if Moses
commanded them to give these injunctions once only to the people of
their own generation, whereas he is rather continuing with the foregoing
sentence. This verse, then, is connected with what went before, viz.,
that the Law should be promulgated anew, in the years in which they were
to hold their greatest assembly; because the people was then called to
the Jubilee by the sound of the trumpet. The word “gather,” therefore,
extends to all these septennial assemblies, of which mention will be
elsewhere made. Nor certainly would what he says of the people that are
“within their gates,” accord with the times of Moses, since in those
days there were none. Consequently he more fully explains why he pointed
out the seventh year, viz., because the whole people then came “to
appear before God.” He specially mentions the “women and children,” lest
their age or sex might be an excuse; and this heightens the villany and
dishonesty of those  <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) who would
debar not children only, but women also, from religious learning; since
God invites all from the least to the greatest to His school, and would
have them to be His disciples. With respect to “the strangers,” we must
understand not those who had come into the land of Canaan on business,
and were soon to return home, but those who had chosen to take up their
abode there, and from their long residence had coalesced into the same
body with the Israelites. The fruit and utility (of this recitation
 <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) ) is added, that by hearing
they might learn to fear God. Whence we infer, that true religion has
its origin in knowledge, and that whatever piety men not instructed by
God’s word may appear to have, is mere pretense. “To observe to do,” is
equivalent to applying themselves diligently and zealously to obey the
precepts of the Law.

<span id="v.xviii-p22"></span><span id="v.xviii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p23"></span>**13.** *And that their children, which
have not known anything.* Again, we see that their present assembly is
not referred to, but that which was to be repeated every seven years, in
order that their posterity might be retained in the path of duty.
Another use, then, of this recitation is adduced; that many who, from
their age, could not be witnesses of the first promulgation, might
thence learn how God was to be served. The possession of the land is
again set before them, that God’s bounty may attract them to obedience.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc03043.htm#fr_237) <span
id="v.xviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p13"></span> Added from the French.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc03043.htm#fr_238) <span
id="v.xviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p14"></span> En chartes authentiques. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc03043.htm#fr_239) <span
id="v.xviii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p15"></span> Larvati. — *Lat.* Les Eveques comus et
masquez. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc03043.htm#fr_240) <span
id="v.xviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p18"></span> “Congregando,” by congregating — *Lat.*
There is much abridgment of the passage in the French.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc03043.htm#fr_241) <span
id="v.xviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p19"></span> <span id="v.xviii-p19.1"></span>הקהל<span
id="v.xviii-p19.2"></span>. The form is strictly that of the imperative
<span id="v.xviii-p19.3"></span>Hiphil, whilst the infinitive of the
same voice is properly <span id="v.xviii-p19.4"></span>הקהיל<span
id="v.xviii-p19.5"></span>, as seen in <span
id="v.xviii-p19.6"></span>[Nu
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#007)<span
id="v.xviii-p19.6"></span><span id="v.xviii-p19.7"></span>, though its
*yod* <span id="v.xviii-p19.8"></span>might be changed into a *tzere,*
<span id="v.xviii-p19.9"></span>in which case the form of these two
different tenses would be identical. — *W*

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc03043.htm#fr_242) <span
id="v.xviii-p19.10"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p20"></span> L’audace du Pape et de son clerge. —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc03043.htm#fr_243) <span
id="v.xviii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p21"></span> Added from the French.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 6:10-12](cc03044)
