[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03044)  [Next](cc03046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xx"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p1"></span>DEUTERONOMY 9

<span id="v.xx-p2"></span><span id="v.xx-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
9:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#001)<span id="v.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p3"></span>**1.** Hear, O Israel: Thou *art* to pass over
Jordan this day, to go in to possess nations greater and mightier than
thyself, cities great, and fenced up to heaven;

<span id="v.xx-p4"></span>**1.** Audi Israel, Tu transis bodie Jordanem,
ut ingrediaris ad possidendum gentes magnas et robustas praeter to,
urbes magnas et munitas usque ad coelum;

<span id="v.xx-p5"></span>**2.** A people great and tall, the children
of the Anakims, whom thou knowest, and *of whom* thou hast heard *say,*
Who can stand before the children of Anak?

<span id="v.xx-p6"></span>**2.** Populum magnum et procerum, filios
Enacim quos tu nosti, et de quibus tu audisti, Quis consister coram
filiis Enac?

<span id="v.xx-p7"></span>**3.** Understand therefore this day, that the
Lord thy God *is* he which goeth over before thee; *as* a consuming fire
he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down before thy face: so
shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them quickly, as the Lord hath
said unto thee.

<span id="v.xx-p8"></span>**3.** Scito itaque hodie quod Jehova Deus
tuus ipse est qui transit ante to, ignis consumens: ipse delebit eos ac
humiliabit eos coram re, ut expellas eos perdasque eos cito, quemadmodum
dixit Jehova tibi.

<span id="v.xx-p9"></span>**4.** Speak not thou in thine heart, after
that the Lord thy God hath cast them out from before thee, saying, For
my righteousness the Lord hath brought me in to possess this land; but
for the wickedness of these nations the Lord doth drive them out from
before thee.

<span id="v.xx-p10"></span>**4.** Ne dicas in corde tuo, quum expulerit
Jehova Deus tuus illos a facie tua, dicendo, Propter justitiam meam
introduxit me Jehova ut possideam terram hanc: quum propter iniquitatem
gentium istarum Jehova expellat eas a facie tua.

<span id="v.xx-p11"></span>**5.** Not for thy righteousness, or for the
uprightness of thine heart, dost thou go to possess their land; but for
the wickedness of these nations the Lord thy God doth drive them out
from before thee, and that he may perform the word which the Lord sware
unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

<span id="v.xx-p12"></span>**5.** Non propter justitiam tuam et
rectitudinem cordis tui tu ingredieris ad possidendam terram eorum, sed
propter impietatem gentium istarum Jehova Deus tuus expellit eas a facie
tua, ut confirmet verbum quod juravit ipse Jehova patribus tuis,
Abrahae, Isaac, et Jacob.

<span id="v.xx-p13"></span>**6.** Understand therefore, that the Lord
thy God giveth thee not this good land to possess it for thy
righteousness; for thou *art* a stiff-necked people.

<span id="v.xx-p14"></span>**6.** Scito itaque quod non propter
justitiam tuam Jehova Deus tuus dat tibi terram istam optimam, ut
possideas eam: siquidem populus durae cervicis es.

<span id="v.xx-p15"></span><span id="v.xx-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p16"></span>**1.** *Thou art to pass over Jordan this
day.* The whole of this passage contains an eulogy on the gratuitous
liberality of God, whereby He had bound the people to Himself unto the
obedience of the Law. But this (as we have already seen) ought to have
been a most pressing stimulus to incite the people, and altogether to
ravish them to the worship and love of God, to whom they were under so
great obligation. The design of Moses, then, was to shew that the
Israelites, for no merit of their own, but by the signal bounty of God,
would be heirs of the land of Canaan; and that this entirely flowed from
the covenant and their gratuitous adoption; in order that, on their
part, they should persevere in the faithful observation of the covenant,
and so should be the more disposed to honor Him. For it would be too
disgraceful that they, whom God had prevented by His grace, should not
meet Him, as it were, by voluntarily submitting to His dominion.
Moreover, lest they should arrogate anything to themselves, he commends
the greatness of God’s power, in that they could not be victorious over
so many nations, unless by the miraculous aid of heaven. With this view,
he states that these nations excelled not only in greatness and
multitude, but also in military valor. He adds that their cities were
great and impregnable; and, finally, that in them were the children of
the giants, formidable from their enormous stature. For Anak (as is
related in <span id="v.xx-p16.1"></span>[Jos
15](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#000)<span id="v.xx-p16.1"></span>  <span
id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) ) was a celebrated giant, whose
descendants were called Anakim. And, to take away all doubt about this,
he cites themselves as witnesses, that they were so terrified by their
appearance as to wish to turn back again. We now understand the object
of all these details, viz., that God’s glory may shine forth in the
victories and success of the people. The words “whom thou knowest, and
of whom thou hast heard,” have reference to the spies;  <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) for these giants had not yet become
openly known to the people; but he transfers the case of a few to them
all, because, by the account the spies had given, terror had invaded the
whole camp, as though they had actually come into conflict with them.
Since, then, they had been persuaded of their inferiority to their
enemies, and utterly disheartened by the report they received, Moses
convicts them on their own evidence, lest, perchance, they might
hereafter assume to themselves the praise which was due to God alone.
But we are taught in these words, that such is the ingratitude of
mankind, that they obscure, as much as they can, God’s bounties, and
never yield, except when driven to conviction.

<span id="v.xx-p19"></span><span id="v.xx-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p20"></span>**3.** *Understand therefore this day.* He
concludes from what has preceded that the Israelites would be too
perverse, unless they acknowledge that their enemies were overcome by
the hand of God; and, still more to heighten the miracle, he uses a
similitude, comparing God to a fire, which consumes so many nations in
an unwonted and incredible manner. It is as if he had said, that it
could not be effected by human or ordinary means that so many and such
warlike peoples could thus quickly perish. Elsewhere God is called “a
consuming fire” in a different sense, that we may fear his wrath and
power; but here Moses only means that the destruction of the Canaanitish
nations was His wonderful work.

<span id="v.xx-p21"></span><span id="v.xx-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p22"></span>**4.** *Speak not thou in thine heart.* He
now more plainly warns the people not to exalt themselves in proud and
foolish boasting. If they had not been naturally so depraved and
malignant, it would have been sufficient to point out God’s grace in a
single word; but he could not induce them to gratitude except by
correcting and destroying their pride. He therefore takes away this
stumblingblock, in order that God’s generosity might be conspicuous
among them. “To speak in the heart” is equivalent to reflecting or
conceiving an opinion. Wherefore Moses not only reproves the boasting of
the lips, but that hidden arrogance, wherewith men are puffed up, when
they take to themselves the praise which is due to God. Moreover, he not
only prohibits them from ascribing it to their own valor, that they had
routed their enemies, and gained possession of the land, but also from
imagining that this was the just recompense of their merits. For God is
not less defrauded of His glory when men oppose their righteousness to
His liberality, than when they boast that whatever blessings they have
are obtained by their own industry. To make this more ‘clear, I will
repeat it. Moses does not forbid the people from thinking that they had
themselves acquired the land without God’s aid; nay, he takes it for
granted that they themselves will acknowledge that it was by God’s help
that they were victorious; but he is not contented with this limited
gratitude unless they at the same time acknowledge that they had
deserved nothing of the kind, and therefore that it was a mere and
gratuitous act of His bounty. The reason given in the second clause does
not appear sufficiently  <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247)
conclusive, viz., that the nations were driven out on account of their
own wickedness; for it might have been that what God took away from
these wicked reprobates He transferred to those who were more worthy;
but. it appears to be an indirect admonition, that the Israelites should
compare themselves with these nations; because it was evidently to be
gathered by them from thence,  <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248)
that they had not acquired this foreign land, from which the former
inhabitants had been ejected, by their own righteousness. And this is
still more clearly expressed in the two next verses.

<span id="v.xx-p25"></span><span id="v.xx-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p26"></span>**5.** *Not for thy righteousness.* First of
all, he would have the punishment inflicted upon these nations awaken
the Israelites to fear, and thus that they should attribute nothing to
themselves; because it was God’s design not to reward their merits, but
to shew the severity of His judgment. Secondly, he confirms this by two
arguments; viz., because God thus had performed what He promised
Abraham; (which promise, as has been already seen, was founded on mere
grace;) and, again, because the people itself was naturally perverse and
rebellious. Hence, it sufficiently appears that there was no room for
merits, since by them God’s covenant would have been nullified, nor, if
there were, could any such be found in so depraved and contumacious a
nation. And besides, God had made His covenant with Abraham almost four
centuries before they were born. Hence it follows that this benefit
proceeded from some other source. But he still further represses their
pride, by reproaching them with being “stiff-necked;” for it would have
been too absurd to imagine that God, whom they had not ceased to provoke
with their sins, was under obligation to them, as if they had duly
discharged their duty. This metaphor is taken from oxen, which are
useless until they are accustomed to bend their necks; it is then the
same as saying that they were not only unsubmissive, but that in their
obstinacy they shook off the yoke. By his impressing on them, for the
third time, that the Israelites had not deserved the land by their
righteousness, we learn that nothing is more difficult than for men to
strip themselves of their blind arrogance, whereby they detract some
portion of the praise from God’s mercies. Now, if in regard to an
earthly inheritance God so greatly exalts His mercy, what must we think
of the heavenly inheritance?  <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) He
would have it attributed to Himself alone, that the children of Israel
possess the land of Canaan; how much less, then, will He tolerate the
obtrusion of men’s merits in order to the acquisition of heaven? Nor is
there anything in the pretense of the Papists that they attribute the
first place to God’s bounty; because He claims altogether for Himself
what they would share with Him. But if any object that this was only
said to His ancient people, I reply, that we are no better than they.
Let each retire into himself,  <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250)
and he will not excuse the hardness of his neck. But they who are
regenerated by God’s Spirit, know that they are not naturally formed
unto obedience; and thus that it is only mercy which makes them to
differ from the worst of men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc03045.htm#fr_245) <span
id="v.xx-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p17"></span> Or, more fully in <span
id="v.xx-p17.1"></span>[Nu 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#033)<span
id="v.xx-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc03045.htm#fr_246) <span
id="v.xx-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p18"></span> “Qui avoyent este envoyez pour descouvrir la
terre;” who had been sent to descry the land. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc03045.htm#fr_247) <span
id="v.xx-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p23"></span> De prime face. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc03045.htm#fr_248) <span
id="v.xx-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p24"></span> “Pour ce que, se cognoissans povres et
miserables, ils devoyent aisement conclurre,” etc.; because, knowing
themselves to be poor and miserable, they might easily conclude, etc. —
*Fr.*

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc03045.htm#fr_249) <span
id="v.xx-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p27"></span> L’heritage celeste, et permanent. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc03045.htm#fr_250) <span
id="v.xx-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p28"></span> Pour se bien examiner. — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 10:21,22](cc03046)
