[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03012)  [Next](cc03014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x"></span>

<span id="iv.x-p1"></span>EXODUS 10

<span id="iv.x.i"></span>

<span id="iv.x.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.x.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
10:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#001)<span id="iv.x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the Lord said unto Moses, Go in
unto Pharaoh: for I have hardened Ms heart, and the heart of his
servants, that I might show these my signs before him:

<span id="iv.x.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et dixit Jehovah ad Mosen, Vade ad
Pharaonem: quia ego aggravavi cor ejus, et cor servorum ejus, ut ponerem
signa mea haec in medio ejus.

<span id="iv.x.i-p4"></span>**2.** And that thou mayest tell in the ears
of thy son, and of thy son’s son, what things I have wrought in Egypt,
and my signs which I have done among them; that ye may know how that I
am the Lord.

<span id="iv.x.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et ut narres in auribus filii tui et
nepotis tui quae fecerimin AEgypto, et signa mea quae posuero inter eos:
et sciatis quod ego sum Jehova.

<span id="iv.x.i-p6"></span>**3.** And Moses and Aaron came in unto
Pharaoh, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord God of the Hebrews, How
long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself before me? let my people go,
that they may serve me:

<span id="iv.x.i-p7"></span>**3.** Venit ergo Moses et Aharon ad
Pharaonem, et dixerunt ei, Sic dicit Jehova Deus Hebraeorum, Quousque
renuis humiliari coram facie mea? Dimitte populum meum ut serviant mihi.

<span id="iv.x.i-p8"></span>**4.** Else, if thou refuse to let my people
go, behold, tomorrow will I bring the locusts into thy coast:

<span id="iv.x.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quod si tu renuis dimittere populum
meum, ecce, ego inducam cras locustam in terminos tuos.

<span id="iv.x.i-p10"></span>**5.** And they shall cover the face of the
earth, that. one cannot be able to see the earth: and they shall eat the
residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you from the
hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of the field.

<span id="iv.x.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et operiet superficiem terrae, ut
non possit videri terra: et comedet quod residuum est, quod evasit, quod
relictum est vobis a grandine: et comedet omnem arborem quae fructificat
vobis ex agro.

<span id="iv.x.i-p12"></span>**6.** And they shall fill thy houses, and
the houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians;
which neither thy fathers, nor thy fathers’ fathers have seen, since the
day that they were upon the earth unto this day. And he turned himself,
and went out from Pharaoh.

<span id="iv.x.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et implebunt domos tuas, et domos
omnium servorum tuorum, et domos omnium AEgyptiorum: quas non viderunt
patres tui, et patres patrum tuorum, a die quo ipsi fuerunt super terram
usque ad diem hunc. Et aversus, egressus est a Pharaone.

<span id="iv.x.i-p14"></span><span id="iv.x.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.i-p15"></span>**1.** *And the Lord said.* Moses passes on
to another plague, whereby God took vengeance on the treachery and
obstinacy of the wicked king; viz., that He gave over the remaining
produce of the year, which He had spared, to be eaten and devoured by
locusts. And this was no ordinary punishment, to destroy Egypt by dearth
and famine, when all their corn had perished. But, before Moses proceeds
to this, he again relates that he was the proclaimer of this plague, and
that God had announced to him the reason why Pharaoh had so often
resisted to his own injury. Therefore God says, that He had hardened his
heart, in order that he might show forth these miracles and evidences of
His power; for if Pharaoh had been humbled, and had yielded immediately,
the contest would have been superfluous; since what would be the object
of contending with a conquered and prostrate enemy? The obstinacy of the
tyrant, then, in so often provoking God, opened the way to more
miracles, as fire is produced by the collision of flint and iron. Thence
also the silly imagination is refuted, that the heart of Pharaoh was no
otherwise hardened than as the miracles were set. before his eyes; for
Moses does not say that his heart was divinely hardened by the sight of
the signs, but that it pleased God in this manner to manifest His power.
Hence also we gather, that whatever occurred was predestinated by the
sure counsel of God. For God willed to redeem His people in a singular
and unusual way. That this redemption might be more conspicuous and
glorious, He set up Pharaoh against himself like a rock of stone, which
by its hardness might afford a cause for new and more remarkable
miracles. Pharaoh was, therefore, hardened by the marvelous providence
of God with this object, that the grace of His deliverance might be
neither despicable nor obscure. For God regarded tits own people more
than the Egyptians, as immediately appears, “that thou mayest tell in
the ears of thy son, and of thy son’s son,” etc. For far more abundant
material for thanksgiving and for celebrating the memory of their
deliverance was afforded, by the fact of the Israelites having seen
God’s arm stretched forth so often from heaven, and with so many
prodigies. Had they been redeemed by any ordinary method, the praise due
to God would soon have been forgotten. It was proper, then, that their
posterity should be thus instructed by their fathers, that they might
have no doubts as to the author of so illustrious a work. But it is here
required of the fathers, who had been eye-witnesses of the signs, that
they should be diligent and assiduous in teaching their children; and on
these also, care and attention in learning is enjoined, that the
recollection of God’s mercies should flourish throughout all ages. The
practical effect of this doctrine is seen in <span
id="iv.x.i-p15.1"></span>[Ps 44](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#000)<span
id="iv.x.i-p15.1"></span> and <span id="iv.x.i-p15.2"></span>[Ps
105](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#000)<span id="iv.x.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.x.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.i-p17"></span>**3.** *And Moses and Aaron came in.* Moses
now relates how, at God’s command, he tried whether Pharaoh’s heart,
after so many experiments, would be bent to obedience out of fear of the
new punishment which impended. But by this proof his impiety was better
known, since, although he saw his kingdom deprived of a part of its
corn, he fears not what is denounced by Moses respecting the other part.
Therefore he reproves him still more severely, inquiring, “How long”
wilt thou proudly resist the command of God? For since plagues vanquish
even the worst natures, it was marvelous that the king, having been
smitten eight times, and in so awful a manner, was still unwilling to
yield, as if he were in safety, and unaffected by any injury. But we may
learn from this passage, that we are chastised with this object by the
rods of God, that we may return from the indulgence of our lusts to
submission to Him. This Moses calls (and Peter after him, <span
id="iv.x.i-p17.1"></span>[1Pe 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)<span
id="iv.x.i-p17.1"></span>) to “humble” ourselves before God, or “beneath
His mighty hand,” when, having experienced His formidable power, we
reverently submit ourselves to His dominion. Whence it follows, that
they, who are neither tamed nor bent by the fear of punishment.,
struggle against God as with an iron  <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) brow. Let fear, then, teach us to
repent; and that we may not provoke His vengeance by proud contempt, let
us learn that nothing is more terrible than to fall into His hands.
Moses also hints that Pharaoh’s contention was not with the Israelites
only, but with God who undertook their cause. And let us not doubt,
therefore, that all tyrants, who unjustly persecute the Church, contend
with God Himself, to whose powers they will find themselves far
inferior.

<span id="iv.x.i-p19"></span><span id="iv.x.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.i-p20"></span>**4.** *Else, if thou refuse.* Moses
denounces the extreme dearth and famine of the land of Egypt, because
the locusts will suddenly arise, altogether to consume the remaining
produce of the year; for half of it had already been destroyed by the
hail. But, although ancient histories bear witness, and it has happened
also in our time, that not only cornfields, but that pastures have been
devoured by locusts, still we may gather from the circumstances, that
this was an extraordinary instance of the divine vengeance; because
Moses both appoints the next day, and also relates that an incredible
multitude suddenly burst forth, and adds, that such had never been seen;
and, lastly, threatens that no house should be exempt from their
invasion. Moreover, it is worth while again to remark the nature of the
scourge, that God collects and arms a host of vile insects, whereby He
may insultingly overcome this indomitable tyrant with all his forces.
The ingratitude of Egypt, too, was worthy of this return, since it was
too great an indignity that the posterity of Joseph should be
tyrannically persecuted in that. country, which a little more than 250
years before he had preserved from famine by his energy. What follows in
verse 6, that “he turned himself, and went out from Pharaoh,” is
recorded as a token of his indignation; as though Moses, worn out with
the perverseness of the tyrant, had hastily withdrawn himself from him,
without bidding him farewell. Therefore, although he was otherwise of a
mild disposition, this peremptory harshness was to be adopted as a
reproof of the arrogance with which the tyrant spit in the face of
heaven itself. But, let the Pharaohs of our age also learn, that when
they impede by their cruel menaces the pure worship of God, it is in His
strict justice that fanatics, like locusts, assail their kingdoms with
their impious errors, and infect their people with contagion.

<span id="iv.x.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.x.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
10:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#007)<span id="iv.x.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p2"></span>**7.** And Pharaoh’s servants said unto
him, How long shall this man be a snare unto us? let the men go, that
they may serve the Lord their God: knowest thou not yet that Egypt is
destroyed?

<span id="iv.x.ii-p3"></span>**7.** Dixerunt autem servi Pharaonis ad
eum, Quousque erit hic vobis in offendiculum? Dimitte homines, ut
serviant Jehovae Deo suo. An ante scies quod perierit AEgyptus? (*vel,*
Antequam scies periisse Aegyptum.)

<span id="iv.x.ii-p4"></span>**8.** And Moses and Aaron were brought
again unto Pharaoh: and be said unto them, Go, serve the Lord your God:
but who are they that shall go?

<span id="iv.x.ii-p5"></span>**8.** Et reductus est Moses atque Aharon
ad Pharaonem: dixitque ad eos, Ite et servite Jehovae Deo vestro. Qui
sunt qui abibunt?

<span id="iv.x.ii-p6"></span>**9.** And Moses said, We will go with our
young and with our old, with our sons and with our daughters, with our
flocks and with our herds will we go: for we must hold a feast unto the
Lord.

<span id="iv.x.ii-p7"></span>**9.** Et ait Moses, Cum pueris nostris, et
cum senioribus nostris ibimus, cum filiis nostris et filiabus nostris,
cum ovibus nostris, et cum armentis nostris ibimus: quia festus dies
Jehovae nobis est.

<span id="iv.x.ii-p8"></span>**10.** And he said unto them, Let the Lord
be so with you, as I will let you go, and your little ones: look to it;
for evil is before you.

<span id="iv.x.ii-p9"></span>**10.** Tunc dixit illis, Ita sit Jehova
vobiscum, ut vos dimittam, et parvulos vestros. Videte, quia malum est
coram vobis.

<span id="iv.x.ii-p10"></span>**11.** Not so: go now ye that are men,
and serve the Lord; for that ye did desire. And they were driven out
from Pharaoh’s presence.

<span id="iv.x.ii-p11"></span>**11.** Non sic, Ite nunc viri, et servite
Jehovae: quia vos hoc postulastis. Et ejecit eos a facie Pharaonis.

<span id="iv.x.ii-p12"></span><span id="iv.x.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p13"></span>**7.** *And Pharaoh’s servants said unto
him.* <span id="iv.x.ii-p13.1"></span>We have seen, a little above, that
they were obstinate in common with their king; nor can it be doubted
that by their servile flattery they had blinded him more and more; but
now, conquered by their calamities, and fearing something still worse,
they seek to mitigate his fury, — not because they had themselves
returned to their senses, but because they feel that they are overcome
by the hand of God, and that strength to resist had failed them. They
say, therefore, that Moses, until he should be dismissed, would be a
constant source of evil to them. Whether you translate the word <span
id="iv.x.ii-p13.2"></span>מוקש<span id="iv.x.ii-p13.3"></span>,  <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) *mokesh,* <span
id="iv.x.ii-p15.1"></span>a snare or a stumbling-block, is of little
consequence, because it is taken metaphorically for every kind of
misfortune or injury. They signify, then, that no end of their troubles
was to be expected so long as Pharaoh shall contend with Moses; for that
evils would follow upon evils. By the question “how long?” they admonish
him that his pertinacity had already been more injurious than enough;
and thence they conclude that there is nothing better to be done than,
by the expulsion of Moses, to free himself from the snare, or to avoid
the stumbling-block, since he could only fight unsuccessfully. As to the
second part of the verse, interpreters differ. The Chaldee Paraphrast
translates it with the introduction of a negative, — “Knowest thou not
yet that Egypt is destroyed?” Word for word it is, “whether to know
before,” or “before that to know.” But because the infinitive is
sometimes taken for the future, thus does it seem to accord very well
with the sense — “Do you wish to know the destruction of the whole
kingdom before you desist from your unhappy contention?” as if they had
said, that unless God should avert His anger, the remedy would be soon
too late and useless.

<span id="iv.x.ii-p16"></span><span id="iv.x.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p17"></span>**8.** *And Moses and Aaron were brought
again.* It is probable that, when the wrath of the king was appeased,
some of the company were hastily dispatched to bring back Moses in that
same hour, lest the calamity denounced by him should happen on the
morrow. For we may gather from the king’s words that he was not
altogether overcome by their entreaties; but that, because he was
unwilling to offend all their minds by an abrupt refusal, he suffered
Moses to be recalled, that he might delude them by an underhand
artifice; since thus do tyrants escape unpopularity by the false
appearance of consent.  <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) But he
returns to his former purpose, when seeking to compound with God by an
intermediate course he wishes to secure to himself the people’s return.
It appears indeed that he was himself also frightened, and sought some
way to propitiate God; meanwhile, as if it were free for him to make
conditions, he proposes such as would be advantageous to himself; as
hypocrites are wont so to treat with God, as if He were compelled to
abandon half His rights. But although he cunningly inquires, as if the
point were doubtful,  <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) still his
suspicion is easily discovered. Therefore, what he knows to be enjoined
him respecting all, he restricts to a few, and yet pretends that he
accords what is right and what ought to satisfy God. But although Moses,
in his answer, abundantly cuts off all pretext for subterfuge, and does
not flatter him with any prevarication or ambiguity, still he suppresses
God’s counsel respecting the deliverance of the people — not because he
wishes to deceive or to lie, but that he may confine himself within the
bounds of his commission. And lest it might be objected that in this way
the Israelites would be withdrawn from their legitimate government, he
does not dissemble that, being adopted by God, they were under the
dominion of none other. God therefore openly asks again His own whom He
has once attached to Himself. Nor must He be thought to have dealt
fraudulently with the tyrant, although he conceals His counsel from him.
He says that the Israelites must take their flocks and their herds with
them, that the victims which they should offer to God may be at hand. As
to their “sons and their daughters,” he insinuates that the feast-day
must be kept by the very least of them, because God had devoted them all
to Himself for the services of piety.

<span id="iv.x.ii-p20"></span><span id="iv.x.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p21"></span>**10.** *Let the Lord be so with you.* I
am surprised that this passage, so clear in itself, should be violently
wrested by the interpreters.  <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119)
Some thus expound it, — “I would that God may not otherwise favor you,
than as I am determined to let you go;” while others think that it was
spoken deceitfully, as though he had commended them to God after their
departure. I will not adduce the opinions of all, nor is it necessary. I
have no doubt that it was an ironical sneer, whereby he insults, at the
same time, both God and them; as if he had said, “You boast that God is
on your side; experience will prove this, if I shall let you go.” Thus,
then, establishing himself as the supreme judge as to their departure,
and claiming to himself the power of forbidding and preventing them from
going, he derides their confidence, because, in demanding their free
dismissal, they profess to do so under the auspices and by the command
of God; just as if he had said, “If I do not hinder you, then you may
reasonably pretend that Jehovah is the guide of your journey.” In this
way he wantonly provokes God, and denies that He is able so to aid His
people as to prevent his own power from prevailing to resist Him. Thus
the reprobate, after having been troubled in themselves, sometimes burst
forth with ravings of contempt against God, as if they were well secured
from all dangers, and counting for nothing the aid which God has
promised to give to His own people, fearlessly ridicule the simplicity
of their faith.

<span id="iv.x.ii-p23"></span>Again, in the second clause of the verse,
many, as it appears to me, raise unnecessary difficulties. Some gather
from it this sense, — “The evil which you are planning shall happen to
yourselves, and shall be turned against your own faces.” Others think
that it is a comparison taken from a target, because the Israelites were
looking steadfastly at nothing but ill-doing.  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) But I do not doubt that Pharaoh, after
having set his tyrannical prohibitions in array against God, now
threatens them, to inspire them with terror. He says, therefore, that
evil awaits the Israelites, and is, as it were, held up before their
eyes, because they are about to suffer the penalty of their rashness.
Thus he signifies that the help of God, in which they confide for
protection, is either evanescent or will profit them nothing. But when
he says, “Look to *it*,” he indirectly taunts them; because, in their
reliance on God’s assistance, they are rushing inconsiderately on their
ruin. The conclusion is, that they were ill-advised as to their own
interests in making these attempts, and that they foolishly or
incautiously trusted to the protection of God.

<span id="iv.x.ii-p25"></span><span id="iv.x.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p26"></span>**11.** *Not so.* He pretends to give them
what they had asked at first, and thus accuses them of changeableness,
because they do not persevere in the same determination. Whereas it is
certain that the cause of his pertinacity in resisting was because he
feared that the whole people should depart from Egypt. He knew, then,
that what Moses required in God’s name extended also to their little
ones, else would he have not been enraged at it. But, in order to east
blame upon them, he falsely and calumniously reproaches them with having
doubled their unjust demands, whilst he is exercising the greatest
kindness, because he accedes to their original request. But he had no
wish to rob the parents of their children, but to retain them as
hostages; for he was persuaded that they would not willingly renounce
pledges which were so dear to them. With respect to what is added at the
end of the verse, “He drove them away from Pharaoh’s presence,”  <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) some take it indefinitely, and
understand “some one of his dependents;” but, since it is usual in
Hebrew to omit the antecedent, and then to supply it in the place of the
relative, I have no doubt that Pharaoh, perceiving Moses not to be
contented with half of them, grew angry, and drove him out with renewed
menaces, because he could not endure his presence.

<span id="iv.x.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.x.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
10:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#012)<span
id="iv.x.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p2"></span>**12.** And the Lord said unto Moses,
Stretch out thine hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they
may come up upon the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even
all that the hail hath left.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p3"></span>**12.** Tunc dixit Jehova Mosi, Extende
manum tuam super terram AEgypti pro locusta, ut ascendat super terram
AEgypti, et depascat omnem herbam terrae, quicquid a grandine residuum
est.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p4"></span>**13.** And Moses stretched forth his rod
over the land of Egypt, and the Lord brought an east wind upon the land
all that day, and all that night; and when it was morning, the east wind
brought the locusts.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p5"></span>**13.** Extendit itaque Moses virgam suam
super terram AEgypti, et Jehova adduxit ventum orientalem in terram toto
illo die, et tota nocte: et ubi advenit mane, ventus orientalis
excitavit locustam.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p6"></span>**14.** And the locusts went up over all
the land of Egypt, and rested in all the coasts of Egypt: very grievous
were they; before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after
them shall be such.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p7"></span>**14.** Et ascenderunt locustae super
totam terram Aegypti, et demisit in omnem terminum AEgypti graves valde:
ante illas non fuerunt tales locustae, nec post illas futurae sunt
tales.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p8"></span>**15.** For they covered the face of the
whole earth, so that the land was darkened; and they did eat every herb
of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and
there remained not any green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the
field, through all the land of Egypt.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p9"></span>**15.** Operueruntque superficiem totius
regionis, et obscurata fuit terra, comederuntque omnem herbam terrae
atque omnem fructum arborum quem reliquerat grando, neque remansit
quicquam viride in arboribus, et in herbis agri in tota terra AEgypti.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p10"></span>**16.** Then Pharaoh called for Moses and
Aaron in haste; and he said, I have sinned against the Lord your God,
and against you.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p11"></span>**16.** Tunc festinavit Pharao vocare
Mosen et Aharon, et dixit, Peccavi in Jehovam Deum vestrum et vos.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p12"></span>**17.** Blow therefore forgive, I pray
thee, my sin only this once, and entreat the Lord your God, that he may
take away from me this death only.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p13"></span>**17.** Nunc ergo remitte quaeso peccatum
meum duntaxat vice hac, et orate Jehovam Deum vestrum, et auferat a me
tantum mortem istam.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p14"></span>**18.** And he went out from Pharaoh, and
entreated the Lord.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p15"></span>**18.** Et egressus est a Pharaone, et
oravit Jehovam.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p16"></span>**19.** And the Lord turned a mighty
strong west wind, which took away the locusts, and east them into the
Red sea; there remained not one locust in all the coasts of Egypt.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p17"></span>**19.** Et convertit Jehova ventum
occidentalem fortem valde, et sustulit locustas, et dejecit eas in mare
rubrum: non remansit locusta ulla in tota regione AEgypti.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p18"></span>**20.** But the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s
heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p19"></span>**20.** Et roboravit Jehova cor
Pharaonis, neque dimisit filios Israel.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p20"></span><span id="iv.x.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p21"></span>**12.** *And the Lord said unto Moses.*
Since Pharaoh was not induced to obey by the announcement of the
punishment, its execution is here related. And first, Moses is commanded
to stretch out his hand to bring in the locusts, in right of the
authority with which God had invested him; for the stretching forth of
the hand is a token of power. He therefore adds, just beyond, that he
stretched forth his rod, which we have before seen to have been given
him as a royal scepter. It is, then, just as if God had appointed him to
be His vicegerent, and had subjected to him the sea, and earth, and air.
But that he may sink down into the character of a minister, he does not
say that the locusts came up at his command, but assigns the glory of
the operation to the Lord alone. And this mode of expression is worthy
of remark, since we learn from it that the ministers of God, although
they bring nothing of their own, still do not lose their labor, because
the efficacy of the Spirit is conjoined to their word; and still that
nothing is detracted from the power of God and transferred to them,
since they are but instruments, which by God’s hand are applied in His
service. Thus did not Moses in vain command, as he stretched forth his
rod, the locusts to come up; because the effect of his command
immediately appeared. Still he did not himself create the locusts, nor
attract them by the stirring’ of his rod, but they were divinely brought
by the power of the east wind. But so sudden a gathering unquestionably
occurred contrary to the order of nature; nor, if God thus employed the
wind, does it necessarily follow that this was usual. We know that the
east wind is a wholesome and gentle wind, and although it is sometimes
stormy with respect to Judea, still it does not seem probable that
either by its strength or by its contagious blast, Egypt was covered
with locusts. But it is possible that God, bringing in the immense
abundance of locusts by a sudden whirlwind, gave the Egyptians a sign of
their approaching calamity, so that it might be more manifest that they
had not arisen otherwise than in accordance with the prediction of
Moses. That “before them there were no such locusts as they, neither
after them shall be such,” is no contradiction to the declaration of
Joel, who also affirms that such an instance had never occurred, as that
the locust should eat what the palmer-worm had left; and what the locust
had left the canker-worm should eat; and what the canker-worm had left
the caterpillar should eat., (<span id="iv.x.iii-p21.1"></span>[Joe
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004)<span id="iv.x.iii-p21.1"></span>;)
for he is not there speaking of a single punishment, but of its varied
and multiform continuation.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p22"></span><span id="iv.x.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p23"></span>**16.** *Then Pharaoh called for Moses
and Aaron in haste.* This haste arose from anxiety and fear, because it
was a time of extremity, and the enormity of the evil admitted no delay.
By this vehemence, then, Pharaoh betrays his distress, when he not only
willingly is inclined to recall Moses, whom he had lately driven out,
but does so in such haste. The confession which is added, although it
flowed from a double or deceitful heart, still was not altogether
feigned. For we cannot doubt that (because Pharaoh was conscious of his
sin) God extorted from him this cry, “I have sinned,” under the smiting
and compulsion of His chastisements. For we must observe this
distinction, which I have already laid down, between the hypocrites who
lie and deceive designedly, or who knowingly and willfully delude
others, and those who beguile themselves, and have a terror of God’s
judgments, even while they cherish iniquity and impiety in the secret
recesses of their hearts. Pharaoh was a hypocrite of this latter kind,
who, although having no professed intention of deceiving either God or
Moses, yet, because he did not prove and examine himself, did not
sincerely confess his sin. And this must be carefully observed, lest any
should slumber in false repentance, as if temporary fear or forced
humiliation could propitiate God. As to his saying, that he had “sinned
against the Lord God and the Israelites,” it must be thus explained,
that he had been rebellious against God, because he had unjustly
afflicted that people which He had taken under His care, and into His
confidence. For, although he had not been taught by the Prophets, yet
did he hold this principle; that, because God by plain and illustrious
miracles had shown that people to be under His defense and protection,
he had by his iniquitous and tyrannical oppression of them committed an
injury against their patron and guardian.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p24"></span>He confesses, then, that he is doubly
culpable, because he had been cruel to the people, and had impiously
despised God. This would have been an evidence of true repentance, if it
had proceeded from pure and genuine feeling; for the sinner, voluntarily
condemning himself, prevents the judgment of God. His humiliation also
appears in this respect to have been by no means ordinary, when he
humbly prays to Moses for forgiveness; for it was no slight virtue, that
a very powerful king should thus submit himself to an obscure and
despised individual; which even the lower classes are often ashamed to
do. But., inasmuch as his heart was still enchained by secret
corruption, he deceitfully made a show of the outward signs (of
humiliation) instead of the reality. Wherefore David, when he declares,
“Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered,” has good cause for adding, “and in whose spirit is no guile.”
(<span id="iv.x.iii-p24.1"></span>[Ps.
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002)<span id="iv.x.iii-p24.1"></span>.)
In order, therefore, that we may prove to God, whose attribute it is to
search the heart, the truth of our repentance, let us learn seriously
and inwardly to examine ourselves, lest there should be any hypocrisy
lurking within us. The addition “only this once,” is meant to testify
the continuance of his better mind; as though he acknowledged that he
had been hitherto perfidious, and promised that he would hereafter obey
God in good earnest. Whence we gather, that the reprobate do not return
immediately to their natural habits and disposition, because they are
ignorant of the power and nature of true conversion, but, because being
without a spirit of uprightness, they have a perverse and crooked heart.
Moreover, by desiring only that this present death should be removed
from him, he seems not much to care for an entire reconciliation with
God; as it is usual for the wicked to be indifferent to the hatred or
favor of God, and only to have a dread of His hand. Careless, then, of
his sin, he merely wishes that punishment should be far removed from
him.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p25"></span><span id="iv.x.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p26"></span>**18.** *And he went out.* <span
id="iv.x.iii-p26.1"></span>We have stated why the holy Prophet went out
from the king to pray, viz., because he was not worthy that the sacred
name of God should be invoked in his presence. Therefore Moses did not
offer prayer for him, because he thought him to be really converted, but
that he might open God’s way for the remaining contests. If, indeed, a
choice had been given to the holy man, I do not doubt that he would have
been disposed by his extraordinary kindness of heart, willingly to
provide for the tyrant’s safety; but, since he had heard the revelation
of his desperate obstinacy, he was only intent on manifesting the power
of God. Nor is there any question that he prayed under the special
impulse of the Spirit, until he was assured of the final act; and the
event proves that his prayers were not vainly cast into the air, because
the land was immediately cleared of the locusts. We must have the same
opinion with respect to the west wind as we have lately advanced
respecting the opposite wind; for a temporary blast would not have been
sufficient to dissipate so vast and filthy a host; but, in both cases,
God testified by a visible token that he was influenced by the prayers
of His servant, and that on this account the plague was stayed. It is
sufficiently well known that the Arabian Gulf is called by the name of
the Red Sea. By the Hebrews it is called <span
id="iv.x.iii-p26.2"></span>סוף<span id="iv.x.iii-p26.3"></span>,  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) *suph,* <span
id="iv.x.iii-p27.6"></span>either from the reeds or rushes with which it
abounds, or from its whirlwinds; since this word is used in Scripture in
both senses.  <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) <span
id="iv.x.iii-p28.1"></span> If, therefore, you choose to translate it
into Latin it must be called “Mare algosum et junceum,” or “turbinosum.”
(The weedy and rushy sea, or the tempestuous sea.) But, since there is
something monstrous and incredible in such raving obstinacy, it is
expressly stated that his heart was hardened by God; that we may learn
to tremble at that terrible judgment, when the wicked, seized by a
spirit of madness, do not hesitate to provoke more and more that God
whose name overwhelms them with terror.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p29"></span><span id="iv.x.iii-p29.1"></span>[Exodus
10:21-29](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#021)<span
id="iv.x.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p30"></span>**21.** And the Lord said unto Moses,
Stretch out thine hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over
the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p31"></span>**21.** Tunc dixit Jehova ad Mosen,
Extende manum tuam in coelum, ut sint tenebrae super terram Aegypti, et
palpet tenebras, (*vel,* et palpentur tenebrae.)

<span id="iv.x.iii-p32"></span>**22.** And Moses stretched forth his
hand toward heaven; and there was a thick darkness in all the hind of
Egypt three days:

<span id="iv.x.iii-p33"></span>**22.** Et extendit Moses manum suam in
coelum: et fuerunt tenebrae caliginosae in tota terra Aegypti tribus
diebus.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p34"></span>**23.** They saw not one another, neither
rose any from his place for three days: but all the children of Israel
had light in their dwellings.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p35"></span>**23.** Non videbat alter alterum, neque
surrexerunt quisque e loco suo tribus diebus: at omnibus filiis Israel
erat lux in habitaculis suis.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p36"></span>**24.** And Pharaoh called unto Moses,
and said, Go ye, serve the Lord; only let your flocks and your herds be
stayed: let your little ones also go with you.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p37"></span>**24.** Tunc accersivit Pharao Mosen, et
dixit, Ite, servite Jehovae: tantum pecus vestrum et armentum vestrum
remanebit: etiam parvuli vestri ibunt vobiscum.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p38"></span>**25.** And Moses said, Thou must give us
also sacrifices and burnt-offerings, that we may sacrifice unto the Lord
our God.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p39"></span>**25.** Dixitque Moses, Tu quoque dabis
in manu nostra sacrificia et holocausta, ut faciamus Jehovae Deo nostro.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p40"></span>**26.** Our cattle also shall go with us;
there shall not an hoof be left behind: for thereof must we take to
serve the Lord our God; and we know not with what we must serve the Lord
until we come thither.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p41"></span>**26.** Insuper pecudes nostrae ibunt
nobiscum, non remanebit ungula: quia ex eo accipiemus ad colendum
Jehovam Deum nostrum: nos autem nescimus quo colemus Jehovam, donec
pervenerimus illuc.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p42"></span>**27.** But the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s
heart, and he would not let them go.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p43"></span>**27.** Et roboravit Jehova cor
Pharaonis, neque voluit dimittere illos.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p44"></span>**28.** And Pharaoh said unto him, Get
thee from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more: for in that day
thou seest my face thou shalt die.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p45"></span>**28.** Et dixit Pharao, Recede a me,
cave tibi ne amplius videas faciem meam, qua enim die videbis faciem
meam, morieris.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p46"></span>**29.** And Moses said, Thou hast spoken
well; I will see thy face again no more.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p47"></span>**29.** Respondit Moses, Rectum dixisti,
non videbo ultra faciem tuam.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p48"></span><span id="iv.x.iii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p49"></span>**21.** *And the Lord said unto Moses.*
<span id="iv.x.iii-p49.1"></span>God here inflicts the punishment
without denouncing it; because Pharaoh had deceitfully broken his
promise of being obedient to His word. Since, therefore, he had so
wickedly abused God’s clemency, he must needs be suddenly overtaken by a
new calamity, that he might in the darkness feel God’s avenging hand,
which he had despised. Nor, indeed, would he have been alarmed by
menaces; as it will directly appear, that, when he was warned of the
death of his first-born, and of the same slaughter both upon the
first-born of man and of beast through the whole land, he was unmoved,
and in his security provoked God, as if he had heard nothing. There is
no wonder, then, that God covered the whole land with darkness before
Pharaoh could suspect anything of the kind. At the end of the verse,
some translate the word <span id="iv.x.iii-p49.2"></span>ימש<span
id="iv.x.iii-p49.3"></span>,  <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124)
*yamesh,* <span id="iv.x.iii-p50.7"></span>passively; as if he had said
that the darkness might be felt. For the word <span
id="iv.x.iii-p50.8"></span>חשך<span id="iv.x.iii-p50.9"></span>,
*choshek, darkness,*  <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) <span
id="iv.x.iii-p51.1"></span>is singular in Hebrew. Those who take it
transitively, because they suppose it to be put indefinitely, understand
a noun, with this meaning, “that a man might feel.” But if the
transitive sense be preferred, it will be better referred to Pharaoh.
But I willingly subscribe to their opinion, who hold that the darkness
was so thick that it might be felt by the hand.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p52"></span><span id="iv.x.iii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p53"></span>**22.** *And Moses stretched forth his
hand.* By this darkness God not only wished to reprove the blindness of
Pharaoh’s mind, but in every way to convince him how senseless and mad
he was in his resistance. There is no blessing which is more common to
all men, from the very highest even to the lowest, than light, which is
enjoyed not less by the humblest and most contemptible people than by
the greatest kings. It was, then, a terrible judgment of God, that the
whole world should be enlightened by the sun’s rays, whilst the
Egyptians, although possessing sight, were plunged in darkness. What
madness, then, could be greater than theirs, when in their hardness of
heart they cease not to contend against God’s hand, formidable as it
was? Their waters turned into blood had denied them drink; frogs and
other animals had filled the whole country; they had almost been
consumed by lice; their limbs had been enfevered by boils; the hail had
destroyed part of their corn; the locusts had brought still increased
destruction; even rocks and stones should have been somewhat terrified
by such warnings. This admonition, then, was very seasonable, viz., that
darkness should be spread over all Egypt, that they might understand
that, when God was wrath with them, the very hosts of heaven were armed
against them. And, in order that God’s vengeance should be neither
obscure nor doubtful, the cause of the darkness could not be assigned to
an eclipse, both on account of its density and the time it lasted; for
both of these circumstances are expressly noted by Moses, that it may be
more clear that the sun was obscured to the Egyptians, because they had
endeavored to extinguish God’s glory by their impious contempt. On the
contrary, the Israelites must have acquired new cheerfulness when they
recognized in the sun’s brightness that God’s paternal countenance was
shining upon them; for He then enlightened them with His favor, as if to
show them the freedom of their egress. And, indeed, He might have at
once led them forth from their astonished enemies; but He chose, as we
shall see, to prepare their departure in another way.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p54"></span><span id="iv.x.iii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p55"></span>**24.** *And Pharaoh called unto Moses.*
We gather that he was greatly alarmed by this infliction; because of his
own accord he again calls to him (as before) the men who were so
troublesome to him, and the authors of such sore calamities, that he may
treat with them of their departure. But it is asked how, if no one rose
from his place for three days, Pharaoh could send for Moses and Aaron?
If we were to answer that the messengers were sent after the darkness
had been dispersed, this objection must readily arise, via, that it does
not appear probable that this untamable wild beast should be so much
subdued, when the severity of the punishment was relaxed; for thus far
we perceive that, as often as God withdrew his hand, the proud tyrant,
having cast aside his fear, returned to his ferocity. My own opinion is,
that whilst the exigency was still pressing upon him, and he feared lest
the darkness should be upon him for ever, he took counsel how to appease
Moses. But when it is here related, that “none rose from his place,” I
understand that it is spoken hyperbolically, as though it were said that
they ceased from all the occupations which required light. But although
the night does not allow of our executing the works in which men are
employed by day, still it does not so confine them that they are unable
to move about. Neither has this hyperbole  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) anything harsh or severe in it, that
the Egyptians were so overwhelmed with darkness as to remain each one
fixed as it were in his own place, and not to behold each other; because
in the three days darkness God forbade them from performing their
customary actions. Although Pharaoh is prepared to accord somewhat more
than before, still he does not make an end of shuffling. He allows their
little ones to go, provided their herds remain; either because he hoped
that the people might easily be recalled through fear of famine; or
because his loss would be at any rate less, if he were enriched by such
spoils. For it. is plain that he was very anxious about the men
themselves, because he so very reluctantly made the concession that they
might go out to sacrifice without their goods; which he would not have
been unwilling to do, if he had only been desirous of spoiling them. But
this passage again teaches us, that the wicked only partially yield to
God, though they cease not meanwhile to struggle like malefactors, who
are compelled to follow the executioner when he drags them by a rope
round their necks, and yet are not on that account any the more
obedient. This, too, is to be observed, that the wicked are quick in
inventing subterfuges, when they are suffering under God’s hand, and
that they turn and twist about in every direction to discover plans for
escaping from a sincere and hearty submission. When he says, “let your
little ones also go with you,” by this particle of amplification he
would make a specious show of generosity, in order to cajole Moses and
Aaron; as if he said, that he now at length granted them what they had
seemed chiefly to require.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p57"></span><span id="iv.x.iii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p58"></span>**25.** *And Moses said.* Moses no less
severely repudiates all exceptions, than as if he authoritatively
demanded of the king what God had enjoined. And assuredly, by this
austere  <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) and abrupt manner of
speaking he evidenced his courage, whereby he might humble the arrogance
and audacity of the impious king. His pretext indeed was, that they had
need of victims, and in this way he avoids the tyrant’s greater
displeasure; but, at the same time, by directly excluding all
conditions, and by not leaving even a hair in the power of the king, he
asserts the indivisible right of God alone; that Pharaoh may know that
all his evasions will profit him nothing. The expression” there shall
not a hoof be left behind,” contains a severe reproof, accompanied with
anger and contempt; as if he would purposely pique  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) the virulent mind of the tyrant. But
we have already said that there was no dissimulation in these words:
for, although the holy man knew that the counsel of God had a further
object, he still thought it sufficient to deliver the commands which
were prescribed to him; nor would: it be proper to suppose that God is
under an obligation always to make the wicked acquainted with all His
purposes.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p61"></span><span id="iv.x.iii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p62"></span>**27.** *But the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s
heart.* A probable conjecture may be elicited front hence, that at the
coming of Moses some light shone forth, so that the darkness was not so
thick; because Pharaoh would never have dared to boast himself so
proudly without being confident of impunity; but his pretences at the
commencement (of their interview) are here omitted by Moses, though the
mitigation of the horrible punishment which had urged him to
supplication depended upon them. But although he is still in a state of
alarm, still he is hardened, and prepares himself for every extremity
rather than simply to obey God. Here, also, according to his custom,
Moses asserts that God was the author of his obduracy; not because he
inspired with obstinacy a heart otherwise disposed to docility and
obedience, but because He gave over as a slave to Satan a reprobate who
was willfully devoted to his own destruction, that he might rush forward
with still increasing pertinacity in his impiety. But, since Moses has
so often used this word, I am astonished at the boldness of certain
sophists who, by the substitution of the word *permission,* allow
themselves by this frivolous evasion to escape so plain a statement.

<span id="iv.x.iii-p63"></span><span id="iv.x.iii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p64"></span>**28.** *And Pharaoh said unto him.* This
ebullition of passion, in the midst of such sore calamities, is a proof
of the violent assaults by which Satan precipitates the wicked, when
they are given over to a reprobate mind. The imperiousness of kings is
indeed notorious, and observed by the ancient poets;  <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) “Animadverte, et dicto pare,” (attend,
and obey my word;) and, again, “Moriere, si te secundo lumine hic
offendero,” (if I meet thee here again a second day, thou shalt die.)
Nor can it be doubted that Pharaoh, with his usual intemperateness, now
breaks out into fierce and cruel threats; but had he not been carried
away by a spirit of madness, he would not have so boldly opposed himself
to God’s servant, whom he had so often known, by experience, to be
endued with unconquerable power, and to be so accredited by God, as to
have supreme dominion over all the elements. Hence, also, we gather,
that he had not been hitherto restrained from treating Moses with
severity either by kindness, or moderation, or patience; because, when
the circumstances of his kingdom were still flourishing, his wrath would
have been more excessive; but that he was kept back by some secret rein.
But Moses shows by his answer, how completely he set at naught all this
froth; for he voluntarily defies him, and by declaring that he will come
before his face no more, signifies that he is not worthy that he should
labor any longer in his favor. But we see that the wicked king, carried
away by his fury, prophesied against the wishes of his own mind, for God
returned upon his own head what he threatened against another. Although,
at the same time, it must be remembered that Moses spoke thus not
without authority, but by God’s command; because, unless he had been
certainly taught that the last trial was come, he would have ever stood
in readiness for the performance of his part. But it will presently
appear from the context, that in this saying also he was the true
messenger of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc03013.htm#fr_115) <span
id="iv.x.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x.i-p18"></span> D’airain; brazen. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc03013.htm#fr_116) <span
id="iv.x.ii-p13.4"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p14"></span> <span id="iv.x.ii-p14.1"></span>מוקש<span
id="iv.x.ii-p14.2"></span>. The root of this word makes it obvious that
its proper meaning is a snare. The word offendiculum mentioned by
*C.*<span id="iv.x.ii-p14.3"></span>, he found in *S. M.*<span
id="iv.x.ii-p14.4"></span>; but the LXX and *V.*<span
id="iv.x.ii-p14.5"></span> have also rendered it a *stumbling-block*

<span id="iv.x.ii-p15"></span>As to the latter part of this verse, *C*.:
appears to have given too hasty a glance at *S. M.*’s notes. Neither the
Hebrew nor the Chaldee Paraphrast has used the infinitive. *S.M.* has
ceased to speak of Onkelos, when he proceeds to say, Alii sic vertunt,
visne prius experiri? — *W.*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc03013.htm#fr_117) <span
id="iv.x.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p18"></span> “A fausses enseignes;” under false
colors. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc03013.htm#fr_118) <span
id="iv.x.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p19"></span> Addition in *Fr*., “quelle partie du
peuple deura aller;” what part of the people was to go.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc03013.htm#fr_119) <span
id="iv.x.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p22"></span> In commenting on this verse, *C.* alludes
to interpretations not noticed by *S*.*M*. — *W*. The gloss in the
*Geneva Bible* is, “I would the Lord were no more affectioned toward you
than I am minded to let you go.”

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc03013.htm#fr_120) <span
id="iv.x.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p24"></span> “Les Israelites ne regardent, et ne
tendent qu’a real faire, come les archiers dressent les yeux a leur
but;” they have no other object or intention but do wrong, and (have
their eyes as steadfastly set upon it) as archers fix theirs on the
butt. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc03013.htm#fr_121) <span
id="iv.x.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p27"></span> *Vide* Latin.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc03013.htm#fr_122) <span
id="iv.x.iii-p26.4"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p27"></span> <span
id="iv.x.iii-p27.1"></span>סוף<span id="iv.x.iii-p27.2"></span>,
sea-weed, <span id="iv.x.iii-p27.3"></span>סופה<span
id="iv.x.iii-p27.4"></span>, or tempest. In Luther’s German,
*Schilfmeer* <span id="iv.x.iii-p27.5"></span>preserves the original
meaning of the Hebrew name for the Red Sea. — *W.*

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc03013.htm#fr_123) <span
id="iv.x.iii-p27.7"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p28"></span> Addition in *Fr*., “C’est par ou les
enfans d’ Israel ont depuis passe comme nous verrons;” the children of
Israel afterwards passed through it, as we shall see.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc03013.htm#fr_124) <span
id="iv.x.iii-p49.4"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p50"></span> <span
id="iv.x.iii-p50.1"></span>ימש<span id="iv.x.iii-p50.2"></span>, the
vowels determine this verb to be in the Hiphil, or active causal voice.
<span id="iv.x.iii-p50.3"></span>חשך*, darkness,* <span
id="iv.x.iii-p50.4"></span>comes after the verb; the ordinary position
of the nominative in Hebrew. The words, therefore, should naturally mean
*the darkness shall make*<span id="iv.x.iii-p50.5"></span> (a man)
*feel.* <span id="iv.x.iii-p50.6"></span>— *W.*

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc03013.htm#fr_125) <span
id="iv.x.iii-p50.10"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p51"></span> Referring, of course, to the Latin
plural noun *tenebrae*.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc03013.htm#fr_126) <span
id="iv.x.iii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p56"></span> Excez de parler. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc03013.htm#fr_127) <span
id="iv.x.iii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p59"></span> Magistrale. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc03013.htm#fr_128) <span
id="iv.x.iii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p60"></span> The *Fr*. thus resolves the metaphor: —
“Comme s’il picquoit de propos delibere le courage envenime du tyran,
pour en faire crever l’aposthume;” as if he purposely lanced the
envenomed audacity of the tyrant, to let out its *matter*.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc03013.htm#fr_129) <span
id="iv.x.iii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.x.iii-p65"></span> Cicero pro C. Rabirio Postumo, c. 11
“Nemo nostrum ignorat, etiam si experti non sumus, consuetudinem regiam.
Regum autem haec sunt imperia: *Animadverte et dicto pare: et praeter
rogitatum si querare*: et illae minae, *Si te secundo lumine hic
offendero, moriere*.” In the *Variorum* edition, Elzevir, 1661, there is
the following note: — “*Animadverte,* etc., Explicat isthaec Columna
commentariis suis ad *Q. Ennium*.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 11](cc03014)
