[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03051)  [Next](cc03053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxvii"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#000)<span id="v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p2"></span><span id="v.xxvii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
8:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#011)<span id="v.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p3"></span>**11.** Beware that thou forget not the
Lord thy God, in not keeping his commandments, and his judgments, and
his statutes, which I command thee this day:

<span id="v.xxvii-p4"></span>**11.** Cave tibi ne obliviscaris Jehovae
Dei tui, ut non observes praecepta ejus, et judicia ejus, et statuta
ejus, quae ego praecipio tibi hodie.

<span id="v.xxvii-p5"></span>**12.** Lest *when* thou hast eaten and art
full, and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt *therein;*

<span id="v.xxvii-p6"></span>**12.** Ne forte comedas et satureris, et
domos egregias aedifices, atque habites in illis.

<span id="v.xxvii-p7"></span>**13.** And *when* thy herds and thy flocks
multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou
hast is multiplied;

<span id="v.xxvii-p8"></span>**13.** Et boves tui ovesque tuae
multiplicentur, argentum quoque et aurum multiplicentur tibi: omne
*inquam* quod est tibi multiplicetur;

<span id="v.xxvii-p9"></span>**14.** Then thine heart be lifted up, and
thou forget the Lord thy God, which brought thee forth out of the land
of Egypt, from the house of bondage;

<span id="v.xxvii-p10"></span>**14.** Tum elevetur cor tuum, et
obliviscaris Jehovae Dei tui, qui eduxit to e terra Aegypti, e domo
servorum:

<span id="v.xxvii-p11"></span>**15.** Who led thee through that great
and terrible wilderness, *wherein were* fiery serpents, and scorpions,
and drought, where *there was* no water; who brought thee forth water
out of the rock of flint;

<span id="v.xxvii-p12"></span>**15.** Qui deduxit to per desertum magnum
et terribile serpentis adurentis, et scorpionis, et sitis, in quo nulla
erat aqua: qui eduxit tibi aquam e petra silicis:

<span id="v.xxvii-p13"></span>**16.** Who fed thee in the wilderness
with manna, which thy fathers knew not; that he might humble thee, and
that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end;

<span id="v.xxvii-p14"></span>**16.** Qui pavit to Man in deserto, quod
non noverant patres tui: ut affligeret to, et probaret to, ut
benefaceret tibi in novissimo tuo.

<span id="v.xxvii-p15"></span>**17.** And thou say in thine heart, My
power, and the might of *mine* hand, hath gotten me this wealth.

<span id="v.xxvii-p16"></span>**17.** Ut dicas in corde tuo, Potentia
mea et robur manus meae paravit mihi has opes.

<span id="v.xxvii-p17"></span>**18.** But thou shalt remember the Lord
thy God: for *it is* he that giveth thee power to get wealth, that he
may establish his covenant which he sware unto thy fathers, as *it is*
this day.

<span id="v.xxvii-p18"></span>**18.** Sed memineris Jehovae Dei tui,
quia ipse dat tibi facultatem ad parandas opes, ut confirmet pactum suum
quod juravit patribus tuis, sicut in hoc die.

<span id="v.xxvii-p19"></span><span id="v.xxvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p20"></span>**11.** *Beware that thou forget not*
 <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) We may easily estimable the
necessity of this admonition from the common corruption of human nature,
which is even yet only too general and too influential; for scarcely
shall we find one person in a hundred in whom satiety does not generate
headiness. Moses will hereafter speak in his Song of the rebelliousness
of this people,  <span id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263)

<span id="v.xxvii-p23"></span>“The beloved, *(Jeshurun,)* waxen fat, and
grown thick, kicked.” (<span id="v.xxvii-p23.1"></span>[De
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span
id="v.xxvii-p23.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.xxvii-p24"></span>It was needful, then, that a restraint
should be put on such refractory beings, nay, that they should have
their wantonness still more tightly repressed in their prosperity. But
we may, and it is well to, extend this doctrine to ourselves also, since
prosperity intoxicates almost all of us, so that we intemperately grow
wanton against God, and forget ourselves and Him. Therefore Moses not
only commands the Israelites not to be ungrateful to God, but warns them
to *guard* themselves (for he uses this word for to *beware)* from that
impious ingratitude. He immediately after uses this same word for the
keeping of the Law. But this is the sum, that they needed the utmost
care and attention to beware lest forgetfulness of God should steal over
them in happy circumstances, and thus they should shake off His fear,
and cast away His yoke, and indulge themselves in the lusts of their
flesh. For he shews that contempt of the Law would be a token of
ingratitude; because it could not be but that they would submit
themselves to God, and keep His Law, if they only reflected that it was
to nothing but His blessing that they owed their prosperity. We have
already observed elsewhere that his designation of the Law by various
terms amounts to a commendation of its perfect doctrine; as much as to
say, that no part of right conduct is omitted in it. He also asserts
here (as often elsewhere) the faithfulness of his ministry, lest they
should shufflingly contend that, whilst they refuse the commands of a
mortal man, they are not therefore rebellious against God. He says,
then, that their piety will not be acceptable to God, unless they keep
the Law propounded by Him.

<span id="v.xxvii-p25"></span><span id="v.xxvii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p26"></span>**12.** *Lest when thou hast eaten and art
full.* He more fully explains what we have already observed, viz., that
it might happen, in the gradual course of time, that they should fail in
their fear of God and honor for His Law, and therefore should take the
greater care lest continual peace and joy should bring this callousness
upon them. We should diligently remark the cause of departure which he
points out, viz., the pride whereby riches and abundance ordinarily puff
up men’s minds. The examples of moderation in prosperity are rare;
rather, as soon as men perceive themselves to be in a flourishing
estate, they begin to swell with arrogance, and so admire their
exaltation that they despise even God Himself. On this ground Paul
charges

<span id="v.xxvii-p27"></span>“the rich in this world that they be not
high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches.” (<span
id="v.xxvii-p27.1"></span>[1Ti
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017)<span id="v.xxvii-p27.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.xxvii-p28"></span>We ought., indeed, the more kindly we are
dealt with by God, to submit ourselves the more meekly to His rule; but,
as I have said, the depravity of our nature hurries us quite the other
way, so that we grow insolent under God’s indulgence, which should bend
us to submission. And if this does not happen immediately, yet whenever
prosperity flows on uninterruptedly, its delights gradually corrupt even
the best of us, so that they at last degenerate from themselves. If,
then, we desire to steer a straight course, we ought to strive after the
healing of this most deadly disease of pride. Again, since by the wiles
of Satan continued prosperity softens and ensnares us, let us learn to
beware not only for a day, but to keep watch through the whole course of
our lives. Moses wisely anticipates their pride by recalling to the
Israelites’ recollection what was their original condition. For whence
does it arise that those who seem to themselves and others to be happy
in the world are puffed up with self-confidence and pride, except
because they reflect not on their origin, but despise all but
themselves, just as if they had come down from the clouds? For there are
few like Codrus, who, after gaining a kingdom, always ingenuously
confessed that his father had been a potter. God here presents a remedy
to this vice, (which reigns too extensively,) by representing to the
Israelites their former state, and commanding them to reflect that they
were rescued from it by His especial blessing. Nothing but the
recollection of their deliverance could tame their arrogance; for what
could be more unreasonable than that *they* should be insolent who were
formerly the slaves of a most haughty nation, and who had not acquired
their liberty by their own efforts, but contrary to their hope and
deserts had obtained it by God’s mere favor, who then had wandered in
exile through the wilderness, and at length, under God’s guidance, had
entered the land promised them? In a word, God deals with them just as
if one should reproach a man (who, having become suddenly rich, bore
himself intemperately) with his former beggary and want. Moreover, since
they were too slow of heart to receive this admonition promptly and
cheerfully, Moses enlarges on the Divine benefits which they had
experienced in the wilderness. For this was incredible, that this mixed
multitude of men, and women, and children, and slaves should have lived
so many years, not only amongst wild beasts, but amongst scorpions and
vipers, and all that is most venomous in the serpent tribe. God’s
goodness shone forth, too, still more brightly in that sudden miracle
whereby He supplied water to them in their thirst from what was before
an and rock.  <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) But since he
reminds them in the next verse how they had manna for their bread or
food, I will join these two things together.

<span id="v.xxvii-p30"></span><span id="v.xxvii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p31"></span>**16.** *Who fed thee in the wilderness.*
He had said that water was brought forth from the rock of flint when the
people were suffering from thirst; now, he adds that they had manna
instead of bread; as if he had said that when meat and drink failed them
they must have perished of want unless God had preternaturally given
them both, causing the hard rock to flow down in water, and sending
bread from heaven. Moreover he repeats what he had said before, that the
people were afflicted with this need as a trial of their faith and
patience; yet in this trial both their incredulity and intemperance were
discovered, whilst God’s goodness and power were eventually more clearly
displayed, since He pardoned their ingratitude, and, notwithstanding it,
aided their necessity. For if they had not suffered from hunger, God’s
bounty in supplying them with their daily food would have been
neglectfully received. This is the meaning of the conclusion, “to do
thee good at thy latter end.” From which words let us also learn that we
are often deprived of our necessary supplies, in order that our senses
may awaken to acknowledge God’s aid which appears in our extremity. For
whilst abundance covers our eyes with a veil, or dims their sight, so,
on the other hand, deprivation and want purge and remove this dimness
that we may more clearly perceive the benefits afforded us by God.

<span id="v.xxvii-p32"></span><span id="v.xxvii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p33"></span>**17.** *And thou say in, thy heart.* He
describes that kind of pride of which we have lately spoken, viz., when
men attribute to their own industry, or labor, or foresight, what they
ought to refer to the blessing of God. It has indeed been said, that our
hearts are uplifted in other ways also; but this is the principal ground
of pride, to assume and assign to ourselves what belongs to God. For
nothing so greatly confines us within the boundaries of humility and
modesty as the acknowledgment of God’s grace; for it is madness and
temerity to raise our crests against Him on whom we depend, and to whom
we owe ourselves and all we possess. Rightly, then, does Moses reprove
the pride of the human heart which arises from forgetfulness of God, if
they think that they have gained by their own exertions *(marte suo)*
what God has given them of His own pleasure, in order to lay them under
obligation to Himself. “To say in the heart,” is a Hebraism for thinking
in one’s self, or reflecting in one’s self. He does not, therefore, only
require the outward expression of the lips, whereby men profess that
they are grateful to God’s bounty, (for in this there is often nothing
more than hypocrisy and vanity;) but he would have them seriously
persuaded that whatever they possess is derived from His sheer
beneficence. He has already said, that although when they entered the
land they would be fed with bread and other foods, still the manna
wherewith God had supported them in the wilderness would be a perpetual
proof that man is not sustained by bread only, but by the secret virtue
of God, which inspires the principle of life. Another lesson is now
added, viz., that because God formerly fed and clothed them
gratuitously, and without any act of their own, they thence are taught
that, even whilst they strenuously labor and strive, whatever they
acquire is not so much the reward of their own industry as the fruit of
God’s blessing. For he not only affirms that at their first entrance
into the land they were enriched, because God dealt with them liberally,
but He extends this to the whole course of human life, that men obtain
nothing by their own vigilance and diligence, except in so far as God
blesses them from above. And this he more fully explains immediately
afterwards, where he commands them to remember therefore that “it is God
who giveth them power,” etc. For although God would not have us slumber
in inactivity, yet what Paul says of the preaching of the Gospel,  <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) holds good also in the most trifling
matters, viz., that “neither is he that planteth anything, neither he
that watereth,” but all things are in the power of God, by whose only
influence it is that the earth brings forth fruit. (<span
id="v.xxvii-p34.1"></span>[1Co
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="v.xxvii-p34.1"></span>.)
We must then recollect that although God reproves man’s slothfulness,
and punishes it with want and hunger, still they who are active in labor
do not get wealth by their own diligence, but by the blessing of God
alone. On this doctrine the prayer which Christ dictated to us is
founded, in which we ask to have our daily bread given us. But although
this relates alike to all mankind, yet Moses appropriates it especially
to God’s chosen people, in whom God’s blessing shines forth most
brightly, and at the same time admonishes them that the fact of His
supplying them with food depends on the covenant whereby He adopted the
race of Abraham to Himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc03052.htm#fr_262) <span
id="v.xxvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p21"></span> Take heed to thyself — *Lat.*

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc03052.htm#fr_263) <span
id="v.xxvii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p22"></span><span id="v.xxvii-p22.1"></span> “LXX.
autem pro eo (Jeshurun) substituerunt <span id="v.xxvii-p22.2"></span>ὀ
ἠγαπημένος<span id="v.xxvii-p22.3"></span>, et *V.*<span
id="v.xxvii-p22.4"></span> imitatur per suum *Dilectus.* <span
id="v.xxvii-p22.5"></span>Unde autem sit illa versio, vix explicari
video; fatente etiam Steucho, se nescire a quo verbo id nomen duct
possit si Dilectum significat,” *etc.* <span id="v.xxvii-p22.6"></span>—
*Marckius on <span id="v.xxvii-p22.7"></span>[Deuteronomy
32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#000)<span id="v.xxvii-p22.7"></span>:*
<span id="v.xxvii-p22.8"></span>C.’s own translation of the word is
*Rectus.*

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc03052.htm#fr_264) <span
id="v.xxvii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p29"></span> The following sentence is omitted in the
French.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc03052.htm#fr_265) <span
id="v.xxvii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p34"></span> A parenthesis is here added in the *Fr.,*
(“selon qu’il est prins de la similitude des laboureurs;”) as it. is
taken from the similitude of laborers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 23:20-23,25-31](cc03053)
