[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03040)  [Next](cc03042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p1"></span>deuteronomy 11

<span id="v.xvi-p2"></span>ANOTHER REPETITION

<span id="v.xvi-p3"></span>deuteronomy 11:18-20

<span id="v.xvi-p4"></span>**18.** Therefore shall ye lay up these my
words in your heart, and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon
your hand, that they may be as frontlets between your eyes.

<span id="v.xvi-p5"></span>**18.** Ponite verba haec in corde vestro, et
animo vestro, atque ea ligate in signum in manu vestra, sintque in
frontalia inter oculos vestros.

<span id="v.xvi-p6"></span>**19.** And ye shall teach them your
children, speaking of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when
thou walkest by the way, when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

<span id="v.xvi-p7"></span>**19.** Et docete ea filios vestros, et
loquamini de eis quum sedebis domi tuae, et quum ambulabis per viam:
quumque jacebis in lecto, et quum surges.

<span id="v.xvi-p8"></span>**20.** And thou shalt write them upon the
door-posts of thine house, and upon thy gates.

<span id="v.xvi-p9"></span>**20.** Scribes quoque ea in postibus domus
tuae, et in portis tuis.

<span id="v.xvi-p10"></span><span id="v.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p11"></span>**18.** *Therefore shall ye lay up these my
words.* He again demands their serious attention, lest if the doctrine
he propounds should be only lightly and carelessly received, it should
speedily be let slip; for to lay up in, or on, the heart, is the same as
to hide deeply in it; although, where the word “soul” is added, the
“heart” refers to the mind, or the intellectual faculties. In fine, he
commands them to have the Law not only impressed on the mind, but
embraced with sincere affection. In the next place, he commands that aid
to the memory which we have just considered, viz., that they should wear
the precepts on the arms and foreheads; as if God should constantly meet
them, to arouse their senses. For (as has been said) God had no regard
to the bands themselves, but would have them seen on their arms and
foreheads for another object, viz.,  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) to suggest and renew their care for
religion. Again, He appointed them to occupy the place of ornaments, in
order to accustom the people to take their chief delight in meditating
on the Law. Thus that foolish ambition is sufficiently refuted, when
hypocrites sought after a reputation for holiness by their fringes and
other fopperies, as well as that gross error of the whole people, in
thinking that they discharged their duty to God by their outward dress.
What follows afterwards, that the precepts should be written on the
gates of their cities, and on their private houses, tends to the same
thing; for we have said, that since men’s minds are prone to vanity, and
are easily distracted by innumerable allurements, they have need of such
stays to hold them back. And this object is plainly expressed, when He
commands them severally to speak of the precepts of the Law, whether
they are sitting at home, or going abroad, or lying down, or rising up;
because without diligent exercise, it usually happens that whatever men
have once learnt is soon lost. He adds, also, another effect of this
diligence, viz., that not only should each of them consult their own
individual advantage, but also teach their children, whereby God’s Law
would ever be maintained in rigor by perpetual succession.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc03041.htm#fr_235) <span
id="v.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p12"></span> C’est de renouveler aux enfans d’Israel la
pensee, qu ils devoyent avoir de s’enquerir de sa volonte;” to renew in
the children of Israel the care they ought to have in inquiring as to
His will. — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 27:1-4,8](cc03042)
