[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc03005)  [Next](cc03007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span>EXODUS 3

<span id="iv.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro
his father-in-law, the priest of Midian: and he led the flock to the
back-side of the desert, and came to the mountain of God, *even*, to
Horeb.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Pascebat autem Moses oves Jethro
soceri sui sacerdotis Midian, duxitque oves post desertum, et venit ad
mentem Dei, *nempe* Horeb.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And the Angel of the Lord appeared
unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush; and he looked,
and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush *was* not consumed.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et visus est ei Angelus Jehovae in
flamma ignis e medio rubi: et vidit, et ecce rubus ardebat in igne, et
rubus ipse non consumebatur.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And Moses said, I will now turn
aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Dixit itaque Moses, Divertam nunc
ut videam visionem hanc magnam, quare non comburatur rubus.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And when the Lord saw that he
turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush,
and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here *am* I.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et vidit Jehova quod diverteret ad
videndum: vocavitque eum Deus e medio rubi, dicens, Moses, Moses. Et
respondit, Ecce ego.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And he said, Draw not nigh hither:
put off thy shoes from off thy feet; for the place whereon thou standest
*is* holy ground.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Tunc dixit, Ne appropinques huc:
solve calceamenta e pedibus tuis: quia locus, in quo stas, terra sancta
est.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p12"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p13"></span>**1.** *Now Moses kept the flock.* We
have already said that he was occupied as a shepherd for a long time
(viz., about forty years) before this vision appeared to him. The
patience, then, of the holy man is commended by his continuance in this
work; not that Moses had any intention of boastfully celebrating his own
virtues, but that the Holy Spirit dictated what would be useful to us,
and, as it were, suggested it to his mouth, that what he did and
suffered might be an example for ever. For he must have had much mental
struggle at this tedious delay, when old age, which weakens the body,
came on, since even in those days few retained their activity after
their eightieth year; and although he might have lived frugally, yet
temperance could not protect even the most robust body against so many
hardships, because it is given to very few persons to be able thus to
live in the open air, and to bear heat, and cold, and hunger, constant
fatigue, the care of cattle, and other troubles. God, indeed,
miraculously supported the holy man in the performance of his arduous
duties; but still the internal conflict must have gone on, — why does
God so long delay and suspend what he so long ago determined? It was,
then, no ordinary virtue which overcame these distracting assaults,
which were constantly renewing his anxiety; whilst, in the mean time, he
was living poorly, in huts and sheds, as well as often wandering over
rough and desert places, though from childhood to mature manhood he had
been accustomed to luxury; as he here relates, that, having led his
flock across the Desert, he came to Horeb, which certainly could not
have been effected without his experiencing the cold as he lay on the
ground by night, and burning heat by day. The title of “the mountain of
God” refers  <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md) by anticipation to a
future period, when the place was consecrated by the promulgation of the
Law there. It is well known that Horeb is the same mountain which is
also called Sinai, except that a different name is given to its opposite
sides, and, properly speaking, its eastern side is called Sinai, its
western, Horeb.  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md) Since, then, God
appeared there and gave so many manifest signs of his heavenly glory,
when he renewed his covenant with his people, and furnished them with a
rule of perfect holiness, the place became invested with peculiar
dignity.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p17"></span>**2.** *And the Angel of the Lord
appeared unto him.* It was necessary that he should assume a visible
form, that he might be seen by Moses, not as he was in his essence, but
as the infirmity of the human mind could comprehend him. For thus we
must believe that God, as often as he appeared of old to the holy
patriarchs, descended in some way from his majesty, that he might reveal
himself as far as was useful, and as far as their comprehension would
admit. The same, too, is to be said of angels, who, although they are
invisible spirits, yet when it seemed good to the Almighty, assumed some
form in which they might be seen. But let us inquire who this Angel was?
since soon afterwards he not only calls himself Jehovah, but claims the
glory of the eternal and only God. Now, although this is an allowable
manner of speaking, because the angels transfer to themselves the person
and titles of God, when they are performing the commissions entrusted to
them by him; and although it is plain from many passages, and  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md) especially from the first chapter of
Zechariah, that there is one head and chief of the angels who commands
the others, the ancient teachers of the Church have rightly understood
that the Eternal Son of God is so called in respect to his office as
Mediator, which he figuratively bore from the beginning, although he
really took it upon him only at his Incarnation. And Paul sufficiently
expounds this mystery to us, when he plainly asserts that Christ was the
leader of his people in the Desert. (<span
id="iv.iii.i-p18.2"></span>[1Co
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p18.2"></span>.) Therefore, although at that time, properly
speaking, he was not yet the messenger of his Father, still his
predestinated appointment to the office even then had this effect, that
he manifested himself to the patriarchs, and was known in this
character. Nor, indeed, had the saints ever any communication with God
except through the promised Mediator. It is not then to be wondered at,
if the Eternal Word of God, of one Godhead and essence with the Father,
assumed the name of “the Angel” on the ground of his future mission.
There is a great variety of opinions as to the vision. It is too forced
an allegory to make, as some do, the body of Christ of the bush, because
his heavenly majesty consumed it not when he chose to inhabit it. It is
also improperly wrested by those who refer it to the stubborn spirit of
the nation, because the Israelites were like thorns, which yield not to
the flames. But when the natural sense is set forth, it will not be
necessary to refute those which are improbable. This vision is very
similar to that former one which Abraham saw. (<span
id="iv.iii.i-p18.3"></span>[Ge
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p18.3"></span>.) He saw a burning lamp in the midst of a
smoking furnace; and the reason assigned is, that God will not permit
his people to be extinguished in darkness. The same similitude answers
to the bush retaining its entireness in the midst of the flame. The bush
is likened to the humble and despised people; their tyrannical
oppression is not unlike the fire which would have consumed them, had
not God miraculously interposed. Thus, by the presence of God, the bush
escaped safely from the fire; as it is said in <span
id="iv.iii.i-p18.4"></span>[Ps
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.iii.i-p18.4"></span>,
that though the waves of trouble beat against the Church and threaten
her destruction, yet “shall she not be moved,” for “God is in the midst
of her.” Thus was the cruelly afflicted people aptly represented, who,
though surrounded by flames, and feeling their heat, yet remained
unconsumed, because they were guarded by the present help of God.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p19"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p20"></span>**3.** *And Moses said, I will now turn
aside.* It is certain that his mind was disposed to reverence from no
rashness, but by divine inspiration. Although not yet accustomed to
visions, he still perceives that, this is no unmeaning spectacle, but
that some mystery was contained in it, which he must by no means
neglect, and to the knowledge of which he was divinely called. In this,
too, we must observe his tractableness, in turning aside to learn. For
it often happens that God presents himself to us in vain, because we
presumptuously reject such great mercy. Let us learn, then, by the
example of Moses, as often as God invites us to himself by any sign, to
give diligent heed, lest the proffered light be quenched by our own
apathy. But from his calling it a “great sight,” we gather that he was
taught by secret inspiration the depth of the mystery, though it was as
yet unknown. In this way God prepared his mind to reverence,  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md) that he might the sooner profit by it.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p22"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p23"></span>**4.** *God called unto him out of the
midst of the bush.* In the first place, my readers will observe that, as
is the case in almost all visions, it was not a voiceless spectacle to
alarm the holy man, but that instruction accompanied it by which his
mind might obtain encouragement. For there would be no use in visions,
if the senses of those who see them were kept in alarm. But although God
was unwilling to terrify his servant, yet, in two ways, he claims
authority and reverence for his intended address; first, by calling
Moses twice by name, he makes his way into the depths of his heart,
that, as if cited before the tribunal of God, he may be more attentive
in listening; and, again, by commanding him to put off his shoes, he
prepares him to humility, by admiration and fear. There is much
discussion with respect to the latter clause amongst many, who delight
in allegory.  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md) I will not recite
their various opinions, because a simple exposition of the true meaning
will dispose of the whole of their subtle triflings. Moses is commanded
to put off his shoes, that by the very bareness of his feet his mind
might be disposed to reverential feelings; and on this account, too, he
is reminded of the holiness of the ground, because, in our prayers, the
bending of the knees, and the uncovering of the head, are helps and
excitements to the worship of God. And this, I think, is made
sufficiently clear by the reason which is immediately added, that the
place on which Moses stood was “holy ground,” and, therefore, not
rashly, or in a profane manner to be trodden on. Whence we gather, that
he was instructed by the outward sign of adoration to enter into the
presence of God as a trembling suppliant. He had, indeed, said, “Here am
I,” (which was a testimony that his mind was teachable, and prepared to
obey,) yet it was good that he should be more actively aroused, in order
that he might come before God with greater fear. But if this most noble
Prophet of God had need of such a preparation, no wonder that God stirs
up our unwilling hearts, by many aids, in order that we may worship him
in truth. And although the same command is not given to all which was
given to Moses, still let us learn, that this is the object of all
ceremonies, that the majesty of God, being duly and seriously perceived
in our minds, may obtain its rightful honor, and that he may be regarded
in accordance with his dignity. If any prefer the deeper meaning
(*anagoge*,) that God cannot be heard until we have put off our earthly
thoughts, I object not to it; only let the natural sense stand first,
that Moses was commanded to put off his shoes, as a preparation to
listen with greater reverence to God. If the question be now raised as
to the holiness of the place, the reply is easy, that it received this
honorable title on account of the vision. Mount Sinai did not,
therefore, naturally possess any peculiar sanctity; but because God, who
sanctifies all things, deigned to give there the sign of his presence.
Thus Bethel was dignified by Jacob with high and honorable titles.
(<span id="iv.iii.i-p24.1"></span>[Ge
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p24.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.i-p25"></span>“How dreadful is this place! this is none
other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven;”

<span id="iv.iii.i-p26"></span>because it had been consecrated by a
special revelation. For, wherever we see any sign of the glory of God,
piety awakens this feeling of admiration in our hearts. In the meantime,
however, since we are too prone to superstition, these two errors must
be avoided; lest, in our gross imaginations, we should, as it were, draw
down God from heaven, and affix him to places on earth; and, also, lest
we should account that sanctity perpetual which is only temporary. The
remedy of the first evil is to reflect on the nature of God; of the
second, to observe his design, how far, and for what use he sanctifies
places. For since the nature of God is spiritual, it is not allowable to
imagine respecting him anything earthly or gross; nor does his immensity
permit of his being confined to place. Again, the sanctity of a place
must be restricted to the object of the manifestation. Thus Mount Horeb
was made holy in reference to the promulgation of the law, which
prescribes the true worship of God. If the descendants of Jacob had
considered this, they would never have set up Bethel as a holy place in
opposition to Sion; because, although God once appeared there to the
patriarch, He had never chosen that place; therefore they were wrong in
proceeding from a particular instance to a general conclusion.

<span id="iv.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
3:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Moreover he said, I *am* the God
of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon God.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p3"></span>**6.** Ego Deus patris tui, Deus Abraham,
Deus Isaac, et Deus Jacob. Et operuit Moses faciem suam, quia timuit
aspicere ad Deum.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p4"></span>**7.** And the Lord said, I have surely
seen the affliction of my people which *are* in Egypt, and have heard
their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows;

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p5"></span>**7.** Et dixit Jehovah, Videndo vidi
afflictionem populi mei, qui est in Aegypto, et clamorem eorum audivi a
facie exactorum ejus: certe cognovi  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md) dolores ejus.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p7"></span>**8.** And I am come down to deliver them
out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land
unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey;
unto the place of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites,
and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p8"></span>**8.** Descendi itaque ad liberandum eum
e manu Aegyptiorum, ad educendum e terra ista in terram fertilem, ac
latam, in terram fluentem lacte et melle, in locum Cananaei, et
Hitthaei, et Amorrhaei, et Pheresaei, et Hivaei, et Jebusaei.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p9"></span>**9.** Now therefore, behold, the cry of
the children of Israel is come unto me: and I have also seen the
oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p10"></span>**9.** Nunc ecce clamor filiorum Israel
venit ad me: atque etiam vidi afflictionem qua Aegyptii opprimunt eos.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p11"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p12"></span>**6.** *I am the God of thy father.* He
does not merely proclaim himself as some heavenly power, nor claim for
himself only the general name of God, but recalling to memory his
covenant formerly made with the patriarchs, he casts down all idols and
false gods, and confirms Moses in the true faith. For hence he knew
surely, that he had not set his hopes in vain in the God whom Abraham
and the other patriarchs had worshipped, and who, by the privilege of
adoption, had separated their race from all other nations. And lest,
through the long lapse of time, Moses might think that what had been
handed down concerning Abraham was obsolete, He expressly asserts that
His faithfulness still held good, by calling Himself “the God of his
father.” But since, in setting forth the hope of redemption, He renews
the memory of His covenant, we gather that it was not obliterated from
the heart of Moses; because it would have been absurd so to speak of a
thing unknown; nor would it have been of any use to make mention of
promises of which no recollection existed in the heart of Moses. Since,
therefore, the hope of the redemption of the chosen people depended on
the covenant which God had formerly made with the patriarchs, He shews
that He had not been trusted to in vain, because His engagement would
not be ineffectual. It was not so much a sign of reverence as of terror
that Moses covered his face; yet must we take both feelings into
account, that he felt sudden alarm at the sight of God, and voluntarily
adored his majesty. It was necessary that his mind should be affected,
and impressed with reverential feelings, that he might be more ready to
obey. We read in Isaiah, (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p12.1"></span>[Isa
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.1"></span>,) that even the angels veil their faces,
because they cannot bear the infinite glory of God; no wonder then that
a mortal man dared not to look upon him. The name of God is appropriated
to the visible appearance in which his majesty was concealed.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p13"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p14"></span>**7.** *And the Lord said.* Before he
delegates to Moses the office of delivering his people, God encourages
him in a somewhat lengthened address to the hope of victory and success;
for we know how doubts enfeeble and hold back the mind with anxiety and
care; Moses then could not engage in or set about his work earnestly
until furnished with the confidence of divine assistance. Therefore God
promises to be his guide, that in reliance upon such aid he may gird
himself boldly to the warfare. From hence we may gather this general
doctrine — that, however slow and unwilling we may naturally be to obey
God, we must not turn away from any command when he assures us of
success, because no stimulus can be stronger than the promise that his
hand shall be always ready to help us when we follow whither he calls
us. With this object God thus speaks before he makes mention of the
vocation of Moses, that he may more cheerfully enter upon his work, in
the assurance of a successful issue. Moreover, when God has founded the
redemption of his people upon his gratuitous covenant, and therefore on
his own free bounty, he adds another argument derived from his justice,
namely, that it is impossible for the judge of the world not to help the
oppressed and afflicted when they are undeservedly mistreated, and
especially when they implore his assistance. This is true generally,
that God will be the avenger of all unjust cruelty; but his special aid
may be expected by believers whom he has taken into his friendship and
protection. Accordingly, when he has declared that he has been moved by
his adoption of this people not to desert it in its extreme necessity,
he adds, in confirmation, that he has come to restrain their oppressors’
tyranny, since he has heard the cry of the afflicted. This was said at
that particular time to encourage Moses; but it ought to afford no
common consolation in the troubles of us all when we are groaning under
any unjust burden; for God, whose sight was then so clear, is not now so
blind as not to see all injustice, and to pity them that call upon him.
Although the expression here used in the original, “seeing I have seen,”
is a Hebraism, still it signifies that, while God delays and suspends
punishment, his winking at men’s evil deeds is no proof that he does not
behold them from heaven, and will in due time appear as their judge, for
the words denote a continued observation — as much as to say, that even
then he was beholding them, when by his quiescence he might have seemed
to neglect the tribulation of his people. By adding that he had heard
their cry, he indirectly rebukes their lukewarmness, since we do not
read that they cried until compelled by their extremity and despair.
Therefore there is no cause for wonder that they almost wasted away
under their misfortunes before succor came, because their prayers were
scarcely offered  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md) after a long
time. And not even then is it probable (as I said before) that they
prayed earnestly; but God had more respect to his mercy and faithfulness
than to their right and well-grounded preparedness. In these words the
Spirit exhorts us to call upon God, and not to be stunned and stupified
by our cares and sorrows, but to learn to fly straightway to this sacred
anchor; as the Psalmist also says, “The eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry,” (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>[Ps
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>,) and as he testifies in another place,
(<span id="iv.iii.ii-p15.2"></span>[Ps
65:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p15.2"></span>,) that he is a God that heareth prayer;
thus does he anxiously invite us to this remedy whenever we are hard
pressed. When he speaks of them as his “people which are in Egypt,” the
apparent inconsistency does not a little tend to confirmation, implying
that the promise which he made to Abraham with regard to inheriting the
land of Canaan would not be without effect; for it would not accord with
the truth of God that a people to whom an inheritance elsewhere was
given should sojourn in Egypt, unless it was to be freed in the
appointed season. It might also be understood *adversatively* — although
a people dwelling in Egypt be far from the land of Canaan, and so might
seem in a manner to be put away from me, still have I heard their cry.
But the probable meaning is, that because it was not fit that a people
which was to inherit the Holy Land should always remain sojourning
elsewhere, therefore God would shortly deliver them. In the end of the
verse the repetition in other words, “I know their sorrows,” is also an
amplification of what came before.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p16"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p17"></span>**8.** *And I am come down to deliver
them.* He now more clearly announces his intention not only to relieve
their present calamity, but to fulfill the promise given to Abraham as
to the possession of Canaan. He therefore marks the end of their
deliverance, that they might enjoy the rest and inheritance promised to
them. It is a common manner of speaking to say, God descends to us, when
he actually puts forth his power and shews that he is near us; as much
as to say, that the Israelites would experience plainly that his help
was at hand. The “large” land seems to be brought in comparison with the
straits in which they now were; for although the land of Goshen was
fertile and convenient, still it scarcely afforded room enough for their
increasing multitude; besides, there they were kept shut in like slaves
in a house of bondage. Finally, he again assures them that he would deal
graciously with them, because he had heard their cry, and was not
ignorant of their sorrows, although he might have long delayed to avenge
them.

<span id="iv.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
3:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p2"></span>**10.** Come now therefore, and I will
send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people, the
children of Israel, out of Egypt.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p3"></span>**10.** Veni itaque, et mittam te ad
Pharaonem, ut educas populum meum filios Israel ex Aegypto.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p4"></span>**11.** And Moses said unto God, Who
*am* I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the
children of Israel out of Egypt?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p5"></span>**11.** Et dixit Moses ad Deum, Quis sum
ego ut vadam ad Pharaonem, et educam filios Israel ex Aegypto?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p6"></span>**12.** And he said, Certainly I will be
with thee; and this *shall be* a token unto thee that I have sent thee:
When thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God
upon this mountain.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p7"></span>**12.** Et respondit, Quia tecum ero: et
hoc tibi signum quod ego miserim te: Quum eduxeris populum ipsum ex
Aegypto, coletis Deum prope montem hunc.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p8"></span>**13.** And Moses said unto God, Behold,
*when* I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The
God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me,
What *is* his name? what shall I say unto them?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p9"></span>**13.** Et ait Moses ad Deum, Ecce ubi
ego venero ad filios Israel, et dixero eis, Deus patrum vestrorum misit
me ad vos: tunc si dixerint, Quod nomen ejus est? quid dicam illis?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p10"></span>**14.** And God said unto Moses, I AM
THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel,
I AM hath sent me unto you.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p11"></span>**14.** Tunc respondit Deus Mosi, Sum
qui sum. Et ait, Sic dices ad filios Israel, Sum misit me ad vos.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p12"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p13"></span>**10.** *Come now therefore.* After God
had furnished his servant with promises to engage him more cheerfully in
his work, he now adds commands, and calls him to undertake the office to
which he is designed. And this is the best encouragement to duty, when
God renders those, who would be otherwise slow through doubt, sure of
good success; for although we must obey God’s plain commands without
delay or hesitation, still he is willing to provide against our
sluggishness by promising that our endeavors shall not be vain or
useless. And certainly it is a feeling naturally implanted in us all,
that we are excited into action by a confidence of good success;
therefore although God sometimes, for the purpose of trying the
obedience of his servants, deprives them of hope, and commands them
peremptorily to do this or that, still he more often cuts off hesitation
by promising a successful issue. Thus, then, he now aroused Moses to
perform his commands by setting the hope of the deliverance before him.
The *copula* must be resolved into the *illative particle*, because the
command and vocation undoubtedly depend upon the promise.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p14"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p15"></span>**11.** *Who am I?* He cannot yet be
accused of disobedience, because, conscious of his own weakness, he
answers that he is not sufficient for it, and therefore refuses the
commission. His comparison of himself with Pharaoh was an additional
pretext for declining it. This, then, seems to be the excuse of modesty
and humility; and as such, I conceive it not only to be free from blame,
but worthy of praise. It is no contradiction to this that he knew God to
be the proposer of this very arduous task, for he wonders that some one
else was not rather chosen, since God has so many thousands of beings at
command. But another question arises, why he, who forty years ago had
been so forward in killing the Egyptian, and, relying on the vocation of
God, had dared to perform so perilous a deed, should now timidly deny
his sufficiency for the deliverance of the people? It does not seem
probable that his rigor had decreased from age; though youth is
naturally ardent, and age induces coldness and supineness: but it
appears that his fault was of another kind, viz., that he advanced
hastily at first, not having sufficiently considered his own powers, nor
weighed the greatness of his undertaking. For although such
precipitation may be praiseworthy, still it often fails in the middle of
its course; just as precocious fruits either never arrive at maturity,
or soon perish. Therefore, although Moses afforded an example of a noble
disposition, when he so hastily devoted himself to God’s work; yet was
he not then provided with that firmness which would support him to the
end, because the faith, which prevailed in his heart, had not yet struck
its roots deeply enough, nor had he thoroughly examined his own
capability. Therefore does he tremble when he is brought to the point,
though he had been more confident when its difficulty was as yet
unconsidered. So daily do we, who appear to ourselves of good courage
 <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md) when out of the reach of darts,
begin to quake as the battle comes near us; because we perceive the
dangers which did not affect us at a distance. No wonder, then, if
Moses, who had been ready to obey forty years ago, and who had
perseveringly cherished in himself this holy feeling, is filled with new
alarm, when he is commanded to enter on the field of battle.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p17"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p18"></span>**12.** *And he said, Certainly I will
be with thee.* It is remarkable that God sets his ready help alone
against all to overcome every fear, and to take away every scruple; as
much as to say, It matters not who Moses is, or what may be his
strength, so that God be his leader. In these words we are taught, that
he is never regarded by us with due honor, unless when, contented with
his assistance alone, we seek for no ground of confidence apart from
him; and, although our own weakness may alarm us, think it enough that
he is on our side. Hence these celebrated confessions of his saints:

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p19"></span>“Yea, though I walk through the valley
of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me.”
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p19.1"></span>[Ps
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p20"></span>Again,

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p21"></span>“In God have I put my trust;  
I will not fear what flesh can do unto me.” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p21.2"></span>[Ps
56:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p21.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p22"></span>Again,

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p23"></span>“I will not be afraid of ten thousands
of the people.”  
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p23.2"></span>[Ps
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p23.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p24"></span>Again,

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p25"></span>“If God be for us, who can be against
us?” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p25.1"></span>[Ro
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p25.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p26"></span>Therefore, in proportion to our
advancement in the faith, when we are exposed to the greatest dangers,
do we magnify the power of God, and, exalting ourselves in that, advance
boldly against all the world; and this is the ground of firm and
unwearied obedience, when the thought that God is with us is deeply
rooted in our hearts. But, after Moses is commanded to turn away his
reflections from himself, and to fix all his regards upon the promised
help of God, he is confirmed by a sign, that the Israelites should
sacrifice on Mount Horeb three days after their departure from Egypt.
Still this promise appears neither very apt nor opportune, since it
would not exist in effect till the thing was done. I pass over the
forced interpretations, which some, to avoid this absurdity, have
adduced; since others wisely and prudently observe, that the
confirmation which we receive from posterior tokens, is neither useless
nor vain, and that there are examples of it elsewhere in Scripture.
Samuel, by anointing David, promises that he shall be king of the
people; and pronounces that this shall be the sign that the anointing is
from God. (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p26.1"></span>[1Sa
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p26.1"></span>.) David had long to battle with
misfortunes before he could enjoy this token, yet will it not be thought
superfluous, since in its season it confirmed the favor of God. Isaiah,
prophesying of the raising of the siege of the city, adds a sign,

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p27"></span>“Ye shall eat this year such as groweth
of itself; and the second year that which springeth of the same; and in
the third year sow ye and reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit
thereof.”  
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p27.2"></span>[Isa
37:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p27.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p28"></span>It was said to John the Baptist,

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p29"></span>“Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit
descending, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>[Joh
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p30"></span>Yet, before he beheld that sign, he
already knew that Christ was the Son of God; for the prophecies of both
his parents were well known to him. But there is nothing absurd in the
faith, which is founded on the word, being increased by the addition of
a sign. In fine, God magnifies his mercy by the new mercy which
supervenes, thus, as it were, heaping up the measure; and, in truth, the
vocation of Moses was ratified by a remarkable proof, when, in the very
place on which he then stood, the people, brought forth by his
instrumentality, offered a solemn sacrifice. In the meantime God kept
his servant in suspense, as though he had said, Let me perform what I
have decreed; in due time you will know that your were not sent by me in
vain, when you have brought the people safely to this spot.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p31"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p32"></span>**13.** *Behold, when I come to the
children of Israel.* If we believe that Moses spoke his own sentiments
here, he would say, that he could not be the messenger of an unknown
God; which seems highly improbable. For who can think that the faith of
the holy Prophet was so obliterated, that he was forgetful of the true
God, whom he had devoutly served? Whereas, in the name of his elder son,
he had borne witness to his solemn recollection of Him, when he
voluntarily professed himself a stranger in the land of Midian. Nor does
it appear at all more suitable to the children of Israel, in whose
mouths the covenant made with their fathers constantly was. It will not,
however, be far from the truth, if we suppose that the faith both of
Moses and the Israelites had grown somewhat faint and rusty. He himself,
with his father-in-law, was altogether without the instruction which
would retain him in that peculiar worship, and in that knowledge, which
he had imbibed in Egypt; and the whole people had departed far away from
the course of their fathers; for although the brightness of the true and
ancient religion was not entirely gone, still it only shone in small
sparks. But whilst Moses tacitly confesses his ignorance, because he was
not sufficiently familiar with the doctrine handed down from the holy
patriarchs, yet because he was about to present himself to the people as
a stranger, he infers that he shall be rejected, unless he brings with
him some watchword which will be acknowledged. “I will declare that
which thou commandest, (he seems to say,) that I am sent by the God of
our fathers; but they will deride and despise my mission, unless I shall
present some surer token, from whence they may learn that I have not
falsely made use of thy name.” He therefore seeks for a name which may
be a distinguishing mark; since it is not a mere word or syllable which
is here in question, but a testimony, by which he may persuade the
Israelites that they are heard on the score of the covenant with their
fathers.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p33"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p34"></span>**14.** *I am that I am.* <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p34.1"></span>The verb in the Hebrew is in the future
tense, “I <span id="iv.iii.iii-p34.2"></span>will be what I will be;”
but it is of the same force as the present, except that it designates
the perpetual duration of time. This is very plain, that God attributes
to himself alone divine glory, because he is self-existent and therefore
eternal; and thus gives being and existence to every creature. Nor does
he predicate of himself anything common, or shared by others; but he
claims for himself eternity as peculiar to God alone, in order that he
may be honored according to his dignity. Therefore, immediately
afterwards, contrary to grammatical usage, he used the same verb in the
first person as a substantive, annexing it to a verb in the third
person; that our minds may be filled with admiration as often as his
incomprehensible essence is mentioned. But although philosophers
discourse in grand terms of this eternity, and Plato constantly affirms
that God is peculiarly <span id="iv.iii.iii-p34.3"></span>τὸ ὄν<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p34.4"></span> (the Being); yet they do not wisely and
properly apply this title, viz., that this one and only Being of God
absorbs all imaginable essences; and that, thence, at the same time, the
chief power and government of all things belong to him. For from whence
come the multitude of false gods, but from impiously tearing the divided
Deity into pieces by foolish imaginations? Wherefore, in order rightly
to apprehend the one God, we must first know, that all things in heaven
and earth derive  <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p35.1"></span> at His will their essence, or subsistence
from One, who only truly is. From this Being all power is derived;
because, if God sustains all things by his excellency, he governs them
also at his will. And how would it have profited Moses to gaze upon the
secret essence of God, as if it were shut up in heaven, unless, being
assured of his omnipotence, he had obtained from thence the buckler of
his confidence? Therefore God teaches him that He alone is worthy of the
most holy name, which is profaned when improperly transferred to others;
and then sets forth his inestimable excellency, that Moses may have no
doubt of overcoming all things under his guidance. We will consider in
the sixth chapter the name of Jehovah, of which this is the root.

<span id="iv.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
3:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p2"></span>**15.** And God said moreover unto Moses,
Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, The Lord God of your
fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
hath sent me unto you: this *is* my name for ever, and this *is* my
memorial unto all generations.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p3"></span>**15.** Et dixit rursum Deus ad Mosen,
Sic dices filiis Israel, Jehova Deus patrum vestrorum, Deus Abrahae,
Deus Isaac, et Deus Jacob, misit me ad vos. Hoc est nomen meum in
perpetuum, et memoriale meum in seculum et seculum.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p4"></span>**16.** Vade et congrega seniores Israel,
et dices illis, Jehova Deus patrum vestrorum apparuit mihi, Deus
Abrahae, Isaac, et Jacob, dicendo, Recordando recordatus sum vestri, et
quid vobis factum fuerit in Aegypto.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p5"></span>**16.** Go, and gather the elders of
Israel together, and say unto them, The Lord God of your fathers, the
God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared unto me, saying, I have
surely visited you, and *seen* that which is done to you in Egypt:

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p6"></span>**17.** Propterea dixi, Educam vos ex
afflictione Aegypti ad terrain Chananaei, et Hitthaei, et Amorrhaei, et
Pheresaei, et Hivaei, et Jebusaei, ad terram fluentem lacte et melle.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p7"></span>**17.** And I have said, I will bring you
up out of the affliction of Egypt unto the land of the Canaanites, and
the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and
the Jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p8"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p9"></span>**15.** *And God said moreover.* God
again assumes his name taken from the covenant which he had made with
Abraham and his posterity, that the Israelites may know that they do not
deceive themselves in an uncertain God, provided they depart not from
the religion of their fathers; for as soldiers assemble round their
standard to maintain the order of their ranks, so does he command them
to look back upon the special grace of their adoption, and to know that
they are a people elected of God, because they are Abraham’s sons. He
confines them within these limits, that they may not wander about in
search of God. For we know that whatever opinions were held by the
Gentiles as to the Deity, were not only entangled with many errors, but
were also ambiguous, so that they were always wavering with respect to
them. God demands another kind of religion from his people, on the
certainty of which their hearts may depend. Besides, their long sojourn
in the land of Egypt, although it had not destroyed the knowledge of the
true God, had yet much obscured that light of revelation which their
fathers possessed. And again, the promise might seem to be obsolete,
when they had received no assistance, whilst overwhelmed in such an
abyss of misery; and on this ground the faith received from their
fathers had undoubtedly grown cold. Wherefore, that they may learn to
repose upon it, he calls himself the God of their fathers, and declares,
that by this title he will be celebrated for ever; for I cannot consent
to refer this to the previous expression, “I am that I am,” since the
context does not admit of it. Hence might be inferred the incomparable
love of God towards his chosen people, because he had passed over all
the nations of the earth, and had attached himself to them alone. But we
must remember, that although it was honorable to Abraham and the
patriarchs for God to take his name from them, yet that the main object
of this was to confirm the truth of his promise. There may be an
apparent incongruity in saying, “this is my memorial unto all
generations,” because a much more excellent memorial succeeded in the
person of our Lord Jesus Christ; but my reply is, that since, in the
coming of Christ, the truth of the covenant made with Abraham was shewn
forth, and was thus demonstrated to be firm and infallible, its memory
was rather renewed than destroyed; and that thus it still survives and
flourishes in the Gospel, since Abraham even now ceases not to be the
father of the faithful, under the one Head. We conclude that God would
not be spoken of on earth, without the effects of his gratuitous
adoption appearing, by which he may be proved to be faithful and true.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p10"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p11"></span>**16.** *Go and gather.* Because it was
not easy either to gather the whole people into one place, or for his
commission to be heard by so great a multitude, Moses is commanded to
begin with the elders, and to speak to them concerning their coming
deliverance, that they may thus by their authority arouse the body of
the people to a good hope. For their dismissal must be sought for from
the king in the name of all, and all their minds prepared for departure;
since, unless they had timely notice of it, there would have been no
general consent to embrace the mercy of God. It was then of great
importance that the vocation of Moses should be well known, that they
might boldly follow him as the leader set over them by God. He does not
express without a purpose, that the God who had been seen by him, was
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; for the vision, which would have
been otherwise hardly credited by the people, depended on the ancient
covenant which was deposited with them. Therefore, in order to obtain
belief for his words, Moses reminds them that the deliverance, of which
he was now about to treat, and of which he is appointed by God as the
leader, was formerly promised in Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Lastly,
because we usually receive with difficulty what is new and strange,
Moses therefore lays his foundation on the old revelations, which were
beyond the reach of doubt. But he repeats what he had before related to
be said to himself, thus setting before the others what he had privately
heard to assure him of his vocation. We know that when God does not
immediately succour us in our adversities, our minds are worn down with
grief, and sink into despair; because we think that God has no care for
us. Lest, therefore, the minds of the Israelites should despond, Moses
is commanded to tell them that it is God’s time for remembering them;
and, although he might seem not to behold for a while, yet that he would
not for ever forget his own people. What follows, that the injuries done
to them by the Egyptians had come into account, is added in
confirmation; for, since he is judge of the world, he cannot but rise as
an avenger after long endurance of injustice and tyranny. Let us, too,
learn from this passage, when God seems to turn away his face from us,
by delaying to help us, to wait patiently until he looks upon us in due
season; since his forgetfulness is only temporary, when he gives us over
to the will of our enemies. I have shewn elsewhere how these phrases are
to be understood, viz., that according to the estimate of our own
senses, things are attributed to God which do not properly belong to
him.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p12"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p13"></span>**17.** *And I have said.* By this
expression God reminds us that he in his secret counsel determines what
he will do, and therefore that we must put a restraint on our desires,
which otherwise press forward too fast, and let him freely and
voluntarily appoint what he knows to be best to be done; not because he
has need of taking time to deliberate, but that we may learn to depend
on his providence. By this decree the children of Israel were assured
that the end of their woes was near, because there is nothing which can
prevent God from performing his work. But he speaks briefly, as of a
thing well known; because what had been handed down through the
patriarchs, as to their future deliverance, was not entirely forgotten.
He enumerates several nations whose lands He would give them, that he
might thus the more attract them to come forth. With the same object he
affirms that the whole country flows “with milk and honey,” lest its
barrenness should alarm them, because famine had driven their fathers
out from thence. But although the land of Canaan was naturally fertile,
there is no doubt but that its fruitfulness chiefly arose from the
blessing of God. The conclusion is, that a spacious dwelling-place is
prepared for them, since for their sake God will drive out many nations,
that they may possess the habitations of them all; and that, finally,
they need not fear want, because God will abundantly supply them with
food, as if the whole of that land were filled with rivers of milk and
honey.

<span id="iv.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
3:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p2"></span>**18.** And they shall hearken to thy
voice: and thou shalt come, thou and the elders of Israel, unto the king
of Egypt, and ye shall say unto him, The Lord God of the Hebrews hath
met with us: and now let us go, we beseech thee, three days’ journey
into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the Lord our God.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p3"></span>**18.** Et postquam audierint vocem tuam,
ingredieris et seniores Israel ad regem Aegypti, dicetisque ei, Iehova
Deus Hebraeorum occurrit nobis: nunc igitur eamus per iter trium dierum
in desertum et sacrificemus Iehovae Deo nostro.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p4"></span>**19.** And I am sure that the king of
Egypt will not let you go, no, not by a mighty hand.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p5"></span>**19.** Ego autem novi quod non permittet
vobis rex Aegypti ut eatis, nisi in manu forfi.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p6"></span>**20.** And I will stretch out my hand,
and smite Egypt with all my wonders which I will do in the midst
thereof: and after that he will let you go.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p7"></span>**20.** Ideo mittam manum meam, et
percutiam Aegyptum cunctis miraculis meis quae facturus sum in medio
ejus: atque ita postea dimittet vos.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p8"></span>**21.** And I will give this people favor
in the sight of the Egyptians: and it shall come to pass, that, when ye
go, ye shall not go empty:

<span id="iv.iii.v-p9"></span>**21.** Et dabo gratiam populo huic in
oculis Aegyptiorum: et accidet ut abeundo non abeatis vacui.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p10"></span>**22.** But every woman shall borrow of
her neighbor, and of her that sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver,
and jewels of gold, and raiment: and ye shall put *them* upon your sons,
and upon your daughters; and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p11"></span>**22.** Et postulabit mulier a vicina
sua, et ab hospita domus suae, vasa argentea et vasa aurea, et vestes:
quae imponetis filiis vestris et filiabus vestris: et spoliabitis
Aegyptum.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p12"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p13"></span>**18.** *And they shall hearken to thy
voice.*  <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md) The literal translation
is, “They shall hearken to thy voice,” which many take to be a promise
from God that they should be obedient; but the sense given in the Latin,
“after they shall have heard thy voice,” seems more consonant, that
first of all He should command them by the mouth of Moses, and that then
they should accompany him in bearing the message to Pharaoh. For, before
so difficult an undertaking was enjoined to them, it was desirable that
the authority of God should be propounded to them, so that they might go
about it with unwavering hearts. The sum of the message is, that they
should seek permission from Pharaoh to go and sacrifice; but lest they
might be thought to do so from mere unfounded impulse, they are desired
to premise that God had met with them and had given them the command.
For the word which expresses his *meeting* with them, means that he
presented himself voluntarily. They had indeed cried out before, and
often appealed to the faithfulness and mercy of God; yet still this was
a voluntary meeting with them, when, contrary to the hope of them all,
he avowed that he would be their deliverer, for, as we have already
said, they cried out more from the urgency of their affliction than from
confidence in prayer. A pretext is suggested to them, by which suspicion
and anger may be turned away from themselves; for a free permission to
depart altogether, by which grievous loss would have arisen to the
tyrant, never would have been accorded. Besides, by refusing so
equitable a demand, he despoiled himself of his royal right and power,
since he thus withheld His due honour from the King of kings; for
although the Israelites were under his dominion, yet did not his rule
extend so far as to defraud God of his rightful worship. It was
expedient, too, that the people should depart without the king’s
permission only for very good reasons, lest hereafter license of
rebellion should be given to other subjects. Pharaoh indeed suspected
differently, that the sacrifice was a mere false pretense; but since
this mistrust proceeded from his tyranny, his ingratitude was
sufficiently proclaimed by it, because through his own evil conscience
he forbade that God should be served. Whatever, again, might be his
feelings, still the miracles by which the command was followed must
needs have taught him that their mission proceeded from God. If the
Israelites had merely spoken, and no confirmation of their words had
been given, he might perhaps have naturally guarded himself against
deception; but when God openly shewed that he was the originator of this
departure, and that he commanded the sacrifice beyond the bounds of
Egypt, all grounds of excuse are taken away; and thus the departure of
the people is placed out of the reach of calumny. If any object that it
is alien from the nature of God to countenance any craft or pretense,
the reply is easy, — that he was bound by no necessity to lay open his
whole counsel to the tyrant. They mistake who suppose that there is a
kind of falsehood implied in these words; for God had no desire that his
people should use any deceit, he only concealed from the tyrant (as He
had a perfect right to do) what He was about ultimately to effect; and
in this way He detected and brought to light his obstinacy. In a word,
God entered the lists for the Israelites, not in an earthly controversy,
but for religion, to which all the rights of kings must give way. But
Jehovah calls himself the God of the Hebrews, that Pharaoh may know him
to be the peculiar God of that nation, and that their form of worship
was different from the customs of Egypt, and, in fact, that he is the
only true God, and all others are fictitious.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p15"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p16"></span>**19.** *And I am sure that the king of
Egypt.* <span id="iv.iii.v-p16.1"></span>God forearms his people, lest,
suffering a repulse at their first onset, they should retire, and
abandon in despair the work enjoined to them. It was, indeed, a hard
thing to hear that their expedition would be vain; and that they might
as well address themselves to the trunk of a tree, since there was no
hope <span id="iv.iii.v-p16.2"></span>of reaching the obstinate heart of
Pharaoh; but they would have been much more discouraged by this trial,
if his stubbornness had been discovered unexpectedly. Therefore God
foretells that their words would avail nothing; but at the same time he
announces that he should succeed by his own wondrous power. If any think
it absurd for these unhappy men to be wearied by their useless labor,
and to be repulsed with ridicule and insult, I answer, that this was for
the sake of example, and that it was advantageous for setting forth
God’s glory, that the king, having been civilly applied to, should
betray his impious perversity, since nothing could be more just than
that what he had unjustly refused, should be extorted from him against
his will. But interpreters differ as to the meaning of the words. For
some translate it literally from the Hebrew, “no, not by a mighty hand;”
as though God said that the pride of the king would be unconquerable,
and not to be subdued by any power or force; but the context requires a
different sense, because the remedy is afterwards opposed to it, “and
<span id="iv.iii.v-p16.3"></span>I will stretch out my hand;” and the
result is added, that Pharaoh, overcome at length by the plagues, would
let the people go. And this view is grammatically correct; for the
Hebrews use the word <span id="iv.iii.v-p16.4"></span>ולא<span
id="iv.iii.v-p16.5"></span>,  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md)
*velo*<span id="iv.iii.v-p17.10"></span>, for “except.” Therefore God
commands his people to be firm and confident, although Pharaoh may not
immediately obey; because he would evidence his power  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md) <span id="iv.iii.v-p18.1"></span> in a
remarkable manner for their deliverance. In the meantime he arouses them
to hope by the promise of a successful issue; since he will forcibly
compel Pharaoh to yield.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p19"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p20"></span>**21.** *And I will give this people
favor.* By this extreme exercise of His bounty He encourages the
Israelites to contend and strive more heartily; since otherwise it would
be hard for them to struggle with the great cruelty of the king.
Therefore He promises them not only liberty, but also abundance of rich
and precious things. But, inasmuch as this was hard to believe, that the
Egyptians their bitterest enemies would become so kind and liberal as to
exert such beneficence towards them, God reminds them that it is in His
power to turn the hearts of men whithersoever He will. He proclaims,
then, that He will cause these wolves of Egypt to become like lambs, and
that they who used to bite and devour should now supply them with the
very wool from their backs. This passage contains rich and extensive
doctrine; that whenever men cruelly rage against us, it does not happen
contrary to the design of God, because He can in a moment quiet them;
and that He grants this license to their cruelty, because it is
expedient thus to humble and chasten us. Again, we gather from hence,
that we have no enemies so fierce and barbarous, as that it is not easy
for Him readily to tame them. If we were surely persuaded of this, that
men’s hearts are controlled, and guided by the secret inspiration of
God, we should not so greatly dread their hatred, and threatenings, and
terrors, nor should we be so easily turned from the path of duty through
fear of them. This alarm is the just reward of our unbelief, when we
repose not on God’s providence; and although we ought to take pains to
conciliate the kindness of all by courtesy, yet should we remember that
our efforts will not gain their favor, unless God should so incline
their hearts.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p21"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p22"></span>**22.** *But every woman shall borrow.*
 <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md) Those who consider these means of
enriching the people to be but little in accordance with the justice of
God, themselves reflect but little how widely that justice of which they
speak extends. I acknowledge that it is His attribute to defend every
one’s rights, to prohibit theft, to condemn deceit and rapine; but let
us see what every one’s property is. Who will boast that he has
anything, except what is given him by God? And all is given on this
condition, that each one should possess according to His will whatever
God pleases, who is free to take away at any moment whatsoever He has
given. The Hebrews spoiled the Egyptians; and should the latter complain
that an injury is done them, they would argue against God that He had
transferred His own free gifts from them to others. Would this complaint
be listened to, that God, in whose hands are the ends of the earth, who
by His power appoints the bounds of nations, and reduces their kings to
poverty, had deprived certain persons of their furniture and jewels?
Another defense is set up by some, that the Hebrews took nothing which
was not their own, but only the wages which were due to them; because
they were iniquitously driven to servile labors, and had subsisted
meanly upon what belonged to themselves. And certainly it would have
been just that their labor should have been recompensed in some way. But
there is no need of weighing the judgment of God by ordinary rules,
since we have already seen that all the possessions of the world are
His, to distribute them according to His pleasure. Nevertheless I do not
thus suppose Him to be without law; for although His power is above all
laws, still, because His will is the most certain rule of perfect
equity, whatever He does must be perfectly right; and therefore He is
free from laws, because He is a law to Himself, and to all. Neither
would I simply say with Augustin,  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md)
that this was a command of God which should not be canvassed but obeyed,
because He knows that He commands justly, and that his servants must
obediently perform whatever He commands. This indeed is truly said, and
yet we must hold fast that higher principle, that, since whatever people
call their own they possess only by God’s bounty, there is no juster
title to possession than His gift. We will not therefore say that the
Hebrew women purloined that which God ordered them to take, and which He
chose to bestow upon them; neither will God be accounted unjust in
bestowing nothing but what was His own.  <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) The word which I have translated
“*hospitem*,” or “hostess,” some understand as a “fellow*-*sojourner;”
and this is not very important, because we gather from the other word,
that the Egyptians were mixed among the Hebrews. In the end of the
verse, because the original expresses, “ye shall put them upon your
sons, and upon your daughters,” almost all interpreters expound it to
mean that they should ornament them; but it seems to me that it only
refers to the abundance of the spoil; as much as to say, you shall not
only obtain as much as you can carry yourselves, but shall also load
your sons and daughters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc03006.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p14"></span> <span id="iv.iii.i-p14.1"></span>κατὰ
πρόληψιν<span id="iv.iii.i-p14.2"></span>. — *Lat*

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc03006.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p15"></span> Horeb appears to have been the general
name of the whole mountainous district, of which Sinai formed a part.
This solution fully meets the objection of certain modern cavillers, who
have argued, at least, against the identity of the author of the
Pentateuch, if not against its inspiration, on the ground that the same
events are recorded as having taken place sometimes on Horeb, sometimes
on Sinai. *Vide* Hengstenberg on the Genuineness of the Pentateuch,
Ryland’s Transl., vol. 2, p. 325; Fisk’s Memorial of the Holy Land, p.
146.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc03006.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p18"></span> Calvin’s own commentary on <span
id="iv.iii.i-p18.1"></span>[Zec
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.iii.i-p18.1"></span>,
will best explain this reference; there, also, he inclines to identify
the chief of the Angels with the Son of God. “There were then, as it
were, a troop of horsemen: but the Prophet says that one appeared as the
chief leader, who was accompanied by others.” “There was one more
eminent than the rest, and in this there is nothing unusual, for when
God sends forth a company of angels, he gives the lead to some one. If
we regard this angel to be Christ, the idea is consistent with the
common usage of Scripture,” etc. — *Com*. *on Zech*., pp. 31-33.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc03006.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p21"></span> A humilite. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc03006.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p24"></span> “En curiositez frivoles;” in frivolous
subtleties. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc03006.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p6"></span> *Vel*, quia cognovi.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc03006.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p15"></span> “Jusques a ce qu’il ait ete contraint
jusques au dernier desespoir;” until they had been driven even to
complete despair. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc03006.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p16"></span> “Courageux comme lions;” as bold as
lions. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc03006.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p34.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p35"></span> *Precario*. — *Lat*. De grace. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc03006.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p14"></span> *Lat*., “Et postquam audierint vocem;”
after they *shall have* hearkened to thy voice.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc03006.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p16.6"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p17"></span> <span
id="iv.iii.v-p17.1"></span>ולא<span id="iv.iii.v-p17.2"></span> is here
rendered *unless* <span id="iv.iii.v-p17.3"></span>by the LXX., Vulgate,
Pagninus, Luther, Vatablus, and Diodati; and by the equivalent, *but*
<span id="iv.iii.v-p17.4"></span>in the margin of *A* *V* *S.M*<span
id="iv.iii.v-p17.5"></span>. has *neque*<span
id="iv.iii.v-p17.6"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.v-p17.7"></span>but adds,
“alii exponunt <span id="iv.iii.v-p17.8"></span>ולא<span
id="iv.iii.v-p17.9"></span> pro nisi.” — *W*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc03006.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p17.11"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p18"></span> Il a delibere de faire un chef-d’oeuvre.
— *Fr*.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc03006.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p23"></span> *Lat*<span id="iv.iii.v-p23.2"></span>.,
<span id="iv.iii.v-p23.3"></span>“et postulabit mulier;” and *every*
<span id="iv.iii.v-p23.4"></span>woman shall ask. It will be observed
that *C*<span id="iv.iii.v-p23.5"></span>. has avoided the error of
employing the word *borrow* <span id="iv.iii.v-p23.6"></span>here. The
verb <span id="iv.iii.v-p23.7"></span>שאל<span
id="iv.iii.v-p23.8"></span>, *shal*<span id="iv.iii.v-p23.9"></span>,
<span id="iv.iii.v-p23.10"></span>means simply to *ask* <span
id="iv.iii.v-p23.11"></span>or *request*<span
id="iv.iii.v-p23.12"></span>, <span id="iv.iii.v-p23.13"></span>and
cannot properly be rendered *borrow*<span id="iv.iii.v-p23.14"></span>,
<span id="iv.iii.v-p23.15"></span>unless the context makes it
incontestable that an engagement to return the thing asked for is
implied. *C*<span id="iv.iii.v-p23.16"></span>. has followed *S*
*M*<span id="iv.iii.v-p23.17"></span>. in employing the word
*postulabit*<span id="iv.iii.v-p23.18"></span>; <span
id="iv.iii.v-p23.19"></span>and apologizes for using *hospes* <span
id="iv.iii.v-p23.20"></span>in the next clause, where *S* *M*<span
id="iv.iii.v-p23.21"></span>. had used *cohabitatrix* <span
id="iv.iii.v-p23.22"></span>— *W*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc03006.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p23.23"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p24"></span> Contra Faustum, lib. 22. cap. 71.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc03006.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p25"></span> Prof. Hengstenberg quotes this passage
from *C*., and calls it “the traditional vindication,” — “which leaves
quite untouched the point in which the difficulty peculiarly lies.” He
also notices the solution of Michaelis, viz., that the Israelites
borrowed with the intention of returning the goods; as well as other no
less unsatisfactory explanations. His own is, that the idea of a *gift*,
and not a *loan*, is the only one which either the circumstances of the
case or the language itself admits. “They, (the Israelites,)” he says,
“asked,” and this reference leads to a contest of *asking* and *giving*,
in which the latter gains the upper hand. It is immediately connected
with “the Lord gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians,” and
is marked as a consequence of it. The liberal giving of the Egyptians
proceeded from the love and good-will which the Lord awakened in their
hearts towards Israel. He traces the misapprehension to “an error in the
very faulty Alexandrian version, which substitutes *lending* for
*giving*. Jerome, who commonly follows it, was led by it to a similar
mistake, and, through him, Luther, who alludes mostly to his translation
— the Vulgate.” — *Hengstenberg*, vol. 2, pp. 417-432.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 4](cc03007.md)
