[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03025)  [Next](cc03027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span><span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
20:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001)<span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>**1.** And God spoke all these words, saying,

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et loquutus est Deus omnia verba haec:
dicendo,

<span id="v.i-p4"></span>**2.** I am the Lord thy God, which have
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

<span id="v.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ego Jehova Deus tuus, qui eduxi te e
terra AEgypti, e domo servorum.

<span id="v.i-p6"></span><span id="v.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>**1.** *And God spoke.* I am aware that many
agree in reading this verse and the next in connection with each other,
and thus making them together the first of the ten commandments. Others
taking them separately, consider the affirmation to stand in the place
of one entire commandment; but since God neither forbids nor commands
anything here, but only comes forth before them in His dignity, to
devote the people to Himself, and to claim the authority He deserves,
which also He would have extended to the whole Law, I make no doubt but
that it is a general preface, whereby He prepares their minds for
obedience. And surely it was necessary that, first of all, the right of
the legislator should be established, lest what He chose to command
should be despised, or contemptuously received. In these words, then,
God seeks to procure reverence to Himself, before He prescribes the rule
of a holy and righteous life. Moreover, He not merely declares Himself
to be Jehovah, the only God to whom men are bound by the right of
creation, who has given them their existence, and who preserves their
life, nay, who is Himself the life of all; but He adds, that He is the
peculiar God of the Israelites; for it was expedient, not only that the
people should be alarmed by the majesty of God, but also that they
should be gently attracted, so that the law might be more precious than
gold and silver, and at the same time “sweeter than honey,” (<span
id="v.i-p7.1"></span>[Ps. 119:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#072),
[103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103)<span id="v.i-p7.1"></span>;) for
it would not be enough for men to be compelled by servile fear to bear
its yoke, unless they were also attracted by its sweetness, and
willingly endured it. He afterwards recounts that special blessing,
wherewith He had honored the people, and by which He had testified that
they were not elected by Him in vain; for their redemption was the sure
pledge of their adoption. But, in order to bind them the better to
Himself, He reminds them also of their former condition; for Egypt was
like a house of bondage, from whence the Israelites were delivered.
Wherefore, they were no more their own masters, since God had purchased
them unto Himself. This does not indeed literally apply to us; but He
has bound us to Himself with a holier tie, by the hand of His
only-be-gotten Son; whom Paul teaches to have died, and risen again,
“that He might be Lord both of the dead and the living.” (<span
id="v.i-p7.2"></span>[Ro 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009)<span
id="v.i-p7.2"></span>.) So that He is not now the God of one people
only, but of all nations, whom He has called into His Church by general
adoption.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 5:1-6,4:20](cc03027)
