[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc03007)  [Next](cc03009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 3: Harmony of the Law, Part I*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span>EXODUS 5

<span id="iv.v.i"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p2"></span>**1.** And afterwards Moses and Aaron went
in, and told Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Let my people
go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness.

<span id="iv.v.i-p3"></span>**1.** Postea venerunt Moses et Aharon, et
dixerunt Pharaoni: Sic dixit Jehova Deus Israel, Dimitte populum meum ut
festum diem celebrent mihi in deserto.

<span id="iv.v.i-p4"></span>**2.** And Pharaoh said, Who *is* the Lord,
that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the Lord,
neither will I let Israel go.

<span id="iv.v.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et dixit Pharao, Quis est Jehova, ut
obediam voci ejus dimittendo Israelem? Non novi Jehovam, atque etiam
Israelem non dimittam.

<span id="iv.v.i-p6"></span>**3.** And they said, The God of the Hebrews
hath met with us: let us go, we pray thee, three days’ journey into the
desert, and sacrifice unto the Lord our God, lest he fall upon us with
pestilence, or with the sword.

<span id="iv.v.i-p7"></span>**3.** Tunc dixerunt, Deus Hebraeorum
occurrit nobis. Ergo eamus iter trium dierum in desertum, ut
sacrificemus Jehovae Deo nostro, ne forte irruat in nos pestis vel
gladius.

<span id="iv.v.i-p8"></span>**4.** And the king of Egypt said unto them,
Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, let the people from their works? get
you unto your burdens.

<span id="iv.v.i-p9"></span>**4.** Dixit ad eos rex Aegypti, Ut quid
Moses et Aharon abstrahitis populum ab operibus suis? Ite ad labores
vestros.

<span id="iv.v.i-p10"></span>**5.** And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people
of the land now *are* many, and ye make them rest from their burdens.

<span id="iv.v.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et dixit Pharao, En multi nunc
populus terrae, et vos cessare facitis eos a laboribus suis.

<span id="iv.v.i-p12"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p13"></span>**1.** *And afterwards Moses and Aaron went
in.* Moses here begins to set forth how many and how great were the
proofs of God’s power displayed in the deliverance of his people. For,
since the pride, the madness, and the obstinacy of the king were
indomitable, every door was closed, until broken down miraculously, and
by various means. It was, indeed, possible for God to overwhelm him at
once, by a single nod, so that he should even fall down dead at the very
sight of Moses; but, as we have already briefly stated, and he will
himself presently declare, He, *in the first place*, chose more clearly
to lay open His power; for if Pharaoh had either voluntarily yielded, or
had been overcome without effort, the glory of the victory would not
have been so illustrious. *In the second place*, He wished this monument
to exist of His singular love towards His elect people; for by
contending so perseveringly and so forcibly against the obstinacy of
this most powerful king, He gave no doubtful proof of his love towards
his Church. *In the third place*, He wished to accustom His servants in
all ages to patience, lest they should faint in their minds, if He does
not immediately answer their prayers, and, at every moment, relieve them
from their distresses. *In the fourth place*, He wished to shew that,
against all the strivings and devices of Satan, against the madness of
the ungodly, and all worldly hinderances, His hand must always prevail;
and to leave us no room to doubt, but that whatever we see opposing us
will at length be overcome by him. *In the fifth place*, By detecting
the illusions of Satan and the magicians, He would render His Church
more wary, that she might carefully watch against such devices, and that
her faith might continue invincible against all the machinations of
error. *Finally*, He would convince Pharaoh and the Egyptians, that
their folly was not to be excused by any pretense of ignorance; and, at
the same time, by this example, He would shew us how horrible a darkness
possesses the minds of the reprobate, when He has deprived them of the
light of his Spirit. These things must be attentively observed in the
course of the narrative, if we desire to profit by it.

<span id="iv.v.i-p14"></span>Since it is difficult to obtain access to
kings, who deign not to admit to their presence any of the lower orders,
Moses and Aaron must have been endued with no ordinary confidence, when
they boldly approached Pharaoh. For it was a disagreeable message, and
one very likely to give offense, that he should permit the people to
take three days’ journey beyond the bounds of Egypt; since a suspicion
must unquestionably arise that, being thus dismissed, they would no
longer remain his subjects, and that thus a part of the land would be
emptied of its inhabitants. Still Moses and Aaron do not fear to deliver
God’s command, in which there was this additional annoyance to the proud
and sensitive ears of the king, viz., that they attributed the glory of
Deity to the God of Israel alone; for, by calling Him Jehovah, they
imply that the gods worshipped in Egypt were false, and invented by the
imaginations of man. We have said elsewhere that there was no deceit in
the pretext that God called his people into the wilderness to hold a
feast, although He does not reveal His counsel to the tyrant; for it was
really His pleasure that a sacrifice of thanksgiving should be offered
to Himself on Mount Sinai, and that they should be thus separated from
the polluted nation with which they were mixed up; and, assuredly, He
wished to arouse the tyrant’s wrath, by ignominiously condemning the
whole of Egypt, as not capable of pure worship. For He was obliged by no
law to declare openly their deliverance; but that He might draw forth
from the mind of the tyrant the venom of his impiety, He asked for
nothing connected with the advantage of His people, but merely demanded
the worship which was due to Himself. The word which Moses uses means
properly to hold a feast, but also embraces whatever is connected with
it; and, therefore, by *synecdoche*, it is taken here, as also in other
passages, for the solemn worship of God.  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)

<span id="iv.v.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p17"></span>**2.** *And Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord?*
It is scarcely credible that there should be such madness in a mortal
as, by thus wantonly scorning God, to fly, as it were, in the face of
heaven!  <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) But we must observe, that
the tyrant being devoted to idolatries, thus insulted the God of Israel,
that he might manifest his great piety towards his false gods. For his
mockery, in scornfully bandying back the name of Jehovah, must be
referred to the words of Moses, as much as to say, Why do you bring
against me this unknown phantom under the title of the eternal God, as
though we had no god of our own? Thus Pilate, when Christ said, “To this
end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should
bear witness unto the truth,” asks ironically, and not without mockery,
“What is truth?”  <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) (<span
id="iv.v.i-p19.1"></span>[John 18:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#038)<span id="iv.v.i-p19.1"></span>.)
In short, Pharaoh did not conceive himself to be dishonoring the Deity,
when he rejected this false (*prodigiosum*) God, as he thought. Yet his
error did not avail to justify him, since it arose from insane audacity
and contempt of God. Admit that he was unwilling that any should
depreciate his idols, and that he thus imagined himself to perform a
religious duty; still it was an act of very gross impiety, so carelessly
to repudiate the name of the true God, and even to assail it with
mockery. We may remark a like madness in all idolaters. Being
intoxicated by their errors they boldly mock at God, and deign not to
make inquiries about Him. The cry of the Papists now-a-days is, that we
are imposing a new God on the world; and, applauding themselves in their
wildest ravings, they do not hesitate to condemn our whole doctrine as
impious; not because they are persuaded that they are themselves
worshipping God aright; but they are willfully blind, that they may
elude, with impunity, the sacred majesty of God, and stupify their
consciences, and preserve to themselves their death-like slumber. They
seem to themselves to be sharp-witted and facetious, when they are
scoffing at the novelty of our doctrine; though its truth would be plain
enough, if they would only open their eyes. The Epicureans, too, (of
which pestilent sect the world is now full,) although they foam and rage
against God, still invariably take refuge in some cloud, under which
their detestable madness may be concealed: for they pretend that amidst
such a multitude of opinions, it is scarcely possible to discern who is
God, or what He commands. Still, however, this is their constant object,
viz., that they may have nothing to do with God, and yet may conceal by
jests the shame of their impiety; as if it were free for them to reject
what they are willfully ignorant of. But after Pharaoh had indirectly
derided the message of Moses, as a ludicrous affair, he more openly and
more contemptuously vents his pride, implying that he cares not for that
God, with whose name Moses and Aaron would frighten him.

<span id="iv.v.i-p20"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p21"></span>**3.** *And they said, The God of the
Hebrews.* Moses and Aaron proceed with their message; neither does the
pride of the tyrant decrease or weaken their courage in proclaiming the
glory of the One true God, who had peculiarly attached Himself to them.
And, certainly, this is the attribute of faith, to trample upon
everything that exalteth itself on earth; since the truth of God is
superior to all human greatness. Nor could they more effectually refute
that profane and impious word, “I know not the Lord,” than by again
asseverating that the true God is the Protector of their nation, and
that this had been disclosed to them in an open manifestation of
Himself. The threatening, which they added, admonishes Pharaoh that his
rebellion would not be unpunished, if he kept back the people from the
worship of God; for if He would take vengeance on the people which was
retained against their will, how could *he* escape with impunity, who
professedly entered into contention with God? When, then, they declare
that some calamity would befall them unless they obeyed the call of God,
they intimate that Pharaoh must beware of some greater visitation.

<span id="iv.v.i-p22"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p23"></span>**4.** *And the king of Egypt said unto
them.* It is surprising that the king, in the excess of his arrogance,
did not more cruelly entreat these servants of God, whom he accounted
the ringleaders of sedition. But he was undoubtedly restrained by God
from proceeding at once to destroy them. By his pertinacity in resisting
their departure, he will more clearly shew by and bye how important to
his interests he considered it that the people should remain in Egypt;
how comes it then that he is contented with verbal reproof, and refrains
from shedding their blood, if it were not that God protected his
servants under the shield of His defense? He harshly reproves them,
indeed, and condemns them to the same labors, by which the rest of the
people were oppressed; but since it is notorious that moderate rigor
never satisfies tyrants, we conclude that they were preserved under the
guardianship of God, and would otherwise have died a hundred times over.
But let us learn from his accusation against them, as the promoters of
rebellion, to bear patiently, after their example, calumnies and false
imputations; only, in reliance on God’s command, let us be fully
conscious that we are unjustly accused. The next verse, wherein he says,
that “the people of the land are now many,” is intended to aggravate
their guilt; both because they would inflict a deeper injury on the
public, than as if they had withheld a few from their work; and also,
because, by inflaming a large number of people, they would bring greater
danger on the country.

<span id="iv.v.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
5:6-18](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#006)<span id="iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p2"></span>**6.** And Pharaoh commanded the same day
the taskmasters of the people, and their officers, saying,

<span id="iv.v.ii-p3"></span>**6.** Et praecepit die illo Pharao
exactoribus qui erant in populo et praefectis ejus, dicens,

<span id="iv.v.ii-p4"></span>**7.** Ye shall no more give the people
straw to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for
themselves.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p5"></span>**7.** Non continuabitis in danda palea
populo ad conficiendos lateres, sicut heri et nudiustertius, sed ipsi
eant, et colligant sibi paleas.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p6"></span>**8.** And the tale of the bricks, which
they did make heretofore, ye shall lay upon them; ye shall not diminish
*ought* thereof: for they *be* idle; therefore they cry, saying, Let us
go *and* sacrifice to our God.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p7"></span>**8.** Summam vero laterum quam ipsi
fecerunt heri et nudiustertius, imponite eis: non minuetis ex ea: nam
quia otio remissi sunt, propterea ipsi clamant, dicentes, Eamus,
sacrificemus Deo nostro.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p8"></span>**9.** Let there more work be laid upon the
men, that they may labor therein; and let them not regard vain words.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p9"></span>**9.** Aggravetur ergo servitus super
viros, in quo se exerceant, et non attendant verbis mendacibus.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p10"></span>**10.** And the taskmasters of the people
went out, and their officers, and they spake to the people, saying, Thus
saith Pharaoh, I will not give you straw.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p11"></span>**10.** Tunc egressi sunt exactores populi
et praefecti ejus, et dixerunt populo, Sic dicit Pharao, Ego non do
vobis paleas.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p12"></span>**11.** Go ye, get you straw where ye can
find it: yet not ought of your work shall be diminished.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p13"></span>**11.** Vos itc colligite vobis paleas,
ubicunque inveneritis: quia non est imminutum quicquam ex opere vestro.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p14"></span>**12.** So the people were scattered
abroad throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble instead of
straw.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p15"></span>**12.** Dispersus est ergo populus per
totam terram Aegypti, ut colligerent stipulas pro paleis.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p16"></span>**13.** And the taskmasters hasted *them*,
saying, Fulfill your works, *your* daily tasks, as when there was straw.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p17"></span>**13.** Et urgebant eos exactores,
dicendo, Perficite opera vestra, pensum diei die suo perindee ac si
adessent paleae, (*vel*, sicuti quum erant paleae.)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p18"></span>**14.** And the officers of the children
of Israel, which Pharaoh’s taskmasters had set over them, were beaten,
*and* demanded, Wherefore have you not fulfilled your task in making
brick both yesterday and today, as heretofore?

<span id="iv.v.ii-p19"></span>**14.** Et caesi sunt praefecti filiorum
Israel, quos constituerant super ipsos exactores Pharaonis, dicendo,
Quare non absolvistis pensum vestrum in lateribus conficiendis, sicut
heri et nudiustertius, sicut antea ita hodie?

<span id="iv.v.ii-p20"></span>**15.** Then the officers of the children
of Israel came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying, Wherefore dealest thou
thus with thy servants?

<span id="iv.v.ii-p21"></span>**15.** Et venerunt praefecti filiorum
Israel, et conquesti sunt apud Pharaonem dicentes, Cur sic agis cum
servis tuis?

<span id="iv.v.ii-p22"></span>**16.** There is no straw given unto thy
servants, and they say to us, Make brick: and, behold, thy servants
*are* beaten; but the fault *is* in thine own people.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p23"></span>**16.** Palea non datur servis tuis, et
dicunt nobis, Lateres facite: et ecce, servi tui percutiuntur, et
improbe agitur cum populo tuo.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p24"></span>**17.** But he said, Ye *are* idle, *ye
are* idle; therefore ye say, Let us go *and* do sacrifice to the Lord.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p25"></span>**17.** Qui ait, Vos otio remissi estis,
otto remissi: ideo dicitis, eamus, sacrificemus Jehovae.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p26"></span>**18.** Go therefore now *and* work: for
there shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of
bricks.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p27"></span>**18.** Nunc igitur ite, operamini: et
paleae non dabuntur vobis, et summam laterum reddetis.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p28"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p29"></span>**6.** *And Pharaoh commanded.* We shall
more clearly perceive, as the narrative proceeds, that these taskmasters
and officers were taken from amongst the children of Israel, although we
have before read that some were Egyptians. But, as tyrants are ingenious
in securing their own interests, Pharaoh in his subtlety wished to
provide that none should escape, but that all alike should be brought in
turn to the labor. For some, in such a multitude, might have evaded the
Egyptians; but, when the charge was given to the Israelites, their
familiar knowledge would prevent any from escaping. Besides, it is
probable that with these taskmasters was deposited the straw, which they
distributed either to parties of ten, or to individuals; he therefore
doubles the work in this way, by commanding them to gather the straw
with which the bricks were made. But, according to the proverb, that
“the edicts of kings are monosyllables,” Moses shews the vehemence of
the tyranny by the brevity of the command. But this passage teaches us,
that when God has begun to regard us for the purpose of relieving our
troubles, He sometimes takes occasion to increase the pressure of our
burdens. Thus, when God had engaged to be the deliverer of the
Israelites, their trouble became greater, by the tyrant adding to their
ordinary tasks that of gathering the straw for themselves. For thus it
pleases God to prove the faith of His people; and thus is it expedient
to lift up to Him their minds, which are too much set on earth, whilst
they do not immediately perceive the fruit of the grace promised to
them, nay, whilst they feel that nothing else is brought them by God’s
favour, except that their condition becomes worse. It is very useful for
us to ponder this, that we may more patiently and calmly bear to be
excited to the love and desire of heavenly blessings, by crosses and
adversities. Now-a-days the Gospel procures hatred for many, deprives
others of their pleasures, degrades others from their honours, brings to
others the loss of their goods, sentences others to prison, others to
exile, and endangers the life of some; in a word, the more God exerts
His power, the more is Satan’s rage excited on the other side, and the
wicked become more fiercely cruel. This offense would greatly shake us,
unless we knew, from the admonition of this example, that the
inestimable grace, which is offered us in Christ, ought to be so valued
by us, that in comparison with it, riches, honours, and all that men
seek after, should be accounted nothing; and that we should find no
difficulty in despising inconveniences of whatever kind.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p30"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p31"></span>**9.** *Let there more work be laid upon
the men.* Although Pharaoh knew that he was cruelly entreating the
unhappy Israelites, who ought, as strangers, to be hospitably and kindly
received, yet he says that they were abusing their idleness, and were
revolting because he indulged them too much. Thus, when tyranny has lost
all regard for justice, there are no bounds to its harshness; and so far
from being moved to pity by complaints, they only aggravate its cruelty.
And these are the means by which its flatterers inflame it more, viz.,
that its subjects will never be quiet unless they faint under the weight
of their burdens; that this is the best receipt for governing them, so
to oppress them that they dare not open their mouths; if they cry, or
murmur, that they should be oppressed the more,  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) till they grow hardened, and, as it were,
callous to their bondage. They, therefore, relax not their contumelies
and cruelties until the wretched people have altogether succumbed.
Pharaoh insults them still more wantonly, when he says that he imposes
heavier burdens upon them, that “they may not regard vain words.” But
what are these, except that they ask permission to worship God? His
impiety, therefore, bursts forth in the midst of his tyrannical
insolence; nor does he only mean to utter a blasphemy against God, but
he is instigated by the wiles of Satan to undermine the faith of the
Church. By a similar impulse, Rabshakeh proclaimed that Hezekiah
deceived the people by “vain words,” when he bade them trust in the
living God. (<span id="iv.v.ii-p32.1"></span>[Isa.
36:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#005),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#007)<span id="iv.v.ii-p32.1"></span>.)
Nor does Satan cease to employ the same machination against the
faithful, as if all that God promises was deceit and vanity.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p33"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p34"></span>**12.** *So the people were scattered
abroad.* This circumstance proves how bitterly they were afflicted, and
what labor beyond their strength was imposed upon them. In order to make
bricks, at least, they should have remained in a particular spot, but
straw is not supplied to them for the purpose; they are obliged,
therefore, to disperse here and there, and to gather stubble instead of
straw in the distant parts of Egypt. They could not do both; it was then
in fact just to procure a false pretext, which he might catch at as the
ground of their condemnation: as now we often see the enemies of Christ
inventing the most insupportable torments, by which the unhappy Church
may be driven to deny the faith. For it was the design of Pharaoh to
drive Moses and Aaron far away, that they might never agitate any more
for the departure of the people; and if he had obtained this wish, he
would doubtless have remitted some part of his abominable cruelty; but,
because they did not cease, he wished to extort from the people by
bitter sufferings, that they should send them away themselves, or refuse
even to lend an ear to the commands of God. For although he must have
been perfectly conscious that there was no reason to accuse the people
of idleness, but that the tale of bricks was not delivered, because the
poor wretches, who had been hardly able before to perform half their
labor, were now incapable, by the utmost exertion, to bear their
burdens, and therefore sees that they are altogether overwhelmed by
them; yet still he reproaches them with reveling in idleness, in order
that they may turn away from Moses, and renounce and abandon the hope
presented to them from on high. And, because he can only torment them
more by killing them outright, he commands their officers to be beaten,
that by their punishment the whole people might be in greater dread.
Finally, those whom he saw standing too firmly, he determined to drive
at last to despair. He is deaf to every excuse of the officers; for when
he had once made up his mind to crush the people until he had destroyed
in them all recollection of God, there is no more feeling or pity in him
than in a stone.

<span id="iv.v.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
5:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p2"></span>**19.** And the officers of the children
of Israel did see *that* they *were* in evil *case*, after it was said,
Ye shall not minish *ought* from your bricks of your daily task.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p3"></span>**19.** Et viderunt praefecti filiorum
Israel ipsos in miseria, dicendo, Non minuetis ex lateribus vestris opus
diei die sue.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p4"></span>**20.** And they met Moses and Aaron, who
stood in the way, as they came forth from Pharaoh:

<span id="iv.v.iii-p5"></span>**20.** Et occurrerunt Mosi et Aharoni,
qui stabant in occursum eorum quum ipsi egrederentur a Pharaone.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p6"></span>**21.** And they said unto them, The Lord
look upon you, and judge; because ye have made our savor to be abhorred
in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword
in their hand to slay us.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p7"></span>**21.** Dixeruntque ad eos, Videat Iehova
super vos, et judicet, qui foetere fecistis odorem nostrum in oculis
Pharaonis et in oculis servorum ejus, tradendo gladium in manum illorum
ad occidendum nos.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p8"></span>**22.** And Moses returned unto the Lord,
and said, Lord, wherefore hast thou *so* evil-entreated this people? why
*is* it *that* thou hast sent me?

<span id="iv.v.iii-p9"></span>**22.** Tunc reversus est Moses ad
Iehovam, et dixit, Domine, cur malum intulisti populo huic? cur misisti
me?

<span id="iv.v.iii-p10"></span>**23.** For since I came to Pharaoh to
speak in thy name, he hath done evil to this people; neither hast thou
delivered thy people at all.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p11"></span>**23.** Nam ex quo veni ad Pharaonem ut
loquerer in nomine tuo, malo affecit populum hunc: nec liberando
liberasti populum tuum.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p12"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p13"></span>**19.** *And the officers of the children
of Israel did see.* <span id="iv.v.iii-p13.1"></span>Some take the
Hebrew word <span id="iv.v.iii-p13.2"></span>רע  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) <span id="iv.v.iii-p14.12"></span>,
*rang*<span id="iv.v.iii-p14.13"></span>, for “grief,” but refer it to
the people; as though it were said, “the <span
id="iv.v.iii-p14.14"></span>officers did see the people sorrowful, when
they informed them of the command of the king.” But the simpler sense,
in my opinion, will be, that they saw no remedy for their evil case, and
that they could not be delivered from the cruel bondage in which they
were. Some also explain it, that the officers themselves felt, from
their own experience, after they had been so inhumanly repulsed by the
king, how unhappy was their condition. But if I must choose either
meaning, I should prefer what I have above stated, that they themselves
sympathized with the public calamity, whilst they could see no hope of
deliverance. Unless, perhaps, it would be better thus to take it, —
that, when they came into the people’s presence, they were themselves of
sad countenance, and looked upon them with looks cast down by sorrow and
shame, because they brought the cruel edict for doubling their labour.
And certainly I willingly embrace this meaning, that when they were
forced to promulgate the command of the king, their countenances
betrayed their sorrow, because they could not evade the necessity of
being the ministers of his ungodly tyranny and cruelty. For Moses adds
immediately after, that they delivered the edict. Hence, then, their
mournful aspect, because they unwillingly oppressed their brethren,
whose troubles they would have preferred to lighten. The sum of the
matter is, that their case was altogether desperate; because the
officers themselves conveyed this message of the unchangeable cruelty of
the tyrant, and by the agitation of their countenances bore witness that
no mitigation could be hoped for.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p15"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p16"></span>**20.** *And they met Moses.* <span
id="iv.v.iii-p16.1"></span>Some translate it,  <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) <span id="iv.v.iii-p17.1"></span> “they
met together with Moses,” taking the particle <span
id="iv.v.iii-p17.2"></span>את<span id="iv.v.iii-p17.3"></span>,
*eth*<span id="iv.v.iii-p17.4"></span>, <span
id="iv.v.iii-p17.5"></span>for “together with;” but it is more in
accordance with the context that the officers and some part of the
elders or people encountered Moses and Aaron as they returned from
Pharaoh. An accidental meeting is indicated, from whence it arose that
their minds were still more exasperated against the Lord’s servants.
That blind grief is here described which, with a fury akin to madness,
aroused the Israelites to unfounded anger against the innocent, who had
deserved nothing of the kind. It is not indeed wonderful that they were
so brutalized by the weight of their sorrows as to lose all sense of
justice, and were even so completely driven out of their minds, as
unreasonably to vent their indignation against the ministers of their
deliverance; for this not unfrequently happens; but although it may be
too common a fault, yet are not they free from the accusation of
ingratitude who are carried away thus inconsiderately by the force of
their passions; nay, <span id="iv.v.iii-p17.6"></span>we should learn
from this example how carefully we ought to restrain our grief, which,
if indulged, parts company both with reason and with kindness. For what
could be more unjust than because Pharaoh is tyrannical and cruel to lay
the blame on Moses and Aaron? But; this outbreak arose from want of
faith; because they measure the favor of God by their immediate success.
They had lately thanked God for their promised redemption; now, as if
they had been deceived, they accuse Moses and Aaron. Hence we gather how
wavering was their faith, which vanishes at once upon so slight a cause.
If the calling of Moses had not been ratified by miracles, they might
have taken occasion to be angry from their ill success; but now, when
they had experimentally known that God was the author of the whole
proceeding, it is an act of perversity and falsehood to accuse Moses of
rashness; and thus they do injustice not only to a mortal man, but to
God their deliverer — an injustice which is doubled by the blasphemous
abuse of His name, when they speak of Him as the promoter of a bad
cause. For the expression, “the Lord — judge,” is, as it were, to impose
upon Him the law by which He must condemn Himself. On this account
intemperate grief is still more to be watched against, which, whilst it
bursts out immoderately against men, does not even spare God. They did
not indeed think that they were reproaching God and rejecting His
loving-kindness; for the excess of their passion had transported them
out of themselves. Meantime we must mark the source of the evil, namely,
that they were impatient, because God did not immediately complete what
He had promised, but deferred it for a time; and again, because they
sought to be exempted from every evil. Thus they preferred rotting, as
it were, in their miseries, to suffering some little inconvenience for
the hope of the favor of God. And this cowardice is natural to almost
all of us, that we prefer to be without God’s help rather than to suffer
under the cross, whilst He leads us to salvation gradually, and
sometimes by a circuitous path. Nothing indeed is sweeter than to hear
that our afflictions are regarded by God, and that He will come to our
relief in tribulation; but if God’s favor awakens the wrath of the
ungodly against us, we shall be prepared to abandon all His promises
rather than purchase the hopes they afford at so great a price. In the
meantime, we see how kindly God contended with the intemperate and
corrupt conduct of His people. For certainly by reproaching Moses and
Aaron so rudely, the Israelites rejected (as far as in them lay) that
message respecting their deliverance which they at first had greedily
received; and yet He ceased not to carry on His work even to the end.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p18"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p19"></span>**22.** *And Moses returned.* This return
unto the Lord is here used in a bad sense for forsaking his office; for
Moses is not related to have either calmly prayed, or, as in a difficult
emergency, to have humbly sought counsel of the Lord; but, leaving the
men with whom he had to do, to have gone back in disgust to God, to
demand his dismissal. He returned, then, to God, that the whole
undertaking might be abandoned, as though he had never been sent. This
is what the words convey, since he openly expostulates with God, because
He had permitted His people to be more cruelly entreated, though He had
promised them deliverance. At first sight, his madness would seem to be
greater than that of the whole people, because he directly and openly
accuses God as the author of all the evil which Pharaoh had inflicted;
yet I doubt not but that he rather sorrowfully recounted the complaints
of the people than spoke his own sentiments. Still his bitterness is not
altogether excusable, when he repents of his vocation, and is indignant,
because an unsuccessful charge had been intrusted to him. But when he
accuses the slackness of God in redeeming His people, it is made
apparent how deep is the darkness which had taken possession of his
mind. He had been forewarned in good time of the hardness of Pharaoh’s
heart; he had heard that he would not yield until crushed by God’s
mighty hand; now, forgetting of all, he marvels that their redemption is
not complete. The same thing often occurs to us, that the doctrine of
faith and hope, which in peaceful times shines brightly in our hearts
and echoes from our tongue, is altogether lost when we come to serious
conflict. Wherefore we ought to devote ourselves with greater goodwill
to its study, that even in the most trying circumstances the
recollection of it may be our support.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc03008.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iv.v.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p15"></span> Nam *festum celebrare* sacrificium
complectitur. — *Vatablus in Pol*. *Syn*.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc03008.htm#fr_66) <span
id="iv.v.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p18"></span> Quasi in coelum conspueret. — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc03008.htm#fr_67) <span
id="iv.v.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p19"></span> Comme s’il disoit, Penses tu que je soye
un petit enfant, pour ne discerner point entre le blanc et le noir? as
much as to say, Do you think I am a little child unable to distinguish
black from white? — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc03008.htm#fr_68) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p32"></span> The original here is, “ut obdurescant ad
servitutem, quasi contracto collo;” which the French translates “pour
l’endurcir a servitude, comme si on le trainoit par le col.” The Geneva
edition of 1617, as well as that of Amsterdam of 1671, however, have
substituted “callo,” which certainly seems to make the sense clearer.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc03008.htm#fr_69) <span
id="iv.v.iii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p14"></span> <span id="iv.v.iii-p14.1"></span>רע<span
id="iv.v.iii-p14.2"></span>, evil; *A* *V*<span
id="iv.v.iii-p14.3"></span>., they (were) in evil (case.) The question
for translators has been whether the pronoun in this clause may be
rendered *themselves* *S* *M* <span id="iv.v.iii-p14.4"></span>has said,
*cum moerore*<span id="iv.v.iii-p14.5"></span>; Hebraice cum malo,
scilicet aspectu. Alii exponunt hic <span
id="iv.v.iii-p14.6"></span>אותם<span id="iv.v.iii-p14.7"></span> pro
<span id="iv.v.iii-p14.8"></span>נפשם<span id="iv.v.iii-p14.9"></span>,
ut est sensus, viderunt praefecti Israelitorum se esse in magno moerore.
The LXX. and the *V*<span id="iv.v.iii-p14.10"></span>. have rendered
the pronoun by words equivalent to *themselves* <span
id="iv.v.iii-p14.11"></span>— *W*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc03008.htm#fr_70) <span
id="iv.v.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p17"></span> In saying “some translate,” *C*. is
again adverting to *S*.*M*., but has rather chosen, with our *A*.*V*.,
to follow the LXX. and Vulgate. — *W*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 6](cc03009)
