[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20322) 
[Next](rp20324) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. III*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

### ANCIENT BABYLONIAN AGRICULTURAL PRECEPTS

<span class="smallcaps">Translated by G. Bertin</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> tablet which contains the
agricultural precepts is one of the series called by the Babylonians,
from the first line of the first tablet, *uludinebisu* = *ana
itti-su*, <span id="fr_360"></span>[1](#fn_359) formerly read
*ki-kankala-bi-su* = *ana itti-su*. This collection, which must have
contained at least ten or twelve tablets, was a compendium of precepts
and prescriptions written at an early date in Akkadian for the guidance
of the people in their various professions. <span
id="fr_361"></span>[2](#fn_360) The work, as we know it from the
fragments in the British Museum, is accompanied with a Babylonian
translation, probably of the time of Sargon of Agade; and the fragments
recovered are those of a Ninevite transcription made in the time of
Assurbanipal for his library.

The tablets are divided into two columns, the left-hand one giving the
Akkadian and the right-hand one the translation. The first six tablets
and part of the seventh contained what may be called the commentary,

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

that is, the list of the most difficult words and expressions, with
explanations or translations. The notion, strange at first sight, of
beginning with the commentary, appears natural when we bear in mind that
these works were the text-books of the Babylonians, which they had to
copy in order to master their complicated system of writing and the
literary Akkadian language <span id="fr_362"></span>[1](#fn_361); the
text-book therefore began, as in our reading-books for children, with
simple expressions or isolated words; the learner having acquired these,
next undertook and understood without difficulty the connected text.

These tablets contained no laws, as has been sometimes stated, but
precepts drawn, perhaps by a philosopher like Confucius or Mencius, from
the customs and usages of the time. The seventh tablet contained
"Precepts for a man in his private life." <span
id="fr_363"></span>[2](#fn_362) The agricultural precepts covered no
doubt more than one tablet; the only one we possess is partly mutilated,
and, the colophon being lost, we do not know what place exactly it
occupied in the collection. What we possess, however, strange to say,
has never been entirely published; the fragments found at first were
published by the trustees of the British

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Museum, <span
id="fr_364"></span>[1](#fn_363) and a fragment found afterwards was
published by Dr. Haupt. <span id="fr_365"></span>[2](#fn_364) No
complete translation of the fragments has been attempted, <span
id="fr_366"></span>[3](#fn_365) no doubt because the tablet was
considered to be a list of unconnected words and sentences; some of the
paragraphs have, however, been incidentally explained in order to
support the interpretation of other texts. <span
id="fr_367"></span>[4](#fn_366)

In the following translation the Akkadian has been taken as the standard
text, but it has often been necessary to follow the Babylonian
translation. Some parts of the translation are doubtful, partly on
account of the mutilated state of the text and partly because, as many
words are not found anywhere else, we have no means of testing their
signification, <span id="fr_368"></span>[5](#fn_367) and some paragraphs
are still obscure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_359"></span>[91:1](rp20323.htm#fr_360) E. G. Pinches.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[91:2](rp20323.htm#fr_361) *S. B. A.*, vol.
viii. part 2; *Akkadian Precepts*, pp. 4 and 5.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[92:1](rp20323.htm#fr_362) An exercise book (on
clay) has been found in which some parts of these tablets have been
copied three times over for practice; this fragment of a copy-book is
now in the British Museum.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[92:2](rp20323.htm#fr_363) *W. A. I.*, ii. pl.
10, and v. pls. 24 and 25. It is the tablet which revealed to me the
real character of this collection. See my paper which contains a
translation of it; it must be remembered that our knowledge of Akkadian
has made great progress since its publication. A mutilated tablet of
"Commercial Precepts," which belong probably to the same collection, is
published, *W. A. I.*, ii. pl. 13.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[93:1](rp20323.htm#fr_364) *W. A. I.*, ii. pls.
14 and 15.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[93:2](rp20323.htm#fr_365) *Keilschrifttexte*,
p. 74. In the same publication Dr. Haupt has also republished the two
first columns, pp. 71–73; it is difficult to see why he has not also
republished the other parts, so as to make the publication complete.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[93:3](rp20323.htm#fr_366) Prof. Sayce has
given in the *Records of the Past*, vol. xi. p. 153, the translation of
the fourth column nearly complete.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[93:4](rp20323.htm#fr_367) The difficult
passages have been generally omitted, and in the vocabularies already
made public many words found in these texts are left out.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[93:5](rp20323.htm#fr_368) I may also state
that the translation is free, as my object is to give the meaning of the
text and not that of the isolated words; I reserve the discussion of the
words for a critical paper, where the text can be reproduced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20324)
