[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20330) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. III*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1890\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span> <span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

The following advertisements followed the original book. They are
included for completeness.

NEW EDITION (35,000) 1s.

# <span class="smallcaps">How we Got Our Bible.</span>

#### An Answer to Questions suggested by the Late Revision.

BY

J. PATERSON SMYTH, LL.B., B.D.,

<span class="small">*Senior Moderator and Gold Medalist, Primate's
Hebrew Prizeman, &c., &c.  
Trinity College, Dublin*.</span>

<span id="img_sbslogo"></span> ![](img/sbslogo.jpg)

<span class="small">Multæ terricolis linguæ, cœlestibus una.</span>

LONDON:

SAMUEL BAGSTER & SONS, LIMITED.

DUBLIN: EASON & SON, LIMITED.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

"HOW WE GOT OUR BIBLE."

*REVIEW NOTICES AND OPINIONS OF EMINENT MEN*.

*Letter from the Bishop of Derry*.—<span class="smallcaps">Palace,
Derry</span>, *Jan. 1886*.

"I can safely say that my attention was throughout stimulated, and that
my interest never flagged from the first page to the last. There are few
scholars who may not learn from Mr. Smyth."

<span class="smallcaps">William, Derry and Raphoe.</span>

"It gives much interesting information with admirable simplicity."

<span class="smallcaps">Archdeacon Farrar</span>.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

"This little volume is indispensable to the Bible reader who wishes to
have in small compass an account of ancient manuscripts and early
versions. It supplies a felt need."—*The Christian*.

"We have seldom met with a better written digest of the history of our
English Bible. It might honestly have been presented to the public as a
five-shilling volume."—*Sword and Trowel*.

"In these pages a flood of light is thrown on the sources of our English
version, most valuable in answer to questions raised by the new
revision."—*Word and Work*.

"This volume is partly historical, partly. bibliographical, and partly
critical. Anybody can understand it, and everybody would be better for
the thoughtful study of it."—*Christian Advocate*.

"Gives an excellent and comprehensive account for popular reading of the
ancient manuscripts of the Bible."—*The Christian World*.

"It ought to find its way into our Training Colleges, Bible Classes, and
Upper Classes in Schools."—*Ecclesiastical Gazette*.

"This little book deserves the attention of the large number of
professing Christians who cannot devote the time to the larger histories
of our English Bible."—*Presbyterian Churchman*.

"The book is a fine study of the history of the Bible, and should be
read attentively and with profit."—*Publishers’ Circular*.

"This very interesting little work cannot fail to be highly
appreciated."—*Northern Whig*.

"This is a capital little hand-book on the history of the Bible, which
should be in the hands of every teacher and preacher."—*The Primitive
Methodist World*.

"The author has done good service by this most interesting and
instructive little book."—*The Messenger*.

"Mr. Smyth possesses the true teaching instinct. We have never before
seen so much valuable information on the subject conveyed in so portable
a form, and in such clear and interesting style."—*Dublin Daily
Express*.

"This book supplies a real need."—Christian Commonwealth. "This is
altogether an admirable little book."—*Dublin Evg. Mail*.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

*NEW WORK BY THE AUTHOR OF*

"HOW WE GOT OUR BIBLE."

**Now ready, SECOND EDITION—making 7000 Copies, crown 8vo, 240 pp.,
price 2s. 6d., extra cloth**.

# THE OLD DOCUMENTS

###### AND

# THE NEW BIBLE.

An Easy Lesson for the People in Biblical Criticism.

BY

J. PATERSON SMYTH, LL.B., B.D.

Senior Moderator and Gold Medalist, Primate's Hebrew Prizeman, &c.,
&c.  
Trinity College, Dublin.

THE OLD TESTAMENT.

<span id="img_sbslogo"></span> ![](img/sbslogo.jpg)

<span class="small">Multæ terricolis linguæ, cœlestibus una.</span>

LONDON:

SAMUEL BAGSTER AND SONS, LIMITED.

DUBLIN: EASON & SON, LIMITED.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

# THE OLD DOCUMENTS

## AND THE NEW BIBLE.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

*REVIEW NOTICES AND OPINIONS OF EMINENT MEN*.

It is not too much to say that this is a book that should be put into
the hands, or better still, into the head of every Sunday School teacher
and scholar. There is another excellent little book by the same author,
"How we got our Bible," of which we may say the same thing.—*Oxford
Journal*, April 5.

*From* Right Hon. <span class="smallcaps">W. E. Gladstone</span>.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I find the work itself most interesting. I have rarely seen the faculty
of lucid exposition more conspicuously displayed.

</div>

*From the Professor of Hebrew, Trinity College, Cambridge*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A very readable and attractive account of a subject on which I fear very
general ignorance prevails.

</div>

A thoroughly excellent book is Mr. J. Paterson Smyth's *Old Documents
and the New Bible*. … The history of the Bible is a subject on which
nearly equal ignorance and curiosity prevail among the people, and Mr.
Smyth's book meets a real want.—*Scottish Leader*, April 10.

…… It is a long time since we have come across a book which so
thoroughly combined pleasure with profit as the volume now under
description. It is small praise to say that there is not a dull page in
it. Of the driest and most unpromising of materials he has constructed a
book that anyone can understand, and that most readers will find to
contain not only information but amusement. It is a perfect model of
what such a book ought to be.—*The Bookseller*, April 5.

From Rev. <span class="smallcaps">W. Alexander</span>, D.D., Bishop of
Derry.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Truly "The Old Documents and the New Bible" is *delightful* reading. It
is pellucidly arranged and written, sometimes witty, sometimes pathetic
in a high degree. A most instructive book.

</div>

It contains a first and easy, yet capital and most indispensable lesson
in Biblical criticism, for the understanding of which no long and
laborious preliminary studies are necessary. There is scholarship enough
in it to make it exceedingly valuable to the young divinity
student.—*Church Review*, May 2.

This little volume is an admirable piece of work by a writer who is
evidently thoroughly master of his subject—*Glasgow Herald*, April 4.

From Rev. <span class="smallcaps">Wm. Sanday</span>, *Professor of
Exegesis, Exeter College, Oxford*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Much impressed by the range of knowledge it displays, and by the vigour
and clearness with which the subject is presented.

</div>

 

 
