[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tut08)  [Next](tut10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

# A.--A HYMN TO ATEN BY THE KING. <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63)

A HYMN OF PRAISE TO THE LIVING HORUS OF THE TWO HORIZONS, WHO REJOICETH
IN THE HORIZON IN HIS NAME OF "SHU, WHO IS IN THE ATEN" (*i.e.*, DISK),
THE GIVER OF LIFE FOR EVER AND EVER, BY THE KING WHO LIVETH IN TRUTH,
THE LORD OF THE TWO LANDS, NEFER-KHEPERU-RA UA-EN-RA, SON OF RA, WHO
LIVETH IN TRUTH, LORD OF THE CROWNS, AAKHUNATEN, GREAT IN THE DURATION
OF HIS LIFE, GIVER OF LIFE FOR EVER AND EVER.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

\[He saith\]:--

Thou risest gloriously, O thou Living Aten, Lord of Eternity! Thou art
sparkling (or coruscating), beautiful, \[and\] mighty. Thy love is
mighty and great . . . thy light, of diverse colours, leadeth captive
(or, bewitcheth) all faces. Thy skin shineth brightly to make all hearts
to live. Thou fillest the Two Lands with thy love, O thou god, who
did\[st\] build \[thy\]self. Maker of every land, Creator of whatsoever
there is upon it, \[viz.\] men and women, cattle, beasts of every kind,
and trees of every kind that grow on the land.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

They live when thou shinest upon them. Thou art the mother \[and\]
father of what thou hast made; their eyes, when thou risest, turn their
gaze upon thee. Thy rays at dawn light up the whole earth. Every heart
beateth high at the sight of thee, \[for\] thou risest as their Lord.

Thou settest in the western horizon of heaven, they lie down in the same
way as those who are dead. Their heads are wrapped up in cloth, their
nostrils are blocked, until thy rising taketh place at dawn in the
eastern horizon of heaven. Their hands then are lifted up in adoration
of thy

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

\[paragraph continues\] KA (or person); thou vivifiest hearts with thy
beauties (or, beneficent acts), which are life. Thou sendest forth thy
beams, \[and\] every land is in festival. Singing men, singing women,
\[and\] chorus men make joyful noises in the Hall of the House of the
Benben Obelisk, \[and\] in every temple in \[the city of\] Aakhut-Aten,
the Seat of Truth, wherewith thy heart is satisfied. Within it are
dedicated offerings of rich food (?).

Thy son is sanctified (or, ceremonially pure) to perform the things
which thou willest, O thou Aten, when he showeth himself in the
appointed processions.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

Every creature that thou hast made skippeth towards thee, thy honoured
son \[rejoiceth\], his heart is glad, O thou Living Aten, who
\[appearest\] in heaven every day. He hath brought forth his honoured
son, UA-EN-RA, like his own form, never ceasing so to do. The son of Ra
supporteth his beauties (or beneficent acts).

NEFER-KHEPERU-RA UA-EN-RA \[saith\]:--

I am thy son, satisfying thee, exalting thy name. Thy strength \[and\]
thy power are established in my heart. Thou art the Living Disk,
eternity is thine emanation (or, attribute). Thou hast made the heavens
to be remote so that thou

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

mightest shine therein and gaze upon everything that thou hast made.
Thou thyself art Alone, but there are millions of \[powers of\] life in
thee to make them (*i.e.*, thy creatures) live. Breath of life is it to
\[their\] nostrils to see thy beams. Buds burst into flower (?), \[and\]
the plants which grow on the waste lands send up shoots at thy rising;
they drink themselves drunk before thy face. All the beasts frisk about
on their feet; all the feathered fowl rise up from their nests and flap
their wings with joy, and circle round in praise of the Living Aten. . .
.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_63"></span>[116:1](tut09.htm#fr_63) See N. de G. Davies,
*The Rock Tombs of El Amarna*, Vol. IV, pl. xxxii, xxxiii. The text is
from the Tomb of Api at Tall al-'Amarnah, with an addition from the tomb
of Tutu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: B.--Hymn to Aten by Ai, Overseer of the Horse of
Aakhunaten](tut10)
