[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tut03)  [Next](tut05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE REIGN OF TUTANKHAMEN.

<span id="img_00100"></span> ![](img/00100.jpg) ("Living Image of Amen
"), King of Egypt, about B.C. 1400.

WHEN and where TUTANKHAMEN was born is unknown, and there is some doubt
about the identity of his father. From a scarab which was found in the
temple of Osiris at Abydos, <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) we learn
that his mother was called Merit-Ra. In the inscription on the red
granite lion in the Southern Egyptian Gallery in the British Museum (No.
431), he says that he "restored the monuments of his father, King of the
South and North, Lord of the Two Lands, Nebmaatra, the emanation of Ra,
the son of Ra, Amenhetep (III), Governor of Thebes." It is possible that
Tutankhamen was the son of Amenhetep III by one of his concubines, and
that when he calls this king his father the statement is literally true,
but there is no proof of it. On the other hand, Tutankhamen may have
used the word "father" simply as a synonym of "predecessor." The older
Egyptologists accepted the statement made by him on the lion that he
dedicated to the Temple of Sulb in Nubia as true, but some of the more
recent writers reject it. The truth is that the name of Tutankhamen's
father is unknown. He became king of Egypt by

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

virtue of his marriage with princess ANKHSEN-PAATEN, the third daughter
of Amenhetep IV <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md), at least that is what
it is natural to suppose, but it is possible that he got rid of his
immediate predecessor, Smenkhkara, or Seaakara, who married the princess
MERITATEN, or ATENMERIT, the eldest daughter of Amenhetep IV, and
usurped his throne.

When Tutankhamen ascended the throne he was, or at all events he
professed to be, an adherent of the cult of Aten, or the "Solar Disk,"
and to hold the religious views of his wife and his father-in-law. Proof
of this is provided by the fragment of a calcareous stone stele
preserved at Berlin (No. 14197), on which he is described as "Lord of
the Two Lands, Rakheperuneb, Lord of the Crowns, Tutankhaten, to whom
life is given for ever." <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3.md)

He did not at once sever his connection with the cult of Aten, for he
started work on a temple, or some other building, of Aten at Thebes.
This is certain from the fact that several of the blocks of stone which
Heremheb, one of his immediate successors, used in his buildings bear
Tutankhamen's name. It is impossible to describe the extent of
Tutankhamen's building operations, for this same Heremheb claimed much
of his work as his own, and cut out wherever possible Tutankhamen's name
and inserted his own in its place. He went so far as to usurp the famous
stele of Tutankhamen

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

that Legrain discovered at Karnak in 1905. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) From this stele we learn that the "strong
names" and official titles which Tutankhamen adopted were as follows:--

1\. Horus name. KA-NEKHT-TUT-MES

2\. Nebti name. NEFER-HEPU-S-GERH TAUI.

3\. Golden Horus name. RENP-KHAU-S-HETEP-NETERU

4\. Nesu bat name. NEB-KHEPERU-RA

5\. Son of Ra name. TUTANKHAMEN

In some cases the cartouche of the nomen contains the signs which mean
"governor of Anu of the South" (*i.e.*, Hermonthis). When Tutankhaten
ascended the throne he changed his name to Tutankhamen, *i.e.*, "Living
image of Amen."

Our chief authority for the acts of Tutankhamen is the stele in Cairo
already referred to, and from the text, which unfortunately is mutilated
in several places, we can gain a very good idea of the

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

state of confusion that prevailed in Egypt when he ascended the throne.
The hieroglyphs giving the year in which the stele was dated are broken
away. The first lines give the names and titles of the king, who says
that he was beloved of Amen-Ra, the great god of Thebes, of Temu and
Ra-Heraakhuti, gods of Anu (Heliopolis), Ptah of Memphis, and Thoth, the
Lord of the "words of god" (*i.e.*, hieroglyphs and the sacred
writings). He calls himself the "good son of Amen, born of Kamutef," and
says that he sprang from a glorious seed and a holy egg, and that the
god Amen himself had begotten him. Amen built his body, and fashioned
him, and perfected his form, and the Divine Souls of Anu were with him
from his youth up, for they had decreed that he was to be an eternal
king, and an established Horus, who would devote all his care and
energies to the service of the gods who were his fathers.

These statements are of great interest, for when understood as the king
meant them to be understood, they show that his accession to the throne
of Egypt was approved of by the priesthoods of Heliopolis, Memphis,
Hermopolis and Thebes. Whatever sympathy he may have possessed for the
Cult of Aten during the lifetime of Amenhetep IV had entirely
disappeared when he set up his great stele at Karnak, and it is quite
clear that he was then doing his utmost to fulfil the expectations of
the great ancient priesthoods of Egypt.

The text continues: He made to flourish again the monuments which had
existed for centuries, but which had fallen into ruin \[during the reign
of Aakhunaten\]. He put an end to rebellion and disaffection. Truth
marched through the Two Lands \[which he

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

established firmly\]. When His Majesty became King of the South the
whole country was in a state of chaos, similar to that in which it had
been in primeval times (*i.e.*, at the Creation). From Abu (Elephantine)
to the Swamps \[of the Delta\] the properties of the temples of the gods
and goddesses had been \[destroyed\], their shrines were in a state of
ruin and their estates had become a desert. Weeds grew in the courts of
the temples. The sanctuaries were overthrown and the sacred sites had
become thoroughfares for the people. The land had perished, the gods
were sick unto death, and the country was set behind their backs.

The state of general ruin throughout the country was, of course, largely
due to the fact that the treasuries of the great gods received no income
or tribute on any great scale from the vassal tribes of Palestine and
Syria. It is easy to understand that the temple buildings would fall
into ruin, and the fields go out of cultivation when once the power of
the central authority was broken. Tutankhamen next says that if an envoy
were sent to Tchah (Syria) to broaden the frontiers of Egypt, his
mission did not prosper; in other words, the collectors of tribute
returned empty-handed because the tribes would not pay it. And it was
useless to appeal to any god or any goddess, for there was no reply made
to the entreaties of petitioners. The hearts of the gods were disgusted
with the people, and they destroyed the creatures that they had made.
But the days wherein such things were passed by, and at length His
Majesty ascended the throne of his father, and began to regulate and
govern the

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

lands of Horus, *i.e.*, the temple-towns and their estates. Egypt and
the Red Land (*i.e.*, Desert) came under his supervision, and every land
greeted his will with bowings of submission.

The text goes on to say that His Majesty was living in the Great House
which was in Per-Aakheperkara. This palace was probably situated either
in a suburb of Memphis or in some district at no great distance from
that city. (Some think that it was in or quite near Thebes.) Here "he
reigned like Ra in heaven," and he devoted him self to the carrying out
of the "plan of this land." He pondered deeply in his mind on his
courses of action, and communed with his own heart how to do the things
that would be acceptable to the people. It was to be expected that, when
once he had discarded Aten and all his works, he would have gone and
taken up his abode in Thebes, and entered into direct negotiations with
the priests of Amen. In other words, Tutankhamen was not certain as to
the kind of reception he would meet with at Thebes, and therefore he
went northwards, and lived in or near Memphis. Whilst here "he sought
after the welfare of father Amen," and he cast a figure of his "august
emanation," in gold, or silver-gold. Moreover, he did more than had ever
been done before to enhance the power and splendour of Amen. The text
unfortunately gives no description of the figure of Amen which he made
in gold, but a very good idea of what it was like maybe gained from the
magnificent solid gold figure of the god that is in the Carnarvon
Collection at Highclere Castle, and was exhibited at the Burlington Fine
Arts Club in 1922. A handsome silver figure of Amen-Ra, plated with
gold, is exhibited in the British Museum (Fifth Egyptian

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Room, Table-case I, No. 42). This must have come
from a shrine of the god. He next fashioned a figure of "Father Amen" on
thirteen staves, a portion of which was decorated with gold *tcham*
(*i.e.*, gold or silver-gold), lapis lazuli and all kinds of valuable
stones; formerly the figure of Amen only possessed eleven (?) staves. He
also made a figure of Ptah, south of his wall, the Lord of Life, and a
portion of this likewise was decorated with gold or silver-gold, lapis
lazuli, turquoises and all kinds of valuable gems. The figure of Ptah,
which originally stood in the shrine in Memphis, only possessed six (?)
staves. Besides this, Tutankhamen built monuments to all the gods, and
he made the sacred images of them of real tcham metal, which was the
best produced. He built their sanctuaries anew, taking care to have
durable work devoted to their construction; he established a system of
divine offerings, and made arrangements for the maintenance of the same.
His endowments provided for a daily supply of offerings to all the
temples, and on a far more generous scale than was originally
contemplated.

He introduced or appointed libationers and ministrants of the gods, whom
he chose from among the sons of the principal men in their villages, who
were known to be of good reputation, and provided for their increased
stipends by making gifts to their temples of immense quantities of gold,
silver, bronze and other metals. He filled the temples with servants,
male and female, and with gifts which had formed part of the booty
captured by him. In addition to the presents which he gave to the
priests and servants of the temples, he increased the revenues

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

of the temples, some twofold, some threefold and others fourfold, by
means of additional gifts of *tcham* metal, gold, lapis lazuli,
turquoises, precious stones of all kinds, royal cloth of byssus,
flax-linen, oil, unguents, perfumes, incense, *ahmit* and myrrh. Gifts
of "all beautiful things" were given lavishly by the king. Having
re-endowed the temples, and made provision for the daily offerings and
for the performance of services which were per-formed every day for the
benefit of the king, that is to say, himself, Tutankhamen made provision
for the festal processions on the river and on the sacred lakes of the
temples. He collected men who were skilful in boat-building, and made
them to build boats of new acacia wood of the very best quality that
could be obtained in the country of Negau. Many parts of the boats were
plated with gold, and their effulgence lighted up the river.

The information contained in the last two paragraphs enables us to
understand the extent of the ruin that had fallen upon the old religious
institutions of the country through the acts of Aakhunaten. The temple
walls were mutilated by the Atenites, the priesthoods were driven out,
and all temple properties were confiscated and applied to the
propagation of the cult of Aten. The figures of the great gods that were
made of gold and other precious metals in the shrines were melted down,
and thus the people could not consult their gods in their need, for the
gods had no figures wherein to dwell, even if they wished to come upon
the earth. There were no priests left in the land, no gods to entreat,
no funeral ceremonies could be performed, and the dead had to be laid in
their tombs without the blessing of the priests.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

During this period of religious chaos, which obtained throughout the
country, a number of slaves, both male and female, and singing men,
*shemaiu*, and men of the acrobat class had been employed by the Atenite
king to assist in the performance of his religious services, and at
festivals celebrated in honour of Aten. These Tutankhamen "purified" and
transferred to the royal palace, where they performed the duties of
servants of some kind in connection with the services of all the
"father-gods." This treatment by the king was regarded by them as an act
of grace, and they were exceedingly content with their new positions.
The concluding lines of the stele tell us little more than that the gods
and goddesses of Egypt rejoiced once more in beholding the performance
of their services, that the old order of worship was reestablished, and
that all the people of Egypt thanked the king for his beneficent acts
from the bottom of their hearts. The gods gave the king life and
serenity, and by the help of Ra, Ptah and Thoth he administered his
country with wisdom, and gave righteous judgments daily to all the
people.

In line 18 on the Stele of Tutankhamen it is stated that the gifts made
by the king to the priests and temples were part of the booty which His
Majesty had captured from conquered peoples This suggests that even
during his short reign of from eight to ten years he managed to make
raids --they cannot be called wars--in the countries which his
predecessors had conquered and made dependencies of Egypt. The truth of
his

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

statement is fully proved by the pictures and inscriptions found in the
tomb of Hui in Western Thebes. This officer served in Nubia under
Amenhetep IV, and as a reward for his fidelity and success the king made
him Prince of Kesh (Nubia), and gave him full authority to rule from
Nekhen, the modern Al-kab, about 50 miles south of Thebes, to
Nest-Taui <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) or Napata (Jabal Barkal.md), at
the foot of the Fourth Cataract. During the reign of Tutankhamen Hui
returned from Nubia to Thebes, bringing with him large quantities of
gold, both in the form of rings and dust, vessels of gold and silver,
bags full of precious stones, Sudani beds, couches, chairs of state,
shields and a chariot. <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6.md) With these
precious objects came the shekh of Maam, the shekh of Uait, the sons of
all the principal chiefs on both sides of the river from Buhen (Wadi
Halfah) to Elephantine, and a considerable number of slaves. Hui and his
party arrived in six boats, and when all the gifts were unloaded they
were handed over to Tutankhamen's officials, who had gone to receive
them. It is not easy to decide whether this presentation of the produce
of Nubia by Hui was an official delivery of tribute due to Tutankhamen,
or a personal offering to the new king of Egypt. If Hui was appointed
Viceroy of Kesh by Amenhetep IV or his father, it is possible that he
was an adherent of the cult of Aten. In this case, his gifts to
Tutankhamen were probably personal, and were offered to him by Hui with
the set

 

<span id="img_pl01"></span> [![](tn/pl01.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl01.jpg.md)  
*Plate I*.  
Hui presenting tribute and gifts from vassal peoples to Tutankhamen.
From Lepsius, *Denkmäler* III, 117.

 

<span id="img_pl02"></span> [![](tn/pl02.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl02.jpg.md)  
*Plate II*.  
Red granite lion with an inscription on the base stating that it was
made by Tutankhamen. It was dedicate by him to the temple of Sulb, in
the Third Cataract in the Egyptian Sudan, when he "restored the
monuments of his father, Amenhetep III.  
British Museum, Southern Egyptian Gallery, No. 431.

 

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

purpose of placating the restorer of the cult of Amen. Be this as it
may, the gold and silver and precious stones from Nubia were most
acceptable to the king, for they supplied him with means for the
re-endowment of the priests and the temples.

Egyptologists, generally, have agreed that the scenes in Hui's tomb
representing the presentation of gifts from Nubia have a historical
character, and that we may consider that Tutankhamen really exercised
rule in Nubia. But there are also painted on the walls scenes in which
the chiefs and nobles of Upper Retennu (Syria) are presenting the same
kinds of gifts to Tutankhamen, and these cannot be so easily accepted as
being historical in character. In his great inscription, Tutankhamen
says explicitly that during the reign of Aakhunaten it was useless to
send missions to Syria to "enlarge the frontiers of Egypt," for they
never succeeded in doing so. But he does not say that he himself did not
send missions, *i.e.*, make raids, into some parts of Phoenicia and
Syria, and it is possible that he did. It is also possible that some of
the Syrian chiefs, hearing of the accession of a king who was following
the example of Thothmes III and honouring Amen, sent gifts to him with
the view of obtaining the support of Egyptian arms against their foes.

Exactly when and how Tutankhamen died is not known, and his age at the
time of his death cannot be stated. No tomb of his has been found in the
mountains of Tall al-'Amarnah, and, up to the present, there is no
evidence that he had a tomb specially hewn for him in the Valley of the
Tombs of the Kings. During the course of his excavations in this Valley,
Mr. Theodore Davis found a tomb which he believed to be that of

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

Tutankhamen. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) In it there was a broken
box containing several pieces of gold leaf stamped with the names of
Tutankhamen and his wife Ankhsenamen, etc. In a pit some distance from
this tomb he discovered what he took to be the débris from a tomb, such
as dried wreaths of leaves and flowers. The cover of a very large jar,
which had been broken, was wrapped up in a cloth on which was inscribed
the name of Tutankhamen. One of the most beautiful objects found by
Davis was the little blue glazed funerary vase which is figured on plate
XCII of this book. It was discovered in a sort of hiding place under a
large rock, and bears the inscription "Beautiful god, Neb-kheperu Ra,
giver of life". These facts certainly suggest that Davis found a tomb of
Tutankhamen.

The objects in the British Museum that bear the name of Tutankhamen are
few, the largest and most important being the granite lion which he
placed in the temple built by Amenhetep III at Sulb (the "Soleb" of
Lepsius), about half-way up the Third Cataract on the left or west bank.
Several scarabs <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8.md) and a bead bearing his
prenomen or nomen are exhibited in Table-Case B. (Fourth Egyptian Room),
and also the fragment of a I model of a boomerang in blue glazed faience
in Wall-Case 225 (Fifth Egyptian Room), No. 54822. Two fine porcelain
tubes for stibium, or eye-paint, are exhibited in Wall-Case 272 (Sixth
Egyptian Room). The one (No. 27376) has a dark bluish green colour and
is inscribed "Beautiful god, Lord of the Two Lands, Lord of Crowns,
Neb-kheperu-Ra,

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

giver of life for ever" and the other (No. 2573), which is white in
colour, is inscribed with the names of his wife and himself. A writing
palette bearing the king's prenomen <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md)
was found at Kurnah during the time of the French Expedition, and this
and the other objects mentioned above suggest that the royal tomb was
being plundered during the early years of the XIXth century.

An interesting mention is made of Tutankhamen in one of the tablets from
Boghaz Keui, and it suggests that communications passed more or less
frequently between the kings of the Hittites at that period and the
kings of Egypt. The document is written in cuneiform characters <span
id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10.md) in the Hittite language, and states that
the Queen of Egypt, called Da-kha-mu-un wrote to the father of the
reigning Hittite king to tell him that her husband Bi-ib-khu-ruri-ya-ash
was dead, and that she had no son, and that she wanted one, and she
asked him to send to her one of his many sons, and him she would make
her husband. <span id="fr_11"></span>[3](#fn_11.md) Now Bibkhururiyaash is
nothing more nor less than a transcription of NEB-KHEPERU-RA, the
prenomen of king Tutankhamen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:1](tut04.htm#fr_1.md) See Mariette, *Abydos*,
Paris, 1880, tom. II, pl. 40N.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2:1](tut04.htm#fr_2.md) This name means "Her life
is of Aten" (*i.e.*, of the Solar Disk).

<span id="fn_3"></span>[2:2](tut04.htm#fr_3.md) See *Aegyptische
Zeitschrift*, Bd. 38, 1900, pp. 112-114.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[3:1](tut04.htm#fr_4.md) See *Annales du Service*,
Vol. V, 1905, p. 192; *Recueil de Travaux*, Vol. XXIX, 1907, pp.
162-173.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[10:1](tut04.htm#fr_5.md) This is a name of Thebes,
but it was also applied to the town of Napata, where the great temple of
Amen-Ra of Nubia was situated.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[10:2](tut04.htm#fr_6.md) See the drawing published
by Lepsius, *Denkmäler* III, pl. 116-118.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[12:1](tut04.htm#fr_7.md) See Davis-Maspero-Daressy,
*The Tombs of Harmhabi and Touat-ankhamanou*, London, 1912.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[12:2](tut04.htm#fr_8.md) See Hall, H. R.,
*Catalogue of Egyptian Scarabs*, London, 1913, Nos. 1968-1972, pp. 197,
198.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[13:1](tut04.htm#fr_9.md) This is the legend as
printed in Champollion, *Monuments*, tom. II, pl. CXCI *bis* No. 2.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[13:2](tut04.htm#fr_10.md) For the text see
*Keilschrift aus Boghazkoï*, Heft V, No. 6. Rev. III, 11. 7-13.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[13:3](tut04.htm#fr_11.md) See Dr. F. Hrosny, *Die
Lösung des Hethitischen Problems*, in the *Mitteilungen der Deutschen
Orient-Gesellschaft*, December, 1915, No. 56, p. 36.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tutankhamen and the Cult of Amen](tut05.md)
