[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tut09)  [Next](tut11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

# B.--HYMN TO ATEN <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64.md)

###### BY

#### AI, OVERSEER OF THE HORSE OF AAKHUNATEN.

1\. A Hymn of praise of Her-aakhuti, the living one exalted in the
Eastern Horizon in his name of Shu who is in the Aten, who liveth for
ever and ever, the living and great Aten, he who is in the Set-Festival,
the lord of the Circle, the Lord of the Disk, the Lord of heaven, the
Lord of earth, the lord of the House of the Aten in Aakhut-Aten, \[of\]
the King of the South and the North, who liveth in Truth, lord of the
Two Lands (*i.e.*, Egypt), NEFER-KHEPERU-RA UA-EN-RA, the son of Ra,

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

who liveth in Truth, Lord of Crowns, AAKHUN-ATEN, great in the period of
his life, \[and of\] the great royal woman (or wife) whom he loveth,
Lady of the Two Lands, NEFER-NEFERU-ATEN NEFERTITI, who liveth in health
and youth for ever and ever.

2\. He (*i.e.*, Ai, a Fan-bearer and the Master of the King's Horse)
saith:--

Thy rising \[is\] beautiful in the horizon of heaven, O Aten, ordainer
of life. Thou dost shoot up in the horizon of the East, thou fillest
every land with thy beneficence. Thou art beautiful and great and
sparkling, and exalted above every land.. Thy arrows

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (i.e., rays) envelop (i.e., penetrate)
everywhere all the lands which thou hast made.

3\. Thou art as Ra. Thou bringest \[them\] according to their number,
thou subduest them for thy beloved son. Thou thyself art afar off, but
thy beams are upon the earth; thou art in their faces, they \[admire\]
thy goings.

Thou settest in the horizon of the west, the earth is in darkness, in
the form of death. Men lie down in a booth wrapped up in cloths, one eye
cannot see its fellow.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

\[paragraph continues\] If all their possessions, which are under their
heads, be carried away they perceive it not.

4\. Every lion emergeth from his lair, all the creeping things bite,
darkness \[is\] a warm retreat (?). The land is in silence. He who made
them hath set in his horizon.

The earth becometh light, thou shootest up in the horizon, shining in
the Aten in the day, thou scatterest the darkness. Thou sendest out
thine arrows (i.e., rays),

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

the Two Lands make festival, \[men\] wake up, stand upon their feet, it
is thou who raisest them up. \[They\] wash their members, they take
\[their apparel\]

5\. and array themselves therein, their hands are \[stretched out\] in
praise at thy rising, throughout the land they do their works.

Beasts and cattle of all kinds settle down upon the pastures, shrubs and
vegetables flourish, the feathered fowl fly about over their marshes,
their feathers praising thy Ka (person). All the cattle rise up on their
legs, creatures that fly and insects of all kinds

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

6\. spring into life, when thou risest up on them.

The boats drop down and sail up the river, likewise every road openeth
(or showeth itself) at thy rising, the fish in the river swim towards
thy face, thy beams are in the depths of the Great Green (i.e., the
Mediterranean and Red Seas).

Thou makest offspring to take form in women, creating seed in men. Thou
makest the son to live in the womb of his mother, making him to be quiet
that he crieth not; thou art a nurse

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

7\. in the womb, giving breath to vivify that which he hath made.
\[When\] he droppeth from the womb . . . on the day of his birth \[he\]
openeth his mouth in the \[ordinary\] manner, thou providest his
sustenance.

The young bird in the egg speaketh in the shell, thou givest breath to
him inside it to make him to live. Thou makest for him his mature form
so that he can crack the shell \[being\] inside the egg. He cometh forth
from the egg, he chirpeth with all

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

his might, when he hath come forth from it (the egg), he walketh on his
two feet.

O how many are the things which thou hast made!

They are hidden from the face, O thou

8\. One God, like whom there is no other. Thou didst create the earth by
thy heart (or will), thou alone existing, men and women, cattle, beasts
of every kind that are upon the earth, and that move upon feet (or
legs), all the creatures that are in the sky and that fly with their
wings, \[and\] the deserts of Syria and Kesh (Nubia), and the Land of
Egypt.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

Thou settest every person in his place. Thou providest their daily food,
every man having the portion allotted to him, \[thou\] dost compute the
duration of his life. Their tongues are different in speech, their
characteristics (or forms), and

9\. likewise their skins \[in colour\], giving distinguishing marks to
the dwellers in foreign lands.

Thou makest Hapi (the Nile) in the Tuat (Underworld), thou bringest it
when thou wishest to make mortals to live, inasmuch as thou hast made
them for thyself, their Lord who dost support them to

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

the uttermost, O thou Lord of every land, thou shinest upon them, O ATEN
of the day, thou great one of majesty.

Thou makest the life of all remote lands. Thou settest a Nile in heaven,
which cometh down to them.

10\. It maketh a flood on the mountains like the Great Green Sea, it
maketh to be watered their fields in their villages. How beneficent are
thy plans, O Lord of Eternity! A Nile in heaven art thou for the
dwellers in the foreign lands (or deserts), and for all the beasts of
the desert that go upon

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

feet (or legs). Hapi (the Nile) cometh from the Tuat for the land of
Egypt. Thy beams nourish every field; thou risest up \[and\] they live,
they germinate for thee.

Thou makest the Seasons to develop everything that thou hast made:

11\. The season of Pert (*i.e.*, Nov. 16-March 16) so that they may
refresh themselves, and the season Heh (*i.e.*, March 16-Nov. 16) in
order to taste thee. <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md) Thou hast made
the heaven which is remote that thou mayest shine therein and look upon
everything

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

that thou hast made. Thy being is one, thou shinest (or, shootest up)
among thy creatures as the LIVING ATEN, rising, shining, departing afar
off, returning. Thou hast made millions of creations (or, evolutions)
from thy one self (viz.) towns and cities, villages, fields, roads and
river. Every eye (i.e., all men) beholdeth thee confronting it. Thou art
the Aten of the day at its zenith.

12\. At thy departure thine eye . . . thou didst create their faces so
that thou mightest not see. . . . ONE thou didst

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

make . . . Thou art in my heart. There is no other who knoweth thee
except thy son Nefer-kheperu-Ra Ua-en-Ra. Thou hast made him wise to
understand thy plans \[and\] thy power. The earth came into being by thy
hand, even as thou hast created them (i.e., men). Thou risest, they
live; thou settest, they die. As for thee, there is duration of life in
thy members, life is in thee. \[All\] eyes \[gaze upon\]

13\. thy beauties until thou settest, \[when\] all labours are
relinquished. Thou settest in the West, thou risest, making to flourish
. . . for the King. Every man who

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

\[paragraph continues\] \[standeth on his\] foot, since thou didst lay
the foundation of the earth, thou hast raised up for thy son who came
forth from thy body, the King of the South and the North, Living in
Truth, Lord of Crowns, Aakhun-Aten, great in the duration of his life
\[and for\] the Royal Wife, great of majesty, Lady of the Two Lands,
Nefer-neferu-Aten Nefertiti, living \[and\] young for ever and ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[122:1](tut10.htm#fr_64.md) See N. de G. Davies,
*op. cit.*, Vol. VI, pl. xxvii.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[132:1](tut10.htm#fr_65.md) *i.e.*, for men to feel
the heart of Shu who is in the Aten.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymns to the Sun-God](tut11.md)
