[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jat09)  [Next](jat11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 8. NAIYENESGANI REMOVES CERTAIN DANGERS.

At that time a trail passed between a cliff and a stream.
TsedagediLîsdîhî, a monster, sat by this trail. His home was in the
large stream flowing by. When anyone passed along the trail in front of
him, he kicked him into the water where the children of the monster ate
the victim and only his red bones floated to the surface. The people
passed along there and TsedagediLîsdîhî kicked them down.

Then Naiyenesgani came there and asked, "Where does the trail go
through?" "There," he told him. He came there and made motions as if to
pass through. The monster, kicking, missed him. "Where does the trail
pass?" he asked. "There," he told him. He came there and made motions as
if to pass. The monster, kicking, missed him. "Where

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

does the trail pass?" he asked. "There," he told him. He made motions as
if to pass again. The monster missed when he kicked at him. Then
Naiyenesgani kicked him into the water. When his children had finished
eating him they said, "It was our father's meat." His bones, very red,
floated to the top. Naiyenesgani came there and sent the young ones
out. <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)

Then he was about to lie with his wife. He pounded some sumac sticks and
twisted them together. Having them in his hand he went with her and when
she lay down for him, he inserted the sticks first. Her vulvae were
provided with teeth by means of which she killed men. She cut these
sticks with her teeth and he destroyed them. After that she had no such
teeth. Before that, cutting the men with her teeth, she had killed
them. <span id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17)

Then the reeds needed for arrows stood at the junction of two canyons.
When anyone came there for arrows the rocks closed on him and killed
him. Notwithstanding the danger, people continued coming for arrows and
were killed. Naiyenesgani came there, made as if to pass four times, and
then went to the reeds and broke some of them off. The rocks did not
come together. He carried the reeds out and distributed them so that
everybody had arrows. He did that. <span id="fr_18"></span>[3](#fn_18)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[203:1](jat10.htm#fr_16) Matthews gives a
similar incident, not associated with a stream, p. 122. It has been
recorded from the San Carlos Apache.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[203:2](jat10.htm#fr_17) A very widespread
conception. See Lowie, (a), p. 237; Dorsey, (c), p. 35.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[203:3](jat10.htm#fr_18) Usually this danger of
approaching rocks is passed on the journey to the sun. Matthews, p. 109.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9. The Killing of the Bear](jat11)
