[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jat16)  [Next](jat18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

### 15. COYOTE SECURES FIRE. <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27)

Fireflies had their camp where high rocks stood around it in a circle
and there was no trail leading down to it. They were the only people who
had fire. They were playing the hoop and pole game with Otters. In vain
Coyote walked around the rocks seeking a place to go down. He went where
some children were playing beyond a hill and asked them where the trail
was that lead down. They would not tell him. Having gathered some red
berries and having made two strings of beads from them, he came again to
the children. "Now tell me where the trail is," he said as he gave them
the beads. "Right by the edge of the rocks stands a cedar tree," they
told him, "one takes hold of it and it bends with him to the ground. If
one says to it, 'Bend down to me' it will bend down and you may go out
with it." Coyote pulled off some cedar bark and made a bundle of it to
serve as a torch.

He went over where they were playing the hoop and pole game. They were
betting their hides and when one was beaten his hide was pulled off and
he jumped into the river and came out again dressed as he was before.
Coyote wanted to bet his hide. "No," the other players told him, "your
skin sticks too tightly to your nose, you might cry badly about it." He
played, however, and lost, and when they were stripping off his skin it
stuck to his nose and he cried. He jumped into the river but came out as
he went in, red and without a skin. Then the others caught him and
pushed him into a badger's hole. He came out with a coat of short fur.
He wished to bet again but the others would not permit him saying, "You
cry so about it that every one is ashamed." <span
id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28)

When it was nearly night Fireflies built a fire in the center of their
camp preparatory to a dance. When the people were all standing about
after the dance began, Coyote tied the cedar bark he had prepared to his
tail, and dancing about, tried to get his tail in the fire. "Coyote,
your tail is on fire," they called to him. "I am working magic with it;
it will not burn," he replied. His tail blazed up, and he jumped over
the heads of the spectators and ran to the place where the trail led up.
Fireflies ran after him. "Come bend down to me," he called to the cedar.
When it

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

came down to him he went up, tossing up his tail as he topped the rock.
He ran off, throwing his tail from side to side. Those running after him
tried to put the fire out. Coyote ran on, whipping the trees with his
tail, still pursued, until he came to the border of the sky. When he had
run almost entirely around the world with the fire he was tired and
crawled into a hole.

The whole world was afire and burning. It was burned black everywhere.
That is why you can make a fire with a drill from all kinds of trees.
Here at the east some trees were left unburned. They are like stone and
will not burn if they are put in the fire. Petrified wood was the only
thing of all that was on the world that was not burned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[208:1](jat17.htm#fr_27) Russell obtained this
story with additional details. The hero in his account should be Coyote
instead of Fox, an error probably due to the interpreter. The birds with
whom he was flying, if named tetl, (deL) were cranes instead of geese,
(a). p. 261. While this form of the story seems to be peculiar to the
Southwest, a similar origin for fire is found in many other localities.
Teit, (a), pp. 56-57; Goddard, p. 195; Lowie, (a), p. 244; Kroeber, (c),
pp. 252-260.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[208:2](jat17.htm#fr_28) Matthews has this
incident in another connection, p. 97.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16. Coyote Secures Fire. (Second Version.)](jat18)
