[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jat10)  [Next](jat12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 9. THE KILLING OF THE BEAR. <span id="fr_19"></span>[4](#fn_19)

When some children were playing one of them said, "I will be a bear." He
made a pile of dirt which the other children carried away in their hands
until it was all gone. In their absence, he made claws for himself of
hide fleshers and muscles of the larger hide dresser. With these, he dug
a deep hole into which he went so far that he could not be seen. When he
came out, he was covered with hair to his elbows and knees. He went in
again and came out with hair to his shoulders and hips. When he came out
the third time, his body was nearly covered, and the fourth time
completely covered with hair.

He went among the people, running in and out, and killing the children.
He went off to the Navajo country and hid his heart near some oak trees

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

at a place called, "open-mouth-bear". He then came back and again began
to kill the people. Although they shot arrows at him, they could not
hurt him.

Naiyenesgani went to the Navajo country carrying his war club. The bear,
seeing the danger, started to run to the place where his heart lay.
Naiyenesgani ran after him and came to the heart first. As he came near
it be heard the oak leaves lying over it, making a noise like "ca a ca
a". It was the beating of the heart that made them move. Naiyenesgani,
making motions four times, struck the heart, and the bear, running close
behind, fell dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[203:4](jat11.htm#fr_19) The story given by
Russell, (a), p. 262, agrees very well except that Fox (Coyote) is the
hero; but the bears referred to by Mooney (a, p. 208) seem not the same
in any particular. Matthews has the incident of the gradual
transformation of a girl into a bear and that of the detached vitals but
not in connection with Naiyenesgani, pp. 99-101. Naiyenesgani does kill
the bear that pursues one of the monsters, but the account is
abbreviated, p. 124. The same motive with different details appears in
Gros Ventre, Kroeber, (a), p. 105.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. The Traveling Rock](jat12)
