[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jat26)  [Next](jat28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 25. THE MAN WHO TRAVELED WITH THE BUFFALO. <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45)

At another time, they were on a war expedition going toward the enemy's
country. It was very hot and they had now gone a long way without

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

finding the enemy. They turned back, dying from thirst. There was only
one who had not died and he was weak from thirst. When it was dark he
lay down where a clump of trees was standing.

Ravens were living in the trees under which he lay. Near morning, he
woke up and heard the ravens talking. "This is the man who killed the
buffalo. They have been killing a great many of them over there." Up
above him, he heard the ravens naming the men one by one. "This man, he
killed one, over there," they were saying. "Another man killed one here.
This man killed a very fat buffalo. This man also killed a very fat
buffalo." When morning came, the ravens had mentioned the killing of
very many. The man was very thirsty.

About noon he came to a prairie dog village where he lay down. A prairie
dog came up out of his hole and brought him a small dish of water. He
drank that and again started on his journey.

After a time, he saw a buffalo calf standing. The man traveled along
with the buffalo calf. They came where the red mountain ridge stands up
horizontally. The buffalo was then about so large (four feet high). When
they came to the red place, the buffalo was fully grown. There was a
plain there and very many buffalo among which the two went. At evening
the ground was white with their tipis. The man lay down in the doorway
and spent the night. The next morning the buffalo all went off away from
him. There were no tents, only signs that buffalo had been lying there.
The buffalo went off toward the east, and the man followed after them.
That evening, he came to their camp again. He lay down again in a tipi
by the door. The next morning instead of their camp there were only
signs of buffalo having lain there. They went off again and the man
followed them. At evening he came again to their camp and lay down for
the night in the doorway. The next day he followed after them again and
came to their camp at evening.

When it was dark, a buffalo who was chief, said, "You have married a
very brave man's wife." It was a white buffalo who spoke thus as a
chief. He had said, "If any man is braver than I, he may marry my wife."
Then the chief came to his house and said, "Make arrows and feather them
with the tail feathers of the falcon. Make some also and feather them
with mixed feathers. Make a bow of locust (?), one of mulberry wood and
another of cedar." Then he made arrows and feathered them. "Make a bow
also," he told him.

Then the chiefs all gathered at one place. The man and the largest
buffalo stood facing each other. "Do not be afraid," he said, "shoot
with these arrows." He commenced shooting and continued until he had
used up those he made first. Then he began to shoot with the other kind
and used them all. He gave them all to him.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

Then he said to him, "The Pecos River will be your chief; the Canadian
River will be your chief; the Rio Grande will be your chief; the Chama
River will be your chief." <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_45"></span>[221:1](jat27.htm#fr_45) A story probably
connected with this has been published by Dr. R. H. Lowie. The fight
with the Buffalo chief which is so obscure here is entirely pertinent in
the Assiniboine narrative, (c), p, 130. The narrator omitted the latter
portion of this myth, which is the basis of the ceremony for infants
because he did not wish to impart such information. The man succeeded in
killing the white buffalo. The infants when four days old are placed on
a buffalo blanket during the ceremony which introduces them to the world
and its powers. See p. 269.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[223:1](jat27.htm#fr_46) These are the sacred
rivers of the Jicarilla. The Canadian and Rio Grande are male, "men,"
the Pecos and Chama are female and are so pictured in the ceremonial dry
paintings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26. Coyote Steals a Man's Wife](jat28)
