[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jat39)  [Next](jat41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 38. COYOTE IS DISOBEYED BY TURKEY. <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59)

Coyote came where there was a flock of turkeys. He said to one of them,
"Go to my home and they will eat you. Tell them that they must save the
hind quarter that has a black mark on it for me." Turkey went to
Coyote's home and said to his family, "Coyote says that you should eat
the smallest child, but that you shall mark a hind quarter and save it
for him. That was what your father told me when he sent me to you."
Coyote's wife struck the youngest child on the side of his head and
killed him and then they ate him up.

Turkey went back to the people. When Coyote came back he said, "Where is
that man I sent you to eat?" "When he came to us, he said, 'Your father
sent me here to tell you that you should kill the smallest child and eat
him, saving the right hind quarter marked with a coal for me., Because
of that we killed the smallest child and ate him. The right hind quarter
we marked with a coal and put away for you," they told Coyote. "May he
die! He lied. I sent him to you that you should eat him."

Coyote started away again and cattle to the turkeys. They flew away from
him and alighted in a pine tree. Coyote started to chop down the tree.
When it was about to fall, they flew off to another tree which Coyote
also commenced to chop. As it was about to fall they flew again into
still another tree. This Coyote also cut down. Before it fell, the
turkeys flew, alighting in still another tree. Coyote commenced chopping
this also. Before it fell, the turkeys flew away alighting in another
tree. Coyote tired out, gave up the task. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[3](#fn_60)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_59"></span>[233:2](jat40.htm#fr_59) The Wichita story has
Coyote first make Turkey declare he is an honest man, Dorsey, (b), p.
289.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[233:3](jat40.htm#fr_60) Ed. Ladd added that
Coyote shot his arrows into the under side of the limb on which the
turkeys were sitting in a row, cut the tree down and recovered his
arrows. He repeated this four times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 39. Coyote is Shot With a Pine Tree](jat41)
