[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jat61)  [Next](jat63) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 60. AN EXPEDITION TO THE ADOBE WALLS WITH KIT CARSON.

It was at Cimarron also that they started off with Gidi (Kit Carson)
after the enemy. There were Ute, Apache, soldiers, and Mexicans. Four
different nations went with him after the enemy. They went down the
Canadian River to HweLdibade (Mexican name?) where they found the enemy.
There were many tipis there. At evening, when they were approaching the
camp of the enemy, men were sent out to observe. There their camp was
lying some way off. The party moved on until nearly day when they saw
the campfires. The horsemen, leaving the others, rode forward. There
were two camps of the enemy, one above the other. All the Apache rode
together and commenced to fight. They drove them from the upper camp and
pursued them to the lower camp where they fought with them. Taking away
their horses they fought with them until night. Many of the soldiers
were killed. One Apache was killed and one was wounded in the foot. A
spent ball entered his foot but did not pass through it. Another Apache
received an arrow under his arm through his clothing. Many of the enemy
were killed and all their tents and goods were brought home on wagons.
The enemy drove them away from their lower camp. They came back to
Cimarron where they danced until they were tired. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[250:1](jat62.htm#fr_76) This account was given
after an inquiry had been made of Casa Maria whether he went on the
expedition. He said that he did not go but that his brother went. An
extended account of this affair is given by Lieut. G. H. Pettis, "Kit
Carson's Fight with the Comanche and Kiowa Indians at the Adobe Walls on
the Canadian River, Nov. 25, 1864." See also, Mooney, (b), p. 314-17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 61. An Unsuccessful Expedition Led by Maxwell](jat63)
