[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jat66)  [Next](jat68) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 65. THE ARROWS FAIL ON THE HUNT.

In the fall they camped out in the plains for buffalo. They camped at
the Canadian River, then at DzîLts'îdgaiye, "mountains stand" at
LiyeLdeseLye, "saddled floated away", at Balisoye, (Mexican name?) where
they came among the buffalo. The bulls that were going around in advance
of the herd were killed and the meat brought back. In the evening, the
chief made a speech saying, "We shall stay here two days, you should
have everything ready. There are many buffalo here. After two days, in
the evening, we shall move camp toward them." After two days when the
sun was here in the sky they started off eastward and came to Gadjaeyi
and camped below in the arroyo. During the night, the buffalo ran away
from them. They kept bellowing. The next day some men rode to the top of
the hill to look over the country. They came back and reported that
there were buffalo in large numbers in all directions. They caught their
good horses and rode them out on the plains. They rode right among them
killing a great number and bringing back much meat. The next day they
killed many again. Still another day they killed a good many and brought
in the meat.

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

In the evening the chief spoke to them again. "Our arrows are all gone.
If the enemy sees us, there is nothing we can do, for we have nothing to
shoot with." Then they were afraid and started back with some of the
meat still fresh. They were obliged to leave behind some of the flour,
piling it up, taking only the sacks. They turned back, some of the men
having only one arrow, others none at all, and some of them having two.
That was the reason they started back while the meat was still fresh.
They started early in the morning and traveled until noon when they
stopped. In the evening they started again and traveled through the
night although they could not see. In four days they came back to
Cimarron with the meat. They set to work and made many arrows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 66. A Successful Hunt](jat68)
