[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jat59)  [Next](jat61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 58. A CAPTIVE WOMAN ATTEMPTS TO MAKE PEACE.

A company of Ute who was traveling down the Canadian River was met near
Salt River by a band of the enemy from the east. Early one morning, two
of the enemy rode up to a tipi where a Ute woman was staying by
herself. <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74) When she started to run to
the main camp the enemy rode away. Her relatives, on being told what had
happened, drove up their horses and, selecting the best ones, rode after
the enemy. These, whom they found to be numerous, turning, rode back
toward them.

An old woman, a captive from the enemy, rode out from the ranks and
spoke to them. The enemy and the Ute had stopped in two lines facing
each other. The old woman, attempting to make peace, rode along the
line, saying, "I came out to make peace with you." When she had
proceeded about half the length of the line, and the men had agreed to
make peace, those at the other end of the line began to fight.

The Ute, piling up their property close to the edge of the road, took
their position behind it. Their horses were tied in the arroyo. The
enemy came directly at them and they began to fight. When they were
close one of the enemy fell from his horse, wounded. An Apache woman
having an ax in her hand jumped upon him and although he was not yet
dead, cut off both his arms with the ax. She pulled his wrist guard off
and threw it upon his stomach. <span id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75)

They began to fight again, the Ute driving the enemy forward. They
captured four horses from the enemy. The Ute, mounted, rode on both
sides of the enemy who were on foot, pursuing them some distance. When
the Ute turned back, the enemy followed them. They sang as they marched
along. When the enemy came again within shooting distance, the Ute
dismounted and without moving from their position, killed all their
enemies and took their scalps. They immediately broke camp and set out
for Cimarron which they reached in four days. They established their
camp there and held the dance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[248:1](jat60.htm#fr_74) The woman was by
herself because of her condition at that time. She nevertheless broke
the established custom in the time of peril.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[248:2](jat60.htm#fr_75) This story was told to
explain the giving of names to children. This old woman when she
returned from the expedition, gave an account of what she had done and
named the narrator, Casa Maria, then an infant, bet'ô, wrist guard. It
seems to have been customary among the Apache for the women to mutilate
the dead thereby preventing the warriors from losing their luck by
pollution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 59. The Horses of the Ollero are Stolen](jat61)
