[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jat60)  [Next](jat62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

### 59. THE HORSES OF THE OLLERO ARE STOLEN.

Long ago the Ollero came to Cimarron where the Llanero were then living
and said, "We are going to hunt buffalo." Maxwell, having loaned them a
number of good horses, burros, and mules, they went away to the plains
and camped near the Canadian River. Having camped successively at
K'aixactciye, Dakûgaye, and TseLîtcî naxabîLîye "stone red hangs down"
they came to Nadôstse?aLîye "where pipes are made." They had now reached
the range of the buffalo but there were none there except a few who were
roaming about by themselves. They caught two buffalo calves with a lasso
and led them home.

Breaking camp, they traveled east to Red River, having camped on the way
at Cheyenne Canyon and at NabeLtc'îdîye. Riding down the river, they
came to a large herd of buffalo. Riding in among them they killed
several and brought the meat back home. The next day they went again
after the buffalo, securing several which they brought back. Although
they now had much meat they went again, on the third day, and brought
back a large quantity.

That night, after it was dark, the enemy came and drove away half of
their horses. The next day when their loss had been discovered they rode
after the enemy but did not overtake them. After two days, they gave up
the pursuit and returned to the place where the horses were driven off.
Those who had extra horses lent them to those who were without for the
packing of their loads. As they went back, some of the men rode far out
on each side, watching for the enemy. They discovered a band of wild
horses and sent word to the main party who immediately caught their good
horses and rode after them. They found the wild horses on the south side
of a dry lake. The wild horses having been already surrounded noticed
the men, stood looking at them for an instant and then broke away. The
Indians rode after them and turned them back. Coming toward them from
both directions, they caught a good many. A colt was following close
behind a wild horse which a man who was chasing kept missing. Soon
after, having caught another wild horse, he succeeded in catching the
horse which the colt was following and when he stopped it the colt
stopped also. Everyone laughed. They brought many of the wild horses
back to their camp.

As they came back toward the west up Canadian River they saw wild horses
again near the Salt River. Surrounding them, they caught two.

From there they came to Cimarron having camped at Nagôntt'iye, Dakûgâye,
K'aixactc'îye, and at the Canadian River. The Ollero went westward to
their own country, and camped near El Rito. We camped on the

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

other side of the Rio Grande by Cimarron which was our country. The
enemy used to come after us there at Cimarron but we did not come
westward on that account for we were not afraid of them. We used to go
to the east and fight them, Sometimes the horses gave out on the journey
and had to be left behind. If any of the enemy were killed their horses
were taken away. When they returned with scalps, they camped about
Cimarron and danced. They always kept watch toward the east while they
were dancing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 60. An Expedition to the Adobe Walls with Kit Carson](jat62)
