<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hkt07)  [Next](hkt09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002RHOUAK/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The History of the Knights Templar*, by Charles G. Addison, \[1842\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

<span class="small">The Patriarch Heraclius quarrels with the king of
England--He returns to Palestine without succour--The disappointments
and gloomy forebodings of the Templars--They prepare to resist
Saladin--Their defeat and slaughter--The valiant deeds of the Marshal of
the Temple--The fatal battle of Tiberias--The captivity of the Grand
Master and the true Cross--The captive Templars are offered the Koran or
death--They choose the latter, and are beheaded--The fall of
Jerusalem--The Moslems take possession of the Temple--They purify it
with rose-water, say prayers, and hear a sermon--The Templars retire to
Antioch--Their letters to the king of England and the Master of the
Temple at London--Their exploits at the siege of Acre.</span>

<span class="small">"Gloriosa civitas Dei Jerusalem, ubi dominus passus,
ubi sepultus, ubi gloriam resurrectionis ostendit, hosti spurio
subjicitur polluenda, nec est dolor sicut dolor iste, cum sepulchrum
possideant qui sepulchrum persequuntur, crucem teneant qui crucifixum
contemnunt. "--*The Lamentation of Geoffrey de Visnisauf over the Fall
of Jerusalem*.</span>

<span class="small">"The earth quakes and trembles because the king of
heaven hath lost his land, the land on which his feet once stood. The
foes of the Lord break into his holy city, even into that glorious tomb
where the virgin blossom of Mary was wrapt up in linen and spices, and
where the first and greatest flower on earth rose up again."--*St.
Bernard*, epist. cccxxii.</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1185.</span>THE Grand Master, Arnold de Torroge, who died on his
journey to England, as before mentioned, was succeeded by Brother Gerard
de Riderfort. <span id="fr_178"></span>[\*](#fn_178)

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1185.</span>On the tenth of the calends of April, a month after the
consecration by the patriarch Heraclius of the Temple church, the grand
council or parliament of the kingdom, composed of the bishops, earls,
and barons, assembled in the house of the Hospitallers at Clerkenwell in
London. It was attended by William king of Scotland and David his
brother, and many of the counts and barons of that distant land. <span
id="fr_179"></span>[\*](#fn_179) The august assembly was acquainted, in
the king's name, with the object of the solemn embassy just sent to him
from Jerusalem, and with the desire of the royal penitent to fulfil his
vow and perform his penance; but the barons were at the same time
reminded of the old age of their sovereign, of the bad state of his
health, and of the necessity of his presence in England. They
accordingly represented to King Henry that the solemn oath taken by him
on his coronation was an obligation antecedent to the penance imposed on
him by the pope; that by that oath he was bound to stay at home and
govern his dominions, and that, in their opinion, it was more wholesome
for the king's soul to defend his own country against the barbarous
French, than to desert it for the purpose of protecting the distant
kingdom of Jerusalem. They, however, offered to raise the sum of fifty
thousand marks for the levying of troops to be sent into Asia, and
recommended that all such prelates and nobles as desired to take the
cross should be permitted freely to leave the kingdom on so pious an
enterprise. <span id="fr_180"></span>[†](#fn_180)

Fabian gives the following quaint account of the king's answer to the
patriarch, from the Chron. Joan Bromton: "Lasteley, the kynge gaue
answere, and sayde that he myghte not leue hys lande wythoute kepynge,
nor yet leue yt to the praye and robbery of Frenchemen. But he wolde
gyue largely of hys owne to

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1185.</span>such as wolde take upon theym that vyage. Wyth thys
answere the patryarke was dyscontente, and sayde, 'We seke a man, and
not money; welnere euery crysten regyon sendyth unto us money, but no
lande sendyth to us a prince. Therefore we aske a prynce that nedeth
money, and not money that nedeth a prynce.' But the kynge layde for hym
suche excuses, that the patryarke departed from hym dyscontentyd and
comforteless, whereof the kynge beynge aduertysed, entendynge somwhat to
recomforte hym wyth pleasaunte wordes, folowed hym unto the see syde.
But the more the kynge thought to satysfye hym wyth hys fayre speche,
the more the patryarke was discontented, in so myche that at the laste
he sayde unto hym, 'Hytherto thou haste reygned gloryously, but here
after thou shalt be forsaken of him whom thou at thys tyme forsakeste.
Thynke on hym what he hath gyuen to thee, and what thou haste yelden to
him agayne: howe fyrste thou were false unto the kynge of Fraunce, and
after slewe that holy man Thomas of Caunterburye, and lastely thou
forsakeste the proteccyon of Crystes faith.' The kynge was amoued wyth
these wordes, and sayde unto the patryarke, 'Though all the men of my
lande were one bodye, and spake with one mouth, they durste not speke to
me such wordys.' 'No wonder,' sayde the patriarke, 'for they loue thyne
and not the; that ys to meane, they loue thy goodes temporall, and fere
the for losse of promocyon, but they loue not thy soule.' And when he
hadde so sayde, he offeryd hys hedde to the kynge, sayenge, 'Do by me
ryghte as thou dyddest by that blessed man Thomas of Caunterburye, for I
had leur to be slayne of the, then of the Sarasyns, for thou art worse
than any Sarasyn.' But the kynge kepte hys paeyence, and sayde, 'I may
not wende oute of my lande, for myne own sonnes wyll aryse agayne me
whan I were absente.' 'No wonder,' sayde the patryarke, 'for of the

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1185.</span>deuyll they come, and to the deuyll they shall go,' and
so departyd from the kynge in great ire." <span
id="fr_181"></span>[\*](#fn_181)

According to Roger de Hoveden, however, the patriarch, on the 17th of
the calends of May, accompanied King Henry into Normandy, where a
conference was held between the sovereigns of France and England
concerning the proposed succour to the Holy Land. Both monarchs were
liberal in promises and fair speeches; but as nothing short of the
presence of the king of England, or of one of his sons, in Palestine,
would satisfy the patriarch, that haughty ecclesiastic failed in his
negotiations, and returned in disgust and disappointment to the Holy
Land. <span id="fr_182"></span>[†](#fn_182) On his arrival at Jerusalem
with intelligence of his ill success, the greatest consternation
prevailed amongst the Latin christians; and it was generally observed
that the true cross, which had been recovered from the Persians by the
Emperor Heraclius, was about to be lost under the pontificate, and by
the fault of a patriarch of the same name.

A resident in Palestine has given us some curious biographical

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1185.</span>notices of this worthy consecrator of our Temple church
at London. He says that he was a very handsome parson, and, in
consequence of his beauty, the mother of the king of Jerusalem fell in
love with him, and made him archbishop of Cæsarea, (biau clerc estoit,
et par sa beauté l’ama la mere de roi, et le fist arcevesque de
Cesaire.) He then describes how he came to be made patriarch, and how he
was suspected to have poisoned the archbishop of Tyre. After his return
from Rome he fell in love with the wife of a haberdasher who lived at
Naplous, twelve miles from Jerusalem. He went to see her very often,
and, not long after the acquaintanceship commenced, the husband died.
Then the patriarch brought the lady to Jerusalem, and bought for her a
very fine stone house. "Le patriarche la fist venir en Jerusalem, et li
acheta bonne maison de pierre. Si la tenoit voiant le siecle ausi com li
hons fait sa fame, fors tant que ele n'estoit mie avec lui. Quant ele
aloit au mostier, ele estoit ausi atornée de riches dras, com ce fust un
emperris, et si serjant devant lui. Quant aucunes gens la veoient qui ne
la connoissoient pas, il demandoient qui cele dame estoit. Cil qui la
connoissoient, disoient que cestoit la fame du patriarche. Ele avoit nom
Pasque de Riveri. Enfans avoit du patriarche, et les barons estoient,
que là où il se conseilloient, vint un fol ou patriarche, si li dist;
'Sire Patriarche, dones moi bon don, car je vous aport bones novelles
*Pasque de Riveri, vostre fame, a une bele fille!*'" <span
id="fr_183"></span>[\*](#fn_183) When Jesus Christ," says the learned
author, "saw the iniquity and wickedness which they committed in the
very place where he was crucified, he could no longer suffer it."

The order of the Temple was at this period all-powerful in

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1186.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Palestine, and the Grand Master, Gerard de Riderfort, coerced with the
heavy hand of authority the nobles of the kingdom, and even the king
himself. Shortly after the return of Heraclius to Palestine, King
Baldwin IV. died, and was succeeded by his infant nephew, Baldwin V.,
who was crowned in the church of the Resurrection, and was afterwards
royally entertained by the Templars in the Temple of Solomon, according
to ancient custom. <span id="fr_184"></span>[\*](#fn_184) The young king
died at Acre after a short reign of only seven months, and the Templars
brought the body to Jerusalem, and buried it in the tombs of the
christian kings. The Grand Master of the Temple then raised Sibylla, the
mother of the deceased monarch, and her second husband, Guy of Lusignan,
to the throne. Gerard de Riderfort surrounded the palace with troops; he
closed the gates of Jerusalem. and delivered the regalia to the
Patriarch. He then conducted Sibylla and her husband to the church of
the Resurrection, where they were both crowned by Heraclius, and were
afterwards entertained at dinner in the Temple. Guy de Lusignan was a
prince of handsome person, but of such base renown, that his own brother
Geoffrey was heard to exclaim, "Since they have made *him* a king,
surely they would have made *me* a God!" These proceedings led to
endless discord and dissension; Raymond, Count of Tripoli, withdrew from
court; many of the barons refused to do homage, and the state was torn
by faction and dissension at a time when all the energies of the
population were required to defend the country from the Moslems. <span
id="fr_185"></span>[†](#fn_185)

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1186.</span>Saladin, on the other hand, had been carefully
consolidating and strengthening his power, and was vigorously preparing
for the reconquest of the Holy City, the long-cherished enterprise of
the Mussulmen. The Arabian writers enthusiastically recount his pious
exhortations to the true believers, and describe with vast enthusiasm
his glorious preparations for the holy war. Bohadin F. Sjeddadi, his
friend and secretary, and great biographer, before venturing upon the
sublime task of describing his famous and sacred actions, makes a solemn
confession of faith, and offers up praises to the one true God.

"Praise be to GOD," says he, who hath blessed us with *Islam*, and hath
led us to the understanding of the true faith beautifully put together,
and hath befriended us; and, through the intercession of our prophet,
hath loaded us with every blessing . . . . . . "I bear witness that
there is no God but that one great God who hath no partner, (a testimony
that will deliver our souls from the smoky fire of hell,) that Mohammed
is his servant and apostle, who hath opened unto us the gates of the
right road to salvation. . . . . ."

"These solemn duties being performed, I will begin to write concerning
the victorious defender of the faith, the tamer of the followers of the
cross, the lifter up of the standard of justice and equity, the saviour
of the world and of religion, Saladin Aboolmodaffer Joseph, the son of
Job, the son of Schadi, Sultan of the Moslems, ay, and of Islam itself;
the deliverer of the holy house of God (the Temple) from the hands of
the idolaters, the servant of two holy cities, whose tomb may the Lord
moisten with the dew of his favour, affording to him the sweetness of
the fruits of the faith." <span id="fr_186"></span>[\*](#fn_186)

On the 10th of May, A.D. 1187, Malek-el-Afdal, "Most

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span>excellent prince," one of Saladin's sons, crossed the
Jordan at the head of seven thousand Mussulmen. The Grand Master of the
Temple immediately despatched messengers to the nearest convents and
castles of the order, commanding all such knights as could be spared to
mount and come to him with speed. At midnight, ninety knights of the
garrison of La Feue or Faba, forty knights from the garrison of
Nazareth, with many others from the convent of Caco, were assembled
around their chief, and began their march at the head of the serving
brothers and the light cavalry of the order. They joined themselves to
the Hospitallers, rashly engaged the seven thousand Moslems, and were
cut to pieces in a bloody battle fought near the brook Kishon. The Grand
Master of the Temple and two knights broke through the dense ranks of
the Moslems, and made their escape. Roger de Molines, the Grand Master
of the Hospital, was left dead upon the field, together with all the
other brothers of the Hospital and of the Temple.

Jacqueline de Mailly, the Marshal of the Temple, performed prodigies of
valour. He was mounted on a white horse, and clothed in the white habit
of his order, with the blood-red cross, the symbol of martyrdom, on his
breast; he became, through his gallant bearing and demeanour, an object
of respect and of admiration even to the Moslems. He fought, say the
writers of the crusades, like a wild boar, sending on that day an
amazing number of infidels to *hell!* The Mussulmen severed the heads of
the slaughtered Templars from their bodies, and attaching them with
cords to the points of their lances, they placed them in front of their
array, and marched off in the direction of Tiberias. <span
id="fr_187"></span>[\*](#fn_187)

The following interesting account is given of the march of

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span>another band of holy warriors, who, in obedience to the
summons of the Grand Master of the Temple, were hastening to rally
around the sacred ensigns of their faith.

"When they had travelled two miles, they came to the city of Saphet. It
was a lovely morning, and they determined to march no further until they
had heard mass. They accordingly turned towards the house of the bishop
and awoke him up, and informed him that the day was breaking. The bishop
accordingly ordered an old chaplain to put on his clothes and say mass,
after which they hastened forwards. Then they came to the castle of La
Feue, (a fortress of the Templars,) and there they found, outside the
castle, the tents of the convent of Caco pitched, and there was no one
to explain what it meant. A varlet was sent into the castle to inquire,
but he found no one within but two sick people who were unable to speak.
Then they marched towards Nazareth, and after they had proceeded a short
distance from the castle of La Feue, they met a brother of the Temple on
horseback, who galloped up to them at a furious rate, calling out, Bad
news, bad news; and he informed them how that the Master of the Hospital
had had his head cut off, and how of all the brothers of the Temple
there had escaped but three, the Master of the Temple and two others,
and that the knights whom the king had placed in garrison at Nazareth,
were all taken and killed." <span id="fr_188"></span>[\*](#fn_188)

In the great battle of Tiberias or of Hittin, fought on the 4th of July,
which decided the fate of the holy city of Jerusalem, the Templars were
in the van of the Christian army, and led the attack against the
infidels. The march of Saladin's host, which amounted to eighty thousand
horse and foot, over the hilly country, is compared by an Arabian
writer, an eye-witness, to mountains in movement, or to the vast waves
of an agitated sea. The same author speaks of the advance of the
Templars against

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span>them at early dawn in battle array, "horrible in arms,
having their whole bodies cased with triple mail." He compares the noise
made by their advancing squadrons to the *loud humming of bees!* and
describes them as animated with "a flaming desire of vengeance." <span
id="fr_189"></span>[\*](#fn_189) Saladin had behind him the lake of
Tiberias, his infantry was in the centre, and the swift cavalry of the
desert was stationed on either wing, under the command of *Faki-ed-deen*
(teacher of religion.) The Templars rushed, we are told, like lions upon
the Moslem infidels, and nothing could withstand their heavy and
impetuous charge. "Never," says an Arabian doctor of the law, "have I
seen a bolder or more powerful army, nor one more to be feared by the
believers in the true faith."

Saladin set fire to the dry grass and dwarf shrubs which lay between
both armies, and the wind blew the smoke and the flames directly into
the faces of the military friars and their horses. The fire, the noise,
the gleaming weapons, and all the accompaniments of the horrid scene,
have given full scope to the descriptive powers of the oriental writers.
They compare it to the last judgment; the dust and the smoke obscured
the face of the sun, and the day was turned into night. Sometimes gleams
of light darted like the rapid lightning amid the throng of combatants;
then you might see the dense columns of armed warriors, now immovable as
mountains, and now sweeping swiftly across the landscape like the rainy
clouds over the face of heaven. "The sons of paradise and the children
of fire," say they, "then decided their terrible quarrel; the arrows
rustled through the air like the wings of innumerable sparrows, the
sparks flew from the coats of mail and the glancing sabres, and the
blood spurting forth from the bosom of the throng deluged the earth like
the rains of heaven." . . . . . "The avenging sword of the true
believers was drawn forth against the infidels; the faith of the

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
UNITY was opposed to the faith of the TRINITY, and speedy ruin,
desolation, and destruction, overtook the miserable sons of baptism!"

The cowardly patriarch Heraclius, whose duty it was to bear the holy
cross in front of the christian array, confided his sacred charge to the
bishops of Ptolemais and Lydda, <span
id="fr_190"></span>[\*](#fn_190)--a circumstance which gave rise to many
gloomy forebodings amongst the superstitious soldiers of Christ. In
consequence of the treachery, as it is alleged, of the count of Tripoli,
who fled from the field with his retainers, both the Templars and
Hospitaliers were surrounded, and were to a man killed or taken
prisoners. The bishop of Ptolemais was slain, the bishop of Lydda was
made captive, and the holy cross, together with the king of Jerusalem,
and the Grand Master of the Temple, fell into the hands of the Saracens.
"Quid plura?" says Radulph, abbot of the monastery of Coggleshale in
Essex, who was then on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, and was wounded in
the nose by an arrow. "Capta est crux, et rex, et Magister militiæ
Templi, et episcopus Liddensis, et frater Regis, et Templarii, et
Hospitalarii, et marchio de Montferrat, atque omnes vel mortui vel capti
sunt. Plangite super hoc omnes adoratores crucis, et plorate; sublatum
est lignum nostræ salutis, dignum ab indignis indigne heu! heu!
asportatum. Væ mihi misero, quod in diebus miseræ vitæ meæ talia cogor
videre. . . . . . O dulce lignum, et suave, sanguine filii Dei roratum
atque lavatum! O crux alma, in qua salus nostra pependit! &c. <span
id="fr_191"></span>[†](#fn_191)

"I saw," says the secretary and companion of Saladin, who was present at
this terrible fight, and is unable to restrain himself from pitying the
disasters of the vanquished--"I saw the mountains

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span>and the plains, the hills and the valleys, covered with
their dead. I saw their fallen and deserted banners sullied with dust
and with blood. I saw their heads broken and battered, their limbs
scattered abroad, and the blackened [corpses](errata.htm#3) piled one
upon another like the stones of the builders. I called to mind the words
of the Koran, 'The infidel shall say, What am I but *dust?*' . . . . I
saw thirty or forty tied together by one cord. I saw in one place,
guarded by one Mussulman, two hundred of these famous warriors gifted
with amazing strength, who had but just now walked forth amongst the
mighty; their proud bearing was gone; they stood naked with downcast
eyes, wretched and miserable. . . . . The lying infidels were now in the
power of the true believers. Their king and their cross were captured,
that cross before which they bow the head and bend the knee; which they
bear aloft and worship with their eyes; they say that it is the
identical wood to which the God whom they adore was fastened. They had
adorned it with fine gold and brilliant stones; they carried it before
their armies; they all bowed towards it with respect. It was their first
duty to defend it; and he who should desert it would never enjoy peace
of mind. The capture of this cross was more grievous to them than the
captivity of their king. Nothing can compensate them for the loss of it.
It was their God; they prostrated themselves in the dust before it, and
sang hymns when it was raised aloft!" <span
id="fr_192"></span>[\*](#fn_192)

Among the few christian warriors who escaped from this terrible
encounter, was the Grand Master of the Hospital; he clove his way from
the field of battle, and reached Ascalon in safety, but died of his
wounds the day after his arrival. The multitude of captives was
enormous, cords could not be found to bind them, the tent-ropes were all
used for the purpose, but were insufficient,

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span>and the Arabian writers tell us that, on seeing the
dead, one would have thought that there could be no prisoners, and on
seeing the prisoners, that there could be no dead. As soon as the battle
was over, Saladin proceeded to a tent, whither, in obedience to his
commands, the king of Jerusalem, the Grand Master of the Temple, and
Reginald de Chatillon, had been conducted. This last nobleman had
greatly distinguished himself in various daring expeditions against the
caravans of pilgrims travelling to Mecca, and had become on that account
particularly obnoxious to the pious Saladin. The sultan, on entering the
tent, ordered a bowl of sherbet, the sacred pledge amongst the Arabs of
hospitality and security, to be presented to the fallen monarch of
Jerusalem, and to the Grand Master of the Temple; but when Reginald de
Chatillon would have drunk thereof, Saladin prevented him, and
reproaching the christian nobleman with perfidy and impiety, he
commanded him instantly to acknowledge the prophet whom he had
blasphemed, or be prepared to meet the death he had so often deserved.
On Reginald's refusal, Saladin struck him with his scimitar, and he was
immediately despatched by the guards. <span
id="fr_193"></span>[\*](#fn_193)

Bohadin, Saladin's friend and secretary, an eye-witness of the scene,
gives the following account of it: "Then Saladin told the interpreter to
say thus to the king, 'It is thou, not I, who givest drink to this man!'
Then the sultan sat down at the entrance of the tent, and they brought
Prince Reginald before him, and after refreshing the man's memory,
Saladin said to him, 'Now then, I myself will act the part of the
defender of Mohammed!' He then offered the man the Mohammedan faith, but
he refused it; then the king struck him on the shoulder with a drawn
scimitar, which was a hint to those that were present to do

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span>for him; so they sent his soul to *hell*, and cast out
his body before the tent-door! <span id="fr_194"></span>[\*](#fn_194)

Two days afterwards Saladin proceeded in cold blood to enact the grand
concluding tragedy. The warlike monks of the Temple and of the Hospital,
the bravest and most zealous defenders of the christian faith, were, of
all the warriors of the cross, the most obnoxious to zealous Mussulmen,
and it was determined that death or conversion to Mahometanism should be
the portion of every captive of either order, excepting the Grand Master
of the Temple, for whom it was expected a heavy ransom would be given.
Accordingly, on the christian Sabbath, at the hour of sunset, the
appointed time of prayer, the Moslems were drawn up in battle array
under their respective leaders. The Mamlook emirs stood in two ranks
clothed in yellow, and, at the sound of the holy trumpet, all the
captive knights of the Temple and of the Hospital were led on to the
eminence above Tiberias, in full view of the beautiful lake of
Gennesareth, whose bold and mountainous shores had been the scene of so
many of their Saviour's miracles. There, as the last rays of the sun
were fading away from the mountain tops, they were called upon to deny
him who had been crucified, to choose God for their Lord, Islam for
their faith, Mecca for their temple, the Moslems for their brethren, and
Mahomet for their prophet. To a man they refused, and were all
decapitated in the presence of Saladin by the devout zealots of his
army, and the doctors and expounders of the law. An oriental historian,
who was present, says that Saladin sat with a smiling countenance
viewing the execution, and that some of the executioners cut off the
heads with a degree of dexterity that excited great applause. <span
id="fr_195"></span>[†](#fn_195) "Oh," says Omad’eddin Muhammed,

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
"how beautiful an ornament is the blood of the infidels sprinkled over
the followers of the faith and the true religion!"

If the Mussulmen displayed a becoming zeal in the decapitation and
annihilation of the infidel Templars, these last manifested a no less
praiseworthy eagerness for martyrdom by the swords of the unbelieving
Moslems. The Knight Templar, Brother Nicolas, strove vigorously, we are
told, with his companions to be the first to suffer, and with great
difficulty accomplished his purpose. <span
id="fr_196"></span>[\*](#fn_196) It was believed by the Christians, in
accordance with the superstitious ideas of those times, that heaven
testified its approbation by a visible sign, and that for three nights,
during which the bodies of the Templars remained unburied on the field,
celestial rays of light played around the corpses of those holy
martyrs. <span id="fr_197"></span>[†](#fn_197)

The government of the order of the Temple, in consequence of the
captivity of the Grand Master, devolved upon the Grand Preceptor of the
kingdom of Jerusalem, who addressed letters to all the brethren in the
West, imploring instant aid and assistance. One of these letters was
duly received by Brother Geoffrey, Master of the Temple at London, as
follows:--

"Brother Terric, Grand Preceptor of the poor house of the Temple, and
every poor brother, and the whole convent, now, alas! almost
annihilated, to all the preceptors and brothers of the Temple to whom
these letters may come, salvation through him to whom our fervent
aspirations are addressed, through him who causeth the sun and the moon
to reign marvellous."

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span>"The many and great calamities wherewith the anger of
God, excited by our manifold sins, hath just now permitted us to be
afflicted, we cannot for grief unfold to you, neither by letters nor by
our sobbing speech. The infidel chiefs having collected together a vast
number of their people, fiercely invaded our christian territories, and
we, assembling our battalions, hastened to Tiberias to arrest their
march. The enemy having hemmed us in among barren rocks, fiercely
attacked us; the holy cross and the king himself fell into the hands of
the infidels, the whole army was cut to pieces, two hundred and thirty
of our knights were beheaded, without reckoning the sixty who were
killed on the 1st of May. The Lord Reginald of Sidon, the Lord
Ballovius, and we ourselves, escaped with vast difficulty from that
miserable field. The Pagans, drunk with the blood of our Christians,
then marched with their whole army against the city of Acre, and took it
by storm. The city of Tyre is at present fiercely besieged, and neither
by night nor by day do the infidels discontinue their furious assaults.
So great is the multitude of them, that they cover like ants the whole
face of the country from Tyre to Jerusalem, and even unto Gaza. The holy
city of Jerusalem, Ascalon, and Tyre, and Beyrout, are alone left to us
and to the christian cause, and the garrisons and the chief inhabitants
of these places, having perished in the battle of Tiberias, we have no
hope of retaining them without succour from heaven and instant
assistance from yourselves." <span id="fr_198"></span>[\*](#fn_198)

Saladin, on the other hand, sent triumphant letters to the caliph. "God
and his angels," says he, "have mercifully succoured Islam. The infidels
have been sent to feed the fires of hell! The cross is fallen into our
hands, around which they

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span>fluttered like the moth round a light; under whose
shadow they assembled, in which they boldly trusted as in a wall; the
cross, the centre and leader of their pride, their superstition, and
their tyranny." . . . <span id="fr_199"></span>[\*](#fn_199)

After the conquest of between thirty and forty cities and castles, many
of which belonged to the order of the Temple, Saladin laid siege to the
holy city. On the 20th of September the Mussulman army encamped on the
west of the town, and extended itself from the tower of David to the
gate of St. Stephen. The Temple could no longer furnish its brave
warriors for the defence of the holy sanctuary of the Christians; two
miserable knights, with a few serving brethren, alone remained in its
now silent halls and deserted courts.

After a siege of fourteen days, a breach was effected in the walls, and
ten banners of the prophet waved in triumph on the ramparts. In the
morning a barefoot procession of the queen, the women, and the monks and
priests, was made to the holy sepulchre, to implore the Son of God to
save his tomb and his inheritance from impious violation. The females,
as a mark of humility and distress, cut off their hair and cast it to
the winds; and the ladies of Jerusalem made their daughters do penance
by standing up to their necks in tubs of cold water placed upon Mount
Calvary. But it availed nought; "for our Lord Jesus Christ," says a
Syrian Frank, "would not listen to any prayer that they made; for the
filth, the luxury, and the adultery which prevailed in the city, did not
suffer prayer or supplication to ascend before God." <span
id="fr_200"></span>[†](#fn_200)

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span>On the surrender of the city (October 2, A.D. 1187) the
Moslems rushed to the Temple in thousands. "The Imauns and the doctors
and expounders of the wicked errors of Mahomet," says Abbot Coggleshale,
who was then in Jerusalem suffering from a wound which he had received
during the siege, "first ascended to the Temple of the Lord, called by
the infidels *Beit Allah*, (the house of God,) in which, as a place of
prayer and religion, they place their great hope of salvation. With
horrible bellowings they proclaimed the law of Mahomet, and vociferated,
with polluted lips, ALLAH *Acbar*--ALLAH *Acbar*, (GOD is victorious.)
They defiled all the places that are contained within the Temple; i. e.
the place of the presentation, where the mother and glorious virgin Mary
delivered the Son of God into the hands of the just Simeon; and the
place of the confession, looking towards the porch of Solomon, where the
Lord judged the woman taken in adultery. They placed guards that no
Christian might enter within the seven atria of the Temple; and as a
disgrace to the Christians, with vast clamour, with laughter and
mockery, they hurled down the golden cross from the pinnacle of the
building, and dragged it with ropes throughout the city, amid the
exulting shouts of the infidels and the tears and lamentations of the
followers of Christ." <span id="fr_201"></span>[\*](#fn_201)

When every Christian had been removed from the precincts of the Temple,
Saladin proceeded with vast pomp to say his prayers in the *Beit Allah*,
the holy house of God, or " Temple of the Lord," erected by the Caliph
Omar. <span id="fr_202"></span>[†](#fn_202) He was preceded by five
camels laden with rose-water, which he had procured from

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Damascus, <span id="fr_203"></span>[\*](#fn_203) and he entered the
sacred courts to the sound of martial music, and with his banners
streaming in the wind. The *Beit Allah*, "the Temple of the Lord," was
then again consecrated to the service of one God and his prophet
Mahomet; the walls and pavements were washed and purified with
rose-water; and a pulpit, the labour of Noureddin, was erected in the
sanctuary. <span id="fr_204"></span>[†](#fn_204) The following account
of these transactions was forwarded to Henry the Second, king of
England.

"To the beloved Lord Henry, by the grace of God, the illustrious king of
the English, duke of Normandy and Guienne, and count of Anjou, Brother
Terric, *formerly* Grand Preceptor of the house of the Temple AT
JERUSALEM, sendeth greeting,--salvation through him who saveth kings.

"Know that Jerusalem, with the citadel of David, hath been surrendered
to Saladin. The Syrian Christians, however, have the custody of the holy
sepulchre up to the fourth day after Michaelmas, and Saladin himself
hath permitted ten of the brethren of the Hospital to remain in the
house of the hospital for the space of one year, to take care of the
sick . . . . . Jerusalem, alas, hath fallen; Saladin hath caused the
cross to be thrown down from the summit of the Temple of the Lord, and
for two days to be publicly kicked and dragged in the dirt through the
city. He then caused the Temple of the Lord to be washed within and
without, upwards and downwards, with rose-water, and the law of Mahomet
to be proclaimed throughout the four quarters of the Temple with
wonderful clamour. . . ." <span id="fr_205"></span>[‡](#fn_205)

Bohadin, Saladin's secretary, mentions as a remarkable and

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span>happy circumstance, that the holy city was surrendered
to the sultan of most pious memory, and that God restored to the
faithful their sanctuary on the twenty-seventh of the month Regeb, on
the night of which very day their most glorious prophet Mahomet
performed his wonderful nocturnal journey from the Temple, through the
seven heavens, to the throne of God. He also describes the sacred
congregation of the Mussulmen gathered together in the Temple and the
solemn prayer offered up to God; the shouting and the sounds of
applause, and the voices lifted up to heaven, causing the holy buildings
to resound with thanks and praises to the most bountiful Lord God. He
glories in the casting down of the golden cross, and exults in the very
splendid triumph of Islam. <span id="fr_206"></span>[\*](#fn_206)

Saladin restored the sacred area of the Temple to its original condition
under the first Mussulman conquerors of Jerusalem. The ancient christian
church of the Virgin (otherwise the mosque *Al Acsa*, otherwise the
Temple of Solomon) was washed with rose-water, and was once again
dedicated to the religious services of the Moslems. On the western side
of this venerable edifice the Templars had erected, according to the
Arabian writers, an immense building in which they lodged, together with
granaries of corn and various offices, which enclosed and concealed a
great portion of the edifice. Most of these were pulled down by the
sultan to make a clear and open area for the resort of the Mussulmen to
prayer. Some new erections placed between the columns in the interior of
the structure were taken away, and the floor was covered with the
richest carpets. "Lamps innumerable," says Ibn Alatsyr, "were suspended
from the ceiling; verses of the Koran were again inscribed on the walls;
the call to prayer was again heard; the bells were silenced; the exiled
faith returned to its ancient sanctuary; the devout Mussulmen

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span>again bent the knee in adoration of the one only God,
and the voice of the imaun was again heard from the pulpit, reminding
the true believers of the resurrection and the last judgment." <span
id="fr_207"></span>[\*](#fn_207)

The Friday after the surrender of the city, the army of Saladin and
crowds of true believers, who had flocked to Jerusalem from all parts of
the East, assembled in the Temple of the Lord to assist in the religious
services of the Mussulman sabbath. Omad, Saladin's secretary, who was
present, gives the following interesting account of the ceremony, and of
the sermon that was preached. "On Friday morning at daybreak," says he,
"every body was asking whom the sultan had appointed *to preach*. The
Temple was full; the congregation was impatient; all eyes were fixed on
the pulpit; the ears were on the stretch; our hearts beat fast, and
tears trickled down our faces. On all sides were to be heard rapturous
exclamations of 'What a glorious sight! What a congregation! Happy are
those who have lived to see *the resurrection of Islam*.' At length the
sultan ordered the judge (doctor of the law) *Mohieddin
Aboulmehali-Mohammed* to fulfil the sacred function of imaun. I
immediately lent him the black vestment which I had received as a
present from the caliph. He then mounted into the pulpit and spoke. All
were hushed. His expressions were graceful and easy; and his discourse
eloquent and much admired. He spake of the virtue and the sanctity of
Jerusalem, of the purification of the Temple; he alluded to the silence
of the bells, and to the flight of the infidel priests. In his I prayer
he named the caliph and the sultan, and terminated his discourse with
that chapter of the Koran in which God orders justice and good works. He
then descended from the pulpit,

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span>and prayed in the Mihrah. Immediately afterwards a
sermon was preached before the congregation." <span
id="fr_208"></span>[\*](#fn_208)

This sermon was delivered by *Mohammed Ben Zeky*. "Praise be to God,"
saith the preacher, "who by the power of his might hath raised up
Islamism on the ruins of Polytheism; who governs all things according to
his will; who overthroweth the devices of the infidels, and causeth the
truth to triumph. . . . . I praise God, who hath succoured his elect;
who hath rendered them victorious and crowned them with glory, who hath
purified his holy house from the filthiness of idolatry. . . . . I bear
witness that there is no God but that one great God who standeth alone
and hath no partner; sole, supreme, eternal; who begetteth not and is
not begotten, and hath no equal. I bear witness that Mahomet is his
servant, his envoy, and his prophet, who hath dissipated doubts,
confounded polytheism, and put down LIES, &c. . . . .

"O men, declare ye the blessings of God, who hath restored to you this
holy city, after it has been left in the power of the infidels for a
hundred years. . . . . This holy house of the Lord hath been built, and
its foundations have been established, for the glory of God. . . . .
This sacred spot is the dwelling place of the prophets, the *kebla*,
(place of prayer,) towards which you turn at the commencement of your
religious duties, the birth-place of the saints, the scene of the
revelation. It is thrice holy, for the angels of God spread their wings
over it. This is that blessed land of which God hath spoken in his
sacred book. In this house of prayer, Mahomet prayed with the angels who
approach God. It is to this spot that all fingers are turned after the
two holy places. . . . . . This conquest, O men, hath opened unto you

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1187.</span>the gates of heaven; the angels rejoice, and the eyes
of the prophets glisten with joy. . . . . . <span
id="fr_209"></span>[\*](#fn_209)

Omad informs us that the marble altar and chapel which had been erected
over the sacred rock in the Temple of the Lord, or mosque of Omar, was
removed by Saladin, together with the stalls for the priests, the marble
statues, and all the abominations which had, been placed in the
venerated building by the Christians. The Mussulmen discovered with
horror that some pieces of the holy stone or rock had been cut off by
the Franks, and sent to Europe. Saladin caused it to be immediately
surrounded by a grate of iron. He washed it with rose-water and
Malek-Afdal covered it with magnificent carpets. <span
id="fr_210"></span>[†](#fn_210)

After the conquest of the holy city, and the loss of the Temple at
Jerusalem, the Knights Templars established the chief house of their
order at Antioch, to which place they retired with Queen Sibylla, the
barons of the kingdom, and the patriarch Heraclius. <span
id="fr_211"></span>[‡](#fn_211)

The following account of the condition of the few remaining christian
possessions immediately after the conquest of Jerusalem, was conveyed by
the before-mentioned Brother Terric, Grand Preceptor of the Temple, and
Treasurer General of the order, to Henry the Second, king of England.

"The brothers of the hospital of Belvoir as yet bravely resist the
Saracens; they have captured two convoys, and have valiantly possessed
themselves of the munitions of war and provisions which were being
conveyed by the Saracens from the fortress of La Feue. As yet, also,
Carach, in the [neighbourhood](errata.htm#4) of Mount Royal, Mount Royal
itself, the Temple of

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1188.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Saphet, the hospital of Carach, Margat, and Castellum Blancum, and the
territory of Tripoli, and the territory of Antioch, resist Saladin. . .
. . From the feast of Saint Martin up to that of the circumcision of the
Lord, Saladin hath besieged Tyre incessantly, by night and by day,
throwing into it immense stones from thirteen military engines. On the
vigils of St. Silvester, the Lord Conrad, the Marquis of Montferrat,
distributed knights and foot soldiers along the wall of the city, and
having armed seventeen galleys and ten small vessels, with the
assistance of the house of the Hospital and the brethren of the Temple,
he engaged the galleys of Saladin, and vanquishing them he captured
eleven, and took prisoners the great admiral of Alexandria and eight
other admirals, a multitude of the infidels being slain. The rest of the
Mussulman galleys, escaping the hands of the Christians, fled to the
army of Saladin, and being run aground by his command, were set on fire
and burnt to ashes. Saladin himself, overwhelmed with grief, having *cut
off the ears and the tail of his horse*, rode that same horse through
his whole army in the sight of all. Farewell!" <span
id="fr_212"></span>[\*](#fn_212)

Tyre was valiantly defended against all the efforts of Saladin until the
winter had set in, and then the disappointed sultan, despairing of
taking the place, burnt his military engines and retired to Damascus. In
the mean time, negotiations had been set on foot for the release from
captivity of Guy king of Jerusalem, and Gerard de Riderfort, the Grand
Master of the Temple. No less than eleven of the most important of the
cities and castles remaining to the Christians in Palestine, including
Ascalon, Gaza, Jaffa, and Naplous, were yielded up to Saladin by way of
ransom for these illustrious personages; and at the commencement of the
year 1188, the Grand Master of the

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1188.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Temple again appeared in arms at the head of the remaining forces of the
order. <span id="fr_213"></span>[\*](#fn_213)

The torpid sensibility of Christendom had at this time been aroused by
the intelligence of the fall of Jerusalem, and of the profanation of the
holy places by the conquering infidels. Three hundred knights and a
considerable naval force were immediately despatched from Sicily, and
all the Templars of the West capable of bearing arms hurried from their
preceptories to the sea-ports of the Mediterranean, and embarked for
Palestine in the ships of Genoa, Pisa, and Venice. The king of England
forwarded a large sum of money to the order for the defence of the city
of Tyre; but as the siege had been raised before its arrival, and as
Conrad, the valiant defender of the place, claimed a title to the throne
of Jerusalem in opposition to Guy de Lusignan, the Grand Master of the
Temple refused to deliver the money into Conrad's hands, in consequence
whereof the latter wrote letters filled with bitter complaints to King
Henry and the archbishop of Canterbury. <span
id="fr_214"></span>[†](#fn_214)

In the spring of the year 1189, the Grand Master of the Temple marched
out of Tyre at the head of the newly-arrived brethren of the order, and,
in conjunction with a large army of crusaders, laid siege to Acre. The
"victorious defender of the faith, tamer of the followers of the cross,"
hastened to its relief, and pitched his tents on the mountains of
Carouba.

On the 4th of October, the newly-arrived warriors from Europe, eager to
signalize their prowess against the infidels, marched out to attack
Saladin's camp. The Grand Master of the Temple, at the head of his
knights and the forces of the order, and a large body of European
chivalry who had ranged themselves

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="margnote">GERARD  
DE  
RIDERFORT.  
A.D. 1189.</span>under the banner of the Templars, formed a reserve. The
Moslem array was broken by the impetuous charge of the soldiers of the
cross, who penetrated to the imperial tent, and then abandoned
themselves to pillage. The infidels rallied, they were led on by Saladin
in person; and the christian army would have been annihilated but for
the Templars. Firm and immovable, they presented, for the space of an
hour, an unbroken front to the advancing Moslems, and gave time for the
discomfited and panic-stricken crusaders to recover from their terror
and confusion; but ere they had been rallied, and had returned to the
charge, the Grand Master of the Temple was slain; he fell pierced with
arrows at the head of his knights; the seneschal of the order shared the
same fate, and more than half the Templars were numbered with the
dead. <span id="fr_215"></span>[\*](#fn_215)

<span class="margnote">WALTER.  
A.D. 1190.</span>To Gerard de Riderfort succeeded the Knight Templar,
Brother WALTER. <span id="fr_216"></span>[†](#fn_216) Never did the
flame of enthusiasm burn with fiercer or more destructive power than at
this famous siege of Acre. Nine pitched battles were fought, with
various fortune, in the neighbourhood of Mount Carmel, and during the
first year of the siege a hundred thousand Christians are computed to
have perished. The tents of the dead, however, were replenished by-new
corners from Europe; the fleets of Saladin succoured the town, the
christian ships brought continual aid to the besiegers, and the contest
seemed interminable. <span id="fr_217"></span>[‡](#fn_217) Saladin's
exertions in the cause of the prophet were incessant. The Arab authors
compare him to a mother wandering with desperation in search of her lost
child, to a lioness who has lost its young. "I saw him," says his

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

<span class="margnote">WALTER.  
A.D. 1190.</span>secretary Bohadin, "in the fields of Acre afflicted
with a most cruel disease, with boils from the middle of his body to his
knees, so that he could not sit down, but only recline on his side when
he entered into his tent, yet he went about to the stations nearest to
the enemy, arranged his troops for battle, and rode about from dawn till
eve, now to the right wing, then to the left, and then to the centre,
patiently enduring the severity of his pain." . . . . "O God," says his
enthusiastic biographer, "thou knowest that he put forth and lavishly
expended all his energies and strength towards the protection and the
triumph of thy religion; do thou therefore, O Lord, have mercy upon
him." <span id="fr_218"></span>[\*](#fn_218)

At this famous siege died the Patriarch Heraclius. <span
id="fr_219"></span>[†](#fn_219)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_178"></span>[114:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_178) *Bernard Thesaur*.
cap. 157, apud *Muratori* script. rer. Ital. p. 792. *Cotton* MS., Nero
E. vi. p. 60, fol. 466.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[115:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_179) *Radulph de Diceto*,
ut sup. p. 626. *Matt. Par.* ad ann. 1185.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[115:†](hkt08.htm#fr_180) *Hoveden* annal. apud
rer. Angl. script. post Bedam, p. 636, 637.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[117:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_181) The above passage is
almost literally translated from Abbot Bromton's Chronicle. The
Patriarch there says to the king, "Hactenus gloriose regnasti, sed amodo
ipse te deseret quem tu deseruisti. Recole quæ dominus tibi contulit, et
qualia illi reddidisti; quomodo regi Franciæ infidus fuisti, beatum
Thomam occidisti, et nunc protectionem Christianorum abjecisti. Cumque
ad hæc rex excandesceret, obtulit patriarcha caput suum et collum
extensum, dicens, 'Fac de me quod de *Thomá* fecisti. Adeo libenter volo
a te occidi in Anglia, sicut a Saracenis in Syria, quia tu omni Saraceno
pejor es.' Cui rex, 'Si omnes hommes mei unum corpus essent, unoque ore
loquerentur, talia mihi dicere non auderent.' Cui ille, 'Non est mirum,
quia tu et non te diligunt, prædam etiam et non hominem sequitur turba
ista.' 'Recedere non possum, quia filii mei insurgerent in me absentem.'
Cui ille, 'Nec mirum, quia de diabolo venerunt, et ad diabolum ibunt.'
Et sic demum patriarcha navem ascendens in Galliam reversus
est."--*Chron. Joan. Bromton*, abbatis Jornalensis, script. X. p. 1144,
ad ann. 1185.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[117:†](hkt08.htm#fr_182) Sed hæc omnia
præfatus Patriarcha parum pendebat, sperabat enim quod esset reducturus
secum ad defensionem Ierosolymitanæ terræ præfatum regem Angliæ, vel
aliquem de filiis suis, vel aliquem virum magnæ auctoritatis; sed quia
hoc esse non potuit, repatriaturus dolens et confusus a curiâ
recessit.--*Hoveden* ut sup. p. 630.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[118:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_183) *Contin. Hist. Bell.
Sacr.* apud *Martene*, tom. v. col. 606. It appears from *Mansi* that
this valuable old chronicle, formerly attributed to Hugh Plagon, is the
original French work of *Bernard the Treasurer*.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[119:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_184) Quand le roi avoit
offert sa corone au Temple Dominus, si avaloit uns degrès qui sont
dehors le Temple, et entroit en son pales au Temple de Salomon, ou li
Templiers manoient. La etoient les tables por mengier, ou le roi
s’asseoit, et si baron et tuit cil qui mengier voloient.--Contin. bell.
sacr. apud *Martene*, tom. v. col. 586.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[119:†](hkt08.htm#fr_185) Contin. hist. ut
sup., col. 593, 4. *Bernard. Thesaur.* apud *Muratori* script. rer.
Ital., tom. vii. cap. 147, col. 782, cap. 148, col. 173. Assizes de
Jerusalem, cap. 287, 288. *Guill. Neubr.* cap. 16.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[120:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_186) Vita et res gestæ
Saladini by *Bohadin F. Sjeddadi*, apud *Schultens*, ex. MS. Arab. Pref.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[121:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_187) Chron. terræ Sanctæ
apud *Martene*, tom. y. col. 551. Hist. Hierosol. Gest. Dei, tom, i. pt.
ii. p. 1150, 1. *Geoffrey de Vinisauf*.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[122:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_188) Contin. hist. bell.
sacr. ut sup., col. 599.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[123:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_189) *Mohammed F.
Mohammed, N. Koreisg. Ispahan*, apud *Schultens*, p. 18.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[124:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_190) *Radulph
Coggleshale*, as eye-witness, apud *Martene*, tom. v. col. .553.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[124:†](hkt08.htm#fr_191) Chron. Terræ Sanctæ,
apud *Martene*, tom. v. col. 558 and 545. A most valuable history.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[125:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_192) *Omad’eddin
Kateb-Abou-hamed-Mohamed-Benhamed*, one of Saladin's secretaries.
Extraits Arabes, par *M. Michaud*.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[126:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_193) Contin. hist. bell.
sacr. apud *Martene*, tom. v. col. 608. *Bernard. Thesaur.* apud
*Muratori* script. rer. Ital., cap. 46. col. 791.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[127:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_194) *Bohadin*, cap. 35.
*Abulfeda*. *Abulpharag*.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[127:†](hkt08.htm#fr_195) *Omad’eddin Kateb*,
in his book called *Fatah*, celebrates the above exploits of Saladin.
Extraits Arabes, *Michaud*. *Radulph Coggleshale*, Chron. Terr. San et.
apud *Martene*, <span id="page_128">p. 128</span> tom. v. col. 553 to
559. *Bohadin*, p. 70. *Jac. de Vitr.* cap. xciv. *Guil. Neubr.* apud
Hearne, tom. i. lib. iii. cap. 17, 18. *Chron. Gervasii*, apud X.
script. col. 1502. *Abulfeda*, cap. 27. *Abulpharag*. Chron. Syr. p.
399, 401, 402. *Khondemir*. *Ben-Schunah*.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[128:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_196) *Geoffrey de
Vinisauf* apud *Gale*, script. Antiq. Anglic. p. 15, "O zelus fidei! O
fervor animi!" says that admiring historian, cap. xv. p. 251.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[128:†](hkt08.htm#fr_197) *Geoffrey de
Vinisauf*, ut sup. cap. v. p. 251.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[129:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_198) Epistola Terrici
Præceptoris Templi de captione terræ Jerosolymitanæ, *Hoveden* anal.
apud rer. Angl. script. post Bedam, p. 636, 637. *Chron. Gervas.* ib.
col. 1502. *Radulph de Diceto*, apud X. script. col. 635.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[130:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_199) Saladin's letter to
the caliph *Nassir Deldin-Illah Aboul Abbas Ahmed*.--*Michaud*, Extraits
Arabes.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[130:†](hkt08.htm#fr_200) Les dames de
Jerusalem firent prendre *cuves* et mettre en la place devant le monte
Cauviaire, et emplir *d’eue froide*, et firent lors filles entrer
jusqu’au col, et couper for treices et jeter les.--Contin. hist. bell.
sacr. apud *Martene*, tom. v. col. 615.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[131:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_201) Chron. Terra Sancta,
*Radulphi Coggeshale*, apud *Martene*, tom. v. col. .572, 573; flentibus
christianis, trines et vestes rumpentibus, pectora et capita
tundentibus, says the worthy abbot.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[131:†](hkt08.htm#fr_202) See ante, p. 6.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[132:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_203) Saladin ot mandé a
Damas por euë rose assés por le Temple laver . . . il avoit quatre
chamiex ou cinq tous chargiés.--Contin. hist. Bell. Sacr. col. 621.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[132:†](hkt08.htm#fr_204) *Bohadin*, cap.
xxxvi, and the extracts from *Abulfeda*, apud *Schultens*, cap. xxvii.
p. 42, 43. *Ib’n Alatsyr*, Michaud, Extraits Arabes.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[132:‡](hkt08.htm#fr_205) *Hoveden*. annal.
apud rer. Angl. script. post Bedam, p. 645, 646.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[133:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_206) *Bohadin* apud
*Schultens*, cap. xxxvi.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[134:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_207) *Ibn-Alatsyr*, hist.
Arab. and the *Raoudhatein*, or "the two gardens." *Michaud*, Extraits
Arabes. Excerpta ex *Abulfeda* apud *Schultens*, cap. xxvii. p. 43.
*Wilken* Comment. Abulfed. bist. p. 148.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[135:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_208) Omad’eddin
Kateb.--*Michaud*, Extraits Arabes.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[136:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_209) *Khotbeh*, or sermon
of *Mohammed Ben Zeky*.--*Michaud*, Extraits Arabes.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[136:†](hkt08.htm#fr_210) See the account of
this remarkable stone, ante p. [7](hkt03.htm#page_7),
[8](hkt03.htm#page_8).

<span id="fn_211"></span>[136:‡](hkt08.htm#fr_211) *Hist. Hierosol.*
Gesta Dei per Francos, tom. i. pt. ii. p. 1155.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[137:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_212) *Hoveden* ut sup. p.
646. *Schahab'eddin* in the Raoudhatein.--*Michaud*.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[138:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_213) *Jac. de Vitr.* cap.
acv. *Vinisauf*, apud XV script. p. 257. *Trivet* ad ann. 1188, apud
*Hall*, p. 93.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[138:†](hkt08.htm#fr_214) *Radulph de Diceto*
ut sup. col. 642, 643. *Matt. Par.* ad ann. 1188.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[139:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_215) *Radulph
Coggeshale*, p. 574. Hist. Hierosol. apud Gesta Dei, tom. i. pars 2, p.
1165. *Radulph de Diceto* ut sup, col. 649. *Vinisauf*, cap. xxix. p.
270.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[139:†](hkt08.htm#fr_216) *Ducange* Gloss. tom.
vi. p. 1036.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[139:‡](hkt08.htm#fr_217) *Geoffrey de
Vinisauf*, apud XV script. cap. xxxv. p. 427. *Rad. Coggleshale* apud
*Martene*, tom. v. col. .566, 567. *Bohadin*, cap. l. to c.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[140:\*](hkt08.htm#fr_218) *Bohadin*, cap. v.
vi.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[140:†](hkt08.htm#fr_219) L’art de verif. tom.
i. p 297.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](hkt09)

</div>
