<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hkt04)  [Next](hkt06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002RHOUAK/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The History of the Knights Templar*, by Charles G. Addison, \[1842\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

### CHAPTER III.

<span class="small">Hugh de Payens returns to Palestine--His
death--Robert de Craon made Master--Success of the Infidels--The second
Crusade--The Templars assume the Red Cross--Their gallant actions and
high discipline--Lands, manors, and churches granted them in
England--Bernard de Tremelay made Master--He is slain by the
Infidels--Bertrand de Blanquefort made Master--He is taken prisoner, and
sent in chains to Aleppo--The Pope writes letters in praise of the
Templars--Their religious and military enthusiasm--Their war banner
called Beauseant--The rise of the rival relit o-military order of the
Hospital of St. John.</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"We heard the *tecbir*, so the Arabs call  
Their shouts of onset, when with loud appeal  
They challenge *heaven*, as if demanding conquest."</span>

</div>

<span class="margnote">HUGH DE  
PAYENS.  
A.D. 1129</span>HUGH DE PAYENS, having now laid in Europe the
foundations of the great monastic and military institution of the
Temple, which was destined shortly to spread its ramifications to the
remotest quarters of Christendom, returned to Palestine at the head of a
valiant band of newly-elected Templars, drawn principally from England
and France.

On their arrival at Jerusalem they were received with great distinction
by the king, the clergy, and the barons of the Latin kingdom, a grand
council was called together, at which Hugh de Payens assisted, and
various warlike measures were undertaken for the extension and
protection of the christian territories.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

<span class="margnote">ROBERT DE  
CRAON.  
A.D. 1136.</span>Hugh de Payens died, however, shortly after his return,
and was succeeded (A.D. 1136) by the Lord Robert, surnamed the
Burgundian, (son-in-law of Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury,) who, after
the death of his wife, had taken the vows and the habit of the
Templars. <span id="fr_27"></span>[\*](#fn_27) He was a valiant and
skilful general, <span id="fr_28"></span>[†](#fn_28) but the utmost
exertions of himself and his military monks were found insufficient to
sustain the tottering empire of the Latin Christians.

The fierce religious and military enthusiasm of the Mussulmen had been
again aroused by the warlike Zinghis and his son Noureddin, two of the
most famous chieftains of the age, who were regarded by the disciples of
Mahomet as champions that could avenge the cause of the prophet, and
recover to the civil and religious authority of the caliph the lost city
of Jerusalem, and all the holy places so deeply venerated by the
Moslems. The one was named *Emod-ed-deen*, "Pillar of religion;" and the
other *Nour-ed-deen*, "Light of religion," vulgarly, Noureddin. The
Templars were worsted by overpowering numbers in several battles; and in
one of these the valiant Templar, Brother Odo de Montfaucon, was
slain. <span id="fr_29"></span>[‡](#fn_29) Emodeddeen took Tænza,
Estarel, Hizam, Hesn-arruk, Hesn-Collis, &c. &c., and closed his
victorious career by the capture of the important city of Edessa.
Noureddin followed in the footsteps of the father: he obtained
possession of the fortresses of Arlene, Mamoula, Basarfont, Kafarlatha;
and overthrew with terrific slaughter the young Jocelyn de Courtenay, in
a rash

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

attempt to recover possession of his principality of Edessa. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[\*](#fn_30) The Latin kingdom of Jerusalem was shaken
to its foundations, and the oriental clergy in trepidation and alarm
sent urgent letters to the Pope for assistance. The holy pontiff
accordingly commissioned St. Bernard to preach the second crusade.

<span class="margnote">EVERARD  
DES  
BARRES.  
A.D. 1146</span>The Lord Robert, Master of the Temple, was at this
period (A.D. 1146) succeeded by Everard des Barres, Prior of France, who
convened a general chapter of the order at Paris, which was attended by
Pope Eugenius the Third, Louis the Seventh, king of France, and many
prelates, princes, and nobles, from all parts of Christendom. The second
crusade was there arranged, and the Templars, with the sanction of the
Pope, assumed the blood-red cross, the symbol of martyrdom, as the
distinguishing badge of the order, which was appointed to be worn on
their habits and mantles on the left side of the breast over the heart,
whence they came afterwards to be known by the name of the *Red Friars*
and the *Red Cross Knights*. <span id="fr_31"></span>[†](#fn_31)

At this famous assembly various donations were made to the Templars, to
enable them to provide more effectually for the defence of the Holy
Land. Bernard Baliol, through love of God and for the good of his soul,
granted them his estate of Wedelee, in Hertfordshire, which afterwards
formed part of the preceptory of Temple Dynnesley. This grant is
expressed to be made at the chapter held at Easter, in Paris, in the
presence of the Pope, the king of France, several archbishops, and one
hundred and thirty Knights Templars clad in white mantles. <span
id="fr_32"></span>[‡](#fn_32) Shortly before

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="margnote">EVERARD  
DES  
BARRES.  
A.D. 1147</span>this, the Dukes of Brittany and Lorraine, and the Counts
of Brabant and Fourcalquier, had given to the order various lands and
estates; and the possessions and power of the fraternity continued
rapidly to increase in every part of Europe. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[\*](#fn_33)

Brother Everard des Barres, the newly-elected Master of the Temple,
having collected together all the brethren from the western provinces,
joined the standard of Louis, the French king, and accompanied the
crusaders to Palestine.

During the march through Asia Minor, the rear of the christian army was
protected by the Templars, who greatly signalized themselves on every
occasion. Odo of Deuil or Diagolum, the chaplain of King Louis, and his
constant attendant upon this expedition, informs us that the king loved
to see the frugality and simplicity of the Templars, and to imitate it;
he praised their union and disinterestedness, admired above all things
the attention they paid to their accoutrements, and their care in
husbanding and preserving their equipage and munitions of war: he
proposed them as a model to the rest of the army, and in a council of
war it was solemnly ordered that all the soldiers and officers should
bind themselves in confraternity with the Templars, and should march
under their orders. <span id="fr_34"></span>[†](#fn_34)

Conrad, emperor of Germany, had preceded King Louis at the head of a
powerful army, which was cut to pieces by the infidels in the north of
Asia; he fled to Constantinople, embarked

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="margnote">EVERARD  
DES  
BARRES.  
A.D. 1148</span>on board some merchant vessels, and arrived with only a
few attendants at Jerusalem, where he was received and entertained by
the Templars, and was lodged in the Temple in the Holy City. <span
id="fr_35"></span>[\*](#fn_35) Shortly afterwards King Louis arrived,
accompanied by the new Master of the Temple, Everard des Barres; and the
Templars now unfolded for the first time the red-cross banner in the
field of battle. This was a white standard made of woollen stuff, having
in the centre of it the blood-red cross granted by Pope Eugenius. The
two monarchs, Louis and Conrad, took the field, supported by the
Templars, and laid siege to the magnificent city of Damascus, "the Queen
of Syria," which was defended by the great Noureddin, "Light of
religion," and his brother *Saif-eddin*, "Sword of the faith."

The services rendered by the Templars are thus gratefully recorded in
the following letter sent by Louis, the French king, to his minister and
vicegerent, the famous Suger, abbot of St. Denis.

"Louis, by the grace of God king of France and Aquitaine, to his beloved
and most faithful friend Suger, the very reverend Abbot of St. Denis,
health and good wishes.

" . . . . . . I cannot imagine how we could have subsisted for even the
smallest space of time in these parts, had it not been for their (the
Templars’) support and assistance, which have never failed me from the
first day I set foot in these lands up to the time of my despatching
this letter--a succour ably afforded and generously persevered in. I
therefore earnestly beseech you, that as these brothers of the Temple
have hitherto been blessed

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="margnote">EVERARD  
DES  
BARRES.  
A.D. 1148</span>with the love of God, so now they may be gladdened and
sustained by our love and favour.

"I have to inform you that they have lent me a considerable sum of
money, which must be repaid to them quickly, that their house may not
suffer, and that I may keep my word. . . ." <span
id="fr_36"></span>[\*](#fn_36)

Among the English nobility who enlisted in the second crusade were the
two renowned warriors, Roger de Mowbray and William de Warrenne. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[†](#fn_37) Roger de Mowbray was one of the most
powerful and warlike of the barons of England, and was one of the
victorious leaders at the famous battle of the standard: he marched with
King Louis to Palestine; fought under the banners of the Temple against
the infidels, and, smitten with admiration of the piety and valour of
the holy warriors of the order, he gave them, on his return to England,
many valuable estates and possessions. Among these were the manors of
Kileby and Witheley, divers lands in the isle of Axholme, the town of
Balshall in the county of Warwick, and various places in Yorkshire; and
so munificent were his donations, that the Templars conceded to him and
to his heirs this special privilege, that as often as the said Roger or
his heirs should find any brother of the order of the Temple exposed to
public penance, according to the rule and custom of the religion of the
Templars; it should be lawful for the said Roger and his heirs to
release such brother from the punishment of his public penance, without
the interference or contradiction of any brother of the order. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[‡](#fn_38)

About the same period, Stephen, king of England, for the health of his
own soul and that of Queen Matilda his wife, and for the good of the
souls of King Henry, his grandfather, and

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

<span class="margnote">EVERARD  
DES  
BARRES.  
A.D. 1148</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Eustace, his son, and all his other children, granted and confirmed to
God and the blessed Virgin Mary, and to the brethren of the knighthood
of the Temple of Solomon at Jerusalem, all the manor of Cressynge, with
the advowson of the church of the same manor, and also the manors of
Egle and Witham. <span id="fr_39"></span>[\*](#fn_39) Queen Matilda,
likewise, for the good of the souls of Earl Eustace, her father, the
Lord Stephen, king of England, her husband, and of all her other
children, granted "to the brethren of the Temple at Jerusalem" the manor
of Covele or Cowley in Oxfordshire, two mills in the same county, common
of pasture in Shotover forest, and the church of Stretton in
Rutland. <span id="fr_40"></span>[†](#fn_40) Ralph de Hastings and
William de Hastings also gave to the Templars, in the same reign, (A.D.
1152,) lands at Hurst and Wyxham in Yorkshire, afterwards formed into
the preceptory of Temple Hurst. William Asheby granted them the estate
whereon the house and church of Temple Bruere were afterwards
erected; <span id="fr_41"></span>[‡](#fn_41) and the order continued
rapidly to increase in power and wealth in England and in all parts of
Europe, through the charitable donations of pious Christians.

After the miserable failure of the second crusade, <span
id="fr_42"></span>[§](#fn_42) brother Everard des Barres, the Master of
the Temple, returned to Paris, with his friend and patron Louis, the
French king; and the Templars, deprived of their chief, were now left
alone and unaided to withstand the victorious career of the fanatical
Mussulmen.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span class="margnote">EVERARD  
DES  
BARRES.  
A.D. 1149</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Their miserable situation is thus portrayed in a melancholy letter from
the treasurer of the order, written to the Master, Everard des Barres,
during his sojourn at the court of the king of France.

"Since we have been deprived of your beloved presence, we have had the
misfortune to lose in battle the prince of Antioch <span
id="fr_43"></span>[\*](#fn_43) and all his nobility. To this catastrophe
has succeeded another. The infidels invaded the territory of Antioch;
they drove all before them, and threw garrisons into several strong
places. On the first intelligence of this disaster, our brethren
assembled in arms, and in concert with the king of Jerusalem went to the
succour of the desolated province. We could only get together for this
expedition one hundred and twenty knights and one thousand serving
brothers and hired soldiers, for whose equipment we expended seven
thousand crowns at Acre, and one thousand at Jerusalem. Your paternity
knows on what condition we assented to your departure, and our extreme
want of money, of cavalry, and of infantry. We earnestly implore you to
rejoin us as soon as possible, with all the necessary succours for the
Eastern Church, our common mother.

" . . . Scarce had we arrived in the neighbourhood of Antioch, ere we
were hemmed in by the Turcomans on the one side, and the sultan of
Aleppo (Noureddin) on the other, who blockade us in the environs of the
town, whilst our vineyards are destroyed, and our harvests laid waste.
Overwhelmed with grief at the pitiable condition to which we are
reduced, we conjure you to abandon everything, and embark without delay.
Never was your presence more necessary to your brethren;--at no
conjuncture could your return be more agreeable to God. . . . The

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="margnote">EVERARD  
DES  
BARRES.  
A.D. 1149</span>greater part of those whom we led to the succour of
Antioch are dead. . . .

"We conjure you to bring with you from beyond sea all our knights and
serving brothers capable of bearing arms. Perchance, alas! with all your
diligence, you may not find one of us alive. Use, therefore, all
imaginable celerity; pray forget not the necessities of our house: they
are such that no tongue can express them. It is also of the last
importance to announce to the Pope, to the King of France, and to all
the princes and prelates of Europe, the approaching desolation of the
Holy Land, to the intent that they succour us in person, or send us
subsidies. Whatever obstacles may be opposed to your departure, we trust
to your zeal to surmount them, for now hath arrived the time for
perfectly accomplishing our vows in sacrificing ourselves for our
brethren, for the defence of the eastern church, and the holy sepulchre.
. . . .

"For you, our dear brothers in Europe, whom the same engagements and the
same vows ought to make keenly alive to our misfortunes, join yourselves
to our chief, enter into his views, second his designs, fail not to sell
everything; come to the rescue; it is from you we await liberty and
life!" <span id="fr_44"></span>[\*](#fn_44)

On the receipt of this letter, the Master of the Temple, instead of
proceeding to Palestine, abdicated his authority, and entered into the
monastery of Clairvaux, where he devoted the remainder of his days to
the most rigorous penance and mortification.

He was succeeded (A.D. 1151) by Bernard de Tremelay, a nobleman of an
illustrious family in Burgundy, in France, and a valiant and experienced
soldier. <span id="fr_45"></span>[†](#fn_45)

The infidels made continual incursions into the christian territories,

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="margnote">BERNARD DE  
TREMELAY.  
A.D. 1152.</span>and shortly after his accession to power they crossed
the Jordan, and advanced within sight of Jerusalem. Their yellow and
green banners waved on the summit of the Mount of Olives, and the
warlike sound of their kettle-drums and trumpets was heard within the
sacred precincts of the holy city. They encamped on the mount over
against the Temple; and had the satisfaction of regarding from a
distance the *Beit Allah*, or Temple of the Lord, their holy house of
prayer. In a night attack, however, they were defeated with terrible
slaughter, and were pursued all the way to the Jordan, five thousand of
their number being left dead on the plain. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[\*](#fn_46)

Shortly after this affair the Templars lost their great patron, Saint
Bernard, who died on the 20th of April, A.D. 1153, in the sixty-third
year of his age. On his deathbed he wrote three letters in behalf of the
order. The first was addressed to the patriarch of Antioch, exhorting
him to protect and encourage the Templars, a thing which the holy abbot
assures him will prove most acceptable to God and man. The second was
written to Melesinda, queen of Jerusalem, praising her majesty for the
favour shown by her to the brethren of the order; and the third,
addressed to Brother André de Montbard, a Knight Templar, conveys the
affectionate salutations of St. Bernard to the Master and brethren, to
whose prayers he recommends himself. <span id="fr_47"></span>[†](#fn_47)

The same year, at the siege of Ascalon, the Master of the Temple and his
knights attempted alone and unaided to take that important city by
storm. At the dawn of day they rushed through a breach made in the
walls, and penetrated to the centre of the town. There they were
surrounded by the infidels and overpowered, and, according to the
testimony of an eye-witness, who was in the campaign from its
commencement to its close,

 

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

not a single Templar escaped: they were slain to a man, and the dead
bodies of the Master and his ill-fated knights were exposed in triumph
from the walls. <span id="fr_48"></span>[\*](#fn_48)

<span class="margnote">BERTRAND DE  
BLANQUEFORT  
A.D. 1154.</span>De Tremelay was succeeded (A.D. 1154) by Brother
Bertrand de Blanquefort, a knight of a noble family of Guienne, called
by William of Tyre a pious and God-fearing man.

The Templars continued to be the foremost in every encounter with the
Mussulmen, and the Monkish writers exult in the number of infidels they
sent to *hell*. A proportionate number of the fraternity must at the
same time have ascended to *heaven*, for the slaughter amongst them was
terrific. On Tuesday, June 19, A.D. 1156, they were drawn into an
ambuscade whilst marching with Baldwin, king of Jerusalem, near
Tiberias, three hundred of the brethren were slain on the field of
battle, and eighty-seven fell into the hands of the enemy, among whom
was Bertrand de Blanquefort himself, and Brother Odo, marshal of the
kingdom. <span id="fr_49"></span>[†](#fn_49) Shortly afterwards, thirty
Knights Templars put to flight, slaughtered, and captured, two hundred
infidels; <span id="fr_50"></span>[‡](#fn_50) and in a night attack on
the camp of Noureddin, they compelled that famous chieftain to fly,
without arms and half-naked, from the field of battle. In this last
affair the names of Robert Mansel, an Englishman, and Gilbert de Lacy,
preceptor of the. Temple of Tripoli, are honourably mentioned. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[§](#fn_51) The services of the Templars were
gratefully acknowledged in Europe, and the Pope, in a letter written in
their behalf to the Archbishop of Rheims, his legate in France,
characterizes

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="margnote">BERTRAND DE  
BLANQUEFORT  
A.D. 1154.</span>them as "New Maccabees, far famed and most valiant
champions of the Lord." "The assistance," says the Pope, "by those holy
warriors to all Christendom, their zeal and valour, and untiring
exertions in defending from the persecution and subtilty of the filthy
Pagans, those sacred places which have been enlightened by the corporal
presence of our Saviour, we doubt not have been spread abroad throughout
the world, and are known, not only to the neighbouring nations, but to
all those who dwell at the remotest corners of the earth." The holy
pontiff exhorts the archbishop to procure for them all the succour
possible, both in men and horses, and to exert himself in their favour
among all his suffragan bishops. <span id="fr_52"></span>[\*](#fn_52)

The fiery zeal and warlike enthusiasm of the Templars were equalled, if
not surpassed, by the stern fanaticism and religious ardour of the
followers of Mahomet. "Noureddin fought," says his oriental biographer,
"like the meanest of his soldiers, saying, 'Alas! it is now a long time
that I have been seeking martyrdom without being able to obtain it.' The
Imaum Koteb-ed-din, hearing him on one occasion utter these words,
exclaimed, 'In the name of God do not put your life in danger, do not
thus expose Islam and the Moslems. Thou art their stay and support, and
if (but God preserve us therefrom) thou shouldest be slain, it will be
all up with us.' 'Ah! Koteb-ed-deen,' said he, 'what hast thou said, who
can save *Islam* <span id="fr_53"></span>[†](#fn_53) and our country,
but that great God who has no equal?' 'What,' said he, on another
occasion, 'do we not look to the security of our houses against robbers
and plunderers, and shall we not defend religion?'" <span
id="fr_54"></span>[‡](#fn_54)

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="margnote">BERTRAND DE  
BLANQUEFORT.  
A.D. 1154.</span>Like the Templars, Noureddin fought constantly with
spiritual and with carnal weapons. He resisted the world and its
temptations by fasting and prayer, and by the daily exercise of the
moral and religious duties and virtues inculcated by the Koran. He
fought with the sword against the foes of Islam, and employed his whole
energies, to the last hour of his life, in the enthusiastic and fanatic
struggle for the recovery of Jerusalem. <span
id="fr_55"></span>[\*](#fn_55)

The close points of resemblance, indeed, between the religious
fanaticism of the Templars and that of the Moslems are strikingly
remarkable. In the Moslem camp, we are told by the Arabian writers, all
profane and frivolous conversation was severely prohibited; the
exercises of religion were assiduously practised, and the intervals of
action were employed in prayer, meditation, and the study of the Koran.

The Templars style themselves "The Avengers of Jesus Christ," and the
"instruments and ministers of God for the punishment of infidels," and
the Pope and the holy fathers of the church proclaim that it is
specially entrusted to them "to blot out from the earth all
unbelievers," and they hold out the joys of paradise as the glorious
reward for the dangers and difficulties of the task. <span
id="fr_56"></span>[†](#fn_56) "In fighting for Christ," declares St.
Bernard, in his address to the Templars, "the kingdom of Christ is
acquired. . . Go forth, therefore, O soldiers, in nowise mistrusting,
and with a fearless spirit cast down the enemies of the cross of Christ,
in the certain assurance that neither in life nor in death can ye be
separated from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus, repeating to
yourselves in every danger, whether we live or whether we die

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="margnote">BERTRAND DE  
BLANQUEFORT.  
A.D. 1156.</span>we are the Lord's. How gloriously do the victors return
from the fight, how happy do the martyrs die in battle! Rejoice, valiant
champion, if thou livest and conquerest in the Lord, but rejoice rather
and glory if thou shouldest die and be joined unto the Lord. . . . If
those are happy who die *in* the Lord, how much more so are those who
die *for* the Lord! . . . Precious in the sight of God will be the death
of his holy soldiers."

"The *sword*," says the prophet Mahomet, on the other hand, "is the key
of heaven and of hell; a drop of blood shed in the cause of God, a night
spent in arms, is of more avail than two months of fasting and of
prayer. Whosoever falls in battle, his sins are forgiven him at the day
of judgment. His wounds will be resplendent as vermilion, and
odoriferous as musk, and the loss of limbs shall be supplied by the
wings of angels and of cherubims."

Thus writes the famous Caliph Abubeker, the successor of Mahomet, to the
Arabian tribes:

"In the name of the most merciful GOD, *Abdollah Athich Ib’n Abi
Kohapha*, to the rest of the true believers." . . . . . "This is to
acquaint you, that I intend to send the true believers into Syria, to
take it out of the hands of the infidels, and I would have you to know,
that *the fighting for religion is an act of obedience to* GOD."

"Remember," said the same successor of the prophet and commander of the
faithful, to the holy warriors who had assembled in obedience to his
mandate, "that you are always in the presence of God, on the verge of
death, in the assurance of judgment, and the hope of paradise. . . . .
When you fight *the battles of the Lord*, acquit yourselves like men,
and turn not your backs."

The prowess and warlike daring of the Templars in the field are thus
described by St. Bernard.

"When the conflict has begun, then at length they throw aside their
former meekness and gentleness, exclaiming, *Do not I* 

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="margnote">BERTRAND DE  
BLANQUEFORT.  
A.D. 1156.</span>*hate them, O Lord, that hate thee, and am I not
grieved with those who rise up against thee?* They rush in upon their
adversaries, they scatter them like sheep, in nowise fearing, though few
in number, the fierce barbarism or the immense multitude of the enemy.
They have learned indeed to rely, not on their own strength, but to
count on victory through the aid of the Lord God Sabaoth, to whom they
believe it easy enough, according to the words of Maccabees, to make an
end of many by the hands of a few, for victory in battle dependeth not
on the multitude of the army, but on the strength given from on high,
which, indeed, they have very frequently experienced, since one of them
will pursue a thousand, and two will put to flight ten thousand. Yea,
and lastly, in a wonderful and remarkable manner, they are observed to
be both more gentle than *lambs*, and more fierce than lions, so that I
almost doubt which I had better determine to call them, monks forsooth,
or soldiers, unless perhaps, as more fitting, I should name them both
the one and the other."

At a later period, Cardinal de Vitry, Bishop of Acre, the frequent
companion of the Knights Templars on their military expeditions, thus
describes the religious and military enthusiasm of the Templars: "When
summoned to arms they never demand the number of the enemy, but where
are they? Lions they are in war, gentle lambs in the convent; fierce
soldiers in the field, hermits and monks in religion; to the enemies of
Christ ferocious and inexorable, but to Christians kind and gracious.
They carry before them," says he, "to battle, a banner, half black and
white, which they call *Beau-seant*, that is to say, in the Gallic
tongue, *Bien-seant*, because they are fair and favourable to the
friends of Christ, but black and terrible to his enemies." <span
id="fr_57"></span>[\*](#fn_57)

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="margnote">BERTRAND DE  
BLANQUEFORT.  
A.D. 1158.</span>Among the many instances of the fanatical ardour of the
Moslem warriors, are the following, extracted from the history of *Abu
Abdollah Alwakidi*, Cadi of Bagdad. "Methinks," said a valiant Saracen
youth, in the heat of battle against the Christians under the walls of
Emesa--"methinks I see the black-eyed girls looking upon me, one of
whom, should she appear in this world, all mankind would die for love of
her; and I see in the hand of one of them a handkerchief of green silk,
and a cap made of precious stones, and she beckons me, and calls out,
Come hither quickly, for I love thee." With these words, charging the
infidels, he made havoc wherever he went, until he was at last struck
down by a javelin. "It is not," said a dying Arabian warrior, when he
embraced for the last time his sister and mother--"it is not the fading
pleasure of this world that has prompted me to devote my life in the
cause of religion, I seek the favour of God and his apostle, and I have
heard from one of the companions of the prophet, that the spirits of the
martyrs will be lodged in the crops of green birds who taste the fruits
and drink of the waters of paradise. Farewell; we shall meet again among
the groves and the fountains which God has prepared for his
elect." <span id="fr_58"></span>[\*](#fn_58)

The Master of the Temple, Brother Bertrand de Blanquefort, was liberated
from captivity at the instance of Manuel Comnenus, Emperor of
Constantinople. <span id="fr_59"></span>[†](#fn_59) After his release he
wrote several letters to Louis VII., king of France, describing the
condition

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="margnote">BERTRAND DE  
BLANQUEFORT.  
A.D. 1159.</span>and prospects of the Holy Land; the increasing power
and boldness of the infidels; and the ruin and desolation caused by a
dreadful earthquake, which had overthrown numerous castles, prostrated
the walls and defences of several towns, and swallowed up the dwellings
of the inhabitants. "The persecutors of the church," says he, "hasten to
avail themselves of our misfortunes; they gather themselves together
from the ends of the earth, and come forth as one man against the
sanctuary of God." <span id="fr_60"></span>[\*](#fn_60)

It was during his mastership, that Geoffrey, the Knight Templar, and
Hugh of Cæsarea, were sent on an embassy into Egypt, and had an
interview with the Caliph. They were introduced into the palace of the
Fatimites through a series of gloomy passages and glittering porticos,
amid the warbling of birds and the murmur of fountains; the scene was
enriched by a display of costly furniture and rare animals; and the long
order of unfolding doors was guarded by black soldiers and domestic
eunuchs. The sanctuary of the presence chamber was veiled with a
curtain, and the vizier who conducted the ambassadors laid aside his
scimetar, and prostrated himself three times on the ground; the veil was
then removed, and they saw the Commander of the Faithful. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[†](#fn_61)

Brother Bertrand de Blanquefort, in his letters to the king of France,
gives an account of the military operations undertaken by the Order of
Temple in Egypt, and of the capture of the populous and important city
of Belbeis, the ancient Pelusium. <span id="fr_62"></span>[‡](#fn_62)
During the absence of the Master with the greater part of the fraternity
on that expedition, the sultan Noureddin invaded Palestine; he defeated
with terrible slaughter the serving brethren

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="margnote">BERTRAND DE  
BLANQUEFORT.  
A.D. 1164.</span>and Turcopoles, or light horse of the order, who
remained to defend the country, and sixty of the knights who commanded
them were left dead on the plain. <span id="fr_63"></span>[\*](#fn_63)

The zeal and devotion of the Templars in the service of Christ continued
to be the theme of praise and of admiration both in the east and in the
west. Pope Alexander III., in his letters, characterizes them as the
stout champions of Jesus Christ, who warred a divine warfare, and daily
laid down their lives for-their brethren, "We implore and we admonish
your fraternity," says he, addressing the archbishops and bishops, "that
out of love to God, and of reverence to the blessed Peter and ourselves,
and also out of regard for the salvation of your own souls, ye do
favour, and support, and honour them, and preserve all their rights
entire and intact, and afford them the benefit of your patronage and
protection." <span id="fr_64"></span>[†](#fn_64)

Amalric, king of Jerusalem, the successor of Baldwin the Third, in a
letter "to his dear friend and father," Louis the Seventh, king of
France, beseeches the good offices of that monarch in behalf of all the
devout Christians of the Holy Land; "but above all," says he, "we
earnestly entreat your Majesty constantly to extend to the utmost your
favour and regard to the Brothers of the Temple, who continually render
up their lives for God and the faith, and through whom we do the little
that we are able to effect, for in them indeed, after God, is placed the
entire reliance of all those in the eastern regions who tread in the
right path." . . . .  <span id="fr_65"></span>[‡](#fn_65)

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="margnote">PHILIP OF  
NAPLOUS.  
A.D. 1167.</span>The Master, Brother Bertrand de Blanquefort, was
succeeded (A.D. 1167,) by Philip of Naplous, the first Master of the
Temple who had been born in Palestine. He had been Lord of the
fortresses of Krak and Montreal in Arabia Petræa, and took the vows and
the habit of the order of the Temple after the death of his wife. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[\*](#fn_66)

We must now pause to take a glance at the rise of another great
religio-military institution which, from henceforth, takes a leading
part in the defence of the Latin kingdom.

In the eleventh century, when pilgrimages to Jerusalem had greatly
increased, some Italian merchants of Amalfi, who carried on a lucrative
trade with Palestine, purchased of the Caliph *Monstasser-billah*, a
piece of ground in the christian quarter of the Holy City, near the
Church of the Resurrection, whereon two hospitals were constructed, the
one being appropriated for the reception of male pilgrims, and the other
for females. Several pious and charitable Christians, chiefly from
Europe, devoted themselves in these hospitals to constant attendance
upon the sick and destitute. Two chapels were erected, the one annexed
to the female establishment being dedicated to St. Mary Magdalene, and
the other to St. John the Eleemosynary, a canonized patriarch of
Alexandria, remarkable for his exceeding charity. The pious and
kind-hearted people who here attended upon the sick pilgrims, clothed
the naked and fed the hungry, were called "The Hospitallers of Saint
John."

On the conquest of Jerusalem by the Crusaders, these charitable persons
were naturally regarded with the greatest esteem and reverence by their
fellow-christians from the west; many of

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="margnote">PHILIP OF  
NAPLOUS.  
A.D. 1167.</span>the soldiers of the Cross, smitten with their piety and
zeal, desired to participate in their good offices, and the
Hospitaliers, animated by the religious enthusiasm of the day,
determined to renounce the world, and devote the remainder of their
lives to pious duties and constant attendance upon the sick. They took
the customary monastic vows of obedience, chastity, and poverty, and
assumed as their distinguishing habit a *black* mantle with a *white*
cross on the breast. Various lands and possessions were granted them by
the lords and princes of the Crusade, both in Palestine and in Europe,
and the order of the hospital of St. John speedily became a great and
powerful institution. <span id="fr_67"></span>[\*](#fn_67)

Gerard, a native of Provence, was at this period at the head of the
society, with the title of "Guardian of the Poor." He was succeeded
(A.D. 1118) by Raymond Dupuy, a knight of Dauphiné, who drew up a series
of rules for the direction and government of his brethren. In these
rules no traces are discoverable of the military spirit which afterwards
animated the order of the Hospital of St. John. The Abbé de Vertot, from
a desire perhaps to pay court to the Order of Malta, carries back the
assumption of arms by the Hospitallers to the year 1119, and describes
them as fiercely engaged under the command of Raymond Dupuy, in the
battle fought between the Christians and Dol de Kuvin, Sultan of
Damascus; but none of the historians of the period make any mention
whatever of the Hospitallers in that action. De Vertot quotes no
authority in support of his statement, and it appears to be a mere
fiction.

The first authentic notice of an intention on the part of the
Hospitaliers to occupy themselves with military matters, occurs in the
bull of Pope Innocent the Second, dated A.D. 1130. This bull is
addressed to the archbishops, bishops, and clergy of the

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="margnote">PHILIP OF  
NAPLOUS.  
A.D. 1167.</span>church universal, and informs them that the
Hospitallers then retained, at their own expense, a body of horsemen and
foot soldiers, to defend the pilgrims in going to and in returning from
the holy places; the pope observes that the funds of the hospital were
insufficient to enable them effectually to fulfil the pious and holy
task, and he exhorts the archbishops, bishops, and clergy,, to minister
to the necessities of the order out of their abundant property. <span
id="fr_68"></span>[\*](#fn_68) The Hospitallers consequently at this
period had resolved to add the task of *protecting* to that of tending
and relieving pilgrims.

After the accession (A.D. 1168) of Gilbert d’Assalit to the guardianship
of the Hospital--a man described by De Vertot as "bold and enterprising,
and of an extravagant genius"--a military spirit was infused into the
Hospitaliers, which speedily predominated over their pious and
charitable zeal in attending upon the poor and the sick. Gilbert
d’Assalit was the friend and confidant of Amalric, king of Jerusalem,
and planned with that monarch a wicked invasion of Egypt in defiance of
treaties. The Master of the Temple being consulted concerning the
expedition, flatly refused to have anything to do with it, or to allow a
single brother of the order of the Temple to accompany the king in arms;
"For it appeared a hard matter to the Templars," says William of Tyre,
"to wage war without cause, in defiance of treaties, and against all
honour and conscience, upon a friendly nation, preserving faith with us,
and relying on our own faith." <span id="fr_69"></span>[†](#fn_69)
Gilbert d’Assalit consequently determined to obtain for the king from
his own brethren that aid which the Templars denied; and to tempt the

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="margnote">PHILIP OF  
NAPLOUS.  
A.D. 1167.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Hospitallers to arm themselves generally as a great military society, in
imitation of the Templars, <span id="fr_70"></span>[\*](#fn_70) and join
the expedition to Egypt, Gilbert d’Assalit was authorised to promise
them, in the name of the king, the possession of the wealthy and
important city of Belbeis, the ancient Pelusium, in perpetual
sovereignty. <span id="fr_71"></span>[†](#fn_71)

According to De Vertot, the senior Hospitallers were greatly averse to
the military projects of their chief: "They urged," says he, "that they
were a religious order, and that the church had not put arms into their
hands to make conquests;" <span id="fr_72"></span>[‡](#fn_72) but the
younger and more ardent of the brethren, burning to exchange the
monotonous life of the cloister for the enterprize and activity of the
camp, received the proposals of their superior with enthusiasm, and a
majority of the chapter decided in favour of the plans and projects of
their Guardian. They authorized him to borrow money of the Florentine
and Genoese merchants, to take hired soldiers into the pay of the order,
and to organize the Hospitallers as a great military society.

Gilbert d’Assalit bestirred himself with great energy in the execution
of these schemes; he wrote letters to the king of France for aid and
assistance, <span id="fr_73"></span>[§](#fn_73) and borrowed money of
the emperor of Constantinople. "Assalit," says De Vertot,

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

<span class="margnote">PHILIP OF  
NAPLOUS.  
A.D. 1168.</span><span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
"with this money levied a great body of troops, which he took into the
pay of the order; and as his fancy was entirely taken up with flattering
hopes of conquest, he drew by his indiscreet liberalities a great number
of volunteers into hit service, who like him shared already in
imagination all the riches of Egypt."

It was in the first year of the government of Philip of Naplous (A.D.
1168) that the king of Jerusalem and the Hospitaliers marched forth upon
their memorable and unfortunate expedition. The Egyptians were taken
completely by surprise; the city of Belbeis was carried by assault, and
the defenceless inhabitants were barbarously massacred; "they spared,"
says De Vertot, "neither old men nor women, nor children at the breast,"
after which the desolated city was delivered up to the brethren of the
Hospital of St. John. They held it, however, for a very brief period;
the immorality, the cruelty, and the injustice of the Christians,
speedily met with condign punishment. The king of Jerusalem was driven
back into Palestine; Belbeis was abandoned with precipitation; and the
Hospitaliers fled before the infidels in sorrow and disappointment to
Jerusalem. There they vented their indignation and chagrin upon the
unfortunate Gilbert d’Assalit, their superior, who had got the order
into debt to the extent of 100,000 pieces of gold; they compelled him to
resign his authority, and the unfortunate guardian of the hospital fled
from Palestine to England, and was drowned in the Channel. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[\*](#fn_74)

From this period, however, the character of the order of the Hospital of
St. John was entirely changed; the Hospitaliers

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="margnote">PHILIP OF  
NAPLOUS.  
A.D. 1168.</span>appear henceforth as a great military body; their
superior styles himself Master, and leads in person the brethren into
the field of battle. Attendance upon the poor and the sick still
continued, indeed, one of the duties of the fraternity, but it must have
been feebly exercised amid the clash of arms and the excitement of war.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[37:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_27) *Will. Tyr.* lib. xiii.
cap. 26; *Anselmus*, lib. iii. epistolarum. epist. 43, 63, 66, 67;
*Duchesne in Hist. Burg.* lib. iv. cap. 37.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[37:†](hkt05.htm#fr_28) Miles eximius et in
armis strenuus, nobilis carne et moribus, dominus Robertus cognomine
Burgundio Magister militiæ Templi.--*Will. Tyr.* lib. xv. cap. 6.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[37:‡](hkt05.htm#fr_29) Vir eximius frater
militiæ Templi Otto de Monte Falconis, omnes de morte suâ mœrore et
gemitu conficiens, occisus est.--*Will. Tyr.* lib. xv. cap. 6.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[38:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_30) *Abulfeda*, ad ann.
Hegir. 534, 539. *Will. Tyr.* lib. xvi. cap. 4, 5, 7, 15, 16, who terms
Zinghis, Sanguin. *Abulfaradge Chron. Syr*. p. 326, 328. *Will. Tyr.*
lib. xvi. cap. 14.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[38:†](hkt05.htm#fr_31) *Odo de Diogilo*, p. 33.
*Will. Tyr.* lib. xii. cap. 7; *Jac. de Vitr.* cap. lxv.; *Paul. Æmil.*
p. 254; *Monast. Angl.* vol. vii. p. 814.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[38:‡](hkt05.htm#fr_32) In nomine sanctæ et
individuæ Trinitatis omnibus dominis et amicis suis, et Sanctæ <span
id="page_39">p. 39</span> Dei ecelesiæ filiis, Bernardus de Baliolo
Salutem. Volo notum fieri omnibus tam futuris quam præsentibus, quod pro
dilectione Dei et pro salute animæ meæ, antecessorumque meorum fratribus
militibus de Templo Salomonis dedi et concessi Wedelee, &c. . . . Hoc
donum in capitulo, quod in Octavis Paschæ Parisiis fuit feci, domino
apostolico Eugenio præsente, et ipso rege Franciæ et archiepiscopo
Seuver, et Bardell et Rothomagi, et Frascumme, et fratribus militibus
Templi alba chlamide indutis cxxx præsentibus.--*Reg. Cart. S. Joh.
Jerus. in Bib. Cotton. Nero E. b.* No. xx. fo. 118.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[39:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_33) *Gallia Christiana
nova*, tom. i. col. 486.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[39:†](hkt05.htm#fr_34) *Odo de Diogilo de
Ludov*. vii. *profectione in Orientem*, p. 67.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[40:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_35) Rex per aliquot dies in
Palatio Templariorum, ubi olim Regia Domus, quæ et Templum Salomonis
constructa fuit manens, et sancta ubique loca peragrans, per Samariam ad
Galilæam Ptolemaidam rediit. . . . . Convenerat enim cum rege
militibusque Templi, circa proximum Julium, in Syriam ad expugnationem
Damasci exercitum ducere.--*Otto Frising*, cap. 58.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[41:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_36) Ludovici regis ad
abbatem Sugerium epist. 58.--*Duchesne hist. franc. scrip*. tom. iv. p.
512; see also epist. 59, ibid.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[41:†](hkt05.htm#fr_37) *Simeonis Dunelmensis
hist*. ad ann. 1148, *apud* X *script*.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[41:‡](hkt05.htm#fr_38) *Dugdale Baronage*, tom.
i. p. 122. *Dugd. Monast*. vol. 7, p. 838.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[42:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_39) Ex regist. Hosp. S.
Joh. Jerusalem in Angli in *Bib. Cotton*. fol. 289, a-b. *Dugd. Monast.
Angl.* ed. 1830, vol. vii. p. 820.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[42:†](hkt05.htm#fr_40) Ex. cod. vet. M. S.
penes Anton Wood, Oxon, fol. 14 a. Ib. p. 843.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42:‡](hkt05.htm#fr_41) *Liber Johannis
Stillingflete*, M. S. in officio armorum (L. I7) fol. 141 a, Harleian M.
S. No. 4937.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[42:§](hkt05.htm#fr_42) Geoffrey of Clairvaur
observes, however, that the second crusade could hardly be called
unfortunate, since, though it did not at all help the Holy Land, it
served to people heaven with martyrs.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[43:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_43) His head and right hand
were cut off by Noureddin, and sent to the caliph at
Bagdad.--*Abulfarag. Chron. Syr.* p. 336.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[44:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_44) *Spicilegii
Dacheriani*, tom. ii. p. 511; see also *Will. Tyr.* lib. xvii. cap. 9.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[44:†](hkt05.htm#fr_45) *Will. Tyr.* lib. xvii.
cap. 21. *L’art de verifier les dates*, p. 340. *Nobiliaire de
Franche-Compté*, par Dunod, p.140.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[45:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_46) *Will. Tyr.* lib. xvii.
cap. 20, ad ann. 1152.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[45:†](hkt05.htm#fr_47) *S. Bernardi epistolæ*,
288, 289, 392, ed. Mabillon.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[46:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_48) *Anselmi Gemblacensis
Cron.* ad ann. 1153. *Will. Tyr.* lib. xvii. cap. 27.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[46:†](hkt05.htm#fr_49) Captus est inter cæteros
ibi Bertrandus de Blanquefort, Magister Militiæ Templi, vir religiosus
ac timens Deum. *Will. Tyr.* lib. xviii. cap. 14. *Registr. epist*. apud
*Martene* vet. script. tom. ii. col. 647.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[46:‡](hkt05.htm#fr_50) Milites Templi circa
triginta, ducentos Paganorum euntes ad nuphas verterent in fugam, et
divino præsidio comitante, omnes partim ceperunt, partim gladio
trucidarunt. *Registr. epist. ut sup*. col. 647.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[46:§](hkt05.htm#fr_51) *Will. Tyr.* lib. xix.
cap. 8.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[47:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_52) *Epist*. xvi. S.
Remensi archiepiscopo et ejus suffraganeis pro ecclesia Jerosolymitana
et militibus Templi, apud *Martene vet. script.* tom. ii. col. 647.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[47:†](hkt05.htm#fr_53) *Islam*, the name of the
Mahometan religion. The word signifies literally, delivering oneself up
to God.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[47:‡](hkt05.htm#fr_54) Keightley's Crusaders.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[48:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_55) The virtues of
Noureddin are celebrated by the Arabic Historian *Ben-Schunah*, in his
*Raoudhat Almenadhir*, by [*Azzeddin*](errata.htm#0) *Ebn-al-ather*, by
*Khondemir*, and in the work entitled, "The flowers of the two gardens,"
by *Omaddeddin Kateb*. See also *Will. Tyr.* lib. xx. cap. 33.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[48:†](hkt05.htm#fr_56) Regula, cap. xlviii.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[50:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_57) Vexillum bipartitum ex
Albo et Nigro quod nominant *Beau-seant* id est Gallia linguâ
*Bien-seant;* eo quod Christi amicis candidi sunt et benigni, inimicis
vero terribiles atque nigri, *Jac. de Vitr.* *Hist. Hierosol. apud Gesta
Dei*, cap. lxv. The idea is quite <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> an
oriental one, black and white being always used among the Arabs
metaphorically, in the sense above described. Their customary salutation
is, May your day be *white*, i. e. may you be happy.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[51:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_58) *Alwakidi Arab. Hist.*
translated by Ockley. *Hist. Saracen*. It refers to a period antecedent
to the crusades, but the same religio-military enthusiasm prevailed
during the holy war for the recovery of Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[51:†](hkt05.htm#fr_59) *Cinnamus*, lib. iv.
num. 22.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[52:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_60) *Gesta Dei*, inter
regum et principum epistolas, tom. i. p. 1173, 6, 7. *Hist. Franc.
Script.* tom. iv. p. 692, 693.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[52:†](hkt05.htm#fr_61) Hist. de Saladin, par
*M. Marin*, tom. i. p. 120, 1. *Gibbon*, cap. 59.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[52:‡](hkt05.htm#fr_62) *Gesta Dei*, epist. xiv.
p. 1178, 9.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[53:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_63) De fratribus nostris
ceciderunt LX. milites fortissimi, præter fratres clientes et
Turcopulos, nec nisi *septem* tantum evasêre periculum. Epist. *Gauf
Fulcherii* procuratoris Templi Ludovico regi Francorum. *Gesta Dei*,
tom. i. p. 1182, 3, 4.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[53:†](hkt05.htm#fr_64) Registr. epist. apud
*Martene*, vel script. tom. ii. col. 846, 847, 883.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[53:‡](hkt05.htm#fr_65) ". . . . præcipue pro
fratribus Templi, vestram exoramus Majestatem . . . . qui quotidie
moriuntur pro Domino et servitio, et per quos possumus, si quid
possumus. In <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> illis enim tota summa post
Deum consistit omnium eorum, qui sano fiunt consilio in partibus
orientis . . . . " *Gesta Dei*, tom. i. epist. xxi. p. 1181.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[54:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_66) Dominus fuit Arabiæ
secundæ, quæ est Petracensis, qui locus hodie Crach dicitur, et Syriæ
Sobal . . . factus est Magister Militiæ Templi.--*Will. Tyr.* lib. xxii.
cap. 5.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[55:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_67) *Will. Tyr.* lib.
xviii. cap. 4, 5.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[56:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_68) Fratres ejusdem domus
non formidantes pro fratribus suis animas ponere; cum servientibus et
equitaturis *ad hoc officium specialiter deputatis et propriis sumptibus
retentis*, tam in eundo, quam redcundo ab incursibus Paganorum
defensant.--*De Verto*t. hist. des chev. de Malte, liv. i. preuve 9.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[56:†](hkt05.htm#fr_69) *Will. Tyr.* lib. xx.
cap. 5.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[57:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_70) Prædicti enim
Hospitalis fratres *ad imitationem* fratrum mllitiæ Templi, armis
materialibus utentes, milites cum servientibus in suo collegio
receperunt.--*Jac. de Vit.* cap. lxv.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[57:†](hkt05.htm#fr_71) *Will. Tyr.* lib. xx.
cap. 5.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[57:‡](hkt05.htm#fr_72) This assumption of arms
by the Hospitallers was entirely at variance with the original end and
object of their institution. Pope Anastasius, in a bull dated A.D. 1154,
observes, "omnia vestra *sustentationibus peregrinorum et pauperum*
debent cedere, ac per hoc nullatenus alas usibus ea convenit
applicari.--De Vertot, liv. L preuve 13.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[57:§](hkt05.htm#fr_73) *Gest. Dei per Francos*,
p. 1177.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[58:\*](hkt05.htm#fr_74) *Will. Tyr.* lib. xx.
cap. 5. *Hoveden* in Hen. 2, p. 622. *De Vertot*, Hist. des Chevaliers
de Malte, liv. ii. p. 150 to 161, ed. 1726.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](hkt06)

</div>
