[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mrad22)  [Next](mrad24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTN5A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mental Radio*, by Upton Sinclair, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

### XXII

<span class="smallcaps">So</span> much for the art of voluntary
mind-reading. In conclusion I attempt to say a few words about what
these phenomena mean, and how they come about.

This attempt involves me in a verbal duel with my wife, which lasts into
the small hours of morning. It involves the everlasting debate between
the vitalists and the mechanists, which had best be left to Dr. Watson
and Professor McDougall, and the others who are no more able than I am
to look at the neurons of the brain in action, to see what happens. But
I insist that until Craig and Dr. Watson, Professor Eddington and Mrs.
Eddy have found out positively whether the universe is all mind or all
matter, I must go on speaking in the old-fashioned way, as if there were
two worlds, the physical and the mental, two sets of phenomena which
interact one upon the other continuously, even though the manner of this
happening is beyond comprehension.

With this much apology, I obtain permission

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

to put forth my humble guess as to the part played by mental
concentration in the causing of telepathy, clairvoyance, and trance
phenomena. It seems to me that the process of intense concentration may
cause the nervous energy, or brain energy, whatever it is, to be
withdrawn from some of the brain centers and transferred to others; and
it may be this displacement and disturbance of balance which accounts
for such phenomena as catalepsy, automatism, and somnambulism. Portions
of the mind which are ordinarily below the level of consciousness are
raised to more intense forms of activity. New levels of mind are tapped,
new "personalities" or faculties are brought into action, and persons
under hypnotism develop mental powers they do not consciously possess.

That it is intense concentration upon one suggestion—the narrowing of
the attention to one focus—which produces the cataleptic trance is
something which my wife set out to prove, and by going close to the
border-line she feels that she did prove it. The rigidity began at the
extremities and crept rapidly over the body. In spite of my protests,
Craig insisted that she was going the whole way, and asked me to stand
by and make some tests. I was to wait three minutes,

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

and then lift her up by the feet. I did so, and found an extraordinary
thing—the body was perfectly rigid, like a log of wood, except at the
neck! When I lifted her by her feet, the neck bent, so that the head
remained on the pillow, while the feet were raised at least a yard in
the air. Later, when Craig had relaxed, she told me that she had known
what was happening; there had been one point of consciousness left, and
she had the belief that she could let that go in another moment, but was
afraid to do so, because she might not come out again. For an instant,
she had felt that strange terror one feels at the moment he ceases to
struggle against the fumes of gas or ether, and plunges into oblivion.
The difference is that, in the case of gas or ether, one cannot hold on
to consciousness; but in the case of the cataleptic state, he can recall
his receding consciousness. Craig, of course, had not concentrated with
complete attention to one idea; one portion of her mind was concentrated
upon achieving rigidity, while another was watching and protesting
against oblivion.

Dr. Morton Prince wrote to Craig: "You are playing with powerful and
dangerous forces." And so she dropped this form of experiment. But more
should be known about these trances,

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

which often occur spontaneously, and can be caused by fear—that is to
say, an intense concentration on the idea of escape from danger, which
produces a tension amounting to paralysis. In such cases there are a
number of new dangers; one being that some doctor will try to restore
you with drugs and wrong suggestions. Every suggestion of fear on the
part of the onlookers must be avoided in case of trances, for the
subconscious mind of the victim hears every word, and believes it; also
telepathy has to be remembered. One must not only speak quietly and
firmly, repeating that everything is all right, and that the person will
come out safely; one must also *think* this. The trance may last a long
time, but keep calm and sure of success, and keep the doctor and the
undertaker away. The condition of catalepsy is more common than is
realized, and it is unpleasant to think how many persons are embalmed
while in this condition.

All this sounds disturbing, but it has nothing to do with our telepathy
experiments, in which the state of concentration is not one of tension
accompanied by the suggestion of rigidity, or of fear, but on the
contrary is a state of relaxation, accompanied by the suggestion of
control, or supervision. This matter of supervision has been

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

carefully set forth by Craig in her statement. It is one of the mind's
great mysteries: how, while thinking about nothing, you can not only
remember to give a suggestion, but can also act upon it. Craig insists
that we have three minds.; and she has in this the backing of William
McDougall, who is probably the "dean" of American psychologists, now
that Morton Prince is dead. Professor McDougall talks about the various
"monads" of the mind; so let us say that one "monad" gives an order to a
second "monad" to become blank, after it has given an order to a third
to present to the first a picture.

The psychic Jan gives such "autosuggestions" to himself when he goes
into a trance, and tells his trance mind to bring him out at a certain
moment. How that trance mind can measure time as exactly as a clock is
another of the mysteries; but that it happens is beyond doubt. My wife
took Jan to a group of scientists in Boston, and several of them held
watches and expressed their surprise at what Jan was able to do. It is
obvious that when the psychic lets himself be buried six feet under the
ground in an ordinary pine-wood coffin, he is staking his life upon his
certainty that he will not come out of the state of lethargy until after
he has been dug up.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

He also stakes it upon the hope that the physicians who have the test in
charge will have sufficient sense to realize the importance of having
him dug out at the time agreed. In one case they were several minutes
late, and Jan nearly suffocated. I never saw one of these burials,
because Craig obtained his promise not to do them after she knew him;
but I have talked with several physicians who watched and directed all
the details, and I have a moving-picture film of one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](mrad24.md)
