[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mrad06)  [Next](mrad08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTN5A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mental Radio*, by Upton Sinclair, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

### VI

<span class="smallcaps">As</span> I have said, I hesitate to tell about
incidents such as these. They are hard to believe, and the skeptic may
say that my wife was hypnotized by Jan, and made to believe them. But it
happens that Craig has been able to establish exactly the same *rapport*
with her husband, who has never had anything to do with hypnosis, except
to watch it a few times. A Socialist "muckraker," much wrapped up in his
job, the husband sits and reads, or revises manuscript, while the wife
works her white magic upon his mind. Suddenly his train of thought is
broken by an exclamation; the wife has "willed" him to do such and
so—and he has done it! Or maybe she has been asleep, and come out with
the tail end of a dream, and has written down what appears to be a lot
of rubbish—but turns out to be a reproduction of something the husband
has been reading or writing at that very moment! Hear one or two
instances of such events, all written down at the time.

Colonel Lindbergh has flown to France, but Craig does not know much
about it, because she

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

is not reading the papers, she is asking, "What is life?" A year passes,
and in the mail I receive a monthly magazine, the "Lantern," published
by Sacco-Vanzetti sympathizers in Boston. I open it, and find an article
by a young radical, assailing Lindbergh because he does not follow in
his father's footsteps; his father was a radical congressman, but now
the son allows himself to be used by the army and navy people, and by
the capitalist press, to distract the minds of the masses from social
justice. So runs the charge; and before I am through reading it, my wife
comes downstairs from a nap. "What are you reading?" she asks, and I
answer: "Something about Lindbergh." Says my wife: "Here are my notes
about a dream I just had." She hands me a sheet of paper, I have it
before me now as I write, and I give it with misspelling and
abbreviations exactly as she wrote it in a hurry, not anticipating that
it would ever become public:

"'I do not believe that Lindberg flew across the ocean in order to take
a ransome from a foreign gov as well as from his own. Nor in order to
induce the nations of the earth to a war in the air.' Words which were
in my mind as I awoke from nap on aft May 25."

I should add that my wife had had no opportunity

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

to look at the Boston magazine, whether consciously or unconsciously.
She tells me that Lindbergh had not been in her conscious mind for a
long time, and she had no remotest idea that the radicals were attacking
him.

Another instance: I am reading the latest "book of the month," which has
just come in the mail, and to which my wife has paid no attention. She
interrupts me with a question: "Are there any flowers in what you are
reading?" I answer, "Yes," and she says: "I have been trying to
concentrate, and I keep seeing flowers. I have drawn them." She hands me
two drawings ([figs. 14a, 14b](#img_fig014)):

<span id="img_fig014"></span> ![Fig. 14a, Fig. 14b](img/fig014.jpg)

The book was Mumford's "Herman Melville," and I was at page 346, a
chapter entitled, "The Flowering Aloe." On this page are six lines from
a poem called "The American Aloe on Exhibition." On the preceding page
is a discussion of the habits of this plant. While my wife was

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

making the left-hand drawing ([fig. 14a](#img_fig014)), I had been
reading page 344: "the red clover had blushed through the fields about
their house"; and "he would return home with a handful of clover
blossoms."

Of experiences like this there have been many. Important as the subject
is, I find it a bother, because I am called upon to listen to long
narratives of dreams and telepathy, while my mind is on Sacco and
Vanzetti, or the Socialist presidential campaign, or whatever it is.
Sometimes the messages from the subconscious are complicated and take
patience to disentangle. Consider, for example, a little drawing ([fig.
15](#img_fig015))—one of nearly

<span id="img_fig015"></span> ![Fig. 15, Fig. 15a](img/fig015.jpg)

three hundred which this long-suffering husband has made for his
witch-wife to reproduce by telepathy: a football, you see, neatly laced
up. In her drawing ([fig. 15a](#img_fig015)) Craig gets the general
effect perfectly, but she puts it on a calf. Her written comment was:
"Belly-band on calf."

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

While Craig was making this particular experiment, her husband was
reading a book; and now, wishing to solve the mystery, she asks, "What
are you reading?" The husband replies, wearily: "DeKruif's 'Hunger
Fighters,' page 283." "What does it deal with?" "It is a treatise on the
feeding of cows." "Really?" says Craig. "Will you please write that down
for me and sign it?"

But why did the cow become a calf? That, too, is something to be
explained. Says Craig: "Do you remember what I used to tell you about
old Mr. Bebb and his calves?" Yes, the husband knows the story of the
half-crazy old Welshman, who thirty or forty years ago was the caretaker
of the Kimbrough summer home on the Mississippi Sound. Old Mr. Bebb made
his hobby the raising of calves by hand, and turning them into parlor
pets. He would teach them to use his three fingers as a nursing bottle,
and would make fancy embroidered belly-bands for them, and tie them up
in these. So to the subconscious mind which was once little Mary Craig
Kimbrough of Mississippi, the idea of a calf sewed up like a football is
one of the most natural in the world.

Since my wife and I have no secrets from each other, it does not trouble
me that she is able to

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

see what I am doing. While I am away from home, she will "concentrate"
upon me, and immediately afterwards write out what she "sees." On one
occasion she described to me a little red book which I had got in the
mail at the office. By way of establishing just what kind of book she
had "seen," she had gone to my bookcase and picked out a French
dictionary—and it happened that I had just received the Italian
dictionary of that same series, uniform in binding. On another occasion,
while making a study of dream-material, she wrote out a dream about
being lost in long and involved concrete corridors —while I was trying
to find my way through the locker-rooms of a Y. M. C. A. basement,
running into one blind passage after another, and being much annoyed by
doors that wouldn't open.

Dreams, you understand, are products of subconscious activity, and to
watch them is one method of proving telepathy. By practice Craig has
learned to lie passive, immediately after awakening, and trace back a
long train of dreams. Here is one of the results, a story worth telling
in detail—save that I fear you will refuse to believe it after it is
told.

On the afternoon of January 30, 1928, I was playing tennis on the courts
of the Virginia

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hotel, in Long
Beach, California, and my wife was taking a nap. She did not know that I
was playing tennis, and has no knowledge about the places where I play.
She takes no interest in the game, regarding it as a foolish business
which will some day cause her husband to drop dead of heart failure—and
she declines to be present on the occasion. When I entered the house,
she said: "I woke up with a long involved dream, and it seemed so absurd
I didn't want to write it out, but I did so." Here are the opening
sentences verbatim:

"Dreamed I was on a pier, watching a new kind of small, one or two
seated sport-boat, a little water car into which a woman got and was
shot by machinery from the pier out to the water, where she skidded
around a minute or two and was drawn back to the pier. With us on the
pier were my sister and child, and two young men in white with white
caps. These appeared to be in charge of this new sport-boat. This boat
is not really a boat. It is a sort of miniature car. I've never seen
anything like it. Short, so that only one or two people could sit in it.
An amusement thing, belonging to the pier. The two young men were
intensely interested, and stood close together watching it out on the
water," etc., etc.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

Understand that this dream was not supposed to have anything to do with
me. It was before Craig had come to realize the state of *rapport* with
me; she had not been thinking about me, and when she told me about this
dream, she had no thought that any part of it had come from my mind. But
here is what I told her about my afternoon:

The Virginia Hotel courts are close to what is called "The Pike," and
there is an amusement pier just across the way, and on it a so-called
"Ferris wheel," with little cars exactly like the description, which go
up into the air with people in them. That afternoon it happened that the
tennis courts were crowded, so my partner and I waited out a set or two.
We sat on a bench, in white tennis suits and hats, and watched this
wheel, and the cars which went up in the air, and at a certain point
took a slide on long rods, which made them "skid around," and caused the
women in them to scream with excitement. Underneath the pier was the
ocean, plainly visible along with the little cars.

I should also mention the case of our friend, Mrs. Kate Crane-Gartz,
with whom there is a *rapport* which my wife does not tell her about. My
wife will say to me, "Mrs. Gartz is going to phone," and in a minute or
two the phone will

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

ring. She will say, "Mrs. Gartz is coming. She wants me to go to Los
Angeles with her." Of course, a good deal of guessing might be possible,
in the case of two intimate friends. But consider such guessing as this:
My wife had a dream of an earthquake and wrote it down. Soon thereafter
occurred this conversation with Mrs. Gartz. I heard it, and my wife
recorded it immediately afterwards, and I quote her written record:

"Mrs. Gartz dreamed of earthquake. 'Wasn't it queer that I dreamed of
swaying slowly from side to side.'

"'I dreamed the same,' I said. 'But I was in a high building.'"

"'So was I,' she replied."

Craig calls attention to the word "slowly," as both she and Mrs. Gartz
commented on this. They didn't believe that an earthquake would behave
that way; but I pointed out that it would happen just so with a
steel-frame building.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](mrad08)
