[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mrad01)  [Next](mrad03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTN5A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mental Radio*, by Upton Sinclair, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# MENTAL RADIO

### I

<span class="smallcaps">If</span> you were born as long as fifty years
ago, you can remember a time when the test of a sound, common-sense mind
was refusing to fool with "new-fangled notions." Without exactly putting
it into a formula, people took it for granted that truth was known and
familiar, and anything that was not known and familiar was nonsense. In
my boyhood, the funniest joke in the world was a "flying machine man";
and when my mother took up a notion about "germs" getting into you and
making you sick, my father made it a theme for no end of domestic wit.
Even as late as twenty years ago, when I wanted to write a play based on
the idea that men might some day be able to make a human voice audible
to groups of people all over America, my friends assured me that I could
not interest the public in such a fantastic notion.

Among the objects of scorn, in my boyhood, was what we called
"superstition"; and we made the term include, not merely the notion that
the number thirteen brought you bad luck; not

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

merely a belief in witches, ghosts and goblins, but also a belief in any
strange phenomena of the mind which we did not understand. We knew about
hypnotism, because we had seen stage performances, and were in the midst
of reading a naughty book called "Trilby"; but such things as trance
mediumship, automatic writing, table-tapping, telekinesis, telepathy and
clairvoyance—we didn't know these long names, but if such ideas were
explained to us, we knew right away that it was "all nonsense."

In my youth I had the experience of meeting a scholarly Unitarian
clergyman, the Rev. Minot J. Savage of New York, who assured me quite
seriously that he had seen and talked with ghosts. He didn't convince
me, but he sowed the seed of curiosity in my mind, and I began reading
books on psychic research. From first to last, I have read hundreds of
volumes; always interested, and always uncertain—an uncomfortable mental
state. The evidence in support of telepathy came to seem to me
conclusive, yet it never quite became real to me. The consequences of
belief would be so tremendous, the changes it would make in my view of
the universe so revolutionary, that I didn't believe, even when I said I
did.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

But for thirty years the subject has been among the things I hoped to
know about; and, as it happened, fate was planning to favor me. It sent
me a wife who became interested, and who not merely investigated
telepathy, but learned to practice it. For the past three years I have
been watching this work, day by day and night by night, in our home. So
at last I can say that I am no longer guessing. Now I really. know. I am
going to tell you about it, and hope to convince you; but regardless of
what anybody can say, there will never again be a doubt about it in my
mind. <span class="smallcaps">I know</span>!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](mrad03.md)
