[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mrad21)  [Next](mrad23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTN5A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mental Radio*, by Upton Sinclair, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

### XXI

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> next thing is to carry out our
promise and tell you the technique. My wife has, among her notes, a mass
of writing on this subject in the form of instructions to Bob, and
others who were interested. I tried to condense it, but found I could
not satisfy her, and in the end I realized that her point of view is
correct. No one objects to repetition of phrases in a legal document,
where the one essential is precision; and the same thing applies to
descriptions of these complicated mental processes. This was the most
difficult writing task she ever undertook, and the reason lies in its
newness, and the complexity of the mind itself.

If you want to learn the art of conscious mind-reading, this will tell
you how; and if you don't want to learn it, you can easily skip this
section of the book. Here is Craig's statement:

"The first thing you have to do is to learn the trick of undivided
attention, or concentration. By these terms I mean something quite
different from what is ordinarily meant. One

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'concentrates' on
writing a chapter in a book, or on solving a problem in mathematics; but
this is a complicated process of dividing one's attention, giving it to
one detail after another, judging, balancing, making decisions. The kind
of concentration I mean is putting the attention on *one* object, or one
*uncomplicated* thought, such as joy, or peace, and holding it there
steadily. It isn't thinking; it is inhibiting thought, except for one
thought, or one object in thought.

"You have to inhibit the impulse to think things about the object, to
examine it, or appraise it, or to allow memory-trains to attach
themselves to it. The average person has never heard of such a form of
concentration, and so has to learn how to do it. Simultaneously, he must
learn to relax, for strangely enough, a part of concentration is
complete relaxation.

"There seems to be a contradiction here, in the idea of simultaneous
concentration and relaxation. I do not know whether this is due to a
contradiction in the nature of the mind itself, or to our
misunderstanding of its nature. Perhaps we each have several mental
entities, or minds, and one of these can sleep (be blankly unconscious),
while another supervises the situation, maintaining the first one's
state of unconsciousness

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

for a desired period, and then presenting to it some thought or picture
agreed on in advance, thus restoring it to consciousness.

"Anyway, it is possible to be unconscious and conscious at the same
time! Almost every one has had the experience of knowing, while asleep,
that he is having a bad dream and must awaken himself from it. Certainly
some conscious entity is watching the dream, and knowing it is a dream;
and yet the sleeper is 'unconscious.' Or perhaps there is no such thing
as complete relaxation—until death.

"All I can say is this: when I practice this art which I have learned,
with my mind concentrated on one simple thing, it is a relaxation as
restful, as seemingly 'complete,' as when I am in that state called
normal sleep. The attention is not allowed to be on the sensations of
the body, or on anything but the one thing it is deliberately
'concentrated' on.

"Undivided concentration, then, means, for purposes of this experiment,
a state of complete relaxation, under specified control. To concentrate
in this undivided way you first give yourself a 'suggestion' to the
effect that you will relax your mind and your body, making the body
insensitive and the mind a blank, and yet reserving

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

the power to 'break' the concentration in a short time. By making the
body insensitive I mean simply to relax completely your mental hold of,
or awareness of, all bodily sensation. After giving yourself this
suggestion a few times, you proceed to relax both body and mind. Relax
all mental interest in everything in the environment; inhibit all
thoughts which try to wander into consciousness from the
subconsciousness, or from wherever else thoughts come. This is clearly a
more thorough affair than 'just relaxing.'

"Also, there is something else to it—the power of supervising the
condition. You succeed presently in establishing a blank state of
consciousness, yet you have the power to become instantly conscious,
also; to realize when you are about to go into a state of sleep, in
which you have not the power of instantly returning to consciousness.
Also, you control, to a certain degree, what is to be presented to
consciousness when you are ready to become conscious. For example, you
want a message from the person who is sending you a message; you do not
want a train of subconscious 'day dreams.'

"All this is work; and so far, it is a bore. But when you have learned
to do it, it is an art worth

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

knowing. You can use it, not only for such experiments as telepathy and
clairvoyance, but for improving your bodily health. To relax thoroughly
several times each day while holding on to a suggestion previously
'planted' in the subconsciousness is more beneficial to health than any
other one measure I know.

"The way to relax is to 'let go.' 'Let go' of every tense muscle, every
tense spot, in the body. Pain is tension. Pain can be inhibited by
suggestion *followed by complete relaxation*. Drop your body, a
dead-weight, from your conscious mind. Make your conscious mind a blank.
It is the mind, conscious or subconscious, which holds the body tense.
Give to the subconsciousness the suggestion of concentrating on one
idea, and then completely relax consciousness. To make the conscious
mind a blank it is necessary to 'let go' of the body; just as to 'let
go' of the body requires 'letting go' of consciousness of the body. If,
after you have practiced 'letting go' of the body, you find that your
mind is not a blank, then you have not succeeded in getting your body
rid of all tension. Work at it until you can let both mind and body
relax completely.

"It may help you to start as follows: Relax the body as completely as
possible. Then visualize

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

a rose, or a violet—some pleasant, familiar thing which does not arouse
emotional memory-trains. Gaze steadily, peacefully, at the chosen
object—think only of it—try not to let any memories it may arouse enter
your mind. Keep attention steady, just seeing the color, or the shape of
the flower and nothing else. Do not think things about the flower. Just
look at it. Select one thing about it to concentrate on, such as its
shape, or its color, or the two combined in a visual image: 'pink and
round.'

"If you find that you are made nervous by this effort, it is apt to be
due to the fact that you are thinking things. Maybe the object you have
chosen has some buried memories associated with it—something which
arouses unconscious memories of past unhappy events Roses may suggest a
lost sweetheart, or a vanished garden where you once were happy and to
which you long to return. If so, select some other flower to concentrate
on. Flowers are usually the most restful, the things which are not so
apt to be involved with distressing experiences. A bottle of ink might
suggest the strain of mental work, a spoon might suggest medicine, So,
find a peace-inspiring object to look at. When

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

you have found it, just look at it, with undivided attention.

"If you succeed in doing this, you will find it hard not to drop asleep.
But you must distinguish between this and the state you are to maintain.
If you drop asleep, the sleep will be what is called auto-hypnotic
sleep, and after you have learned to induce it, you will be able to
concentrate on an idea, instead of the rose, and to carry this idea into
the sleep with you as the idea to dominate the subconsciousness while
you sleep. This idea, taken with you into sleep in this way, will often
act in the subconsciousness with the same power as the idea suggested by
a hypnotist. If you have ever seen hypnotism, you will know what this
means. You can learn to carry an idea of the restoration of health into
this auto-hypnotic sleep, to act powerfully during sleep. Of course this
curative effect is not always achieved. Any idea introduced into the
subconsciousness may meet a counter-suggestion which, if you are ill,
already exists in the subconsciousness, and a conflict may ensue. Thus,
time and perseverance may be necessary to success.

"But this is another matter, and not the state for telepathy—in which
you must avoid dropping into a sleep. After you have practiced the

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

exercise of concentrating on a flower—and avoiding sleep—you will be
able to concentrate on holding the peculiar blank state of mind which
must be achieved if you are to make successful experiments in telepathy.
There may be strain to start with, but it is getting rid of strain, both
physical and mental, which constitutes relaxation, or blankness, of the
conscious mind. Practice will teach you what this state is, and after a
while you can achieve it without strain.

"The next step: ask some one to draw a half-dozen simple designs for you
on cards, or on slips of paper, and to fold them so that you cannot see
the contents. They should be folded separately, so that you can handle
one at a time. Place them on a table, or chair, beside your couch, or
bed, in easy reach of your hand, so that you can pick them up, one at a
time, while you are stretched out on the bed, or couch, beside them. It
is best at first to experiment in the dark, or at least in a dimly lit
room, as light stimulates the eyes and interferes with relaxation. If
you experiment at night, have a table lamp within easy reach, so that
you can turn the light off and on for each experiment without too much
exertion, as you must keep your body and mind as passive as possible for
these experiments. If you

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

have no reading light near, use a candle. You must have also a writing
pad and pencil beside you.

"After you have placed the drawings on the table, turn off the light and
stretch your body full length on the couch. Close your eyes and relax
your body. Relax completely. Make the mind a complete blank and hold it
blank. Do not think of anything. Thoughts will come. Inhibit them.
Refuse to think. Do this for several moments. It is essential to induce
a passive state of mind and body. If the mind is not passive, it feels
body sensations. If the body is not relaxed, its sensations interfere
with the necessary mental passivity. Each reacts on the other.

"The next step, after having turned off the light and closed your eyes
and relaxed mind and body full length on the couch, is to reach for the
top drawing of the pile on the table. Hold it in your hand over your
solar plexus. Hold it easily, without clutching it. Now, completely
relaxed, hold your mind a blank again. Hold it so for a few moments,
then give the mental order to the unconscious mind to tell you what is
on the paper you hold in your hand. Keep the eyes closed and the body
relaxed, and give the

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

order silently, and with as little mental exertion as possible.

"However, it is necessary to give it clearly and positively, that is,
with concentration on it. Say to the unconscious mind, 'I want the
picture which is on this card, or paper, presented to my consciousness.'
Say this with your mind concentrated on what you are saying. Repeat, as
if talking directly to another self: 'I want to see what is on *this*
card.' Then relax into blankness again and hold blankness a few moments,
then try gently, without straining, to see whatever forms may appear on
the void into which you look with closed eyes. Do not try to conjure up
something to see; just wait expectantly and let something come.

"My experience is that fragments of forms appear first. For example, a
curved line, or a straight one, or two lines of a triangle. But
sometimes the complete object appears; swiftly, lightly, dimly-drawn, as
on a moving picture film. These mental visions appear and disappear with
lightning rapidity, never standing still unless quickly fixed by a
deliberate effort of consciousness. They are never in heavy lines, but
as if sketched delicately, in a slightly deeper shade of gray than that
of the mental canvas. A person

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

not used to such experiments may at first fail to observe them on the
gray background of the mind, on which they appear and disappear so
swiftly. Sometimes they are so vague that one gets only a notion of how
they look before they vanish. Then one must 'recall' this first vision.
Recall it by conscious effort, which is not the same thing as the method
of passive waiting by which the vision was first induced. Instead, it is
as if one had seen with open eyes a fragment of a real picture, and now
closes his eyes and looks at the *memory* of it and tries to 'see' it
clearly.

"It is necessary to recall this vision and make note of it, so as not to
forget it. One is sure to forget it—indeed it is his duty to do so—in
the process of the next step, which is one of blankness again. This
blankness is, of course, a deliberate putting out of the conscious mind
of all pictures, including the one just visioned. One must now order the
subconscious not to present it to the conscious mind's picture-film
again unless it is the right picture, *i.e.*, the one drawn on the card
which is held in hand. Make the conscious mind blank again for a brief
space. Then look again on the gray canvas of mind for a vision. This is
to test whether the first vision

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

came from subconscious guessing, or whether it came from the deeper
mind—from some other source than that of the subconscious, which is so
apt to offer a 'guess,' or false picture.

"Do this whole performance two or three times, and if the first vision
persists in coming back, accept it. As soon as you have accepted it—that
is, decided that this is the correct vision —turn on the light, and
without looking at the card, or paper, which contains the real picture,
pick up the writing pad and pencil and make a sketch of every detail of
the vision-picture. This is a nuisance, as it interrupts concentration
and the desired passivity. But it is absolutely necessary to record the
vision in every detail, before one looks at the real picture, the one on
the card he has been holding in hand. If one does not make a record of
his vision in advance of looking at the card picture, he is certain to
forget at least some part of it—maybe something which is essential.
Worse yet, he is apt to fool himself; the mind is given to
self-deception. As soon as it sees the real drawing, it not only forgets
the vision, but it is apt to imagine that it visioned the picture it now
sees on the card, which may or may not be true. Imagination is a far
more active function than the average person realizes.

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This
conscious-subconscious mind is 'a liar,' a weaver of fiction. It is the
dream-mind, and also it is the mind of memory trains.

"Do not omit fragments which seem to be out of place in a picture. These
fragments may be the real things. If in doubt as to what the object of
your vision is, do not try to guess. But if you have a 'hunch' that
something you have seen is connected somehow with a watch, for example,
or with an automobile, make a note of this 'hunch.' I use this popular
word to indicate a real presentation from some true source, something
deeper and more dependable than our own subconscious minds. I call this
the 'deep mind' in order to have a name for it. I do not know what it
is, of course—I am only judging from the behavior of the phenomena.

"Do not fail to record what seems to be a stray fragment, for it may be
a perfect vision of some portion of the real picture. Record everything,
and then later you can compare it carefully with the real drawing. Of
course, do not be fantastic in your conclusions. Do not think you have
gotten a correct vision of an automobile because you saw a circle which
resembled a wheel. However, I once saw a circle and *felt* that it was
an automobile wheel—felt it so vividly

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

that I became overwhelmed with curiosity to see if my 'feeling' was
correct, and forthwith turned on the light and examined the real picture
in my hand. I found that it was indeed the wheel of an automobile. But I
do not do this kind of thing unless I have a very decided 'hunch,' as it
tends to lead back to the natural impulse of the mind to 'guess'—and
guessing is one of the things one has to strive to avoid. To a certain
extent, one comes to know a difference between a guess and a 'hunch.'

"The details of this technique are not to be taken as trifles. The whole
issue of success or failure depends on them. At least, this is so in my
case. Perhaps a spontaneous sensitive, or one who has a better method,
has no such difficulties. I am just an average conscious-minded person,
who set out deliberately to find a way to test this tremendously
important question of telepathy and clairvoyance, without having to
depend on a 'medium,' who might be fooling himself, or me. It was by
this method of careful attention to a technique of details that I have
found it possible to get telepathic messages and to see pictures on
hidden cards, and symbolic pictures of the contents of books.

"This technique takes time, and patience, and

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

training in the art of concentration. But this patience is in itself an
excellent thing to learn, especially for nervous and sick people. The
uses of mental concentration are too various and tremendously beneficial
to enumerate here. The average person has almost no power of
concentration, as he will quickly discover by trying to hold his
undivided attention on one simple object, such as a rose, or a bottle of
ink, for just a few minutes. He will find that a thousand thoughts,
usually association trains connected with the rose, or the ink, will
appear on his mental canvas, interrupting his concentration. He will
find that his mind behaves exactly like a moving-picture film, or a
fireworks display. It is the division of attention that uses up energy,
if I am not mistaken.

"Of course this technique is not 'original.' I got it by selecting from
hints here and there in my reading, and from my general study and
observation of the behavior of the mind.

"Among the difficulties to be overcome—and this is one which is easily
detected—is the appearing of visions of objects one has observed in the
environment just before closing the eyes. When I close my eyes to make
the next test, I invariably find that the last picture, and my own

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

drawing of it, and also the electric light bulb which I have lighted in
order to see the last picture—all these immediately appear on the
horizon of my mind. It often takes quite a while to banish these
memory-ghosts. And sometimes it is a mistake to banish them, as the
picture you hold in your hand may be quite similar to the preceding one.
If, therefore, a picture resembling the preceding continues obstinately
to represent itself, I usually accept it, and often find that the
preceding and present cards contain similar pictures.

"Another difficulty is the way things sometimes appear in fragments, or
sections, of the whole picture. A straight line may appear, and it may
be either only a portion of the whole, or it may be all there is on the
card. Then I have to resist the efforts of my imagination to speculate
as to what object this fragment may be part of. For instance, I see a
series of points, and have the impulse to 'guess' a star. I must say no
to this guess-work, unless the indescribable 'hunch' feeling assures me
it is a star. I must tell myself it may be indeed a part of a star, but,
on the other hand, it may be a complete picture of the drawing in hand,
perhaps the letter W, or M, or it may be a part of a pennant,

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

or what not. Then I must start over, and hold blank a while. Then repeat
the request to the deep mind for the true picture. Now I may get a more
complete picture, or maybe this fragment reappears alone, or maybe it
repeats itself upside-down, or doubled up in most any way.

"I start all over once more and now I may get a series of fragments
which follow each other and jump together as do the comic cartoons which
are drawn on the screen with pen and ink. For instance, two points
appear, then another appears separately and jumps to the first two, and
joins up with them, then two more. The result is a star, and this may be
the true picture. It usually is. But sometimes this is the subconscious
mind, or perhaps the conscious, trying to finish the object as it has
'guessed' it should be. This error of allowing the conscious or the
subconscious mind to finish the object is one to be most careful about.
As one experiments, he realizes more and more that these two minds, the
conscious and the subconscious, are really one, subconsciousness being
only a disorderly store-house of memories. The third, or 'deep mind' is
apparently the one which gives us our psychic phenomena. Again I say, I
do not know what this 'deep mind' is; I use the words merely

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

to have a name for that 'other thing' which brings the message.

"The conscious mind, combined with the subconscious, not only wants to
finish the picture, but decides sometimes to eliminate a detail which
does not belong to what it has guessed should be there. For example, I
will discuss the drawings which have been given as figures [35,
35a](mrad12.htm#img_fig035.md), in this book. I 'visioned' what looked like
a figure 5, except that at the top where there should be a small
vertical line projecting toward the right, there was a flare of very
long lines converging at one end. I consciously decided that the long
lines were an exaggeration and multiplication of what should properly be
at the top of a five, and that I should not accept them. Here was
conscious mind making a false decision. But by obeying the rules I had
laid down in advance, I was saved from this error of consciousness. I
closed my eyes, gave a call for the true picture, and the lines appeared
again, so I included them in my drawing. When I opened the envelope and
looked at the picture inside, it was an oil derrick. So the flare of
long lines was the real thing, while the figure 5 was the interloper—at
least, so I now consciously decided. I thought that the figure 5 and the

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

flare of lines were entirely separate mental images, one following the
other so rapidly that they appeared to belong together.

"But again my conscious decision was in error. Several hours later,
after I had put the whole matter out of my mind and had been attending
to household duties, I suddenly remembered the paper jacket of a German
edition of my husband's novel, 'Oil,' which was on a shelf in the next
room to the one in which I had made my experiments. Why did I suddenly
remember this book? I had not noticed it for a long time —its jacket
drawings were out of sight, as the book was wedged between many others
on the book shelves in an inconspicuous place in the room. On one side
of the jacket of this book was a picture of three oil derricks; on the
other side was a large dollar mark, almost covering one entire side of
the book. I had seen this jacket, had indeed taken special notice of it,
at the time of its arrival from Germany. So here seems to have been a
clear case of the subconscious mind at work during my experiment, adding
to my true vision of an oil derrick, the subconsciously remembered
dollar mark which looked like a figure 5, partly hidden by the oil
derrick in my vision. Here was a grand mix-up of the false

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

guesses of consciousness and subconsciousness, and the true
presentations from the 'deep mind.'

"But this was not the end. This confusion in regard to the dollar mark
went forward, in memory-trains to two other experiments. Several days
later, I was trying a new set of drawings, and one of them caused in my
mind a vision of the capital letter S. Instantly, two parallel straight
lines crossed it, turning it into a dollar mark: $. Then it became an S
again without the lines. Then the lines came back. This strange behavior
of my vision continued. I was in a quandary as to which to accept, the S
or the $. Then there appeared an old-fashioned money-bag, such as I used
to see in my father's bank as a child, full of small coins. It took its
place in the vision beside the dollar mark. I decided with the usual
erroneous consciousness that this money-bag was a hint from my real
mind, so I accepted the dollar mark as correct. But it turned out not to
be. When I looked at the drawing in hand it was a letter S. My
subconsciousness had supplied the money-bag, and the two parallel lines.

"Several days later, in a vision with a third set of drawings, I saw a
letter S, and then at once the bag of small change appeared, but there

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

were no parallel lines on the S. This time the real drawing was a dollar
mark! So, my subconsciousness, as soon as the dollar mark had appeared
in subconsciousness, had meddled again; it had remembered the last
experiment and the scolding I had given it for its guess work, so it now
subtracted the parallel lines from the new vision to make it correct,
according to the last experiment. It had remembered the last experiment
only, forgetting the first one, of the oil derrick, just as I had
ordered it to do on the occasion of the second experiment. So, it
subtracted the two parallel lines, but it added the remembered bag of
money, which I had included in my scolding. From this kind of
interference by the subconsciousness, I realized that it is indeed no
simple matter to get things into consciousness from the 'deep mind'
without guesses and additions and subtractions made by the
subconsciousness. Why the subconscious should meddle, I do not know. But
it does. Its behavior is exactly like that of the conscious mind, which
is also prone to guessing. All this sounds fantastic—to any one who has
not studied his mind. But I tell you how it seems to me.

"Maybe everything comes from the subconscious. Maybe there is no 'deep
mind.' Maybe

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

the subconscious gets its knowledge of what is on the drawing directly
from the drawing, and is merely blundering around, adding details by
guess-work to what it has seen incompletely. But I think that these
experiments prove that this is not the case. I think a study of them
shows that a true vision comes into the subconsciousness, not directly
from the drawing, but from another mind which has some means of knowing,
and sending to consciousness via the subconsciousness whatever I ask it
for. Of course I cannot attempt to prove this here. It was one of the
questions to which I was seeking an answer, and the result seems to
point to the existence of a deeper mind, showing how its behavior is
quite different from that of the subconscious.

"I wanted to find out if the true vision could in any way be
distinguished from 'imagination,' or these busy guesses of the
subconsciousness. To help myself in this matter, I first made an
examination of exactly how these guesses come. I said to myself: every
thought that ever comes to consciousness, excepting those due to direct
outside stimulation, may proceed from some deeper source, and by
subconscious memory-trains attaching to them, appear to be the work

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

of subconsciousness. So I shut my eyes and made my mind blank, without
calling on my mind to present any definite thing. I had no drawing in my
hand. After a brief space of blankness, I relaxed the enforced blankness
and waited, dreamily, for what might come. A picture soon came, with a
whole memory-train. First a girl in a large garden hat, then a garden
path and flowers bordering it, then a spade, a wheelbarrow, and so
on—things associated in my memory with a girl in a garden hat. As to
where the girl in the hat came from, I know not. As to why she should
come instead of any other of billions of things seen by me during my
life, I know not. I had not asked my mind for her. The question of why
she came is interesting.

"But it was easy to account for the other things—the association-train.
I learned from this experiment, and several repetitions of it, that
something always came—a girl, or a steamship, or the fact that I had not
attended to some household duty, or what not—and a train of associated
ideas followed. I learned, in a more or less vague way, how these things
behaved, and how I *felt* about them. This enabled me to notice, when
later I got a true vision, that there was a difference between the way
this true vision

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

came and the way the 'idle' visions came. When the true visions came,
there usually came with them a 'something' which I call a 'hunch.' There
was, of course, always in my consciousness the question: is this the
right thing, or not? When the true vision came, this question seemed to
receive an answer, 'yes,' as if some intelligent entity was directly
informing me.

"This was not always the case. At times no answer came, or at least, if
it came, it was obscured by guesses. But usually it did, after I had
watched for it, and a sort of thrill of triumph came with it, quite
different from the quiet way in which the money-bag had appeared in
answer to my uncertainty. The subconscious answers questions, and its
answers are always false; its answers come quietly, like a thief in the
night. But the 'other' mind, the 'deep mind' answers questions, too, and
these answers come, not quietly, but as if by 'inspiration,' whatever
that is—with a rustling of wings, with gladness and conviction. These
two minds seem different from each other. One lies and rambles; the
other sings, and is truthful.

"But do not misunderstand me. I am not a religious convert. I am
searching for knowledge, and recording what I find. Others on this
search

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

may have found these same things, but the conclusions they have drawn
may not turn out to be the ones I shall draw.

"One or two other things of interest should perhaps be mentioned. First,
I found that, in doing a series of several drawings, the percentage of
successes was higher in the first three attempts. Then there began to be
failures, alternating with successes. This may have been due to the fact
that the memory-pictures of these first three experiments now
constituted a difficulty. So much attention had to be given to
inhibiting these memory-pictures, and in deciding whether or not they
were to be inhibited. Or it may be due to some other cause, such as
fatigue or boredom.

"The second detail is that during the earliest experiments, I developed
a headache. I think this was due to the fact that I strained my closed
eyes trying to see with them. I mean, of course, trying to see a vision,
not the card in my hand. Using the eyes to see with is a habit, and
habits are not easily overcome. I soon learned not to use my eyes, at
least not in a strained way, and this was the end of the headaches.
However, this use of the eyes in telepathy may perhaps mean more than a
mere habit. The mental canvas

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

on which these 'visions' are projected seems to be spread in the eyes,
and it is the eyes which seem to see them—despite the fact that the room
may be dark, the eyes closed, and the drawing on the paper be wrapped in
thick covering and not within normal range of the eyes. But this may be
due to the habit of associating all pictures with your eyes."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](mrad23.md)
