[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mrad10)  [Next](mrad12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTN5A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mental Radio*, by Upton Sinclair, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

### X

<span class="smallcaps">Concerning</span> these drawings, there are
preliminary explanations to be made. They were done hastily, by two busy
people. Neither is a trained artist, and our ability to convey what we
wish is limited. When I start on a giraffe, I manage to produce a pretty
good neck, but when I get to the body, I am disturbed to note it turning
into a sheep or a donkey. When I draw a monkey climbing a tree, and
Craig says, "Buffalo or lion, tiger—wild animal"—I have to admit that
may be so; likewise when my limb of a tree is called a "trumpet," or
when Craig's "wild animal" resembles a chorus girl's legs. I will let
you see those particular drawings. [Figure 24](#img_fig024.md) is mine,
while [24a and 24b](#img_fig024a.md) are my wife's.

<span id="img_fig024"></span> ![Fig. 24](img/fig024.jpg.md)

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

<span id="img_fig024a"></span> ![Fig. 24a, Fig. 24b](img/fig024a.jpg.md)

Again, I draw a volcano in eruption, and my wife calls it a black
beetle, which hardly sounds like a triumphant success; but study the
drawings, and you see that my black smoke happens to be the shape of a
beetle, while the two sides of the volcano serve very well for the long
feelers of an insect ([fig. 25, 25a](#img_fig025).md):

<span id="img_fig025"></span> ![Fig. 25 Fig. 25a](img/fig025.jpg.md)

The tests began with four series of drawings, 38 in all, made by my
secretary. Following these were 31 series drawn by myself, comprising

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 252 separate
drawings. Each drawing would be wrapped in an extra sheet of paper, and
sealed in a separate envelope, and the envelopes handed to my wife when
she was ready for the tests. She would put them on the table by her
couch, and lie down, putting the first envelope, unopened, over her
solar plexus, covered by her hand. Her head would be lying back on a
pillow, eyes closed, and head at such an angle that nothing but the
ceiling could be seen if the eyes were open. A dim light to avoid sense
stimulation; enough light to see everything plainly. When she had what
she judged was the right image, she would take a pad and pencil and make
the drawing or write the description of what she "saw." Then she would
open the envelope and compare the two drawings, and number both for
[identification](errata.htm#0.md).

This recording was, of course, an interruption of her passive state, and
made the task difficult. In a few cases she repeated a number or forgot
the number, and this leaves a chance for confusion. I have done my best
to clear up all such uncertainties, but there is a margin of error of
one or two per cent to be noted. This is too small to affect the
results, but is mentioned in the interest of exactness.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

Since I found the sealing of envelopes tiresome, and Craig found the
opening of them more so, we decided half way through the tests to
abandon the sealing, and later we abandoned the envelopes altogether. We
reasoned that acceptance of the evidence rests upon our good faith
anyhow, and all that any sensible reader can ask is that Craig makes
sure of never letting a drawing get within her range of vision. She was
doing this laborious work to get knowledge for herself, and she
certainly made sure that she was not wasting her own time.

At present the practice is this: I make her a set of six or eight
drawings on little sheets of pad paper, and lay them face down on her
table, with a clean sheet of paper over them. She lies down, and with
her head lying back on the pillow and her eyes closed, she reaches for
one of the drawings, and slides it over and onto her body, covered by
her hand. It is always out of her range of vision, even if the drawing
were turned towards her eyes, which it never is.

For the comfort of the suspicious, let me add that the relaxing of the
conditions caused no change in the averages. In the first four series,
drawn by my secretary, and sealed by him in envelopes, there were only
five complete failures

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

in thirty-eight tests, which is thirteen per cent; whereas in the 252
drawings made by me there have been 65 outright failures, which is
nearly twice as large a percentage. Series number six, which was
carefully sealed up, produced four complete successes, five partial
successes, and no failures; whereas series twenty-one, which was not put
in envelopes at all, produced no complete successes, three partial
successes, and six failures. Perhaps I should explain that by a "series"
I mean simply a group of drawings which were done at one time. It is my
custom to make from six to a dozen and when Craig has finished with
them, they are put into an envelope and filed away.

I will add that Craig again and again begged me to sit and watch her
work, so that I might be able to add my testimony to hers; I did so,
watching tests both with envelopes and without, and assure you she left
no loophole for self-deception. There was plenty of light to see by, and
some of the most startling successes were produced under my eyes. I will
add that no one could take this matter with more seriousness than my
wife. She is the most honorable person I know, and she has worked on
these experiments with rigid conscientiousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](mrad12.md)
