[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mrad04)  [Next](mrad06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTN5A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mental Radio*, by Upton Sinclair, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### IV

<span class="smallcaps">Two</span> years ago Craig and I heard of a
"psychic," a young foreigner who was astounding physicians of Southern
California, performing feats so completely beyond their understanding
that they were content to watch without trying to understand. We went to
see this young man, and befriended him; he came to our home every day,
and his strange demonstrations became familiar to us. He had the ability
to produce anæsthesia in many parts of his body, and stick hatpins
through his tongue and cheeks without pain; he could go into a deep
trance in which his body became rigid and cold; and I put his head on
one chair and his heels on another, and stood in the middle, as if he
were a two-inch plank. We have a motion picture film, showing a
150-pound rock being broken with a sledge-hammer on his abdomen while he
lay in this trance. The vital faculties were so far suspended in this
trance that he could be shut up in an airtight coffin and buried
underground for several hours; nor was there any hocus-pocus

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

about this—I know physicians who got the coffins and arranged for the
tests and watched every detail; in Ventura, California, it was done in a
ball park, and a game was played over the grave.

In our home he gave what appeared to be a demonstration of levitation
without contact. I do not say that it really *was* levitation; I merely
say that our friends who witnessed it—physicians, scientists, writers
and their wives, fourteen persons in all—were unable even to suggest a
normal method by which the event could have happened. There was no one
present who could have been a confederate, and the psychic had been
searched for apparatus; it was in our home, where he had no opportunity
whatever for preparation. His wrists and ankles were firmly held by
persons whom I know well; and there was sufficient light in the room so
that I could see the outline of his figure, slumped in a chair. Under
these circumstances a 34-pound table rose four feet into the air and
moved slowly a distance of eight feet over my head.

We saw this; our friends saw it; yet, in my mind, and likewise in
theirs, the worm of doubt would always creep in. There are so many ways
to fool people; so many conjuring tricks—think of Houdini, for example!
I was unwilling to

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

publish what I had seen; yet, also, I was unwilling not to publish
it—for think of the possible importance of faculties such as this,
locked up in our minds! Here was my wife, ill, suffering pain; and these
faculties might perhaps be used in healing. If by concentration and
autosuggestion it was possible for the mind to control the body, and put
a veto upon even a few of its disorders, certainly it was worth while
for us to prove the fact. I could not escape the moral obligation to
probe these matters.

This "psychic" claimed also to possess and demonstrate the power of
telepathy, or mind-reading. He would go out of the room while one of as
selected mentally some object in the room, not revealing the choice to
any one else. The "psychic" would then come back, and tell us to stand
behind him and concentrate our thoughts upon that object, and follow
close behind him, thinking of it. He would wander about the room for a
while, and in the end pick up the object, and do with it whatever we
mentally "willed" him to do.

We saw him make this test not less than a hundred times, in California,
New York, and Boston; he succeeded with it more than half the time.
There was no contact, no word spoken,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

nothing that we could imagine as giving him a clue. Did we unconsciously
make in our throats some faint pronunciation of words, and did the young
man have a super-acuity of hearing? Again, you see, the worm of doubt,
and we never could quite decide what we really believed about this
performance. After puzzling over it for a year or more, my wife said:
"There is only one way to be certain. I am going to learn to do these
things *myself!*"

This young man, whom I will call Jan, was a peculiar person. Sometimes
he would be open and frank, and again he would be mysterious and
secretive. At one time he would agree to teach us all he knew, and again
he would hold on to his arts, which he had had to go all the way to
India to get. Was it that he considered these forces too dangerous for
amateurs to play with? Or was it merely that he was considering his
means of livelihood?

Jan was a hypnotist; and my wife had come to realize that all illness is
more or less amenable to suggestion. She had had the idea of being
hypnotized and given curative suggestions; but she did not know enough
about this stranger, and was unwilling to trust him. After she got to
know him better, her purposes changed. Here was a fund of knowledge
which she craved, and

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

she put her woman's wits to work to get it. She told him to go ahead and
hypnotize her—and explained to me her purpose of trying to turn the
tables on him. Jan fixed his eyes upon hers in the hypnotic stare, and
made his magnetic passes; at the same time his patient stared back, and
I sat and watched the strange duel of personalities.

An essential part of Jan's technique, as he had explained it, was in
outstaring the patient and never blinking his eyes. Now suddenly he
blinked; then he closed his eyes and kept them closed. "Do your eyes
hurt?" asked his patient, in pretended innocence. "No," he replied. "Are
you tired?" she asked. "No, thank you," said he. "What was I thinking?"
she asked. "To hypnotize me," he replied, sleepily. But Craig wanted
further proof, so she closed her eyes and willed that Jan should get up
and go to the telephone. "Shall I go on treating you?" he asked. "Yes,"
said she. He hesitated a moment, then said, "Excuse me, I have to
telephone to a friend!"

I am telling about these matters in the order of time, as they came to
us. I am sorry that these stories of Jan come first, because they are
the strangest, and the least capable of proof. In the hope of taking
part of the onus from our

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

shoulders, let me quote from a book by Charles Richet, a member of the
Institute of Medicine in France, and a leading scientist; he is citing
Pierre Janet, whose name is known wherever in the world the human mind
is studied. The statement reads:

"P. Janet, a most eminent French psychiatrist, and one of the founders
of the famous Salpetriere school of psychology in Paris, and a careful
and sceptical observer, has verified that a patient of his, Leonie B.,
being put into hypnotic sleep by himself, or his brother (from whom
Leonie in her hypnotic sleep was unable to distinguish him), could
recognize *exactly* the substance that he placed in his mouth—sugar,
salt, pepper. One day his brother, J. Janet, in an adjoining room,
scorched his right arm above the wrist. Leonie, who could have known
nothing about it normally, gave signs of real pain, and showed to P.
Janet (who knew nothing of the occurrence), the exact place of the
burn."

Or let me cite the late Professor Quackenbos, of Columbia University,
who wrote many books on hypnotism as a therapeutic agency, and tells of
numerous cases of the same kind. He himself would sometimes go
involuntarily into hypnotic sleep with his patient, and so, sometimes,
would the nurse. Frequently between the hypnotist

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

and the subject comes what is called *rapport*, whereby each knows what
is in the other's mind, and suggestions are taken without their being
spoken. You may believe this, or refuse to believe it—that is your
privilege. All I want to do is to make clear that my wife is claiming no
special achievement, but merely repeating the standard experiences of
the textbooks on this subject.

This *rapport* between Craig and her protégé was developed to such an
extent that she could tell him what was in his mind, and what he had
been doing; she told him many stories about himself, where he had been
and what he had done at a certain hour. This was embarrassing to a young
man who perhaps did not care to have his life so closely overseen; also,
possibly, he was wounded in his *amour propre*, that a mere amateur—and
a woman at that—should be coming into possession of his secret arts.

The trick depends upon a process of intense concentration, which will
later be described in detail. After this concentration, Craig would give
to her subconscious mind the suggestion, or command, that it should
bring to her consciousness a vision of what Jan was doing. This giving
an order to the subconscious mind is much the same sort of thing that
you do when you seek

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

to remember a name; whether you realize it or not, you order your
subconscious mind to get that bit of information and bring it to you.
Whatever came to Craig, she would write it out, and when next she met
Jan, she would use her woman's wits to verify it without Jan's knowing
what was happening. At times it would be very amusing—when he would find
himself accused of some youthful misdemeanor which his preceptress was
not supposed to know about. In his efforts to defend himself, he would
fail entirely to realize the telepathic aspects of the matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](mrad06)
