[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Parapsychology](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mrad07)  [Next](mrad09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTN5A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mental Radio*, by Upton Sinclair, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

### VII

<span class="smallcaps">I come</span> now to a less fantastic and more
convincing series of experiments; those made with the husband of my
wife's younger sister, Robert L. Irwin. Eight years ago the doctors gave
Bob only a few months to live, on account of tuberculosis. Needless to
say, he has much time on his hands, waiting for the doctors'
clairvoyance to be verified. He proved to be a good "subject"—the best
of all in the tests with Jan. One day in our home, a series of five
tests were made, with Bob holding an object in mind, while sitting
several feet away from Jan. The latter found the object, and made the
correct disposition of it, as willed by Bob, in four out of the five
trials. This included such unlikely things as picking up a striped
blanket and wrapping it about my shoulders.

Bob and Craig made the arrangement that at a certain hour each day, Bob,
in his home in Pasadena, was to take pencil and paper and make a drawing
of an object, and sit and concentrate his mind upon that drawing. At the

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

same hour Craig, in our home in Long Beach, forty miles away, was to go
into her state of "concentration," and give orders to her subconscious
mind to find out what was in Bob's mind. The drawings were to be dated,
and filed, and when the two of them met, they would compare the results,
in the presence of myself and Bob's wife. If there should turn out to be
a correspondence between the drawings, greater than could be attributed
to chance, it would be evidence of telepathy, as good as any that could
be imagined or desired.

The results were such as to make me glad that it was another person than
myself, so as to afford a disinterested witness to these matters, so
difficult of belief. I repeat that Bob is a young American business man,
priding himself on having no "crank" ideas; he has had a Socialist
brother-in-law for ten years or more without being in the slightest
degree affected in manners, morals, or convictions. Here is his first
drawing, done on a half sheet of green paper. The word "CHAIR"
underneath, and the date, were written by Bob, while the words "drawn by
Bob Irwin" were added for purposes of record by Craig ([fig.
16](#img_fig016).md):

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span id="img_fig016"></span> ![Fig. 16](img/fig016.jpg.md)

And now for Craig's results. I give her report verbatim, with the two
drawings which are part of her text:

"At 10 o'clock or a little before, while sewing (without effort) I saw
Bob take something from black sideboard—think it was the glass
candlestick. At 11:15 (I concentrate now) I saw Bob sitting at dining
room table—a dish or some small object in front of him (on N. E. corner
table). I try to see the object on table—see white something at last. I
can't decide what it is so I concentrate on seeing his drawing on a
green paper as it is about 11:20 now and I think he has made his
drawing. I try hard to see what

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

he has drawn—try to see a paper with a drawing on it, and see a straight
chair. Am not sure of second drawing. It does not seem to be on his
paper. It may his bed-foot. I distinctly see a chair like 1st on his
paper." ([fig. 16a](#img_fig016a).md):

<span id="img_fig016a"></span> ![Fig. 16a](img/fig016a.jpg.md)

When Bob and my wife discussed the above test, she learned that he had
sat at the northeast corner of the table, trying to decide what to draw,
and facing the sideboard on which were silver candlesticks. Later he
went to his bedroom and lay down, gazing through the foot of his bed at
the chair which he had taken as his model for the drawing. The bed has
white bars running vertically, as in my wife's second drawing. The
chair, like Bob's drawing, has the

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

strips of wood supporting the back running crossways, and this feature
is reproduced in Craig's first drawing. Her report goes on to add that
she sees a star and some straight lines, which she draws; they are
horizontal parallel lines, as in the back of the chair. The back of the
chair Bob had looked at had a carved star upon it.

The second attempt was the next day, and Bob drew his watch ([fig.
17](#img_fig017).md). Craig first drew a chair, and then wrote, "But do not
feel it is correct." Then she drew the following ([fig.
17a](#img_fig017).md):

The comment was: "I see this picture. Later I think it is not flower but
wire (metal, shining). The 'petals' are not petals but wire, and should

<span id="img_fig017"></span> ![Fig. 17 Fig. 17a](img/fig017.jpg.md)

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

be *uniform*. This is hasty drawing so not exact as seen. What I mean
is, I try to see Bob's drawing and not what he drew from. So I see no
flower but shape of one on paper. Then decide it is of wire, but this
may be merely because I see drawing, which would have no flower color.
However, I see it shining as if it is metal. Later a glass circle."
Drawings then show an ellipse, and then a drinking glass and a glass
pitcher. It is interesting to note that Bob had in front of him a glass
bowl with gold-fish.

The next day Bob drew a pair of scissors ([fig. 18](#img_fig018).md):

<span id="img_fig018"></span> ![Fig. 18](img/fig018.jpg.md)

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

The drawings of Craig follow without comment ([figs. 18a,
18b](#img_fig018a).md):

<span id="img_fig018a"></span> ![Fig. 18a Fig. 18b](img/fig018a.jpg.md)

Three days later Bob drew the table fork, which has already been
reproduced ([fig. 1](mrad03.htm#img_fig001).md), and Craig made the report
which has been given in facsimile ([fig. 1a](mrad03.htm#img_fig001a).md):
"See a table fork. Nothing else."

One more test between Bob and Craig, the most sensational of all. It is
quite a story, and I have to ask your pardon for the medical details
involved. So much vital knowledge hangs upon these tests that I have
asked my brother-in-law to forget his personal feelings. The reader will
please consider himself a medical student or hospital nurse for the
moment.

The test occurred July 11, 1928. My wife made her drawing, and then told
me about the

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

matter at once. Also she wrote out all the details and the record is now
before me. She saw a feather, then a flower spray, and then she heard a
scream. Her first thought in case of illness or danger is her aged
parents, and she took it for her mother's voice, and this so excited her
that she lost interest in the experiment. But soon she concentrated
again, and drew a series of concentric circles, with a heavy black spot
in the center. Then she saw another and much larger spot, and this began
to spread and cover the sheet of paper. At the same time came a feeling
of intense depression, and Craig decided that the black spot was blood,
and that Bob had had a hemorrhage. Here is her drawing ([fig.
19a](#img_fig019).md)

<span id="img_fig019"></span> ![Fig. 19a](img/fig019.jpg.md)

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

Two or three days later Bob's wife drove him to our home, and in the
presence of all four of us he produced the drawing he had made. He had
taken a compass and drawn a large circle; making, of course, a hole in
the center of the paper. "Is that all you thought of during the time?"
asked my wife. "No," said Bob, "but I'd hate to have you get the rest of
it." "What was it?" "Well, I discovered that I had a hemorrhoid, and
couldn't put my mind on anything else but the thought, 'My God, my
lungs—my kidneys—and now this!'"

A hemorrhoid is, of course, apt to be accompanied by a hemorrhage; and
it seems clear that my wife got the mood of depression of her
brother-in-law, his thoughts of blood and bodily breakdown, as well as
the circle and the hole in the paper. There is another detail which does
not appear in the written record, but is fixed in my memory. My wife
said: "I wanted to draw a little hill." Upon hearing that, I called up a
physician friend who is interested in these tests, and asked him what a
drawing of a hemorrhoid would look like, and he agreed that "a little
hill' was about as near as one could come. I hope you will note that
this particular drawing test is supported by the testimony of four
different persons,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

my wife, her sister, the sister's husband, and myself. I do not see how
there could possibly be more conclusive evidence of telepathic
influence—unless you suspect all four of us of a series of stupid and
senseless falsehoods. Let me repeat that Bob and his wife have read this
manuscript and certified to its correctness so far as concerns them. The
comment written by my wife reads: "All this dark like a stain—feel it is
blood; that Bob is ill—more than usual."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](mrad09.md)
