<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kn003)  [Next](kn005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A.W. Budge, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

### INTRODUCTION

##### I.—<span class="smallcaps">The Manuscripts of the Kebra Nagast and their Arrival in Europe. The Labours of Bruce, Dillmann, Prætorius, Wright, Zotenberg, And Bezold. King John's Letter to Lord Granville. Date of Compilation of the Kebra Nagast. The Ethiopian Work Based on Coptic and Arabic Sources, etc.</span>

THE <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span>, or the Book of the
Glory of the Kings \[of Ethiopia\], has been held in the highest esteem
and honour throughout the length and breadth of Abyssinia for a thousand
years at least, and even to-day it is believed by every educated man in
that country to contain the true history of the origin of the Solomonic
line of kings in Ethiopia, and is regarded as the final authority on the
history of the conversion of the Ethiopians from the worship of the sun,
moon, and stars to that of the Lord God of Israel.

The existence of the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> appears
to have been unknown in Europe until the second quarter of the sixteenth
century, when scholars began to take an interest in the country of
"Prester John" through the writings of Francisco Alvarez, chaplain to
the Embassy which Emanuel, King of Portugal, sent to David, King of
Ethiopia, under the leadership of Don Roderigo de Lima (1520–1527). In
the collection of documents concerning this Embassy, Alvarez included an
account of the King of Ethiopia, and of the manners and customs of his
subjects, and a description in Portuguese of the habits of the
Ethiopians (alcuni costumi di esso Serenissimo David, e del suo paese e
genti, tradotta di lingua ethiopica in Portogalese); <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) and in his *Ho Preste Joam das*

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Indias* (Coimbra,
1540), and his *Historia de las cosas d’Etiopia* (Anvers 1557, Saragosse
1561 and Toledo 1588) this account was greatly amplified. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)

In the first quarter of the sixteenth century, P. N. Godinho published
some traditions about King Solomon and his son Mĕnyĕlĕk or Mĕnyĕlîk,
derived from the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span>, <span
id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4) and further information on the subject was
included by the Jesuit priest Manoel Almeida (1580–1646) in his
*Historia ger̃al de Ethiopia*, which does not appear to have been
published in its entirety. Manoel Almeida was sent out as a missionary
to Ethiopia, and had abundant means of learning about the <span
class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> at first hand, and his manuscript
*Historia* is a valuable work. His brother, Apollinare, also went out to
the country as a missionary, and was, with his two companions, stoned to
death in Tigré.

Still fuller information about the contents of the <span
class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> was supplied by F. Balthazar
Tellez (1595–1675), the author of the *Historia general de Ethiopia Alta
ou Preste Joâa*, Coimbra, 1660, folio. The sources of his work were the
histories of Manoel Almeida, Alfonzo Mendez, Jeronino Lobo, and Father
Pays. The *Historia* of Tellez was well known to Job Ludolf, and he
refers to it several times in his *Historia Æthiopica*, which was
published at Frankfort in 1681, but it is pretty certain that he had no
first-hand knowledge of the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span>
as a whole. Though he regarded much of its contents as fabulous, he was
prepared to accept the statement of Tellez as to the great reputation
and popularity which the book enjoyed in Abyssinia.

Little, apparently, was heard in Europe about the <span
class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> until the close of the eighteenth
century

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

when James Bruce of Kinnaird (1730–1794), the famous African traveller,
published an account of his travels in search of the sources of the
Nile. When he was leaving Gondar, Râs Michael, the all-powerful Wazîr of
King Takla Haymânôt, gave him several most valuable Ethiopic
manuscripts, and among them was a copy of the <span
class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> to which he attached great
importance. During the years that Bruce lived in Abyssinia he learned
how highly this work was esteemed among all classes of Abyssinians, and
in the third edition of his *Travels* <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)
(vol. iii, pp. 411–416) there appeared a description of its contents,
the first to be published in any European language. Not content with
this manuscript Bruce brought away with him a copy of the <span
class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> which he had made for himself, and
in due course he gave both manuscripts to the Bodleian Library, where
they are known as "Bruce 93" and "Bruce 87" respectively. The former,
which is the "Liber Axumea" of Bruce's *Travels*, was described at great
length by Dillmann, <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6) who to his brief
description of the latter added a transcript of its important
colophon. <span id="fr_7"></span>[3](#fn_7) Thanks to Dillmann, who
printed the headings of all the chapters of the *Fĕtha* *Nagasti* in the
original Ethiopic, there was no longer any doubt about the exact nature
and contents of the work, though there was nothing in it to show exactly
when and by whom the work was compiled.

In 1870 (?) Francis Praetorius published, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[4](#fn_8) with a Latin translation, the Ethiopic text
of Chapters xix to xxxii

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

of the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> edited from the
manuscript at Berlin (Orient. 395), which Lepsius acquired from Domingo
Lorda, and sent to the Königliche Bibliothek in 1843. To the Berlin text
he added the variant readings supplied from the MSS. Orient. 818 and 819
in the British Museum by Professor W. Wright of Cambridge. In 1877
Wright published a full description of the MS. of the <span
class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> in the Maḳdalâ Collection in the
British Museum. The work of Praetorius made known for the first time the
exact form of the Ethiopian legend that makes the King of Ethiopia to be
a descendant of Solomon, King of Israel, by Mâkĕdâ, the Queen of ’Azêb,
who is better known as the "Queen of Sheba."

In August, 1868, the great collection of Ethiopic manuscripts, which the
British Army brought away from Maḳdalâ after the defeat and suicide of
King Theodore, was brought to the British Museum, and among them were
two fine copies of the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span>.
Later these were numbered Oriental 818 and Oriental 819 respectively,
and were described very fully and carefully by Wright in his *Catalogue
of the Ethiopic MSS. in the British Museum*, London, 1877, <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) No. cccxci, p. 297, and in the *Zeitschrift
der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft*, Bd. xxiv, pp. 614–615. It
was the fate of Oriental 819, a fine manuscript which was written in the
reign of ’Îyâsû I, A.D. 1682–1706, to return to Abyssinia, and this came
about in the following manner. On 10 Aug., 1872, Prince Kasa, who was
subsequently crowned as King John IV, wrote to Earl Granville thus: "And
now again I have another thing to explain to you: that there was a
Picture called Qurata Rezoo, which is a Picture of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ,

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

and was found with many books at Magdala by the English. This Picture
King Theodore took from Gondar to Magdala, and it is now in England; all
round the Picture is gold, and the midst of it coloured.

"Again there is a book called Kivera Negust (*i.e.* <span
class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span>), which contains the Law of the
whole of Ethiopia, and the names of the Shums (*i.e.* Chiefs), Churches,
and Provinces are in this book. I pray you will find out who has got
this book, and send it to me, for in my Country my people will not obey
my orders without it."

When a copy of this letter was sent to the British Museum the Trustees
decided to grant King John's request, and the manuscript was restored to
him on 14 December, 1872. King John's letter proves that very great
importance was attached to the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra
Nagast</span> by the Ethiopian peoples, even in the second half of the
nineteenth century. M. Hugues Le Roux, a French envoy from the President
of the French Republic to Menyelek II, King of Ethiopia, went to Addis
Alem where the king was staying, in order to see this manuscript and to
obtain his permission to translate it into French. Having made his
request to Menyelek II personally the king made a reply, which M. Le
Roux translates thus: Je suis d’avis qu’un peuple ne se défend pas
seulement avec ses armes, mais avec ses livres. Celui dont vous parlez
est la fierté de ce Royaume. Depuis moi, l’Empereur, jusqu’au plus
pauvre soldat qui marche dans les chemins, tous les Éthiopiens seront
heureux que ce livre soit traduit dans la langue française et porté à la
connaissance des amis que nous avons dans le monde. Ainsi l’on verra
clairement quels liens nous unissent avec le peuple de Dieu, quels
trésors ont été confiés à notre garde. On comprendra mieux pourquoi le
secours de Dieu ne nous a jamais manqué contre les ennemis qui nous
attaquaient." The king then gave orders that the

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

manuscript was to be fetched from Addis Abeba, where the monks tried to
keep it on the pretext of copying the text, and in less than a week it
was placed in the hands of M. Le Roux, who could hardly believe his
eyes. Having described the manuscript and noted on the last folio the
words, "This volume was returned to the King of Ethiopia by order of the
Trustees of the British Museum, Dec. 14th, 1872. J. Winter Jones,
Principal Librarian," M. Le Roux says: Il n’y avait plus de doute
possible: le livre que je tenais dans mes mains était bien cette version
de l’histoire de la Reine de Saba et de Salomon, que Négus et Prêtres
d’Éthiopie considèrent comme le plus authentique de toutes celles qui
circulent dans les bibliothèques européennes et dans les monastères
abyssins. C’était le livre que Théodoros avait caché sous son oreiller,
la nuit où il se suicida, celui que les soldats anglais avaient emporté
à Londres, qu’un ambassadeur rendit à l’Empereur Jean, que ce même Jean
feuilleta dans sa tente, le matin du jour où il tomba sous les
cimeterres des Mandistes, celui que les moines avaient dérobé. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) With the help of a friend M. Le Roux
translated several of the Chapters of the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra
Nagast</span>, and in due course published his translation. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11)

The catalogues of the Ethiopic MSS. in Oxford, London and Paris, which
had been published by Dillmann, Wright and Zotenberg, supplied a good
deal of information about the contents of the <span
class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> in general, but scholars felt that
it was impossible to judge of the literary and historical value of the
work by transcription and translations of the headings of the chapters
only. In 1882 under the auspices of the Bavarian Government, Dr. C.
Bezold undertook to prepare an

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

edition of the Ethiopic text edited from the best MSS., with a German
translation, which the Royal Bavarian Academy made arrangements to
publish. After much unavoidable delay this work appeared in 1909, and is
entitled *Kebra Nagast*. *Die Herrlichkeit der Könige* (*Abhandlungen
der Königlich Bayerischen Akademie, Band Abth.* 1, Munich, 1909 \[Band
LXXVII of the *Denkschriften*\]. The text is prefaced by a learned
introduction, which was greatly appreciated by Orientalists to whom the
edition was specially addressed. The chief authority for the Ethiopic
text in Bezold's edition is the now famous manuscript which was sent as
a gift to Louis Philippe by Sâhla (or Sâhlû) Dĕngĕl, King of Ethiopia,
who died early in 1855. According to Zotenberg (*Catalogue des
manuscrits Éthiopiens*, p. 6) this manuscript must belong to the
thirteenth century; if this be so it is probably the oldest Ethiopic
manuscript in existence. Though there seems to be no really good reason
for assigning this very early date to the manuscript, there can be no
doubt as to its being the oldest known Codex of the <span
class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span>, and therefore Bezold was fully
justified in making its text the base of his edition of that work. I
have collated the greater part of the British Museum Codex, Oriental
818, with his printed text, and though the variants are numerous they
are not of great importance, in fact, as is the case in several other
Codices of the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span>, they are due
chiefly to the haste or carelessness or fatigue of the scribe. As
Bezold's text represents the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span>
in the form that the Ethiopian priests and scribes have considered
authoritative, I have made the English translation which is printed in
the following pages from it.

Unfortunately, none of the Codices of the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra
Nagast</span> gives us any definite information about the compiler of
the work—for it certainly is a compilation—or the time when he wrote, or
the circumstances under

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

which it was compiled. Dillmann, the first European scholar who had read
the whole book in the original Ethiopic, contented himself with saying
in 1848, "de vero compositionis tempore nihil liquet" (*Catalogue*, p.
72), but later he thought it might be as old as the fourteenth century.
Zotenberg (*Catalogue*, p. 222) was inclined to think that "it was
composed soon after the restoration of the so-called Solomonic line of
kings," that is to say, soon after the throne of Ethiopia was occupied
by Tasfâ ’Îyasûs,or Yĕkûnô ’Amlâk, who reigned from AṂ. 6762–77, *i.e.*
A.D. 1270–1285. A Colophon (see pp. [228](kn125.htm#page_228),
[229](kn126.htm#page_229)), which is found in several of the Codices of
the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> in Oxford, London and
Paris, states that the Ethiopic text was translated from the Arabic
version, which, in turn, was translated from the Coptic. The Arabic
translation was, it continues, made by ’Abu ’l-‘Izz and ’Abu ’-Faraj, in
the "year of mercy" 409, during the reign of Gabra Masḳal (‘Amda Sĕyôn
I), *i.e.* between A.D. 1314 and 1344, when George was Patriarch of
Alexandria. These statements are clear enough and definite enough, yet
Dillmann did not believe them, but thought that the whole Colophon was
the result of the imagination of some idle scribe (ab otioso quodam
librario inventa). The statements about the Ethiopic version being made
from the Coptic through the Arabic, he treated as obvious fictions
(plane fictitia esse), and he condemned the phrasing of the Colophon
because he considered its literary style inferior to that used in the
narrative of the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> itself
(dictio hujus subscriptionis pessima est, et ab oratione eleganti libri
ipsius quam maxime differt). Zotenberg (*Catalogue*, p. 223, col. 1) a
very competent scholar, saw no reason for doubting the truth of the
statements in the Colophon generally, but thought it possible that an
Arab author might have supplied the fundamental facts of the narrative,
and that the author

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

or authors of the Ethiopic version stated that the original source of
their work was a Coptic archetype in order to give it an authority and
importance which it would not otherwise possess. On the other hand,
Wright merely regarded the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span>
as an "apocryphal work," and judging from the list of kings at the end
of the work in Oriental 818, fol. 46n, which ends with Yĕkwênô ’Amlâk,
who died in 1344, concluded that it was a product of the fourteenth
century (*Catalogue*, p. 301, col. 2).

A careful study of the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span>, made
whilst translating the work into English, has convinced me that the
opening statements in the Colophon are substantially correct, and that
it is quite possible that in its original form the Arabic version of the
book was translated from Coptic MSS. belonging to the Patriarchal
Library at Alexandria, and copies of this Arabic translation, probably
enlarged and greatly supplemented by the scribes in the various
monasteries of Egypt, would soon find their way into Ethiopia or
Abyssinia, via the Blue Nile. The principal theme of the <span
class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span>, *i.e.* the descent of the Kings
of Ethiopia from Solomon, King of Israel, and the "Queen of the South,"
or the "Queen of Sheba," was certainly well known in Ethiopia for
centuries before the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> was
compiled, but the general treatment of it in this work was undoubtedly
greatly influenced by supplementary legends and additions, which in
their simplest forms seem to me to have been derived from Coptic and
even Syrian writers.

It is well known that the Solomonic line of kings continued to rule over
Ethiopia until that somewhat mythical woman Esther, or Judith as some
call her, succeeded in dethroning Delna’ad and placing on the throne
Marâ Takla Hâymânôt, the first of the eleven Zâguê kings, who
dispossessed the Solomonic kings for three hundred

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

and fifty-four years (A.D. 914–1268) and reigned at Aksûm. Written
accounts of the descent of the kings of Ethiopia from Solomon must have
existed in Ethiopia before the close of the ninth century A.D. and these
were, no doubt, drawn up in Ethiopic and in Arabic. During the
persecution of the Christians in Egypt and Ethiopia by the Muḥammadans
in the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth centuries, many churches and their
libraries of manuscripts perished. We may, however, be sure that the
Solomonic kings, who settled in the province of Shoa during the period
of the Zâguê domination, managed to preserve chronological lists and
other historical documents that contained the Annals of their
predecessors.

The second part of the Colophon mentions Abu ’l-‘Izz and Abu ’l-Faraj as
being concerned with translating the book into Arabic, and makes one
Isaac (1), who was apparently the Ethiopian translator, ask why they did
not translate it into Ethiopic. In answer to this question he says that
the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> appeared during the
period of the Zâguê rule, when it is obvious that the publication of any
work that supported the claims of the Solomonic kings would meet with a
very unfavourable reception, and cause the death of its editors and
translators. Therefore it is fairly certain that the <span
class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> existed in Arabic in some form
during the three and a half centuries of the Zâguê rule, and that no
attempt was made to multiply copies of it in Ethiopic until the
restoration of the line of Solomonic kings in the days of Yĕkûnô ’Amlâk
(A.D. 1270–1285). The Ethiopic work as we know it now is probably in
much the same state as it was in the days of Gabra Masḳal (‘Amda Ṣĕyôn)
in the first half of the fourteenth century of our era. Of Isaac we
unfortunately know nothing, but there seem to be no good grounds for
attributing the complete authorship of the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra
Nagast</span>

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

to him. Yet he was evidently not merely a scribe or copyist, and when he
speaks of the greatness of the toil which he undertook for the sake of
the glory of the heavenly Zion, and Ethiopia and her king, he seems to
suggest that he was the general redactor or editor who directed the work
of his devoted companions Yamharana-’ab, Ḥezba-Krestôs, Andrew, Philip,
and Maḥârî-’ab.

Now, however important the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span>
may have been considered by the Ethiopians in bygone centuries, and
notwithstanding the almost superstitious awe with which the book is
still regarded in Abyssinia, we are hardly justified in accepting it as
a connected historical document. But it is undoubtedly a very fine work,
and many sections of it merit careful consideration and study. For many
of the statements in it there are historical foundations, and the
greater part of the narrative is based upon legends and sayings and
traditions, many of which are exceedingly ancient. The legends and
traditions are derived from many sources, and can be traced to the Old
Testament and Chaldean Targûms, to Syriac works like the "Book of the
Bee," to Coptic lives of saints, to ancient Ḳur’ânic stories and
commentaries, to apocryphal books like the "Book of Adam and Eve," the
"Book of Enoch," "Kûfâlê," the "Instructions of St. Peter to his
disciple Clement" (*i.e.* the Ḳalêmĕnṭôs), the "Life of Ḥannâ, the
Mother of the Virgin Mary," the "Book of the Pearl," and the "Ascension
of Isaiah," etc. Side by side with the extracts from these works we have
long sections in which works attributed to Gregory Thaumaturgus, to
Damathius (?), Patriarch of Constantinople, and to Cyril are quoted at
great length.

The object of the author, or compiler, and the later editors of the
<span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> (no matter what its original
form may have been), was to glorify Ethiopia by narrating

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

the history of the coming of the "spiritual and heavenly Zion," the
Tabernacle of the Law of the God of Israel, of her own free will from
Jerusalem to Ethiopia, and to make it quite clear that the King of
Ethiopia was descended from Solomon, the son of David, King of Israel,
and through him from Abraham and the early Patriarchs. But Christ also
was descended from Solomon and the early Patriarchs, and he was the Son
of God, so the King of Ethiopia being a kinsman of Christ was also a son
of God, and he was therefore both God and king to his people. The <span
class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> was intended to make the people of
Ethiopia believe that their country was specially chosen by God to be
the new home of the spiritual and heavenly Zion, of which His chosen
people the Jews had become unworthy. This Zion existed originally in an
immaterial form in heaven, where it was the habitation of God. Moses
made, under Divine directions, a copy of it in wood and gold, and placed
in it the Two Tables of the Law, the pot of manna, the rod of Aaron; and
the Shechinah dwelt on it and in it. This material copy was called
"Zion, the Tabernacle of the Law of God." When Solomon finished building
his Temple Zion was established therein in the Holy of Holies, and from
it God made known His commands when He visited the Temple. It was at all
times held to be the visible emblem of God Almighty and the material
duplicate of the immaterial Zion in heaven.

The fame of the wisdom of Solomon reached the ends of the earth, chiefly
because he traded with merchants from the sea coast and from the
countries to the south of Palestine on each side of the Red Sea. These
merchants brought the precious woods and stones, and the scents, and the
spices, and the rich stuffs and other objects with which he decorated
the Temple and his own palace, and when their caravans returned home
their servants described to eager listeners the great

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

works that the King of Israel was carrying out in Jerusalem. Among the
masters, or leaders, of these caravans was one 'Tâmrîn, who managed the
business affairs of a "Queen of the South," whom Arab writers call
"Balḳîs," and Ethiopian writers "Mâkĕdâ"; but neither of these names is
ancient, and it is very doubtful if either represents in any way the
true name of the southern queen. It is doubtful also if she was an
Ethiopian, and it is far more probable that her home was Shĕbhâ, or
Saba, or Sheba, in the south-west of Arabia. As she was a worshipper of
the sun she was probably a princess among the Sabaeans. On the other
hand, her ancestors may have been merely settlers in Arabia, and some of
them of Ethiopian origin. The <span class="smallcaps">Kebra
Nagast</span> says that she was a very beautiful, bright, and
intelligent woman, but tells us nothing about her family. A manuscript
at Oxford (see Dillmann, *Catalogue Bibl. Bodl.*, p. 26), says that five
kings reigned in Ethiopia before Mâkĕdâ, viz. Arâwî 400 years, Angâbô
200 years, Giedur 100 years, Siebadô 50 years, and Kawnâsyâ 1 year. If
these kings were indeed her ancestors she was probably a native of some
country on the western shore of the Red Sea. Be this as it may, she must
have been a woman of great enterprise and intelligence, for having heard
what Tâmrîn, the captain of her caravans, had told her about Solomon's
wisdom, she determined to go to Jerusalem and to put to him a series of
difficult questions that were puzzling her.

When Mâkĕdâ arrived in Jerusalem, she lodged in the splendid quarters
which Solomon prepared for her, and she had frequent opportunities of
conversing with the King. The more she saw him the more she was
impressed with the handsomeness of his person, and with his piety and
wisdom, and with the eloquence of his speech, which he uttered in a low,
musical and sympathetic voice. She spent several months in Jerusalem

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

as the King's guest, and one night after a great and splendid banquet
which Solomon gave to the notables of his kingdom, in her honour, he
took her to wife. When Mâkĕdâ knew that she was with child, she bade
farewell to Solomon, and having received from him a ring as a token, she
returned to her own country, where her son Mĕnyĕlĕk, or Mĕnĕlîk, was
born. In Ethiopic literature this son is often called Walda-Tabbîb,
*i.e.* "son of the wise man" (Solomon), or ’Êbna Ḥakim, or Bayna-Leḥkĕm,
*i.e.* Ibn al-Ḥakîm, or "the son of the wise man." When the boy reached
early manhood he pressed Mâkĕdâ to allow him to go to see his father
Solomon in Jerusalem, and his importunity was so great that at length
she gave him the ring which Solomon had given her, and sent him thither
under the care of Tâmrîn. On his arrival at Gâzâ the people in the city
and everywhere in the district recognized his striking likeness to
Solomon, and almost royal honours were paid to him by them. The same
thing happened in Jerusalem, and when the officials of Solomon's palace
were leading him to the presence chamber all the household knew without
telling that a son was being taken in to his father. Father and son fell
into each other's arms when they met, and the son had no need to prove
his identity by producing the ring which his father had given to his
beloved Mâkĕdâ, for Solomon proclaimed straightway the young man's
parentage, and made him to occupy the royal throne with him, after he
had arrayed him in royal apparel.

Solomon spared no pains in providing both instruction and amusement for
Bayna-Lĕhkĕm (Bin ’l-ḥakîm) whilst he was in Jerusalem, for he hoped to
keep him with him; but after a few months the young man was eager to get
back to his mother and to his own country, and Tâmrîn, the leader of
Mâkĕdâ's caravans, wanted to be gone. Bayna-Lĕhkĕm, or Menyelek, as we
may

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

now call him, saw that Rehoboam must succeed Solomon on the throne of
Israel, and had no wish to occupy the subordinate position of a second
son in Jerusalem, and he therefore pressed Solomon to give him leave to
depart. When the King had arranged that the eldest sons of his nobles
should accompany Menyelek on his return to his mother's capital, Dabra
Mâkĕdâ, and had arranged with Menyelek for the establishment of a
duplicate Jewish kingdom in Ethiopia, he permitted him to depart. When
Mâkĕdâ was in Jerusalem she learned that the Tabernacle Zion in the
Temple of Jerusalem was the abode of the God of Israel, and the place
where God Almighty was pleased to dwell, and in her letter to Solomon
she begged him to send her, as a holy talisman, a portion of the fringe
of the covering of the Tabernacle. Solomon told Menyelek that he would
grant Mâkĕdâ's request, but this satisfied neither Menyelek nor his
nobles, and, to speak briefly, Menyelek and Taman and the eldest sons of
the Jewish notables who were destined to help Menyelek to found his
kingdom in Ethiopia, entered into a conspiracy together to steal the
Tabernacle Zion and to carry it off to Ethiopia. Their object was to
keep the God of Israel with them, and this they expected to be able to
effect by stealing the Tabernacle made of gold and wood (according to
the pattern of the original Spirit-Tabernacle in heaven) which contained
the Two Tables of the Law, the pot of manna, Aaron's rod, etc. One of
the conspirators who had access to the chamber in which the Tabernacle
Zion rested, removed it from under its curtain, and substituted a
construction in wood of exactly the same size and shape, which he had
caused to be made for the purpose. The theft was not discovered until
Menyelek, and Tâmrîn, and their company of young Jews and Ethiopians
were well on their road to the Red Sea, and though Solomon sent out
swift horsemen to overtake

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

them and cut them off, and himself followed with all the speed possible,
the thieves made good their escape, and the King of Israel returned to
Jerusalem in great grief. In due course Menyelek reached his mother's
capital, and he and the Tabernacle Zion were received with frantic
rejoicings, and Mâkĕdâ having abdicated in favour of her son, Menyelek
established in Ethiopia a kingdom modelled on that of Israel, and
introduced into his country the Laws of God and the admonitions of Moses
and the social rules and regulations with which the name of the great
Lawgiver was associated in those days.

The <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> tells us nothing about
Menyelek after his coronation, except that he carried on one or two
campaigns against the enemies of his country, and the book is silent in
respect of Queen Mâkĕdâ's history after her voluntary abdication. The
author seems to expect his readers to assume that Ethiopia was ruled
over by descendants of Solomon and Queen Mâkĕdâ from the tenth century
before Christ to about the tenth century A.D., *i.e.* for about two
thousand years, and that the religion, laws, social customs, etc., of
the Ethiopians were substantially those of the Hebrews in Palestine
under the kings of Israel. In connection with this assumption reference
may be made here briefly to a series of chapters which now form part of
the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span>, in which the author
endeavours to prove that the kings of the Moabites, Philistines,
Egyptians, Persians, Babylonians and the Byzantines, are of Semitic
origin. The fantastic legends which he invented or reproduced contain
much falsified history and bad philology, but it would be interesting to
know their source and their author; these chapters seem to suggest that
he was a Semite, probably a Jew.

In another group of chapters, which can hardly have formed a part of the
oldest version of the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span>,

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

the author summarizes the prophecies in the Old Testament that concern
the Coming of the Messiah, and applies them to Jesus Christ with very
considerable skill. And he devotes much space to the Virgin Mary, and
quotes numerous passages from the Old Testament, with the view of
identifying her symbolically with the Tabernacle of the Covenant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xxiii:1](kn004.htm#fr_2) Printed about 1533.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xxiv:1](kn004.htm#fr_3) A French translation
from the Spanish version of this work appeared in Paris in 1558, folio.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xxiv:2](kn004.htm#fr_4) *De Abassinorum rebus
deque Æthiopiae Patriarchis*, Libri I–III, Leyden, 1615, 8vo, p. 35.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xxv:1](kn004.htm#fr_5) *Travels to Discover the
Source of the Nile in the years* 1768–1773, *containing a Journey
through Egypt, the three Arabias and Ethiopia*. First edition in five
vols., 1790; second edition in six vols., in 1805; 3rd edition in seven
vols., 1813.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xxv:2](kn004.htm#fr_6) *Cat. Codd. MSS.
Bibliothecae Bodleianae*, Oxford, 1848, No. xxvi, p. 68.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xxv:3](kn004.htm#fr_7) *Ibid*., p. 74 (No.
xxvii).

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xxv:4](kn004.htm#fr_8) *Fabula de Regina Sabaea
apud Æthiopes. Dissertatio Inauguralis*. Halle (No date).

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xxvi:1](kn004.htm#fr_9) A description of the
very ancient copy of the <span class="smallcaps">Kebra Nagast</span> in
the Bibliothèque Nationale, which Zotenberg assigned to the thirteenth
century, was published by him in his *Catalogue des MSS. Êthopiens*,
Paris, 1877, No. 5, p. 6.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xxviii:1](kn004.htm#fr_10) *Chez la Reine de
Saba*, Paris, 1914, pp. 110–121.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxviii:2](kn004.htm#fr_11) *Ibid*., pp.
125–227; see also a rendering of the French into English by Mrs. J. Van
Vorst, entitled *Magda, Queen of Sheba*, New York and London, 1007, 8vo.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Translation of the Arabic Version](kn005)

</div>
