<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kn058)  [Next](kn060) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A.W. Budge, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 51. HOW HE SAID UNTO ZADOK THE PRIEST, "GO AND BRING THE COVERING (OR, CLOTHING) WHICH IS UPON IT (*i.e.* ZION)"

And he said unto Zadok the priest, "Go, bring that covering which is
upon Zion, and take thee this covering which is better than that, and
lay it over the two \[cherubs\] which are below it." (Now this covering
was made of threads of the finest gold wirework twisted together and
hammered out into a pattern, and they were not woven like the threads of
purple.) "And the five mice <span id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_74) which
were given to Zion, and the ten <span id="fr_75"></span>[3](#fn_75)
figures of their shame (*i.e.* the emerods) which the nobles of the
Philistines made for their redemption—now on the fringes are figures of
gold that came forth from the land of Ḳâdês, which Moses in Sinai
commanded should be made (or, worked) in the fringe of the apparel of
Aaron his brother—gather \[all these\] together in the covering of Zion
and give \[them\] to my son David. For his mother said in \[her\]
message by Tâmrîn her servant, 'Give us some of the fringe of the
covering of Zion, so that we may worship it, we and those who are in
subjection unto us and all our kingdom.' And now, give it to him, and
say unto him, 'Take \[and\] worship this covering of Zion, for thy
mother sent a message concerning this, and hath said unto thee thyself,
'Give us some of the fringe of its covering, which we can worship, so
that we may not, like the heathen, worship another \[god\].' And Zion,
the Tabernacle of the Law of God, shall be unto thee a guide wheresoever
thou art.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But it must remain
with us perpetually, although we have not paid it all the honour which
is its due; and you, although it be not with you, must honour it, and
revere it according to what is due to it and what is meet. For God said
unto Eli by the mouth of Samuel the Prophet, 'I wished you to remain,
thou and thy father's house, to offer up incense to the Tabernacle of My
Law, and to dwell before Me for ever, but now I have repented. I will
turn My face away from thee because thou hast treated My offerings with
contempt, and hast preferred thy sons to Me. And now, him that honoureth
Me I will honour, and him that esteemeth Me lightly I will esteem
lightly; and I will destroy all thy seed.' <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76) This He said because the Levites had
esteemed Him lightly. And say unto him: Take this covering of Zion, and
this votive gift shall be in the place of it, and place it in thy
sanctuary. And when thou takest an oath and makest another to take an
oath, swear thou and make him to swear by it, so that thou dost not make
mention of the names of other gods of the heathen. And when thou
sacrificest let thy face be towards us, and sacrifice to Jerusalem and
the holy Zion; and when thou prayest let thy face be towards Jerusalem,
and pray towards us."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75:2](kn059.htm#fr_74) 1 Samuel vi, 4.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[75:3](kn059.htm#fr_75) The text of Samuel (vi,
4) gives "five emerods."

<span id="fn_76"></span>[76:1](kn059.htm#fr_76) 1 Samuel ii, 29–34.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 52. How Zadok the Priest Departed](kn060)

</div>
