<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kn109)  [Next](kn111) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A.W. Budge, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

### 102. CONCERNING THE BEGINNING

As David prophesied by the mouth of the Holy Spirit, saying, "With Thee
was the headship on the day of might." <span
id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150) Now what do these words, "day of might"
mean? Is it not the day whereon Christ, the Word of the Father, created
heaven and earth? For Moses saith in the beginning of the Book, "In the
beginning God made the heavens and the earth." <span
id="fr_151"></span>[2](#fn_151) Understand then "In the beginning"
meaneth "in Christ"; the interpretation of "beginning" is Christ. John
the Apostle, the son of Zebedee, saith concerning Christ, "This is the
first (or, beginning) Whom we have heard and seen, Whom we have known,
and Whom our hands have felt." <span id="fr_152"></span>[3](#fn_152) And
we will relate unto you how we have a portion with Him, and ye who
believe our words shall have a portion with us. And Luke the disciple
saith in the Acts of the Apostles, "In the beginning we make speech
concerning everything," <span id="fr_153"></span>[4](#fn_153) and this
that he saith \[sheweth\] that Christ was the redemption of all, and we
believe in Him. And Mark the Evangelist in the beginning of his Book
wrote, saying, "The beginning of the Gospel is Jesus Christ, the Son of
God" <span id="fr_154"></span>[5](#fn_154); and these words mean that
Christ was the glad tidings for the Prophets and the Apostles, and that
we all have participated in His grace. And again John the Evangelist
wrote, saying, "In the beginning was the Word, and that Word was with
God"; and in another place his word showeth \[this\] plainly, and he
saith, "And likewise in the beginning was God the Word." <span
id="fr_155"></span>[6](#fn_155) And now observe that that Word of the
Father is Christ, whereby He made the heavens and the earth and every
created thing. It is He Who created, and without Him nothing that
came came into being,

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

nothing whatsoever: "He spake, and they came into being; He commanded,
and they were created." <span id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_156) And the
third glorious thing, hearken \[to it\]: "Through the breath of His
mouth He created all their host." <span id="fr_157"></span>[2](#fn_157)
This maketh manifest the Holy Spirit, Who is clearly referred to.

And what shall we say? Let us weep for them. Woe be unto the Jews and
unto the pagans (’Aramî) who have wandered from the truth and have
refused to submit to the love of God, with which in His goodness He hath
loved man. For after Adam was rejected through his sin He saved him by
the greatness of His mercy, being crucified on the wood of the Cross,
His hands being pierced with nails. With His palm stretched out in
humility, and His head bowed on one side, for our sakes He, to Whom
suffering was unfitting. suffered in the everlasting majesty of His
Godhead. He died that He might destroy death; He suffered exhaustion
that He might give strength to the wearied being of dust; athirst He
drank vinegar, He was crowned with a crown of thorns; He feared not and
was not ashamed of the contumely and hatred and spitting of the polluted
Jews. He suffered beating, He was buffeted with fists, He was pierced,
He was transfixed with nails, He was reviled and mocked, being God and
the King of Death, and the Bestower of glory, and because of this He
endured patiently all disgrace. Wearied and miserable, they made Him sad
when they rejected Him and hated Him; but strong and glorious, what
could sadden Him when they brought false charges against Him? For He
Himself knew His Godhead, and He knew His glory, and He knew Himself.
And there was none who knew Him, for He was the Creator of everything.
And if they had known Him they would not have crucified the Lord of
praise (or, glory). And He said in His mercy, "Forgive them, Father, for
they

<span id="img_pl26"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate XXVI. How the
Jews crucified our Lord.](tn/pl26.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl26.jpg)  
Plate XXVI. How the Jews crucified our Lord.  
</span>

<span class="small">Plate XXVI. How the Jews crucified our Lord. The
Virgin Mary stands on His right and St. John on His left. Between the
Virgin and the Cross stands Longinus, the soldier who pierced our Lord's
side. The Crusaders are said to have found the body of Longinus in the
church of St. Peter at Antioch in the XIth Century.</span>

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

know not what they do." <span id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158) They
likened their Creator to something that had been created, and they slew
a sojourner who did not belong to mortal creatures, and He was not a
thing that had been made with the hand. But He Himself was the Maker,
and He Himself was the Creator, Light of Light, God of God, Son of the
Father, Jesus Christ.

He was the Refuge, He was the Feeder, He was the Director; He, Whose
domain was above what is on high, and above everything, abased Himself.
Even as Isaiah, the man of keen words among the Prophets, saith, "He was
a humble man, and His appearance was rejected, like a root He hid
Himself in parched ground, He came in the flesh, a being of the earth,
\[though He was\] the Sustainer of the universe and the Saviour of the
universe." <span id="fr_159"></span>[2](#fn_159) And David ascribeth
beauty to Him, saying, "On Thy beauty <span
id="fr_160"></span>[3](#fn_160) and in Thy goodliness of form." And
again he saith, "His form is more goodly than that of the children of
men." And again he saith, "Graciousness is poured forth from Thy lips."
And again he saith, "Direct aright with prosperity, and reign through
righteousness, and justice, and sincerity." <span
id="fr_161"></span>[4](#fn_161) And again he saith concerning the Jews,
the enemies of the truth, "Thine arrows are sharp and strong in the
hearts of the haters of the King"; <span id="fr_162"></span>[5](#fn_162)
"it is right that they should transfix their hearts," He saith "unto
those who did not wish Me to be King, and they shall be brought before
Me and pierced" \[with spears\]. And again Isaiah saith concerning the
Jews, "I have sought for them and found them not; I have called unto
them and they have not answered Me; I have loved them and they have
hated Me." <span id="fr_163"></span>[6](#fn_163) And again David saith,
"They returned unto me evil for good, and they hated me in return for my
love for them." <span id="fr_164"></span>[7](#fn_164) And again

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Isaiah saith,
"With their lips they profess love for Me, but in their hearts they keep
afar from Me and their worshipping of Me is an empty thing." <span
id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_165) And as Moses saith, "They have moved Me
to wrath with their gods, and I will move them to jealousy with that
which is not a nation, for they are a people whose counsel is
destroyed." <span id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_166)

And those who said, "We have no Law," unto them hath the Law been given,
for God is the Giver of the Law unto every one. And God rewarded the
Jews according to their wickedness, and He treated the Gentiles
according to their simplicity. For He is merciful and compassionate to
those who call upon Him and who take refuge in Him, and who purify
themselves from all uncleanness in the Church and in the Tabernacle of
the Law of God; and He loveth those who weep and repent even as Stephen,
\[One\] of the Seventy Disciples saith. <span
id="fr_167"></span>[3](#fn_167) Now among the Seventy Disciples there
were seven who were chosen for service with the Twelve Apostles, to
perform service with Sins, and Barnabas, and Mark and Luke and Paul. And
this Stephen spake unto the Jews whilst he was standing up to martyrdom
and the Jews were killing him, and said unto them as he showed them
their folly in not having kept the commandment of God, "Ye have not kept
the Tôrâh according to the ordinance of the angels, as ye received it."
And it saith in the Acts \[of the Apostles\], "When they heard this they
went mad with anger and gnashed their teeth." <span
id="fr_168"></span>[4](#fn_168) Now hearken ye unto me. In his saying
"Ye have not kept the Tôrâh according to the order of the angels," \[we
have\] a form and a \[fore\] shadowing of what is in the heavens that is
to say, the heavenly and free Jerusalem, the habitation of the Most
High, whereof the situation and construction are incomprehensible to
mortal heart. And in it is the

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

throne of the Most High, which is surrounded with fire, and four beasts
bear it in their place, which is the sixth heaven. And a throne goeth up
to the seventh heaven, the habitation of the Father, and there dwelleth
He Who is with His Father and the Holy Spirit, Who vivifieth everything.
And the Tabernacle of the Church is a similitude of the Jerusalem which
is in the heavens, and the Church of the Gentiles is a similitude of the
Jerusalem which is in the heavens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_150"></span>[191:1](kn110.htm#fr_150) Psalm cx, 3.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[191:2](kn110.htm#fr_151) Genesis i, 1.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[191:3](kn110.htm#fr_152) John i, 1 ff.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[191:4](kn110.htm#fr_153) Acts i.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[191:5](kn110.htm#fr_154) Mark i, 1.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[191:6](kn110.htm#fr_155) John i, 1–3; 1 John
i, 1.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[192:1](kn110.htm#fr_156) Psalm xxxiii, 9.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[192:2](kn110.htm#fr_157) Psalm xxxiii, 6.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[193:1](kn110.htm#fr_158) Luke xxiii, 34.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[193:2](kn110.htm#fr_159) Isaiah liii, 2 ff.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[193:3](kn110.htm#fr_160) Psalm l, 2.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[193:4](kn110.htm#fr_161) Psalm xlv.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[193:5](kn110.htm#fr_162) Compare Psalms xlv,
5; lviii, 7.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[193:6](kn110.htm#fr_163) Isaiah xlv, 12.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[193:7](kn110.htm#fr_164) Psalm cix, 5.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[194:1](kn110.htm#fr_165) Isaiah xxix, 13.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[194:2](kn110.htm#fr_166) Deuteronomy xxxii,
21, 28.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[194:3](kn110.htm#fr_167) Compare Acts vi, 3;
vii, 34.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[194:4](kn110.htm#fr_168) Acts vii, 53, 54.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 103. Concerning the Horns of the Altar](kn111)

</div>
