[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cf108.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter V

### The Fenodyree and his Friends

THE last chapter is hardly such as to call for a recapitulation of its
principal contents, and I venture to submit instead of any such
repetition an abstract of some very pertinent notes on it by Miss M. G.
W. Peacock, who compares with the folklore of the Isle of Man the old
beliefs which survive in Lincolnshire among the descendants of Norse
ancestors \[a\]. She was attracted by the striking affinity which she
noticed between them, and she is doubtless right in regarding that
affinity as due in no small degree to the Scandinavian element present
in the population alike of Man and the East of England. She is, however,
not lavish of theory, but gives us interesting items of information from
an intimate acquaintance with the folklore of the district of which she
undertakes to speak, somewhat in the following order:--

\(1\) Whether the water-bull still inhabits the streams of Lincolnshire
she regards as doubtful, but the deep pools formed, she says, by the
action of the downflowing water at the bends of the country becks are
still known as bull-holes.

(2). As to the *glashtyn*, or water-horse, she remarks that the
tatter-foal, tatter-colt, or shag-foal, as he is variously called, is
still to be heard of, although his visits take place less often than
before the fens and carrs were drained and the open fields and commons
enclosed.- She describes the tatter-foal as a goblin of the shape and
appearance of a small horse or yearling foal in his rough, unkempt coat.
He beguiles lonely travellers with his numberless tricks, one of which
is to lure them to a stream, swamp, or water-hole. When he has succeeded
he vanishes with a long outburst of mockery, half neigh, half human
laughter.

(3). The fenodyree, one is told, has in Lincolnshire a cousin, but he is
diminutive; and, like the Yorkshire Hob or Robin Round-Cap, and the
Danish Niss, he is used to befriend the house in which he dwells. The
story of his driving the farmer's sheep home is the same practically as
in the Isle of Man, even to the point of bringing in with them the
little grey sheep, as he called the fine hare that had given him more
trouble than all the rest of the flock: see pp. 286-7 above.

(4). The story of this manikin's clothing differs considerably from that
of the fenodyree. The farmer gives him in gratitude for his services a
linen shirt every New Year's Eve; and this went on for years, until at
last the farmer thought a hemp shirt was good enough to give him. When
the clock struck twelve at midnight the manikin raised an angry wail,
saying:--

Harden, harden, harden hemp I  
I will neither grind nor stamp!  
Had you given me linen gear,  
I would have served you many a year I

He was no more seen or heard: he vanished for ever. The Cornish
counterpart of this brownie \[12\] reasons in the opposite way; for
when, in gratitude for his help in threshing, a new suit of clothes is
given him, he hurries away, crying \[b\]:--

Pisky new coat, and pisky new hood,  
Pisky now will do no more good.

Here, also, one should compare William Nicholson's a.ccount of the
brownie of Blednoch \[c\], in Galloway, who wore next to no clothing:--

Roun' his hairy form there was naething seen,  
But a philabeg o' the rushes green.

So he was driven away for ever by a newly married wife wishing him to
wear an old pair of her husband's breeches:--

But a new-made wife, fu' o' rippish freaks,  
Fond o' a' things feat for the first five weeks,  
Laid a mouldy pair o' her ain man's breeks  
By the brose o' Aiken-drum.

Let the learned decide, when they convene,  
What spell was him and the breeks between:  
For frae that day forth he was nae mair seen,  
And sair missed was Aiken-drum!

The only account which I have been able to find of a Welsh counterpart
will be found in *Bwca'r Trwyn*, in chapter x: he differs in some
important respects from the fenodyree and the brownie.

(5). A twig of the rowan tree, or *wicken*, as it is called, was
effective against all evil things, including witches. It is useful in
many ways to guard the welfare of the household, and to preserve both
the live stock and the crops, while placed on the churn it prevents any
malign influence from retarding the coming of the butter. I may remark
that Celts and Teutons seem to have been generally pretty well agreed as
to the virtues of the rowan tree. Bits of iron also are lucky against
witches.

(6). Fairies are rare, but witches and wizards abound, and some of them
have been supposed to change themselves into dogs to worry sheep and
cattle, or into toads to poison the swine's troughs. But they do not
seem to change themselves into hares, as in Man and other Celtic lands.

(7). Witchcraft, says Miss Peacock, is often hereditary, passing most
frequently from mother to daughter; but when a witch has no daughter her
power may appear in a son, and then revert to the female line. This
appears far more natural than the Manx belief in its passing from father
to daughter and from daughter to son. But another kind of succession is
mentioned in the Welsh Triads, 1. 32, ii. 20, iii. 90, which speak of
Math ab Mathonwy teaching his magic to Gwydion, who as his sister's son
was to succeed him in his kingdom; and of a certain Rhuddlwm Dwarf
teaching his magic to Cott, son of Collfrewi, his nephew. Both instances
seem to point to a state of society which did not reckon paternity but
only birth.

(8). Only three years previous to Miss Peacock's writing an old man
died, she says, who had seen blood drawn from a witch because she had,
as was supposed, laid a spell on a team of horses: as soon as she was
struck so as to bleed the horses and their load were free to go on their
way again. Possibly no equally late instance could be specified in the
Isle of Man: see p. 20 above.

(9). Traces of animal sacrifice may still be found in Lincolnshire, for
the heart of a small beast, or of a bird, is necessary, Miss Peacock
says, for the efficient performance of several counter-charms,
especially in torturing a witch by the reversal of her spells, and
warding off evil from houses or other buildings. Apparently Miss Peacock
has not heard of so considerable a victim as a sheep or a calf being
sacrificed, as in the Isle of Man, but the objects of the sacrifices may
be said to be the same.

\(10\) Several pin and rag wells are said to exist in Lincolnshire,
their waters being supposed to possess healing virtues, especially as
regards eye ailments.

\(11\) Love-spells and prognostications are mentioned, some of them as
belonging to Allhallows, as they do partly in the Isle of Man: she
mentions the making of dumb cake, and the eating of the salt herring,
followed by dreams of the future husband bringing the thirsting lass
drink in a jug, the quality of which indicates the bearer's position in
life. But other Lincolnshire practices of the kind seem to oscillate
between Allhallows and St. Mark's Eve, while gravitating decidedly
towards the latter date. Here it is preferable to give Miss Peacock's
own words--' Professor Rhys' mention of the footmark in the ashes
reminds me of a love-spell current in the Wapentake of Manley in North
Lincolnshire. Properly speaking, it should be put in practice on St.
Mark's E'en, that eerie spring-tide festival when those who are skilled
may watch the church porch and learn who will die in the ensuing
twelvemonth; but there is little doubt that the charm is also used at
Hallow Ven, and at other suitable seasons of the year. The spell
consists in riddling ashes on the hearthstone, or beans on the floor of
the barn, with proper ceremonies and at the proper time, with the result
that the girl who works her incantation correctly finds the footprint of
the man she is to marry clearly marked on the sifted mass the following
morning. It is to be supposed that the spirit of the lover is
responsible for the mark, as, according to another folk-belief, any girl
who watches her supper on St. Mark's E'en will see the spirit of the man
she will wed come into the room at midnight to partake of the food
provided. The room must be one with the door and windows in different
walls, and both must be open. The spirit comes in by the door (and goes
out by the window?). Each girl who undertakes to keep watch must have a
separate supper and a separate candle, and all talking is to end before
the clock goes twelve, for there must not be any speaking before the
spirits. From these superstitions, and from the generally received idea
that the spirits of all the parishioners are to be observed entering the
church on St. Mark's E'en, it may be inferred that the Manx footprint is
made by the wraith of the person doomed to death.'

What Miss Peacock alludes to as watching the church porch was formerly
well known in Wales \[d\], and may be illustrated from a district so far
east as the Golden Valley, in Herefordshire, by the following story told
me in 1892 by Mrs. Powell of Dorstone, on the strength of what she had
learnt from her mother-in-law, the late Mrs. Powell, who was a native of
that parish:--

'On Allhallows Eve at midnight, those who are bold enough to look
through the church windows will see the building lighted with an
unearthly light, and the pulpit occupied by his Satanic majesty clothed
in a monk's habit. Dreadful anathemas are the burden of his preaching,
and the names of those who in the coming year are to render up their
souls may be heard by those who have courage to listen. A notorious evil
liver, Jack of France, once by chance passed the church at this awful
moment: looking in he saw the lights and heard the voice, and his own
name in the horrid list; and, according to some versions of the story,
he went home to die of fright. Others say that he repented and died in
good repute, and so cheated the evil one of his prey.'

I have no list of places in Wales and its marches which have this sort
of superstition associated with them, but it is my impression that they
are mostly referred to Allhallows, as at Dorstone, and that where that
is not the case they have been shifted to the beginning of the year as
at present reckoned; for in Celtic lands, at least, they seem to have
belonged to what was reckoned the beginning of the year. The old Celtic
year undoubtedly began at Allhallows, and the day next in importance
after the Calends of Winter (in Welsh Calangdeaf) was, among the Celts,
the beginning of the summer half of the year, or the Calends of May (in
Welsh Caldnmai), which St. Mark's Eve approaches too nearly for us to
regard it as accidental. With this modified agreement between the
Lincolnshire date and the Celtic one contrast the irreconcilable English
date of St.John's Eve; and see Tylor's *Primitive Culture*, i. 440,
where one reads as follows of 'the well-known superstition,' I that
fasting watchers on St. John's Eve may see the apparitions of those
doomed to die during the year come with the clergyman to the church door
and knock; these apparitions are spirits who come forth from their
bodies, for the minister has been noticed to be much troubled in his
sleep while his phantom was thus engaged, and when ane of a party of
watchers fell into a sound sleep and could not be roused, the others saw
his apparition knock at the church door.' With an unerring instinct for
the intelligent colligation of facts, Miss Peacock finds the nearest
approach to the yearly review of the moritures, if I may briefly so call
them, in the wraith's footprint in the ashes. Perhaps a more systematic
examination of Manx folklore may result in the discovery of a more exact
parallel. For want of knowing where else to put it, I may mention here
in reference to the dead, a passage which has been copied for me by my
friend Mr. Gwenogvryn Evans, from Manuscript T63 in the Peniarth
Collection. I understand it to be of the earlier part of the sixteenth
century, and p. io has the following passage:--

Yn yr ynys honn \[Manaw\] y kair gweledl iw dydd bobyl a vvessynt
veirwl  
Rrai gwedi tori penav  
eraill gwedi torri i haelode  
Ac os dieithred a dissyfynt i gweled hwynt  
Sengi ar draed gzvyr or tir ac velly hwynt a gaent weled yr hyn a
welssynt hwyntav.

'In this island \[Man\] one beholds in the light of day people who have
died, some with their heads cut off and others with their limbs cut off.
And if strangers desire to see them, they have to stand on the feet of
the natives of the land, and in that way they would see what the latter
had seen.'

A similar instance of the virtue of standing on the feet of another
person has been mentioned in reference to the farmer of Deunant, at p.
230 above; the foot, however, on which he had to stand in order to get a
glimpse of the fairy world, was a fairy's own foot.

Lastly, the passage in the Peniarth Manuscript has something more to say
of the Isle of Man, as follows:--

Mawr oed arfer o swynion a chyvaredion gynt yn yr ynys honn  
Kanys gwraged vyddynt yno yn gwnevthvr gwynt i longwyr gwedir gav mewn
tri chwlm o edav aphan vai eissie gwynt arnynt dattod kwlm or edav
anaynt.

'Great was the practice formerly of spells and sorceries in this island;
for there used to be there women making wind for sailors, which wind
they confined within three knots made on a thread. And when they had
need of wind they would undo a knot of the thread.'

This was written in the sixteenth century, and based probably on
Higden's *Potychronicon*, book I, chap. Xliv (= ii.. 42-3), but the same
practice of wind making goes on to this day, one of the principal
practitioners being the woman to whom reference was made at p. 299. She
is said to tie the breezes in so many knots which she makes on the
purchasing sailor's pocket-handkerchief. This reminds one of the sibyl
of Warinsey, or the Island of Guernsey, who is represented by an ancient
Norse poet as 'fashioning false prophecies.' See Vigfusson and Powell's
*Cortus Poeticum Boreale,* i. 136; also Mela's first-century account of
the virgins of the island of Sena, which runs to the following
effect:--'Sena, in the Britannic Sea, opposite the coast of the Osismi,
is famous for its oracle of a Gaulish god, whose priestesses, living in
the holiness of perpetual virginity, are said to be nine in number. They
call them Gallizenw, and they believe them to be endowed with
extraordinary gifts to rouse the sea and the wind by their incantations,
to turn themselves into whatsoever animal form they may choose, to cure
diseases which among others are incurable, to know what is to come and
to foretell it. They are, however, devoted to the service of voyagers
only who have set out on no other errand than to consult them \[e\] It
is probable that the sacrosanct \[f\] inhabitants of the small islands
on the coasts of Gaul and Britain had wellnigh a monopoly of the traffic
in wind \[g\].

In the last chapter I made allusion to several wells of greater or less
celebrity in the Isle of Man; but I find that I have a few remarks to
add. Mr. Arthur Moore, in his book on *Manx Surnames and Place-Names*,
p. 200, mentions a Chibber Unjin, which means the Well of the Ash-tree,
and he states that there grew near it 'formerly a sacred ash-tree, where
votive offerings were hung.' The ash-tree calls to his mind Scandinavian
legends respecting the ash, but in any case one may suppose the ash was
not the usual tree to expect by a well in the Isle of Man, otherwise
this one would scarcely have been distinguished as the Ashtree Well. The
tree to expect by a sacred well is doubtless some kind of thorn, as in
the case of Chibber Undin in the parish of Malew. The name means
Foundation Well, so called in reference probably to the foundations of
an ancient cell, or *keeill* as it is called in Manx, which lie close
by, and are found to measure twenty-one feet long by twelve feet broad.
The following is Mr. Moore's account of the well in his book already
cited, p. 181:--'The water of this well is supposed to have curative
properties. The patients who came to it, took a mouthful of water,
retaining it in their mouths till they had twice walked round the well.
They then took a piece of cloth from a garment which they had worn,
wetted it with the water from the well, and hung it on the hawthorn tree
which grew there. When the cloth had rotted away, the cure was supposed
to be effected.'

I visited the spot a few years ago in the company of the Rev. E. B.
Savage of St. Thomas' Parsonage, Douglas, and we found the well nearly
dried up in consequence of the drainage of the field around it; but the
remains of the old cell were there, and the thorn bush had strips of
cloth or calico tied to its branches.

We cut off one, which is now in the Pitt-Rivers Museum at Oxford. The
account Mr. Savage had of the ritual observed at the well differed a
little from that given by Mr. Moore, especially in the fact that it made
the patient who had been walking round the well with water from the well
in his mouth, empty that water finally into a rag from his clothing: the
rag was then tied to a branch of the thorn. It does not appear that the
kind of tree mattered much; nay, a tree is not, it seems to me,
essential. At any rate, St. Maughold's Well has no tree growing near it
now; but it is right to say, that when Mr. Kermode and I visited it, we
could find no rags left near the spot, nor indeed could we expect to
find any, as there was nothing to which they might be tied on that windy
headland. The absence of the tree does not, however, prove that the same
sort of ritual was not formerly observed at St. Maughold's Well as at
Chibber Undin; and here I must mention another well which I have visited
in the island more than once. It is on the side of Bradda Hill, a little
above the village of Bradda, and in the direction of Fleshwick: I was
attracted to it by the fact that it had, as I had been told by Mr.
Savage, formerly an old cell or keeill near it, and the name of the
saint to which it belonged may probably be gathered from the name of the
well, which, in the Manx of the south of the island, is Chibbyrt
Valtane, pronounced approximately Chavurt Voltdne or 01ddane. The
personal name would be written in modem Manx in its radical form as
Boltane, and if it occurred in the genitive in Ogam inscriptions I
should expect to find it written *Bollagni* or *Baltagni* \[h\]. It is,
however, unknown to me, though to be placed possibly by the side of the
name of the saint after whom the parish of Santon is called in the
south-east of the island. This is pronounced in Manx approximately \[i\]
Santane or Sanddane, and would have yielded an early inscriptional
nominative SANCTANVS, which, in fact, occurs on an old stone near
Llandudno on the Welsh coast: see some notes of mine in point in the
*Archaevologia Cambrensis*, 1897, pp. 140-2. To return to the well, it
would seem to have been associated with an old cell, but it has no tree
growing by. Mr. Savage and I were told, nevertheless, that a boy who had
searched the well a short time previously had got some coins out of it,
quite recent ones, consisting of halfpennies or pennies, so far as I
remember. On my observing to one of the neighbours that I saw no rags
there, I was assured that there had been some; and, on my further saying
that I saw no tree there to which they could be tied, I was told that
they used to be attached to the brambles, which grew there in great
abundance. Thus it appears that, in the Isle of Man at any rate, a tree
to bear the rags was not an essential adjunct of a holy well.

Before leaving these well superstitions the reader may wish to know how
they were understood in Ireland not long ago: so I venture to quote a
passage from a letter by the late Mr. W. C. Borlase on Rag Offerings and
Primitive Pilgimages in Ireland, as follows -

'Among the MSS. of the late Mr. Windele, of Cork, ... I find a passage
which cannot fail to interest students of folk-lore. It relates to the
custom of affixing shreds of rag to the hawthorn tree, which almost
invariably stands by the brink of the typical Irish " holy well," and it
gives us the meaning of the custom as understood, some half-century
since, by the inhabitants of certain localities in the province of
Munster. The idea is, says the writer, that the putting up these rags is
a putting away of the evils impending or incurred by sin, an act
accompanied by the following ritual words: *Air impide an Tiarna mo
chuid teinis do fhagaint air an ait so*; i.e. By the intercession of the
Lord I leave my portion of illness on this place. These words, he adds,
should be uttered by whoever performs the round, and they are, no doubt,
of extreme antiquity. Mr. Windele doubtless took down the words as he
heard them locally pronounced, though, to be correct, for *Tiarna*
should be read *Tigerna*; for *teinis, tinneas*; and for *fhagaint,
fhagaim* \[j\]!

From the less known saints Boltane and Santane I wish to pass to the
mention of a more famous one, namely, St. Catherine, and this because of
a fair called after her, and held on the sixth day of December at the
village of Colby in the south of the island. When I heard of this fair
in 1888, it was in temporary abeyance on account of a lawsuit respecting
the plot of ground on which the fair is wont to be held; but I was told
that it usually begins with a procession, in which a live hen is carried
about: this is called St. Catherine's hen. The next day the hen is
carried about dead and plucked, and a rhyme pronounced at a certain
point in the proceedings contemplates the burial of the hen, but whether
that ever takes. place I know not. It runs thus:--

Kiark Catrna marroo:  
Catherine's hen is dead

Gowsyn kione as goyms ny cassyn,  
The head take thou and I the feet,

As ver mayd ee fo'n thalloo. W  
e shall put her under the ground.

A man who is found to be not wholly sober after the fair is locally said
to havie plucked a feather from the hen (*T'eh er goaill fedjag ass y
chiark*); so it would seem that there must be such a scramble to get at
the hen, and to take part in the plucking, that it requires a certain
amount of drink to allay the thirst of the over zealous devotees of St.
Catherine. But why should this ceremony be associated with St.
Catherine? and what were the origin and meaning of it? These are
questions on which I should be glad to have light shed.

Manx has a word *quaail* (Irish *comhdhail*, meaning a 'meeting,' and
from it we have a derivative *quaaltagh* or *qualtagh*, meaning,
according to Kelly's *Dictionary*, 'the first person or creature one
meets going from home,' whereby the author can have only meant the first
met by one who is g-oing from home. Kelly goes on to add that 'this
person is of great consequence to the superstitious, particularly to
women the first time they go out after lying-in.' Cregeen, in his
Dictionary, defines the *qualtagh* as 'the first person met on New
Year's Day, or on going on some new work, &c.' Beforq proceeding to give
the substance of my notes on the qualtagh of the present day I may as
well finish with Cregeen, for he adds the following information:--'A
company of young lads or men generally went in old times on what they
termed the *qualtagh*, at Christmas or New Year's Day, to the houses of
their more wealthy neighbours; some one of the company repeating in an
audible voice the following rhyme:--

Ollick ghennal erriu as blein feer vie,  
Seihll as slaynt da'n slane lught thie;  
Bea as gennallys eu bio ry-chelley,  
Skee as graih eddyr mrane as deiney;  
Cooid as cowtyn, stock as stoyr,  
Palchey phuddase, as skaddan dy-liooar;  
Arran as caashey eeym as roayrt;  
Baase, myr lugh, ayns uhllin ny soalt;  
Cadley sauchey tra vees shiu ny lhie,  
As feeackle y jargan, nagla bre dy mie.'

It may be loosely translated as follows .-

A merry Christmas, a happy new year,  
Long life and health to all the household here.  
Food and mirth to you dwelling together,  
Peace and love to all, men and women;  
Wealth and distinction, stock and store,  
Potatoes enough, and herrings galore;  
Bread and cheese, butter and gravy;  
Die like a mouse in a barn or haggard  
In safety sleep while you lie to rest,  
And by the Rea's tooth be not distressed.

At present New Year's Day is the time when the qualtagh is of general
interest, and in this case he is, outside the members of one's own
household, practically the first person one sees on the morning of that
day, whether that person meets one out of doors or comes to one's house.
The following is what I have learnt by inquiry as to the *qualtagh*: all
are agreed that he must not be a woman or girl, and that he must not be
*spaagagh* or splay footed, while a woman from the parish of Marown told
me that he must not have red hair. The prevalent belief, however, is
that he should be a dark haired man or boy, and it is of no consequence
how rough his appearance may be, provided he be black haired. However, I
was told by one man in Rushen that the qualtagh or 'first-foot' need not
be a black haired person: he must be a man or boy. But this less
restricted view. is not the one held in the central and northern parts
of the island, so far as I could ascertain. An English lady living in
the neighbourhood of Castletown told me that her son, whom I know to be,
like his mother, a blond, not being aware what consequences might be
associated with his visit, called at a house in Castletown on the
morning of New Year's Day, and he chanced to be the qualtagh. The
mistress of the house was horrified, and expressed to the English lady
her anticipation of misfortunes; and as it happened that one of the
children of the house died in the course of the year, the English lady
has been reminded of it since. Naturally the association of these events
are not pleasant to her; but, so far as I can remember, they date only
some eight or nine years ago \[k\].

By way of bringing Wales into comparison with Man, I may mention that,
when I was a very small boy, I used to be sent very early on New Year's
morning to call on an old uncle of mine, because, as I was told, I
should be certain to receive a calennig or a calends' gift from him, but
on no account would my sister be allowed to go, as he would only see a
boy on such an occasion as that. I do not recollect anything being said
as to the colour of one's hair or the shape of one's foot; but that sort
of negative evidence is of very little value, as the *qualtagh* was fast
passing out of consideration.

The preference here given to a boy over a girl looks like one of the
widely spread superstitions which rule against the fair sex; but, as to
the colour of the hair, I should be predisposed to think that it
possibly rests on racial antipathy, long ago forgotten; for it might
perhaps be regarded as going back to a time when the dark haired race
reckoned the Aryan of fair complexion as his natural enemy, the very
sight of whom brought with it thoughts calculated to make hinn unhappy
and despondent. If this idea proved to be approximately correct, one
might suggest that the racial distinction in question referred to the
struggles between the inhabitants of Man and their Scandinavian
conquerors; but to my thinking it is just as likely that it goes much
further back.

Lastly, what is one to say with regard tio the spaagagh or splay footed
person, now more usually defined as flat footed or having no instep? I
have heard it said in the south of the island that it is urilucky to
meet a *spaagagh* in the morning at any time of the year, and not on New
Year's Day alone; but this does not help us in the attempt to find the
genesis of this belief If it were said that it was unlucky to meet a
deformed person, it would look somewhat more natural; but why fix on the
flat footed especially? For my part I have not been trained to
distinguish flat footed people, so I do not recollect noticing any in
the Isle of Man; but, granting there maybe a small proportion of such
people in the island, does it not seem strange that they should have
their importance so magnified as this superstition would seem to imply?
I must confess that I cannot understand it, unless we have here also
some supposed racial characteristic, let us say greatly exaggerated. To
explain myself I should put it that the non-Aryan aborigines were a
small people of great agility and nimbleness, and that their Aryan
conquerors moved more slowly and deliberately, whence the former, of
springier movements, might come to nickmame the latter the flat footed.
It is even conceivable that there was some amount of foundation for it
in fact. If I might speak from my own experience, I might mention a
difficulty I have often had with shoes of English make, namely, that I
have always found them, unless made to measure, apt to have their instep
too low for me. It has never occurred to me to buy ready-made shoes in
France or Germany, but I know a lady as Welsh as I am, who has often
bought shoes in France, and her experience is, that it is much easier
for her to get shoes there to fit her than in England, and for the very
reason which I have already suggested, namely, that the instep in
English shoes is lower than in French ones.

Again, I may mention that one day last term \[l\], having to address a
meeting of Welsh undergraduates on folklore, I ventured to introduce
this question. They agreed with me that English shoes did not, as a
rule, fit Welsh feet, and this because they are made too low in the
instep: I ought to have said that they all agreed except one
undergraduate, who held his peace. He is a tall man, powerful in the
football field, but of no dark complexion, and I have never dared to
look in the direction of his feet since, lest he should catch me
carrying my comparisons to cruel extremes. Perhaps the flatness of the
feet of the one race is not emphasized so much as the height of the
instep in those of the other. At any rate I find this way of looking at
the question somewhat countenanced by a journalist who refers his
readers to Wm. Henderson's notes on the *Folklore of the Northern
Counties*, p. 74. The passage relates more particularly to
Northumberland, and runs as follows:--'In some districts, however,
special weight is attached to the " firstfoot" being that of a person
with a high-arched instep, a foot that " water runs under." A
flat-footed person would bring great ill-luck for the coming year.'

These instances do not warrant the induction that Celts are higher in
the instep than Teutons, and that they have inher' ted that
characteristic from the nonAryan element in their ancestry. Perhaps the
explanation is, at least in part, that the dwellers in hilly regions
tend to be more springy and to have higher insteps than the inhabitants
of flatter lands. The statement of Dr. Karl Blind on this point does not
help one to a decision when he speaks as follows in *Folk-Lore* for
1892, p. 89:--'As to the instep, I can speak from personal experience.
Almost every German finds that an English shoemaker makes his boots not
high enough in the instep. The northern Germans (I am from the south)
have perhaps slightly flatter feet than the southern Germans.' The first
part of the comparison is somewhat of a surprise to me, but not so the
other part, that the southern Germans inhabiting a hillier country, and
belonging to a different race, may well be higher in the instep than the
More northern speakers of the German language. But on the whole the more
one examines the *qualtagh*, the less clearly one sees how he can be the
representative of a particular race. More data possibly would enable one
to arrive at greater probability.

There is one other question which I should like to ask before leaving
the *qualtagh*, namely, as to the relation of the custom of New Year's
gifts to the belief in the *qualtagh*. I have heard it related in the
Isle of Man that women have been known to keep indoors on New Year's Day
until the *qualtagh* comes, which sometimes means their being prisoners
for the greater part of the day, in order to avoid the risk of first
meeting one who is not of the right sex and complexion. On the other
hand, when the *qualtagh* is of the right description, considerable fuss
is made of him; to say the least, he has to accept food and drink,
possibly more permanent gifts. Thus a tall, black haired native of Kirk
Michael described to me how he chanced on New Year's Day, years ago, to
turn into a lonely cottage in order to light his pipe, and how he found
he was the *qualtagh*: he had to sit down to have food, and when he went
away it was with a present and the blessings of the family. Now New
Year's Day is the time for gifts in Wales, as shown by the name for
them, *calennig*, which is derived from *calan*, the Welsh form of the
Latin *calendae*, New Year's Day being in Welsh *Y Calan*, 'the Calends!
The same is the day for gifts in Scotland and in Ireland, except in so
far as Christmas boxes have been making inroads from England: I need not
add that the Jour de I'An is the day for gifts also in France. My
question then is this: Is there any essential connexion of origin
between the institution of New Year's Day gifts and the belief in the
first-foot?

Now that it has been indicated what sort of a *qualtagh* it is unlucky
to have, I may as well proceed to mention the other things which I have
heard treated as unlucky in the island. Some of them scarcely require to
be noticed, as there is nothing specially Manx about them, such as the
belief that it is unlucky to have the first glimpse of the new moon
through glass. That is a superstition which is, I believe, widely
spread, and, among other countries, it is quite familiar in Wales, where
it is also unlucky to see the moon for the first time through a hedge or
over a house. What this means I cannot guess, unless it be that it was
once considered one's duty to watch the first appearance of the new moon
from the highest point in the landscape of the district in which one
dwelt. Such a point would in that case become the chief centre of a moon
worship now lost in oblivion.

It is believed in Man, as it used to be in Wales and Ireland, that it is
unlucky to disturb antiquities, especially old burial places and old
churches. This superstition is unfortunately passing away in all three
countries, but you still hear of it, especially in the Isle of Man,
mostly after mischief has been done. Thus a good Manx scholar told me
how a relative of his in the Ronnag, a small valley near South Barrule,
had carted away the earth from an old burial ground on his farm and used
it as manure for his fields, and how his beasts died afterwards. The
narrator said he did not know whether there was any truth in it, but
everybody believed that it was the reason why the cattle died; and so
did the farmer himself at last: so he desisted from completing his
disturbance of the old site. It is possibly for a similar reason that a
house in ruins is seldom pulled down, or the materials used for other
buildings. Where that has been done misfortunes have ensued; at any
rate, I have heard it said so more than once. I ought to have stated
that the non-disturbance of antiquities in the island is quite
consistent with their being now and then shamefully neglected as
elsewhere. This is now met by an excellent statute recently enacted by
the House of Keys for the preservation of the public monuments of the
island.

Of the other and more purely Manx superstitions I may mention one which
obtains among the Peel fishermen of the present day: no boat is willing
to be third in the order of sailing out from Peel harbour to the
fisheries. So it sometimes happens that after two boats have departed,
the others remain watching each other for days, each hoping that
somebody else may be reckless enough to break through the invisible
barrier of' bad luck.' I have often asked for an explanation of this
superstition, but the only intelligible answer I have had was that it
has been observed that the third boat has done badly several years in
succession.; but I am unable to ascertain how far that represents the
fact. Another of the unlucky things is to have a white stone in the
boat, even in the ballast, and for that I never could get any
explanation at all; but there is no doubt as to the fact of this
superstition, and I may illustrate it from the case- of a clergyman's
son on the west side, who took it into his head to go out with some
fishermen several days in succession. They chanced to be unsuccessful
each time, and they gave their Jonah the nickname of *Clagh Vane*, or
'White Stone.' Now what can be the origin of this tabu? It seems to me
that if the Manx had once a habit of adorning the graves of the departed
with white stones, that circumstance! would be a reasonable explanation
of the superstition in question. Further, it is quite possible they did,
and here Manx archaeologists could probably help as to the matter of
fact. In the absence, however, of information to the point from Man, I
take the liberty of citing some relating to Scotland. It comes from Mr.
Gomme's presidential address to the Folk-Lore Society -. see *Folk Lore*
for 1893, pp. 13-4:--'

' Near Inverary, it is the custom among the fisher-folk, and has been so
within the memory of the oldest, to place little white stones or pebbles
on the graves of their friends. No reason is now given for the practice,
beyond that most potent and delightful of all reasons in the minds of
folk-lore students, namely, that it has always been done. Now there is
nothing between this modem practice sanctioned by traditional observance
and the practice of the stone-age people in the same neighbourhood and
in others, as made known to us by their grave-relics. Thus, in a cairn
at Achnacrie opened by Dr. Angus Smith, on entering the innermost
chamber " the first thing that struck the eye was a row of quartz
pebbles larger than a walnut; these were arranged on the ledge of the
lower granite block of the east side." Near Crinan, at Duncraigaig and
at Rudie, the same characteristic was observed, and Canon Greenwell, who
examined the cairns, says the pebbles " must have been placed there with
some intention, and probably possessed a symbolic meaning." ' See also
*Burghead*, by Mr. H. W. Young (Inverness, 1899), p. 10, where we read
that at Burghead the I smooth white pebbles, sometimes five or seven of
them, but never more,' have been usually arranged as crosses on the
graves which he has found under the fallen ramparts. Can this be a
Christian superstition with the white stones of the Apocalypse as its
foundation?

Here I may mention a fact which I do not know where else to put, namely,
that a fisherman on his way in the morning to the fishing, and chancing
to pass by the cottage of another fisherman who is not on friendly terms
with him, will pluck a straw from the thatch of the latter's dwelling.
Thereby he is supposed to rob him of his luck in the fishing for that
day. One would expect to learn that the straw from the thatch served as
the subject of an incantation directed against the owner of the thatch.
I have never heard anything suggested to that effect; but I conclude
that the plucking of the straw is only a partial survival of what was
once a complete ritual for bewitching one's neighbour, unless getting
possession of the straw was supposed to carry with it possession of
everything belonging to the other man, including his luck in fishing for
that day.

Owing to my ignorance as to the superstitions of other fishermen than
those of the Isle of Man, I will not attempt to classify the remaining
instances to be mentioned, such as the unluckiness of mentioning a horse
or a mouse on board a fishing-boat: I seem,

however, to have heard a similar tabus among Scottish fishermen: and,
according to Dr. Blind, Shetland fishermen will not mention a church or
a clergyman when out at sea, but use quite other names for both when on
board a ship (*Folk-Lore* for 1892, p.89). Novices in the Manx fisheries
have to learn not to point to anything with one finger: they have to
point with the whole hand or not at all. This looks as if it belonged to
a code of rules as to the use of the hand, such as prevail among the
Neapolitans and other peoples whose chief article of faith is the belief
in malign influences: see Mr. Elworthy's volume on

The Evil Eye.

 

Whether the Manx are alone in thinking it unlucky to lend salt from one
boat to another when they are engaged in fishing, I know not: such
lending would probably be inconvenient, but why should it be unlucky, as
they believe it to be, does not appear. The first of May is a day on
which it is unlucky to lend anything, and especially to give any one
fire(1). This looks as if it pointed back to some druidic custom of
lighting all fires at that time from a sacred hearth, but, so far as is
known, this only took place at the beginning of the other half-year,
namely, *Sauin* or Allhallows, which is sometimes rendered into Manx
as*Laa 'll mooar ny Saintsh,* "the Day of the great Feast of the
Saints."

      Lastly, may I mention that it is unlucky to say that you are very
well: at any rate, I infer that it is regarded so, as you will never get
a Manxman to say that he is *feer vie,* "very well." He usually admits
that he is "middling"; and if by any chance he risks a stronger
adjective, he hastens to qualify it by adding "now", or "just now," with
an emphasis indicative of his anxiety not to say too much.

 

(1)   With this compare what Mr. Gomme has to say of a New Year's Day
custom observed in Lanarkshire: see p. 633 of the *Ethnographic Report *
referred to above, and compare Henderson, p. 74.

 

His habits of speech point back to a time when  the Manx mind was
dominated by the fear of awaking malignant influences in the spirit
world around him. This has had the effect of giving the Manx peasant's
character a tinge of reserve and suspicion, which makes it difficult to
gain his confidence: his acquaintance has, therefore, to be cultivated
for some time before you can say that you know the working of his heart.
The pagan belief in a Nemesis has doubtless passed away, but not without
materially affecting the Manx idea of a personal devil. Ever since the
first allusion made in my hearing by Manxmen to the devil, I have been
more and more deeply impressed that for them the devil is a much more
formidable being than Englishmen or Welshmen picture him. He is a graver
and, if I may say so, a more respectable being, allowing no liberties to
be taken with his name, so you had better not call him a devil, the evil
one, or like names, for his proper designation is *Noid ny Hanmey,* "the
Enemy of the Soul", and in ordinary Anglo-Manx conversation he is
commonly called "the Enemy of Souls." I well remember getting one day
into a conversation with an old soldier in the south of the island. He
was, as I soon discovered, labouring under a sort of theological
monomania, and his chief question was concerning the Welsh word for "the
Enemy of Souls." I felt at once that I had to be careful, and that the
reputation of my countrymen depended on how I answered. As I had no name
anything like the one he used for the devil, I explained to him that the
Welsh, though not a great nation, were great students of theology, and
that they had by no means neglected the great branch of it known as
satanology. In fact that study, as I went on to say, had left its
impress on the Welsh language: on Sunday the ministers of all
denominations, the deacons

and elders, and all self-respecting congregations spoke of the devil
tri-syllabically as *diafol*, while on the other days of the week
everybody called him more briefly and forcibly *diawl*, except bards
concocting an *awdl* for an Eisteddfod, where the devil must always be
called *diafl*, and excepting also sailors, farm servants, postboys and
colliers, together with country gentlemen learning Welsh to address
their wouldn't-be constituents-for all these the regulation form was
*jawl*, with an English *j*. Thus one could, I pointed out to him, fix
the social standing of a Welshman by the way he named 'the Enemy of
Souls,' as well as appreciate the superiority of Welsh over Greek,
seeing that Welsh, when it borrowed …… from Greek, quadrupled it, while
Greek remained sterile. He was so profoundly impressed that I never was
able to bring his attention back to the small fry, spiritually speaking,
of the Isle of Man, to wit, the fairies and the fenodyree, or even the
witches and the charmers, except that he had some reserve of faith in
witches, since the witch of Endor was in the Bible and had ascribed to
her a 'terr'ble' great power of raising spirits: that, he thought, must
be true. I pointed out to him that a fenodyree (see p. 288) was also
mentioned in his Bible: this display of ready knowledge on my part made
a deep impression on his mind.

The Manx are, as a rule, a sober people, and highly religious; as
regards their tenets, they are mostly members of the Church of England
or Wesleyan Methodists, or else both, which is by no means unusual.
Religious phrases are not rare in their ordinary conversation; in fact,
they struck me as being of more frequent occurrence than in Wales, even
the Wales of my boyhood; and here and there this fondness for religious
phraseology has left its traces on the native vocabulary. Take, for
example, the word for 'anybody, a person, or human being,'which Cregeen
writes *py'agh* or *p'agh*: he rightly regards it as the colloquial
pronunciation of *peccagh*, 'a sinner.' So, when one knocks at a Manx
door and calls out, *Vel p'agh sthie*? he literally asks, I Is there any
sinner indoors?' The question has, however, been explained to me, with
unconscious irony, as properly meaning, 'Is there any Christian
indoors?' and care is now taken in reading to pronounce the middle
conso, nants of the word *peccagh*, 'sinner,' so as to distinguish it
from the word for a Christian 'anybody': but the identity of origin is
unmistakable.

Lastly, the fact that a curse is a species of prayer, to Wit, a prayer
for evil to follow, is well exemplified in Manx by the same words,
*gwee* \[m\], plural *gweeaghyn*, meaning both kinds of prayer. Thus I
found myself stumbling several times, in reading through the Psalms in
Manx, from not bearing in mind the sinister meaning of these words; for
example in Psalm xiv. 6, where we have Ta *'n beeal oc lane dy
ghweeaghyn* *as dy herriuid* which I mechanically construed to mean
'Their mouth is full of praying and bitterness,' instead of 'cursing and
bitterness'; and so in other cases, such as Ps. x. 7, and cix. 27.

It occurred to me on various occasions to make inquiries as to the
attitude of religious Manxmen towards witchcraft and the charmer's
vocation. Nobody, so far as I know, accuses them of favouring witchcraft
in any way whatsoever; but as to the reality of witches and witchcraft
they are not likely to have any doubti s so long as they dwell on the
Biblical account of the witch of Endor, as I have already mentioned in
the case of the old Crimean soldier. Then as to charmers I have heard it
distinctly stated that the most religious men are they who have most
confidence in charmers and their charms; and a lay preacher whom I know
has been mentioned to me as now and then doing a little charming in
cases of danger or pressing need. On the whole, I think the charge
against religious people of consulting charmers is somewhat exaggerated;
but I believe that recourse to the charmer is more usual and more openly
had than, for example, in Wales, where those who consult a *dyn hyspys*
or 'wise man' have to do it secretly, and at the risk of being expelled
by their co-religionists from the Seiet or 'Society.' There is somewhat
in the atmosphere of Man to remind one rather of the Wales of a past
generation-Wales as it was at the time when the Rev. Edmund Jones could
write a *Relation of Apparitions of Spirits in the County of Monmouth
and the* *Principalies of Wales*, as a book 'designed to confute and to
prevent the infidelity of denying the being and apparition of spirits,
which tends to irreligion and atheism': see above.

The Manx peasantry are perhaps the most independent and prosperous in
the British Isles; but their position geographically and politically has
been favourable to the continuance of ideas not quite up to the level of
the latest papers on Darwinism and Evolution read at our Church
Congresses in this country. This may be thought to be here wide of the
mark; but, after giving, in the previous chapter, specimens of rather
ancient superstitions as recently known in the island, it is but right
that one should form an idea of the surroundings in which they have
lingered into modern times. Perhaps nothing will better serve to bring
this home to the reader's mind than the fact, for which there is proof,
that old people still living remember men and women clad in white sheets
doing penance publicly in the churches of Man.

The following is the evidence which I was able to find, and I may state
that I first heard in1888 of the public penance from Mr. Joughin, who
was an aged man and a native of Kirk Bride. He related how a girl named
Mary Dick gave an impertinent answer to the clergyman when he was
catechizing her class, and how she had to do penance for it at church.
She took her revenge on the parson by singing, while attending in a
white sheet, louder than everybody else in the congregation. This,
unless I am mistaken, Mr. Joughin gave me to understand he had heard
from his father. I mentioned the story to a clergyman, who was decidedly
of opinion that no one alive now could remember anything about public
penance. Not long after, however, I got into conversation with a
shoemaker at Kirk Michael, named Dan Kelly, who was nearly completing
his eighty-first year. He was a native of Ballaugh, and stated that he
remembered many successive occupants of the episcopal see. A long time
ago the official called the sumner had, out of spite, he said, appointed
him to serve as one of the four of the chapter jury. It was, he thought,
when he was about twenty-five. During his term of office he saw four
persons, of whom two were married men and two unmarried women, doing
penance in the parish church of Ballaugh for having illegitimate
children. They stood in the alley of the church, and the sumner had to
throw white sheets over them; on the fourth Sunday of their penance they
stood inside the chancel rails, but not to take the communion. The
parson, whose name was Stowell or Stowall, made them thoroughly ashamed
of themselves on the fourth Sunday, as one of the men afterwards
admitted. Kelly mentioned the names of the women and of one of the men,
and he indicated to me some of their descendants as well known in the
neighbourhood. I cross-examined him all the more severely, as I had
heard the other view of the remoteness of the date. But nothing could
shake Kelly, who added that soon after the date of the above mentioned
cases the civil functionary, known as the vicar-general, put an end to
the chapter jury and to public penance: according to his reckoning the
penance he spoke of must have taken place about 1832. Another old man,
named Kewley, living now near Kirk Michael, but formerly in the parish
of Lezayre, had a similar story. He thinks that he was born in the sixth
year of the century, and when he was between eighteen and twenty he saw
a man doing public penance, in Lezayre Church, I presume, but I have no
decided note on that point. However that may be, he remembered that the
penitent, when he had done his penance, had the audacity to throw the
white sheet over the sumner, who, the penitent remarked, might now wear
it himself, as he had had enough of it. Kewley would bring the date only
down to about 1825.

Lastly, I was in the island again in 1891, and spent the first part of
the month of April at Peel, where I had conversations with a retired
captain who was then about seventy-eight. He is a native of the parish
of Dalby, but he was only 'a lump of a boy' when the last couple of
immorals were forced to do penance in white sheets at church. He gave me
the guilty man's name, and the name of his home in the parish, and both
the captain and his daughter assured me that the man had only been dead
six or seven years; that is, the penitent seems to have lived till about
the year 1884. may here mention that the parish of Dalby is the subject
of many tales, which go to show that its people were more old-fashioned
in their ways than those of the rest of the island. It appears to have
been the last, also, to be reached by a cart road; and I was amused by a
native's description of the men at Methodist meetings in Dalby pulling
the *tappag*, or forelock, at the name of Jesus, while the women ducked
a curtsy in a dangerously abrupt fashion. He and his wife appeared to be
quite used to it: the husband was an octogenarian named Quirc, who was
born on the coast near the low-lying peninsula called the Narbyl, that
is to say 'the Tail!

To return to the public penance, it seems to us in this-country to
belong, so to say, to ancient history, and it transports us to a state
of things which we find it hard to realize. The lapse of years has
brought about profounder changes in ouT greater Isle of Britain'than in
the smaller Isle of Man, while we ourselves, helpless to escape the
pervading influence of those profounder changes, become living instances
of the comprehensive truth of the German poet's words,

Omnia mulantur, nos et mutarnur in illis.

Celtic Folklore              ..  ..   ...

\[a\] My paper was read before the *Folk-Lore Society* in April or May,
1891, and Miss Peacock's notes appeared in the journal of the Society in
the following December: see pp. 509-13.

\[b\] See Choice Notes, p. 76.

\[c\] See the third edition of Wm. Nicholson's Poetical Works
(Castle-Douglas, 1878), pp. 78,81.

\[d\]See Howells' *Cambrian Superstitions* p. 58.

\[e\] Pomponius Mela *De Chorographia*, edited by Parthey, iii, chap. 6
(1). 72); see also my *Hibbert Lectures*, pp. 195-6, where, however, the
identification of the name Sena with that of Sein should be cancelled.
*Sein* seems to be derived from the Breton *Seidihun*, otherwise
modified into *Sizun* and *Sun*. See chap. vi below.

\[f\] See my Hibbert Lectures, pp. 195-7; also my *Arthurian Legend*,
pp. 367-8, where a passage in point is cited at length from Plutarch *De
Defectu Oraculorum*, xviii (= the Didot edition of Plutarch's works,
iii. 511); the substance of it will be found given likewise in chap.
viii below.

\[g\] For an allusion to the traffic in winds in Wales see Howells, p.
86, where he speaks as follows:--' In Pembrokeshire there was a person
commonly known as the cunning man of Pentregethen, who sold winds to the
sailors, after the manner of the Lapland witches, and who was reverenced
in the neighbourhood in which he dwelt, much more than the divines.'

\[h\] This may turn out to be all wrong; for I learn from the Rev. John
Quine, vicar of Malew, in Man, that there is a farm called Balthane or
Bolthanie south of Ballasalla, and that in the computus (of 1540) of the
Abbey Tenants it is called *Biulthan*. This last, if originally a man's
name, would seem to point back to some such a compound as *Beo-Ultan*.
In his *Manx Names*, p. 138, Mr. Moore suggests the possibility of
explaining the name as *bwoailtyn*, 'folds or pens'; but the
accentuation places that out of tile question. See also the *Lioar
Manninagh*, iii. 167, where Mr. C. Roeder, referring to the same
computus passage, gives the name as *Builthan* in the boundary *inter
Cross Jvar Buillhan*. This would be read by Mr. Quine as *inter Cross
Ivar et Biulthan*, 'between Cross-Ivar and Bolthane.' For the text of
the boundary see Johnstone's edition of the *Chronicon Manniae*
(Copenhagen, 1786), p. 48. and Oliver's *Monumenta de Insula Manniae*,
vol. i. p. 207; see also Mr. Quine's paper on the Boundary o. Abbey
Lands in the *Lioar Manninagh*, iii. 422--3.

\[i\] I say I approximately,' as, more strictly speaking, the ordinary
pronunciation is *Sjndan*, almost as one syllable, and from this arises
a variant, which is sometimes written *Stondane*, while the latest
English development, regardless of the accentuation of the Anglo-Manx
form, which is Santon, pronounced Sintp, makes the parish into a St.
Ann's! For the evidence that it was the parish of a *St. Sanctain* see
Moore's *Names*, p. 209.

\[j\] The Athenaeum for April 1, 1893, p. 415. 1 may here remark that
Mr. Borlase's note on *do fhagaint* is, it seems to me, unnecessary: let
*do fhagaint* stand, and translate, not 'I leave' but 'to leave.' The
letter should be consulted for curious matter concerning Croagh Patrick,
its pagan stations, cup-markings, &c.

\[k\] Since this paper was read to the Folk-Lore Society a good deal of
information of one kind or another has appeared in its journal
concerning the first-foot: see more especially *Folk-Lore* for 1892, pp.
253-64, and for 1893, pp. 309-21.

\[l\]This was written at the beginning of the year 1892.

\[m\] Old-fashioned grammarians and dictionary makers are always
delighted to handle Mrs. Partington's broom: so Kelly thinks he has done
a fine thing by printing *guee*, 'prayer,' and *gwee*, 'cursing.'
