[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cf106)  [Next](cf108.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter III

### Fairy Ways and Words

Heavens defend me from that Welsh fairy!  
                                        SHAKESPEARE.

IN the previous chapters, the fairy lore of the Principality was hastily
skimmed without any method; and I fear that, now I have to reproduce
some of the things which I gleaned somewhat later, there will be, if
possible, still less method. The general reader, in case he chances on
these pages, will doubtless feel that, as soon as he has read a few of
the tales, the rest seem to be familiar to him, and exceedingly
tiresome. It may be, however, presumed that all men anxious to arrive at
an idea as to the origin among us of the belief in fairies, will agree
that we should have as large and exhaustive a collection as possible of
facts on which to work. If we can supply the data without stint, the
student of anthropology may be trusted in time to discover their value
for his inductions, and their place in the history of the human race.

### I.

In the course of the summer of 1882 <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71.md)
I was a good deal in Wales, especially Carnarvonshire, and I made notes
of a great many scraps of legends about the fairies, and other bits of
folklore. I will now string

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

some of them together as I found them. I began at Trefriw <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72.md), in Nant Conwy, where I came across an old
man, born and bred there, called Morris Hughes. He appears to be about
seventy years of age: he formerly worked as a slater, but now he lives
at Llanrwst, and tries to earn a livelihood by angling. He told me that
fairies came a long while ago to Cowlyd Farm, near Cowlyd Lake, with a
baby to dress, and asked to be admitted into the house, saying that they
would pay well for it. Their request was granted, and they used to leave
money behind them. One day the servant girl accidentally found they had
also left some stuff they were in the habit of using in washing their
children. She examined it, and, one of her eyes happening to itch, she
rubbed it with the finger that had touched the stuff; so when she went
to Llanrwst Fair she saw the same fairy folks there stealing cakes from
a standing, and asked them why they did that. They inquired with what
eye she saw them: she put her hand to the eye, and one of the fairies
quickly rubbed it, so that she never saw any more of them. They were
also very fond of bringing their children to be dressed in the houses
between Trefriw and Llanrwst; and on the flat land bordering on the
Conwy they used to dance, frolic, and sing every moonlight night. Evan
Thomas of Sgubor Gerrig used to have money from them. He has been dead,
Morris Hughes said, over sixty years: he had on his land a sort of
cowhouse where the fairies had shelter, and hence the pay.

Morris, when a boy, used to be warned by his parents

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

to take care lest he should be stolen by the fairies. He knew Thomas
Williams of Bryn Syllty, or, as he was commonly called, Twm Bryn Syllty,
who was a changeling. He was a sharp, small man, afraid of nothing. He
met his death some years ago by drowning near Eglwys Fach, when he was
about sixty-three years of age. There are relatives of his about
Llanrwst still: that is, relatives of his mother, if indeed she was his
mother (*os oedd hi'n fam iddo fo, ynté*). Lastly, Morris had a tale
about a mermaid cast ashore by a storm near Conway. She entreated the
fishermen who found her to help her back into her native element; and on
their refusing to comply she prayed them to place her tail at least in
the water. A very crude rhyme describes her dying of exposure to the
cold, thus:--

Y forforwyn ar y traeth,  
Crio gwaeddu'n arw wnaeth,  
Ofn y deuai drycin drannoeth:  
Yr hin yn oer a rhewi wnaeth.

The stranded mermaid on the beach  
Did sorely cry and sorely screech,  
Afraid to bide the morrow's breeze:  
The cold it came, and she did freeze.

But before expiring, the mermaid cursed the people of Conway to be
always poor, and Conway has ever since, so goes the tale, laboured under
the curse; so that when a stranger happens to bring a sovereign there,
the Conway folk, if silver is required, have to send across the water to
Llansanffraid for change.

My next informant was John Duncan Maclaren, who was born in 1812, and
lives at Trefriw. His father was a Scotsman, but Maclaren is in all
other respects a Welshman. He also knew the Sgubor Gerrig people, and
that Evan Thomas and Lowri his wife had exceeding great trouble to
prevent their son Roger from being carried away by the fairies. For the
fairy maids were always trying to allure him away, and he was constantly
finding fairy money. The fairy dance, and the playing and singing that
accompanied it, used to take place in

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

a field in front of his father's house; but Lowri would never let her
son go out after the sun had gone to his battlements *(ar ol i'r
haulfyn'd i lawr i gaera*). The most dangerous nights were those when
the moon shone brightly, and pretty wreaths of mist adorned the meadows
by the river. Maclaren had heard of a man, whom he called Siôn Catrin of
Tyn TwIt, finding a penny every day at the *pistyll* or water-spout near
the house, when he went there to fetch water. The flat land between
Trefriw and Llanrwst had on it a great many fairy rings, and some of
them are, according to Maclaren, still to be seen. There the fairies
used to dance, and when a young man got into one of the rings the fairy
damsels took him away; but he could be got out unharmed at the end of a
year and a day, when he would be found dancing with them in the same
ring: he must then be dexterously touched by some one of his friends
with a piece of iron and dragged out at once. This is the way in which a
young man whom my notes connect with a place called Bryn Glas was
recovered. He had gone out with a friend, who lost him, and he wandered
into a fairy ring. Hehadnewshoesonatthe time, and his friends brought
him out at the end of the interval of a year and a day; but he could not
be made to understand that he had been away more than five minutes,
until he was asked to look at his new shoes, which were by that time in
pieces. Maclaren had also something to say concerning the history and
habitat of the fairies. Those of Nant Conwy dress in green; and his
mother,.who died about sixty-two years ago, aged forty-seven, had told
him that they lived seven years on the earth, seven years in the air,
and seven years underground. He also had a mermaid tale, like that of
Pergrin from Dyfed. A fisherman from Mandrifto yn Rhos, between Colwyn
and Llandudno, had caught

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

a mermaid in his net. She asked to be set free, promising that she
would, in case he complied, do him a kindness. He consented, and one
fine day, a long while afterwards, she suddenly peeped out of the water
near him, and shouted: *Siôn Ifan, cwyd dy rwyda' a thyn tua'r Ian*,
'John Evans, take up thy nets and make for the shore.' He obeyed, and
almost immediately there was a terrible storm, in which many fishermen
lost their lives. The river Conwy is the chief haunt of the mysterious
afanc, already mentioned, and Maclaren stated that its name used to be
employed within his memory to frighten girls and children: so much was
it still dreaded. Perhaps I ought to have stated that Maclaren is very
fond of music, and that he told me of a gentleman at Conway who had
taken down in writing a supposed fairy tune. I have made inquiries of
the latter's son, Mr. Hennessy Hughes of Conway; but his father's papers
seem to have been lost, so that he cannot find the tune in question,
though he has heard of it.

Whilst on this question of music let me quote from the Llwyd letter in
the *Cambrian Journal* for 1859, pp. 145-6, on which I have already
drawn, pp. 130-3, above. The passage in point is to the following
effect:--

'I will leave these tales aside whilst I go as far as the Ogo Du, "the
Black Cave," which is in the immediate vicinity of Crigcieth <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73.md), and into which the musicians

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

entered so far that they lost their way back. One of them was heard to
play on his pipe, and another on his horn, about two miles from where
they went in; and the place where the piper was heard is called Braich y
Bib, and where the man with the horn was heard is called Braich y
Cornor. I do not believe that even a single man doubts but that this is
all true, and I know not how the airs called Ffarwel Die y Pibydd, "
Dick the Piper's Farewell," and Ffarwel Dwm Bach, " Little Tom's
Farewell," had those names, unle4s it was from the musicians above
mentioned. Nor do I know that Ned Puw may not have been the third, and
that the air called Ffarwel Ned Puw, " Ned Pugh's Farewell," may not
have been the last he played before going into the cave. I cannot
warrant this to be true, as I have only heard it said by one man, and he
merely held it as a supposition, which had been suggested by this air of
Ffarwel Die y Pibydd.'

A story, however, mentioned by Cyndelw in the *Brython* for 1860, p. 57,
makes Ned Pugh enter the cave of Tal y Clegyr, which the writer in his
article identifies with Ness Cliff, near Shrewsbury. In that cave, which
was regarded as a wonderful one, he says the musician disappeared, while
the air he was playing, Ffarwel Ned Puw, Ned Pugh's Farewell," was
retained in memory of him. Some account of the departure of Ned Pugh and
of the interminable cave into which he entered, will be found given in a
rambling fashion in the *Cambrian Quarterly Magazine* (London, 1829),
vol. i, pp. 40-5, where the minstrel's Welsh name is given as lolo ap
Huw. There we are told that he was last seen in the twilight of a misty
Halloween, and the notes of the tune he was last heard to play are duly
given. One of the surmises as to Iolo's ultimate fate is also recorded,
namely, that in the other world he has exchanged his

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

fiddle for a bugle, and become huntsman-in-chief to Gwyn ab Nudd, so
that every Halloween he may be found cheering *Cwn Annwn*, 'the Hounds
of the Other World,' over Cader ldris <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md)

The same summer I fell in with Mr. Morris Evans, of Cerrig Man, near
Amlwch. He is a mining agent on the Gwydir Estate in the Vale of Conwy,
but he is a native of the neighbourhood of Parys Mountain, in Anglesey,
where he acquired his knowledge of mining. He had heard fairy tales from
his grandmother, Grace Jones, of Llwyn Ysgaw near Mynydd Mechelt,
between Amlwch and Holyhead. She died, nearly ninety years of age, over
twenty years ago. She used to relate how she and others of her own age
were wont in their youth to go out on bright moonlight nights to a spot
near Llyn y Bwch. They seldom had to wait there long before they would
hear exquisite music and behold a grand palace standing on the ground.
The diminutive folks of fairyland would then come forth to dance and
frolic. The next morning the palace would be found gone, but the
grandmother used to pick up fairy money on the spot, and this went on
regularly so long as she did not tell others of her luck. My informant,
who is himself a man somewhat over fifty-two, tells me that at a place
not far from Llyn y Bwch there were

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

plenty of fairy rings to be seen in the grass; and it is in them the
fairies were supposed to dance <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75.md).

From Llanrwst I went up to see the bard and antiquary, Mr. Gethin Jones.
His house was prettily situated on the hillside on the left of the road
as you approach the village of Penmachno. I was sorry to find that his
memory had been considerably impaired by a paralytic stroke from which
he had suffered not long before. However, from his room he pointed out
to me a spot on the other side of the Machno, called *Y Werddon*, which
means'The Green Land,' or more literally, 'The Greenery,' so to say. It
was well known for its green, grassy fairy rings, formerly frequented by
the *Tylwyth Teg*; and he said he could distinguish some of the rings
even then from where he stood. The Werdon is on the Bennar, and the
Bermar is the high ground between Penmachno and Dolwydelan. The spot in
question is on the part nearest to the Conwy Falls. This name, *Y
Werddon*, is liable to be confounded with *Iwerddon*, 'Ireland,' which
is commonly treated as if it began with the definite article, so that it
is made into *Y Werddon* and *Werddon*. The fairy *Werddon*, in the
radical form *Gwerddon*, not only recalls to my mind the Green Isles
called *Gwerddonau Llïon*, but also the saying, common in North Wales,
that a person in great anxiety 'sees *Y Werddon*.' Thus, for instance, a
man who fails to return to his family at the hour expected, and believes
his people to be in great anxiety about him, expresses himself by saying
that they will have 'seen the Wercton on my account' (*mi fyddan' wedi
gwel'd y Werddon am dana'i*). Is that Ireland, or is it the land of the
fairies, the other world, in fact?

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

\[paragraph continues\] If the latter, it might simply mean they will
have died of anxiety; but I confess I have not so far been able to
decide. I am not aware that the term occurs in any other form of
expression than the one I have given; if it had, and if the Werddon were
spoken of in some other way, that might possibly clear up the
difficulty. If it refers to Ireland, it must imply that sighting Ireland
is equivalent to going astray at sea, meaning in this sort of instance,
getting out of one's senses; but the Welsh are not very much given to
nautical expressions. It reminds me somewhat of Gerald Griffin's
allusion to the Phantom City, and the penalty paid by those who catch a
glimpse of its turrets as the dividing waves expose them for a moment to
view on the western coast of Ireland:--

Soon close the white waters to screen it  
And the bodement, they say, of the wonderful sight,  
Is death to the eyes that have seen it.

The Fairy Glen above Bettws y Coed is called in Welsh Ffos 'Noddyn, 'the
Sink of the Abyss'; but Mr. Gethin Jones told me that it was also called
Glyn y Tylwyth Teg, which is very probable, as some such a designation
is required to account for the English name, the Fairy Glen.' People on
the Capel Garmon side used to see the *Tylwyth* playing there, and
descending into the Ffos or Glen gently and lightly without occasioning
themselves the least harm. The Fairy Glen was, doubtless, supposed to
contain an entrance to the world below. This reminds one of the name of
the pretty hollow running inland from the railway station at Bangor. Why
should it be called Nant Uffern, or 'The Hollow of Hell'? Can it be that
there was a supposed entrance to the fairy world somewhere there? In any
case, I am quite certain that Welsh place-names involve allusions to the
fairies

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

much oftener than has been hitherto supposed; and I should be inclined
to cite, as a further example, Moel Eilio <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76.md), or Moel Ellian, from the personal name
Eilian, to be mentioned presently. Moel Eilian is a mountain under which
the fairies were supposed to have great stores of treasure. But to
return to Mr. Gethin Jones, I had almost forgotten that I have another
instance of his in point. He showed me a passage in a paper which he
wrote in Welsh some time ago on the antiquities of Yspyty Ifan. He says
that where the Serw joins the Conwy there is a cave, to which tradition
asserts that a harpist was once allured by the *Tylwyth Teg*. He was, of
course, not seen afterwards, but the echo of the music made by him and
them on their harps is still to be heard a little lower down, under the
field called to this day Gweirglodd y Telynorion, 'The Harpers' Meadow':
compare the extract from Edward Llwyd's correspondence above.

Mr. Gethin Jones also spoke to me of the lake called Llyn Pencraig,
which was drained in hopes of finding lead underneath it, an expectation
not altogether doomed to disappointment, and he informed me that its old
name was Llyn Llifon; so the moor around it was called Gwaen Llifon. It
appears to have been a large lake, but only in wet weather, and to have
no deep bed. The names connected with the spot are now Nant Gwaen Llifon
and the Gwaith (or Mine) of Gwaen Llifon: they are, I understand, within
the township of Trefriw. The name Llyn Llifon is of great interest when
taken in connexion with the Triadic account of the cataclysm called the
Bursting of Llyn Lli\[f\]on. Mr. Gethin Jones, however, believed himself
that Llyn

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Llïon was no other than Bala Lake, through which
the Dee makes her way.

### II

One day in August of the same year, I arrived at Dinas Station, and
walked down to Llandwrog in order to see Dinas Dinlle, and to ascertain
what traditions still existed there respecting Caer Arianrhod, Llew
Llawgyffes, Dylan Eilton, and other names that figure in the *Mabinogi*
of Math ab Mathonwy. I called first on the schoolmaster, and he kindly
took me to the clerk, Hugh Evans, a native of the neighbourhood of
Llangefni, in Anglesey. He had often heard people talk of some women
having once on a time come from Tregar Anthreg to Cae'r 'Loda', a place
near the shore, to fetch food or water, and that when they looked back
they beheld the town overflowed by the sea: the walls can still be seen
at low water. Gwennan was the name of one of the women, and she was
buried at the place now called Bed Gwennan, or Gwennan's Grave. He had
also heard the fairy tales of Waen Fawr and Nant y Bettws, narrated by
the antiquary, Owen Williams of the former place. For instance, he had
related to him the tale of the man who slept on a clump of rushes, and
thought he was all the while in a magnificent mansion; see p. 100,
above. Now I should explain that Tregar Anthreg is to be seen at low
water from Dinas Dinlle as a rock not far from the shore. The Caranthreg
which it implies is one of the modern forms to which Caer Arianrhod has
been reduced; and to this has been prefixed a synonym of *caer*, namely,
*tref*, reduced to *tre'*, just as Carmarthen is frequently called *Tre'
Gaefyrddin*. Cae'r 'Loda' is explained as Cae'r Aelodau', 'The Field of
the Limbs'; but I am sorry to say that I forgot to

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

note the story explanatory of the name. It is given, I think, to a farm,
and so is Bedd Gwennan likewise the name of a farm house. The tenant of
the latter, William Roberts, was at home when I visited the spot. He
told me the same story, but with a variation: three sisters had come
from Tregan Anrheg to fetch provisions, when their city was overflowed.
Gwen fled to the spot now called Bedd Gwennan, Elan to Tyddyn Elan, or
Elan's Holding, and Maelan to Rhos Maelan, or Maelan's Moor; all three
are names of places in the immediate neighbourhood.

From Dinas Dinlle I was directed across Lord Newborough's grounds at
Glynillifon to Pen y Groes Station; but on my way I had an opportunity
of questioning several of the men employed at Glynllifon. One of these
was called William Thomas Solomon, an intelligent middle-aged man, who
works in the garden there. He said that the three women who escaped from
the submerged city were sisters, and that he had learned in his infancy
to call them Gwennan bi Don, Elan bi Don, and Maelan bi Dôn. Lastly, the
name of the city, according to him, was Tregan Anthrod. I had the
following forms of the name that day:--Tregar Anrheg, Tregar Anthreg,
Tregan Anrheg, Tregan Anthreg, and Tregan Anthrod. All these are
attempts to reproduce what might be written Tre'-Gaer-Arianrhod. The
modification of *nrh* into *nthr* is very common in North Wales, and
Tregar Anrheg seems to have been fashioned on the supposition that
the:name had something to do with *anrheg*, 'a gift.' Tregan Anthrod is
undoubtedly the Caer Arianrhod, or 'fortress of Arianrhod,' in the
*Mabinogi*, and it is duly marked as such in a map of Speede's at the
spot where it should be. Now the Arianrhod of the *Mabinogi* of Math
could hardly be called a lady of rude virtue, and it is the idea in the

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

neighbourhood that the place was inundated on account of the wickedness
of the inhabitants. So it would appear that Gwennan, Elan, and Maelan,
Arianrhod's sisters, were the just ones allowed to escape. Arianrhod was
probably drowned as the principal sinner in possession; but I did not
find, as I expected, that the crime which called for such an expiation
was in this instance that of playing cards on Sunday. In fact, this part
of the legend does not seem to have been duly elaborated as yet.

I must now come back to Solomon's *bi Dôn*, which puzzles me not a
little. Arianrhod was daughter of Don, and so several other characters
in the same *Mabinogi* were children of Don. But what is *bi Dîôn*? I
have noticed that all the Welsh antiquaries who take Don out of books
invariably call that personage Don or Donn with a short *o*, which is
wrong, and this has saved me from being deceived once or twice: so I
take it that *bi Dôn* is, as Solomon asserted, a local expression of
which he did not know the meaning. I can only add, in default of a
better explanation, that *bi Dôn* recalled to my mind what I had shortly
before heard on my trip from Aberdaron to Bardsey Island. My wife and I,
together with two friends, engaged, after much eloquent haggling, a boat
at the former place, but one of the men who were to row us insinuated a
boy of his, aged four, into the boat, an addition which did not exactly
add to the pleasures of that somewhat perilous trip amidst
incomprehensible currents. But the Aberdaron boatmen always called that
child *bi Donn*, which I took  to have been a sort of imitation of an
infantile pronunciation of 'baby John,' for his name was John, which
Welsh infants as a rule first pronounce Donn: I can well remember the
time when I did. This, applied to *Gwennan bi Dôn*, would imply that
Solomon heard it as a piece of nursery lore when he was a child,

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

and that it meant simply--Gwennan, baby or child of Don. Lastly, the
only trace of Dylan I could find was in the name of a small promontory,
called variously by the Glynllifon men Pwynt Maen Tylen, which was
Solomon's pronunciation, and Pwynt Maen Dulan. It is also known, as I
was given to understand, as Pwynt y Wig: I believe I have seen it given
in maps as Maen Dylan Point.

Solomon told me the following fairy tale, and he was afterwards kind
enough to have it written out for me. I give it in his own words, as it
is peculiar in some respects:--

Mi'r oedd gwr a gwraig yn byw yn y Garth Dorwen <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md) ryw gyfnod maith yn ol, ag aethant i
Gaer'narfon i gyflogi morwyn ar ddydd ffair Glangaeaf, ag yr oedd yn
arferiad gan feibion a merched y pryd hynny i'r rhai oedd yn sefyll
allan am lefydd aros yn top y maes presennol wrth boncan las oedd yn y
fan y lle saif y Post-office presennol; aeth yr hen wr a'r hen wraig at
y fan yma a gwelent eneth lan a gwallt melyn yn sefyll 'chydig o'r
neilldu i bawb arall; aeth yr hen wraig ati a gofynnodd i'r eneth oedd
arni eisiau lle. Atebodd fod, ag felly cyflogwyd yr eneth yn ddioed a
daeth i'w lle i'r amser penodedig. Mi fyddai yn arferiad yr adeg hynny o
nyddu ar ol swper yn hirnos y gauaf, ag fe fyddai y forwyn yn myn'd i'r
weirglodd i nyddu wrth oleu y lloer; ag fe fyddai tylwyth teg yn dwad
ati hi i'r weirglodd i ganu a dawnsio. A ryw bryd yn y gwanwyn pan
esdynnod y dydd diangodd Eilian gyd a'r tylwythion teg i ffwrdd, ag ni
welwyd 'mo'ni mwyach. Mae y cae y gwelwyd hi diwethaf yn cael ei alw hyd
y dydd heddyw yn Gae Eilian a'r weirglodd yn Weirglodd y Forwyn. Mi'r
oedd hen 

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

wraig y Garth Dorwen yn arfer rhoi gwragedd yn eu gwlâu, a byddai pawb
yn cyrchu am dani o bob cyfeiriad; a rhyw bryd dyma wr boneddig ar ei
geffyl at y drws ar noswaith loergan lleuad, a hithau yn glawio 'chydig
ag yn niwl braidd,' i 'nol yr hen wreigan at ei wraig; ag felly aeth yn
sgil y gwr dïarth ar gefn y march i Ros y Cowrt. Ar ganol y Rhos pryd
hynny 'r oedd poncan lled uchel yn debyg i hen amddiffynfia a llawer o
gerrig mawrion ar ei phen a charnedd fawr o gerrig yn yr ochor ogleddol
iddi, ag mae hi i'w gwel'd hyd y dydd heddyw dan yr enw Bryn y Pibion.
Pan gyrhaeddasan' y lle aethan' i ogo' fawr ag aethan' i 'stafell lle'r
oedd y wraig yn ei gwely, a'r lle crandia' a welodd yr hen wraig yrioed.
Ag fe roth y wraig yn ei gwely ag aeth at y tan i drin y babi; ag ar ol
iddi orphen dyna y gwr yn dod a photel i'r hen wraig i hiro llygaid y
babi ag erfyn arni beidio a'i gwffwr' a' i llygaid ei hun. Ond ryw fodd
ar ol rhoi y botel heibio fe ddaeth cosfa ar lygaid yr hen wraig a
rhwbiodd ei llygaid â'r un bys ag oedd wedi bod yn rhwbio llygad y baban
a gwelodd hefo 'r llygad hwnnw y wraig yn gorfedd ar docyn o frwyn a
rhedyn crinion mewn ogo' fawr o gerrig mawr o bob tu iddi a 'chydik bach
o dan mewn rhiw gornel, a gwelodd mai Eilian oedd hi, ei hen forwyn, ag
hefo'r llygad arall yn gwel'd y lle crandia' a welodd yrioed. Ag yn mhen
ychydik ar ol hynny aeth i'r farchnad i Gaer'narfon a gwelodd y gwr a
gofynnodd iddo--'Pa sud mae Edian?' 'O Y mae hi yn bur dda,' medd'ai
wrth yr hen wraig: 'a pha lygad yr ydych yn fy ngwel'd?' 'Hefo hwn,'
meddai hithau. Cymerodd babwyren ag a'i tynodd allan ar unwaith.

'An old man and his wife lived at the Garth Dorwen in some period a long
while ago. They went to Carnarvon to hire a servant maid at the
Allhallows <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78.md) fair;

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

the custom then for young men and women who stood out for places to
station themselves at the top of the present *Maes*, by a little green
eminence which was where the present Post-office stands. The old man and
his wife went to that spot, and saw there a lass with yellow hair,
standing a little apart from all the others; the old woman went to her
and asked her if she wanted a place. She replied that she did, and so
she hired herself at once and came to her place at the time fixed. In
those times it was customary during the long winter nights that spinning
should be done after supper. Now the maid servant would go to the meadow
to spin by the light of the moon, and the *Tylwyth Teg* used to come to
her to sing and dance. But some time in the spring, when the days had
grown longer, Eilian escaped with the *Tylwyth Teg*, so that she was
seen no more. The field where she was last seen is to this day called
Eilian's Field, and the meadow is known as the Maid's Meadow. The old
woman of Garth Dorwen was in the habit of putting women to bed, and she
was in great request far and wide. Some time after Eilian's escape there
came a gentleman on horseback to the door one pight when the moon was
full, while there was a slight rain and just a little mist, to fetch the
old woman to his wife. So she rode off behind the stranger on his horse,
and came to Rhos y Cowrt. Now there was at that time, in the centre of
the rhos, somewhat of a rising ground that looked like an old
fortification, with many big stones on the top, and a large cairn of
stones on the northern side: it is to be seen there to this day, and it
goes by the name of Bryn y Pibion, but I have never visited the spot.
When they

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

reached the spot, they entered a large cave, and they went into a room
where the wife lay in her bed; it was the finest place the old woman had
seen in her life. When she had successfully brought the wife to bed, she
went near the fire to dress the baby; and when she had done, the husband
came to the old woman with a bottle of ointment <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md) that she might anoint the baby's eyes; but
he entreated her not to touch her own eyes with it. Somehow after
putting the bottle by, one of the old woman's eyes happened to itch, and
she rubbed it with the same finger that she had used to rub the baby's
eyes. Then she saw with that eye how the wife lay on a bundle of rushes
and withered ferns in a large cave, with big stones all round her, and
with a little fire in one corner; and she saw also that the lady was
only Eilian, her former servant girl, whilst, with the other eye, she
beheld the finest place she had ever seen. Not long afterwards the old
midwife went to Carnarvon to market, when she saw the husband, and said
to him, "How is Eilian?" "She is pretty well," said he to the old woman,
"but with what eye do you see me?" "With this one," was the reply; and
he took a bulrush and put her eye out at once.'

That is exactly the tale, my informant tells me, as he heard it from his
mother, who heard it from an old woman who lived at Garth Dorwen when
his mother was a girl, about eighty-four years ago, as he guessed it to
have been; but in his written version he has omitted one thing which he
told me at Glynllifon, namely, that, when the servant girl went out to
the fairies to spin, an enormous amount of spinning used to be done.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I mention this as it reminds me of the tales of
other nations, where the girl who cannot spin straw into gold is
assisted by a fairy, on certain conditions which are afterwards found
very inconvenient. It may be guessed that in the case of Eilian the
conditions involved her becoming a fairy's wife, and that she kept to
them. Lastly, I should like the archaeologists of Carnarvonshire to
direct their attention to Bryn y Pibion; for they might be expected to
come across the remains there of a barrow or of a fort.

### III

The same summer I happened to meet the Rev. Robert Hughes, of Uwchlaw'r
Ffynnon, near Llanaelhaearn, a village on which Tre'r Ceiri, or the Town
of the Keiri, looks down in its primitive grimness from the top of one
of the three heights of the Eifl, or Rivals as English people call them.
The district is remarkable for the longevity of its inhabitants, and Mr.
Hughes counted fifteen farmers in his immediate neighbourhood whose
average age was eighty-three; and four years previously the average age
of eighteen of them was no less than eighty-five. He himself was, when I
met him, seventy-one years of age, and he considered that he represented
the traditions of more than a century and a half, as he was a boy of
twelve when one of his grandfathers died at the age of ninety-two: the
age reached by one of his grandmothers was all but equal, while his
father died only a few years ago, after nearly reaching his ninety-fifth
birthday.

Story-telling was kept alive in the parish of Llanaelhaearn by the
institution known there as the *pilnos*, or

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

peeling night, when the neighbours met in one another's houses to spend
the long winter evenings dressing hemp and carding wool, though I guess
that a *pilnos* was originally the night when people met to *peel*
rushes for rushlights. When they left these merry meetings they were
ready, as Mr. Hughes says, to see anything. In fact, he gives an
instance of some people coming from a tilhos across the mountain from
Nant Gwrtheyrn to Llithfaen, and finding the fairies singing and dancing
with all their might: they were drawn in among them and found themselves
left alone in the morning on the heather. Indeed, Mr. Hughes has seen
the fairies himself: it was on the Pwllheli road, as he was returning in
the grey of the morning from the house of his *fiancée* when he was
twenty-seven. The fairies he saw came along riding on wee horses: his
recollection is that he now and then mastered his eyes and found the
road quite clear, but the next moment the vision would return, and he
thought he saw the diminutive cavalcade as plainly as possible.
Similarly, a man of the name of Solomon Evans, when, thirty years ago,
making his way home late at night through Glynllifon Park, found himself
followed by quite a crowd of little creatures, which he described as
being of the size of guinea pigs and covered with red and white spots.
He was an ignorant man, who knew no better than to believe to the day of
his death, some eight or nine years ago, that they were demons. This is
probably a blurred version of a story concerning *Cwn Annwn*, 'Hell
hounds,' such as the following, published by Mr. O. M. Edwards in his
*Cymru* for 1897, p. 190, from Mr. J. H. Roberts' essay mentioned above
at p. 148:--'Ages ago as a man who had been engaged on business, not the
most creditable in the world, was returning in the depth of night across
Cefn Creini, and thinking in a downcast frame of mind

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

over what he had been doing, he heard in the distance a low and
fear-inspiring bark; then another bark, and another, and then half a
dozen and more. Ere long he became aware that he was being pursued by
dogs, and that they were *Cwn Annwn*. He beheld them coming: he tried to
flee, but he felt quite powerless and could not escape. Nearer and
nearer they came, and he saw the shepherd with them: his face was black
and he had horns on his head. They had come round him and stood in a
semicircle ready to rush upon him, when he had a remarkable deliverance:
he remembered that he had in his pocket a small cross, which he showed
them. They fled in the greatest terror in all directions, and this
accounts for the proverb, *Mwy na'r cythraul at y groes* (Any more than
the devil to the cross).' That is Mr. Roberts' story; but several
allusions have already been made to *Cwn Annwn*. It would be right
probably to identify them in the first instance with the pack with which
Arawn, king of Annwn, is found hunting by Pwylt, king of Dyfed, when the
latter happens to meet him in Glyn Cuch in his own realm. Then in a poem
in the *Black Book of Carmarthen* we find Gwyn ab Nudd with a pack led
by Dormarth, a hound with a red snout which he kept close to the ground
when engaged in the chase; similarly in the story of lolo ab Huw the
dogs are treated as belonging to Gwyn. But on the whole the later idea
has more usually been, that the devil is the huntsman, that his dogs
give chase in the air, that their quarry consists of the souls of the
departed, and that their bark forebodes a death, since they watch for
the souls of men about to die. This, however, might be objected to as
pagan; so I have heard the finishing touch given to it in the
neighbourhood of Ystrad Meurig, by one who, like Mr. Pughe, explained
that it is the souls only of notoriously wicked men and well-known evil
livers.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

\[paragraph continues\] With this limitation the pack <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80.md) seems in no immediate danger of being
regarded as poaching.

To return to Llanaelhaearn, it is right to say that good spirits too,
who attend on good Calvinists, are there believed in. Morris Hughes, of
Cwm Corryn, was the first Calvinistic Methodist at Llanaelhaearn; hewas
greatgrandfather to Robert Hughes' wife; and he used to be followed by
two pretty little yellow birds. He would call to them, *'Wryd, Wryd*!'
and they would come and feed out of his hand, and when he was dying they
came and flapped their wings against his window. This was testified to
by John Thomas, of Moelfre Bach, who was present at the time. Thomas
died some twentyfive years ago, at the age of eighty-seven. I have heard
this story from other people, but I do not know what to make of it,
though I may add that the little birds are believed to have been angels.
In Mr. Rees' *Welsh Saints*, pp. 305-6, Gwryd is given as the name of a
friar who lived about the end of the twelfth century, and has been
commemorated on November:t; and the author adds a note referring to the
*Cambrian Register* for 1800, Vol. iii. p. 221, where it is said that
Gwryd relieved the bard Einion ab Gwalchmai of some oppression, probably
mental, which had afflicted him for seven years. Is one to suppose that
Gwryd sent two angels in the form of little birds to protect the first
Llanaelhaearn Methodist? The call 'Wryd, Wryd,' would seem to indicate
that the name was not originally *Gwryd*, but *Wryd*, to be identified
possibly with the Pictish name *Uoret* in an inscription at St.
Vigean's, near Arbroath, and to be distinguished

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

from the Welsh word *gwryd*, 'valour,' and from the Welsh name *Gwriad*,
representing what in its Gaulish form was *Viriatus*. We possibly have
the name *Wryd* in Hafod Wryd, a place in the Machno Valley above Bettws
y Coed; otherwise one would have expected *Hafod y Gwryd*, making
colloquially, *Hafod Gwryd*.

Mr. Hughes told me a variety of things about Nant Gwrtheyrn, one of the
spots where the Vortigern story is localized. The Nant is a sort of a
*cul de sac* hollow opening to the sea at the foot of the Eifl. There is
a rock there called *Y Farches*, and the angle of the sea next to the
old castle, which seems to be merely a mound, is called *Y Llynclyn*,
or'The Whirlpool'; and this is perhaps an important item in the
localizing of Vortigern's city there. I was informed by Mr. Hughes that
the grave of Olfyn is in this Nant, with a razed church close by: both
are otherwise quite unknown to me. Coming away from this weird spot to
the neighbourhood of Celynnog, one finds that the Pennardd of the
*Mabinogi* of Math is now called Pennarth, and has on it a well known
cromlech. Of course, I did not leave Mr. Hughes without asking him about
Caer Arianrhod, and I found that he called it Tre' Gaer Anrheg: he
described it as a stony patch in the sea, and it can, he says, be
reached on foot when the ebb is at its lowest in spring and autumn. The
story he had heard about it when he was a boy at school with David
Thomas, better known by his bardic name of *Dafydd Ddu Eryri*, was the
following:--

'Tregaer Anrheg was inhabited by a family of robbers, and among other
things they killed and robbed a man at Glyn Iwrch, near the further wall
of GlynnItifon Park: this completed the measure of their lawlessness.
There was one woman, however, living with them at Tregaer Anrheg, who
was not related to them, and as she went out one evening with

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

her pitcher to fetch water, she heard a voice crying out, *Dos i ben y
bryn i wefd rhyfeddod*, that is, Go up the hill to see a wonder. She
obeyed, and as soon as she got to the top of the hill, whereby was meant
Dinas Dintle, she beheld Tregaer Anrheg sinking in the sea.'

As I have wandered away from the fairies I may add the following curious
bit of legend which Mr. Hughes gave me:--'When St. Beuno lived at
Celynnog, he used to go regularly to preach at Llandwyn on the opposite
side of the water, which he always crossed on foot. But one Sunday he
accidentally dropped his book of sermons into the water, and when he had
failed to recover it a *gylfin-hir*, or curlew, came by, picked it up,
and placed it on a stone out of the reach of the tide. The saint prayed
for the protection and favour of the Creator for the *gylfn-hir*: it was
granted, and so nobody ever knows where that bird makes its nest.'

### IV.

One day in August of the same summer I went to have another look at the
old inscribed stone at Gesail Gyfarch <span
id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81.md), near Tremadoc, and, instead of returning
the same way, I walked across to Criccieth Station; but on my way I was
directed to call at a farm house called Llwyn y Mafon Uchaf, where I was
to see Mr. Edward Llewelyn, a bachelor then seventy-six years of age. He
is a native of the neighbourhood, and has always lived in it; moreover,
he has now been for some time blind. He had heard a good many fairy
tales. Among others he mentioned John Roberts, a slater from the

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Garn, that is Carn Dolbenmaen, as having one
day, when there was a little mist and a drizzling rain, heard a crowd of
fairies talking together in great confusion, near a sheepfold on
Llwytmor Mountain; but he was too much afraid to look at them. He also
told me of a man at Ystum Cegid, a farm not far off, having married a
fairy wife on condition that he was not to touch her with any kind of
iron on pain of her leaving him for ever. Then came the usual accident
in catching a horse in order to go to a fair at Carnarvon, and the
immediate disappearance of the wife. At this point Mr. Llewelyn's sister
interposed to the effect that the wife did once return and address her
husband in the rhyme, *Os bydd anwyd arfy mab*, &c.: see pp.
[44](cf105.htm#page_44), [55](cf105.htm#page_55.md) above. Then Mr.
Llewelyn enumerated several people who are of this family, among others
a girl, who is, according to him, exactly like the fairies. This made me
ask what the fairies are like, and he answered that they are small
unprepossessing creatures, with yellow skin and black hair. Some of the
men, however, whom he traced to a fairy origin are by no means of this
description. The term there for men of fairy descent is *Belsiaid*, and
they live mostly in the neighbouring parish of Pennant, where it would
never do for me to go and collect fairy tales, as I am told; and Mr.
Llewelyn remembers the fighting that used to take place at the fairs at
Penmorfa if the term Belsiaid once began to be heard. Mr. Llewelyn was
also acquainted with the tale of the midwife that went to a fairy
family, and how the thieving husband had deprived her of the use of one
eye He also spoke of the fairies changing children, and how one of these
changelings, supposed to be a baby, expressed himself to the effect that
he had seen the acorn before the oak, and the egg before the chick, but
never anybody who brewed ale in an egg-shell: see [p.
62](cf105.htm#page_62.md) above. As to

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

modes of getting rid of the changelings, a friend of Mr. Llewelyn's
mentioned the story that one was once dropped into the Glaslyn river,
near Bedgelert. The sort of children the fairies liked were those that
were unlike their own; that is, bairns whose hair was white, or inclined
to yellow, and whose skin was fair. He had a great deal to say of a
certain Elis Bach of Nant Gwrtheyrn, who used to be considered a
changeling. With the exception of this changing of children the fairies
seemed to have been on fairly good terms with the inhabitants, and to
have been in the habit of borrowing from farm houses a *padell* and
*gradell* for baking. The *gradell* is a sort of round flat iron, on
which the dough is put, and the *padell* is the *patella* or pan put
over it: they are still commonly used for baking in North Wales. Well,
the fairies used to borrow these two articles, and by way of payment to
leave money on the hob at night. All over Lleyn the *Tylwyth* are
represented as borrowing *padell a gradell*. They seem to have never
been very strong in household furniture especially articles made of
iron. Mr. Llewelyn had heard that the reason why people do not see
fairies nowadays is that they have been exorcised (*wedi eu hoffrymu*)
for hundreds of years to come.

About the same time I was advised to try the memory of Miss Jane
Williams, who lives at the Graig, Tremadoc: she was then, as I was told,
seventy-five, very quick-witted, but by no means communicative to
idlers. The most important information she had for me was to the effect
that the *Tylwyth Teg* had been exorcised away (*wedi' ffrymu*) and
would not be back in *our* day. When she was about twelve she served at
the Gelli between Tremadoc and Pont Aberglaslyn. Her master's name was
Siôn Ifan, and his wife was a native of the neighbourhood of Carnavon;
she had many tales to

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

tell them about the *Tylwyth*, how they changed children, how they
allured men to the fairy rings, and how their dupes returned after a
time in a wretched state, with hardly any flesh on their bones. She
heard her relate the tale of a man who married a fairy, and how she left
him; but before going away from her husband and children she asked the
latter by name which they would like to have, a dirty cow-yard (*buches
fudur*) or a clean cow-yard (*buches lân*). Some gave the right answer,
a dirty cow-yard, but some said a clean cow-yard: the lot of the latter
was poverty, for they were to have no stock of cattle. The same question
is asked in a story recorded by the late Rev. Elias Owen, in his Welsh
Folk-lore, p. 82 <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82.md): his instance
belongs to the neighbourhood of Pentrevoelas, in Denbighshire.

### V.

When I was staying at Pwlltheli the same summer, I went out to the
neighbouring village of Four Crosses, and found a native of the place,
who had heard a great many curious things from his mother. His name was
Lewis Jones: he was at the time over eighty, and he had formerly been a
saddler. Among other things, his mother often told him that her
grandmother had frequently been with the fairies, when the latter was a
child. She lived at Plas Du, and once she happened to be up near Carn
Bentyrch when she saw them. She found them resembling little children,
and playing in a brook that she had to cross. She was so delighted with
them, and stayed so long with them, that a search was made for her, when
she was found in the company of the fairies. Another time, they met her
as

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

she was going on an errand across a large bog on a misty day, when there
was a sort of a drizzle, which one might call either dew or rain, as it
was not decidedly either, but something between the two, such as the
Welsh would call *gwlithlaw*, 'dew-rain.' She loitered in their company
until a search was made for her again. Lewis Jones related to me the
story of the midwife--he pronounced it in Welsh 'midwaith'-who attended
on a fairy. As in the other versions, she lost the sight of one eye in
consequence of her discovering the gentleman fairy thieving; but the
fair at which this happened was held in this instance at Nefyn. He
related also how a farmer at Pennant had wedded a fairy called Bella.
This tale proceeded like the other versions, and did not even omit the
fighting at Penmorfa: see pp. [89](cf106.htm#page_89.md),
[93](cf106.htm#page_93), [220](#page_220.md). He had likewise the tale
about the two youths who had gone out to fetch some cattle, and came,
while returning about dusk, across a party of fairies dancing. The one
was drawn into the circle, and the other was suspected at length of
having murdered him, until, at the suggestion of a wizard, he went to
the same place at the end of a year and a day: then he found him
dancing, and managed to get him out. He had been reduced to a mere
skeleton, but he inquired at once if the cattle he was driving were far
ahead. Jones had heard of a child changed by the fairies when its mother
had placed it in some hay while she worked at the harvest. She
discovered he was not her own by brewing in an egg-shell, as usual. Then
she refused to take any notice of him, and she soon found her own baby
returned; but the latter looked much the worse for its sojourn in the
land of the *Tylwyth Teg*.

My informant described to me Elis Bach of Nant Gwrtheyrn, already
mentioned, [p. 221](#page_221.md), who died somewhat more than forty years
ago. His father was a

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

farmer there, and his children, both boys and girls, were like ordinary
folks, excepting Elis, who was deformed, his legs being so short that
his body seemed only a few inches from the ground when he walked. His
voice was also small and squeaky. However, he was very sharp, and could
find his way among the rocks pretty well when he went in quest of his
father's sheep and goats, of which there used to be plenty there
formerly. Everybody believed Elis to have been a changeling, and one
saying of his is still remembered in that part of the country. When
strangers visited Nant Gwrtheyrn, a thing which did not frequently
happen, and when his parents asked them to their table, and pressed them
to eat, he would squeak out drily, *Buta 'nynna buta'r cwbwl*, that is
to say, 'Eating that means eating all we have.'

He told me further that the servant girls used formerly to take care to
bring a supply of water indoors at the approach of night, that the
fairies might find plenty in which to bathe their children, for fear
that they might use the milk instead, if water was wanting. Moreover,
when they had been baking, they took care to leave the fairies both
*padell* and *gradell*, that they might do their baking in the night.
The latter used to pay for this kindness by leaving behind them a cake
of fairy bread and sometimes money on the hob. I have, however, not been
able to learn anything about the quality or taste of this fairy food.

He had also a great deal to say about the making of bonfires about the
beginning of winter. A bonfire was always kindled on the farm called
Cromlech on the eve of the Winter Calends or *Nos Galan Gaeaf*, as it is
termed in Welsh; and the like were to be seen in abundance towards
Llithfaen, Carnguwch, and Llanaelhaearn, as well as on the Merioneth
side of the bay.

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Besides fuel, each person present used to throw
into the fire a small stone, with a mark whereby he should know it
again. If he succeeded in finding the stone on the morrow, the year
would be a lucky one for him, but the contrary if he failed to recover
it. Those who assisted at the making of the bonfire watched until the
flames were out, and then somebody would raise the usual cry, when each
ran away for his life, lest he should be found last. This cry, which is
a sort of eqqivalent, well known over Carnarvonshire, of the English
saying, 'The devil take the hindmost,'was in the Welsh of that county--

Yr hwch, ddu gwta  <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83.md)*  
A gipio'ir ola'*;

that is to say, 'May the black sow without a tail seize the hindmost!

The cutty black sow is often alluded to nowadays to frighten children in
Arfon, and it is clearly the same creature that is described in some
parts of North Wales as follows:--

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

Hwch ddu gwta  
Ar bob camfa  
Yn nyddu a chardio  
Bob nos G'langaea'.

A cutty black sow  
On every stile,  
Spinning and carding  
Every Allhallows' Eve.

In Cardiganshire this is reduced to the words:--

Nos Galan Gaea',  
Bwbach ar bob camfa.

On Allhallows' Eve  
A bogie on every stile.

Welsh people speak of only three Calends--*Calan-mai*, or the first of
May; *Calan-gaeaf*, the Calends of Winter, or Allhallows; and *Y Calan*,
or The Calends *par excellence*, that is to say, the first day of
January, which last is probably not Celtic but Roman. The other two most
certainly are, And it is one of their peculiarities that all uncanny
spirits and bogies are at liberty the night preceding each of them. The
*Hwch ddu gwta* is at large on Allhallows' Eve, and the Scottish Gaels
have the name 'Samhanach' for any Allhallows' demon, formed from the
word *Samhain*, Allhallows. The eve of the first of May may be supposed
to have been the same, as may be gathered from the story of Rhiannon's
baby and of Teyrnon's colt, both of which were stolen by undescribed
demons that night--I allude to the *Mabinogi* of Pwyll, Prince of Dyfed.

VI\.

At Nefyn, in Lleyn <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84.md), I had some
stories about the *Tylwyth Teg* from Lowri Hughes, the widow of John

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Hughes, who lives in a cottage at Pen Isa'r
Dref, and is over seventy-four years of age. An aunt of hers, who knew a
great many tales, had died about six years before my visit, at the
advanced age of ninety-six. She used to relate to Lowri how the
*Tylwyth* were in the habit of visiting Singrug, a house now in ruins on
the land of Pen Isa'r Dref, and how they had a habit of borrowing a
*padell* and *gradell* for baking: they paid for the loan of them by
giving their owners a loaf. Her grandmother, who died not long ago at a
very advanced age, remembered a time when she was milking in a corner of
the land of Carn Boduan, and how a little dog came to her and received a
blow from her that sent it rolling away. Presently, she added, the dog
reappeared with a lame man playing on a fiddle; but she gave them no
milk. If she had done so, there was no knowing, she said, how much money
she might have got. But, as it was, such singing and dancing were
indulged in by the *Tylwyth* around the lame fiddler that she ran away
as fast as her feet could carry her. Lowri's husband had also seen the
*Tylwyth* at the break of day, near Madrun Mill, where they seem to have
been holding a sort of conversazione; but presently one of them observed
that he had heard the voice of the hen's husband, and off they went
instantly then. The fairies were in the habit also of dancing and
singing on the headland across which the the old earthworks called
Dinllaen. When they had played and enjoyed themselves enough, they used
to lift a certain bit of sod and descend to their own land. My informant
had also heard the midwife story, and she was aware that the fairies
changed people's children; in fact, she mentioned to me a farm house not
far off where there was a daughter of this origin then, not to mention
that she knew all about Elis Bach. Another woman whom I

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

met near Porth Dintlaen said, that the Dintlaen fairies were only seen
when the weather was a little misty.

At Nefyn, Mr. John Williams (Alaw Lleyn) got from his mother the tale of
the midwife. It stated that the latter lost the sight of her right eye
at Nefyn Fair, owing to the fairy she there recognized, pricking her eye
with a green rush. During my visit to Aberdaron, my wife and I went to
the top of Mynyd Anelog, and on the way up we passed a cottage, where a
very illiterate woman told us that the *Tylwyth* *Teg* formerly
frequented the mountain when there was mist on it; that they changed
people's children if they were left alone on the ground; and that the
way to get the right child back was to leave the fairy urchin without
being touched or fed. She also said that, after baking, people left the
*gradell* for the fairies to do their baking: they would then leave a
cake behind them as pay. As for the fairies just now, they have been
exorcised (*wedi 'ffrymu*) for some length of time. Mrs. Williams, of
Pwtt Defaid, told me that the rock opposite, called Clip y Gylfinir, on
Bodwydog mountain, a part of Mynyd y Rhiw, was the resort of the
*Tylwyth* *Teg*, and that they revelled there when it was covered with
mist; she added that a neighbouring farm, called Bodermud Isa', was well
known at one time as a place where the fairies came to do their baking.
But the most remarkable tale I had in the neighbourhood of Aberdaron was
from Evan Williams, a Smith who lives at Yr Arcl Las, on Rhos Hirwaen.
If I remember rightly, he is a native of Llaniestin, and what he told me
relates to a farmer's wife who lived at the Nant, in that parish. Now
this old lady was frequently visited by a fairy who used to borrow
*padell a gradell* from her. These she used to get, and she returned
them with a loaf borne on her head in acknowledgement. But one day she
came to ask for the loan of her *troell bach*, or wheel for spinning
flax. When handing her this, the farmer's wife wished to know her name,
as she came so often, but she refused to tell her. However, she was
watched at her spinning, and overheard singing to the whir of the
wheel:--

Bychan a wydda' hi  
Mai Sili go Dwt  
Yw f'enw i.

Little did she know  
That Silly go Dwt  
Is my name,

This explains to some extent the *sili ffrit* sung by a Corwrion fairy
when she came out of the lake to spin: see [p. 64](cf105.htm#page_64.md)
above. At first I had in vain tried to make out the meaning of that bit
of legend; but since then I have also found the Llaniestin rhyme a
little varied at Llanberis: it was picked up there, I do not exactly
know how, by my little girls this summer. The words as they have them
run thus:--

Bychan a wydda' hi  
Mai Trwtyn-Tratyn  
Yw f'enw i.

Here, instead of *Sìli go Dwt* or *Sìli ffrit*, the name is
*Trwtyn-Tratyn*, and these doggerels at once remind one of the tale of
Rumpelstiltzchen; but it is clear that we have as yet only the merest
fragments of the whole, though I have been thus far unable to get any
more. So one cannot quite say how far it resembled the tale of
Rumpelstiltzchen: there is certainly one difference, which is at once
patent, namely, that while the German Rumpelstiltzchen was a male fairy,
our Welsh *Sili ffrit* or *Sili go Dwt* is of the other sex. Probably,
in the Llaniestin tale, the borrowing for baking had nothing to do with
the spinning, for all fairies in Lleyn borrow a *padell* and a
*gradell*, while they do not usually appear to spin. Then may we suppose
that the spinning was in this instance done for the farmer's wife on
conditions which she was able to evade by discovering the fairy

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

helper's name? At any rate one expects a story representing the farmer's
wife laid under obligation by the fairy, and not the reverse. I shall
have an opportunity of returning to this kind of tale in chapter x.

The smith told me another short tale, about a farmer who lived not long
ago at Deunant, close to Aberdaron. The latter used, as is the wont of
country people, to go out a few steps in front of his house every night
to--before going to bed; but once on a time, while he was standing
there, a stranger stood by him and spoke to him, saying that he had no
idea how he and his family were annoyed by him. The farmer asked how
that could be, to which the stranger replied that his house was just
below where they stood, and if he would only stand on his foot he would
see that what he said was true. The farmer complying, put his foot on
the other's foot, and then he could clearly see that all the slops from
his house went down the chimney of the other's house, which stood far
below in a street he had never seen before. The fairy then advised him
to have his door in the other side of his house, and that if he did so
his cattle would never suffer from the *clwy' byr* <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85.md). The result was that the farmer obeyed,
and had his door walled up and another made in the other side of the
house: ever after he was a most prosperous man, and nobody was so
successful as he in rearing stock in all that part of the country. To
place the whole thing beyond the possibility of doubt, Evan Williams
assured me that he had often seen the farmer's house with the front door
in the back. I mention this strange story in order to compare it, in the
matter of standing on the fairy's foot, with that of standing with one's
foot just inside a fairy ring. Compare also standing on a particular

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

sod in Dyfed in order to behold the delectable realm of Rhys Ddwfn's
Children: see [p. 158](cf106.htm#page_158.md) above.

### VII

Soon afterwards I went to the neighbourhood of Aber Soch and Llanengan,
where I was lucky enough to find Professor Owen of St. David's College,
Lampeter, since appointed Bishop of St. David's, on a visit to his
native place. He took me round to those of the inhabitants who were
thought most likely to have tales to tell; but I found nothing about the
fairies except the usual story of their borrowing *padell* *a gradell*,
and of their changing children. However, one version I heard of the
process of recovering the stolen child differs from all others known to
me: it was given us by Margaret Edwards, of Pentre Bach, whose age was
then eighty-seven. It was to the effect that the mother, who had been
given a fairy infant, was to place it on the floor, and that all those
present in the house should throw a piece of iron at it. This she
thought was done with the view of convincing the *Tylwyth Teg* of the
intention to kill the changeling, and in order to induce them to bring
the right child back. The plan was, we are told, always successful, and
it illustrates, to my thinking, the supposed efficacy of iron against
the fairies.

On the way to Aber Soch I passed by an old-fashioned house which has all
the appearance of having once been a place of considerable importance;
and on being told that its name is Castellmarch, I began thinking of
March ab Meirchion mentioned in the Triads. He, I had long been
convinced, ought to be the Welsh reflex of Labhraidh Lorc, or the Irish
king with horse's ears; and the corresponding Greek character of Midas
with ass's ears is so well known that I need not dwell on it. So I

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

undertook to question various people in the neighbourhood about the
meaning of the name of Castellmarch. Most of them analysed it into
*Castell y March*, the 'Castle of the Steed,' and explained that the
knight of the shire or some other respectable obscurity kept his horses
there. This treatment of the word is not very decidedly countenanced by
the pronunciation, which makes the name into one word strongly accented
on the middle syllable. It was further related to me how Castellmarch
was once upon a time inhabited by a very wicked and cruel man, one of
whose servants, after being very unkindly treated by him, ran away and
went on board a man-of-war. Some time afterwards the man-of-war happened
to be in Cardigan Bay, and the runaway servant persuaded the captain of
the vessel to come and anchor in the Tudwal Roads. Furthermore he
induced him to shell his old master's mansion; and the story is regarded
as proved by the old bullets now and then found at Castellmarch. It has
since been suggested to me that the bullets are evidence of an attack on
the place during the Civil War, which is not improbable. But having got
so far as to find that there was a wicked, cruel man associated with
Castellmarch, I thought I should at once hear the item of tradition
which I was fishing for; but not so: it was not to be wormed out in a
hurry. However, after tiring a very old blacksmith, whose memory was far
gone, with my questions, and after he had in his turn tired me with
answers of the kind I have already described, I ventured to put it to
him at last whether he had never heard some very silly tale about the
lord of Castellmarch, to the effect that he was not quite like other
men. He at once admitted that he had heard it said that he had horse's
ears, but that he would never have thought of repeating such nonsense to
me. This is not a bad instance of the

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

difficulty which one has in eliciting this sort of tradition from the
people. It is true that, as far as regards Castellmarch, nothing, as it
happens, would have been lost if I had failed at Aber Soch, for I got
the same information later at Sarn Fyllteyrn; not to mention that after
coming back to my books, and once more turning over the leaves of the
*Brython*, I was delighted to find the tale there. It occurs at p. 431
of the volume for 1860. It is given with several other interesting bits
of antiquity, and at the end the editor has put 'Edward Llwyd, 1693'; so
I suppose the whole comes from letters emanating from the great Lhwyd,
for so, or rather *Lhuyd*, he preferred to write his name. It is to the
following effect:--

One of Arthur's warriors, whose name was March (or Parch)
Amheirchion <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86.md), was lord of
Castellmarch in Lleyn. This man had horse's ears (resembling Midas), and
lest anybody should know it, he used to kill every

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

man he sought to shave his beard, for fear lest he should not be able to
keep the secret; and on the spot where he was wont to bury the bodies
there grew reeds, one of which somebody cut to make a pipe. The pipe
would give no other sound than 'March Amheirchion has horse's ears.'
When the warrior heard this, he would probably have killed the innocent
man on that account, if he had not himself failed to make the pipe
produce any other sound. But after hearing where the reed had grown, he
made no further effort to conceal either the murders or his ears. This
story of Edward Llwyd's clearly goes back to a time when some kind of a
pipe was the favourite musical instrument in North Wales, and not the
harp.

### VIII.

Some time ago I was favoured with a short but interesting tale by Mr.
Evan Lloyd Jones, of Dinorwig, near Llanberis. Mr. Lloyd Jones, I may
here mention, publisfied not long ago, in *Llais y Wlad* (Bangor, North
Wales), and in the *Drych* (Utica, United States of North America), a
series of articles entitled *Llen y Werin yn Sir Gaernaarfon* or the
Folklore of Carnarvonshire. I happened to see it at a friend's house,
and I found at once that the writer was passionately fond of
antiquities, and in the habit of making use of the frequent
opportunities he has in the Dinorwig quarries for gathering information
as to what used to be believed by the people of Arfon and Anglesey. The
tale about to be given relates to a lake called Marchlyn Mawr, or the
Great Horse-lake, for there are two lakes called Marchlyn: they lie near
one another, between the Fronttwyd, in the parish of Llandegai, and the
Elidyr, in the parishes

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

of Llanddeiniolen and Llanberis. Mr. Lloyd Jones shall tell his tale in
his own words:--

Amgylchynir y Marchlyn Mawr gan greigian erchyll yr olwg arnynt; a dywed
tradodiad d'arfod i un o feibion y Rhiwen  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87.md) *unwaith tra yn cynorthwyo dafad oed, wedi
syrthio i'r creigiau i dod odiyno, darganfod ogof anferth: aeth i fewn
idi a gwelod' ei bod yn ffawn o drysorau ac arfau gwerthfawr; ond gan ei
bod yn dechreu tywyllu, a dringo i fynu yn orchwyl anhawd hyd yn nod yn
ngoleu'r dyd, aeth adref y noswaith honno, a boreu drannoeth ar lasiad y
dyd cychwvnnodd eilwaith i'r ogof, ac heb lawer o drafferth daeth o hyd
idi: aeth i jewn, a dechreuod edrych o'i amgylch ar y trysorau oedd
yno:--Ar ganol yr ogof yr oedd bwrd enfawr o aur pur, ac ar y bwrdd,
goron o aur a pherlau: deallod yn y fan mai coron a thrysorau Arthur
oedynt--nesaodd at y bwrd, a phan oect yn estyn ei law i gymeryd gafal
yn y goron dychrynwyd ef gan drwst erchyll, trwst megys mil o daranau yn
ymrwygo uwch ei ben ac aeth yr holl le can dywylled a'r afagdu. Ceisiod
ymbafalu odiyno gynted ag y gallai; pan lwydod i gyrraedd i ganol y
creigiau taflod ei olwg ar y llyn, yr hwn oed wedi ei gynhyfu drwydo di
donnau brigwynion yn cael eu lluchio trwy dand ysgythrog y creigiau hyd
y man yr oed efe yn sefyll arno; ond tra yr oedd yn parhau i syllu ar
ganol y llyn gwelai gwrwgl a thair o'r benywod prydferthaf y disgynod
llygad unrhyw dyn arnynt eriod yndo yn cad ei rwyfo yn brysur tuag at
enau yr ogof. Ond och! yr oed golwg ofnadwy yr hwn oed yn rhwyfo yn
digon i beri iasau o fraw trewy y dyn cryfaf. Gallodd y llanc rywfodd
dianc adref ond ni fu* 

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

iechyd yn ei gyfansoddiad ar ol hynny, a bydai hyd yn nod crybwyll enw y
Marchlyn yn ei glywedigaeth yn digon I'w yrru yn wallgof. 

'The Marchlyn Mawr is surrounded by rocks terrible to look at, and
tradition relates how one of the sons of the farmer of Rhiwen, once on a
time, when helping a sheep that had fallen among the rocks to get away,
discovered a tremendous cave there; he entered, and saw that it was full
of treasures and arms of great value; but, as it was beginning to grow
dark, and as clambering back was a difficult matter even in the light of
day, he went home that evening, and next morning with the grey dawn he
set out again forthe cave, when he found it without much trouble. He
entered, and began to look about him at the treasures that were there.
In the centre of the cave stood a huge table of pure gold, and on the
table lay a crown of gold and pearls. He understood at once that they
were the crown and treasures of Arthur. He approached the table, and as
he stretched forth his hand to take hold of the crown he was frightened
by an awful noise, the noise, as it were, of a thousand thunders
bursting over his head, and the whole place became as dark as Tartarus.
He tried to grope and feel his way out as fast as he could. When he had
succeeded in reaching to the middle of the rocks, he cast his eye on the
lake, which had been stirred all through, while its white-crested waves
dashed through the jagged teeth of the rocks up to the spot on which he
stood. But as he continued looking at the middle of the lake he beheld a
coracle containing three women, the fairest that the eye of man ever
fell on. They were being quickly rowed to the mouth of the cave; but the
dread aspect of him who rowed was enough to send thrills of horror
through the strongest of men. The youth was able somehow to escape home,

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

but no health remained in his constitution after that, and even the mere
mention of the Marchlyn in his hearing used to be enough to make him
insane.'

Mr. Lloyd Jones appends to the tale a note to the following
effect:--There is a small eminence on the thore of the Marchlyn Mawr, in
the parish of Llandegai, called *Bryn Cwrwgl*, or the 'Hill of the
Coracle'; and *Ogof y Marchlyn*, or the 'Marchlyn Cave,' is a name
familiar enough to everybody in these neighbourhoods. There were
some-unless he ought to say that there still are some-who believed that
there was abundance of treasure in the cave. Several young men from the
quarries, both of the Cae and of Dinorwig, have been in the midst of the
Marchlyn rocks, searching for the cave, and they succeeded in making
their way into a cave. They came away, however, without the treasures.
One old man, Robert Edwards (Iorwerth Sardis), used to teU him that he
and several others had -brought ropes from the quarry to go into the
cave, but that they found no treasure. So far, I have given the
substance of Mr. Jones' words, to which I would add the following
statement, which I have from a native of Dinorwig:About seventy years
ago, when the gentry were robbing the poor of these districts of their
houses and of the lands whic h the latter had enclosed Out of the
commons, an old wornan called Sian William of the Garned was obliged to
flee from her house with her baby--the latter was known later in life as
the Rev. Robert Ellis, of Ysgoldy-in her arms. It was in one of the
Marchlyn caves thatshe found refuge for a day and night. Another kind of
tale connected with the Marchlyn Mawr is recorded in the Powys-land
*Club's Collections, Hist. and Arch*., vol. xv- p. 137, by the Rev.
Elias Owen, to the effect that 'a man who was fishing in the lake found
himself enveloped in the clouds that had descended

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

from the hills to the water. A sudden gust of wind cleared a road
through the mist that hung over the lake, and revealed to his sight a
man busily engaged in thatching a stack. The man, or rather the fairy,
stood on a ladder. The stack and ladder rested on the surface of the
lake.'

### IX

Mr. E. S. Roberts, of Llandysilio School, near Llangolten, has sent me
more bits of legends about the fairies. He heard the following from Mr.
Thomas Parry, of Tan y Coed Farm, who had heard it from his father, the
late Evan Parry, and the latter from Thomas Morris, of Eglwyseg, who
related it to him more than once:--Thornas Morris happened to be
returning home from Llangollen very late on one Saturday night in the
middle of the summer, and by the time he reached near home the day had
dawned, when he saw a number of the *Tylwyth Teg* with a dog walking
about hither and thither on the declivity of the Eglwyseg Rocks, which
hung threateningly overhead. When he had looked at them for some
minutes, he directed his steps towards them; but as they saw him
approaching they hid themselves, as he thought, behind a large stone. On
reaching the spot, he found under the stone a hole by which they had
made their way into their subterranean home. So ends the tale as related
to Mr. Roberts. It is remarkable as representing the fairies looking
rather like poachers; but there are not wanting others which speak of
their possessing horses and greyhounds, as all gentlemen were supposed
to.

One of Mr. Roberts' tales is in point: he had it from Mr. Hugh
Francis <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88.md) of Holyhead House, Ruthin,

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

and the latter heard it from Robert Roberts, of Amlwch, who has now been
dead about thirty years:--About 105 years ago there lived in the parish
of Llandyfrydog, near Llannerch y Med, in Anglesey, a man named Ifan
Gruffyd, whose cow happened to disappear one day. Han Gruffydd was
greatly distressed, and he and his daughter walked up and down the whole
neighbourhood in search of her. As they were coming back in the evening
from their unsuccessful quest, they crossed the field called after the
Dyfrydog thief, Cae Lleidr Dyfrydog, where they saw a great number of
little men on ponies quickly galloping in a ring. They both drew nigh to
look on; but Han GruffyTs daughter, in her eagerness to behold the
little knights more closely, got unawares within the circle in which
their ponies galloped, and did not return to her father. The latter now
forgot all about the loss of the cow, and spent some hours in searching
for his daughter; but at last he had to go home without her, in the
deepest sadness. A few days afterwards he went to Mynadwyn to consult
John Roberts, who was a magician of no mean reputation. That 'wise man'
told Han Gruffyct to be no longer sad, since he could get his daughter
back at the very hour of the night of the anniversary of the time when
he lost her. He would, in fact, then see her riding round in the company
of the *Tylwyth Teg* whom he had seen on that memorable night. The
father was to go there accompanied by four stalwart men, who were to aid
him in the rescue of his daughter. He was to tie a strong rope round his
waist, and by means of this his friends were to pull him out of the
circle when he entered to seize his daughter. He went to the spot,

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

and in due time he beheld his daughter riding round in great state. In
he rushed and snatched her, and, thanks to his friends, he got her out
of the fairy ring before the little men had time to think of it. The
first thing Ifan's daughter asked him was, if he had found the cow, for
she had not the slightest reckoning of the time she had spent with the
fairies.

Whilst I am about it, I may as well go through Mr. Roberts'
contributions. The next is also a tale related to him by Mr. Hugh
Francis, and, like the last, it comes from Anglesey. Mr. Francis'
great-grandfather was called Robert Francis, and he had a mill at
Aberffraw about 100 years ago; and the substance of the following tale
was often repeated in the hearing of Mr. Roberts' informant by his
father and his grandfather:--In winter Robert Francis used to remain
very late at work drying corn in his kiln. As it was needful to keep a
steady fire going, he used to go backwards and forwards from the house,
looking after it not unfrequently until it was two o'clock in the
morning. Once on a time he happened to leave a cauldron full of water on
the floor of the kiln, and great was his astonishment on returning to
find two little people washing themselves in the water. He abstained
from entering to disturb them, and went back to the house to tell his
wife of it. ' Oh,' said she, I they are fairies! He presently went back
to the kiln and found that they were gone. He fancied they were man and
wife. However, they had left the place very clean, and to crown all, he
found a sum of money left by them to pay him, as he supposed, for the
water and the use of the kiln. The ensuing night many more fairies came
to the kiln, for the visitors of the previous night had brought their
children with them; and the miller found them busy bathing them and
looking very comfortable in the warm room where they were. The pay that
night

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

was also more considerable than the night before, as the visitors were
more numerous. After this the miller never failed to leave a vessel full
of water in the kiln every night, and the fairies availed themselves of
it for years, until, in fact, they took offence at the miller telling
the neighbours of the presents of money which had been left him in the
kiln. Thenceforth no fairies were known to frtquent the kiln belonging
to the Aberffraw mill.

The last tale communicated to me by Mr. Roberts is the following, which
he elicited from Margaret Davies, his housekeeper, by reading to her
some of the fairy legends published in the *Cymmrodor* a short while
ago-probably the Corwrion series, one of which bears great resemblance
to hers. Mrs. Davies, who is sixtyone years of age, says that when her
parents, Edward and Ann Williams, lived at Rhoslydan, near Bryneglwys,
in Yale, some seventy-five years ago, the servant man happened one day
in the spring to be ploughing in a field near the house. As he was
turning his team back at one end of the field, he heard some one calling
out from the other end, *Y mae eisieu hoelen yn y pil*,  or 'The peel
wants a nail'; for *pil* is the English peel, a name given to a sort of
shovel provided with a long handle for placing loaves in an oven, and
for getting them out again. When at length the ploughman had reached the
end of the field whence he guessed the call to have proceeded, he there
saw a small peel, together with a hammer and a nail, under the hedge. He
saw that the peel required a nail to keep it together, and as everything
necessary for mending it were there ready to hand, he did as it had been
suggested. Then he followed at the plough-tail until he came round again
to the same place, and there he this time saw a cake placed for him on
the spot where he had previously

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

found the peel and the other things, which had now disappeared. When the
servant related this too his master, he told him at once that it was one
of the *Tylwyth Teg* of that locality that had called out to him. With
this should be compared the story of the man who mended a fairy's plough
vice: see above..

### X.

Early this year I had occasion to visit the well-known Hengwrt Library
at Peniarth, and during my stay there Mr. Wynne very kindly took me to
see such of the Llanegryn people as were most likely to have soomewhat
to say abouf the fairies. Many of the inhabitants had heard of them, but
they had no long tales about them. One man, however, told me of a
William Pritchard, of Pentre Bach, near Llwyngwryl, who died at sixty,
over eighty years ago, and of a Rhys Williams, the clerk of Llangelynin,
how they were going home late at night from a cock-fight at Llanegryn,
and how they came across the fairies singing and dancing on a plot of
ground known as *Gwastad Meirionyd*, 'the Plain of Merioneth,' on the
way from Llwyngwr3rl to Llanegryn. It consists, I am told by Mr. Robert
Roberts of Llanegryn, of no more than some twenty square yards, outside
which one has a good view of Cardigan Bay and the heights of Merioneth
and Carnarvonshire, while from the Gwastad itself neitheir sea nor
mountain is visible. On this spot, then, the belated cockfighters were
surrounded by the fairies. They swore at the fairies and took to their
heels, but they were pursued as far as Clawd Du. Also I was told that
Elen Egryn, the authoress, some sixty years ago, of some poetry called
*Telyn Egryn,* had also seen fairies in her youth, when she used to go
up the hills to look

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

after her father's sheep. This happened near a little brook, from which
she could see the sea when the sun was in the act of sinking in it; then
many fairies would come out dancing and singing, and also crossing and
recrossing the little brook. It was on the side of Rhiwfelen, and she
thought the little folks came out of the brook somewhere. She had been
scolded for talking about the fairies, but she firmly believed in them
to the end of her life. This was told me by Mr. W. Williams, the tailor,
who is about sixty years of age; and also by Mr. Rowlands, the
ex-bailiff of Peniarth, who is about seventy-five. I was moreover much
interested to discover at Llanegryn a scrap of kelpie story, which runs
as follows, concerning Llyn Gwernen, situated close to the old road
between Dolgetley and Llanegryn:--

As a man from the village of Llanegryn was returning in the dusk of the
evening across the mountain from Dolgettey, he heard, when hard by Llyn
Gwernen, a voice crying out from the water:--

Daeth yr awr ond ni itheth y dyn!

The hour is come but the man is not!

As the villager went on his way a little distance, what should meet him
but a man of insane appearance, and with nothing on but his shirt. As he
saw the man making full pelt for the waters of the lake, he rushed at
him to prevent him from proceeding any further. But as to the sequel
there is some doubt: one version makes the villager conduct the man back
about a mile from the lake to a farm house called Dyffrydan, which was
on the former's way home. Others seem to think that the man in his shirt
rushed irresistibly into the lake, and this I have no doubt comes nearer
the end of the story in its original form. Lately I have heard a part of
a similar story about Llyn Cynnwch, which has already been mentioned,
[p. 135](cf106.htm#page_135.md) above. My informant

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

is Miss Lucy Griffith, of Glynmalden, near Dolgeltey, a lady deeply
interested in Welsh folklore and Welsh antiquities generally. She
obtained her information from a Dolgettey ostler, formerly engaged at
the Ship Hotel, to the effect that on Gwyl Galan, 'the eve of New Year's
Day,' a person is seen walking backwards and forwards on the strand of
Cynnwch Lake, crying out:--

Mae'r awr wedi dyfod a'r dyn heb ttyfod!

The hour is come while the man is not!

The ostler stated also that lights are to be seen on Cader Idris on the
eve of New Year's Day, whatever that statement may mean. The two lake
stories seem to suggest that the Lake Spirit was entitled to a victim
once a year, whether the sacrifice was regarded as the result of
accident or design. By way of comparison, one may mention the notion,
not yet extinct, that certain rivers in various parts of the kingdom
regularly claim so many victims: for some instances at random see an
article by Mr. J. M. Mackinlay, on Traces of River Worship in Scottish
Folklore, a paper published in the *Proceeding-s of the Society of
Antiquaries of Scotland*, 31895-6, pp. 69-76. Take for example the
following rhyme:--

Blood-thirsty Dee  
Each year needs three;

But bonny Don  
She needs none.

Or this:--

Tweed said to Till,  
'What gars ye rin sae still?'  
Till said to Tweed I droon twa.'  
'Though ye tin wi' speed

An' I rin slaw  
Yet whar ye droon ae man  
I droon twa'

### XI

In the neighbourhood of Ystrad Meurig, between the Teifi and the Ystwyth
basins, almost everybody can

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

relate tales about the fairies, but not much that is out of the ordinary
run of such stories elsewhere. Among others, Isaac Davies, the smith
living at Ystrad Meurig, had heard a great deal about fairies, and he
said that there were rings belonging to them in certain fields at Tan y
Graig and at Llanafan. Where the rings were, there the fairies danced
until the ground became red and bare of grass. The fairies were,
according to him, all women, and they dressed like foreigners, in short
cotton dresses reaching only to the knee-joint. This description is
somewhat peculiar, as the idea prevalent in the country around is, that
the fairy ladies had very long trains, and that they were very elegantly
dressed; so that it is a common saying there, that girls who dress in a
better or more showy fashion than ordinary look like *Tylwyth Teg*, and
the smith confessed he had often heard that said. Similarly Howells, pp.
113, 121-2, finds the dresses of the fairies dancing on the Freni, in
the north-east of Pembrokeshire, represented as indescribably elegant
and varying in colour; and those who, in the month of May, used to
frequent the prehistoric encampment of Moeddin <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89.md) or Modin--from which a whole cantred takes
its name in Central Cardiganshire-as fond of appearing in green; while
blue petticoats are said, he says, to have prevailed in the fairy dances
in North Wales <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90.md).

Another showed me a spot on the other side of the Teifi, where the
*Tylwyth Teg* had a favourite spot for

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

dancing; and at the neighbouring village of Swydd Ffynnon, another
meadow was pointed out as their resort on the farm of Dol Bydye.
According to one account I had there, the fairies dressed themselves in
very long clothes, and when they danced they took hold of one another's
enormous trains. Besides the usual tales concerning men enticed into the
ring and retained in Faery for a year and a day, and concerning the
fairies' dread of *pren cerdingen* or mountain ash, I had the midwife
tale in two or three forms, differing more or less from the versions
current in North Wales. For the most complete of them I am indebted to
one of the young men studying at the Grammar School, Mr. D. Lledrodian
Davies. It used to be related by an old woman who died some thirty years
ago at the advanced age of about 100. She was Pàli, mother of old Rachel
Evans, who died seven or eight years ago, when she was about eighty. The
latter was a curious character, who sometimes sang *maswedd*, or rhymes
of doubtful propriety, and used to take the children of the village to
see fairy rings. She also used to see the *Tylwyth*, and had many tales
to tell of them. But her mother, Pàli, had actually been called to
attend at the confinement of one of them. The beginning of the tale is
not very explicit; but, anyhow, Pàli one evening found herself face to
face with the fairy lady she was to attend upon. She appeared to be the
wife of one of the princes of the country. She was held in great esteem,
and lived in a very grand palace. Everything there had been arranged in
the most beautiful and charming fashion. The wife was in her bed with
nothing about her but white, and she fared sumptuously. In due time,
when the baby had been born, the midwife had all the care connected with
dressing it and serving its mother. Pàli could see or hear nobody in the
whole place but

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

the mother and the baby. She had no idea who attended on them, or who
prepared all the things they required, for it was all done noiselessly
and secretly. The mother was a charming person, of an excellent temper
and easy to manage. Morning and evening, as she finished washing the
baby, Pàli had a certain ointment given her to rub the baby with. She
was charged not to touch it but with her hand, and especially not to put
any near her eyes. This was carried out for some time, but one day, as
she was dressing the baby, her eyes happened to itch, and she rubbed
them with her hand. Then at once she saw a great many wonders she had
not before perceived; and the whole place assumed a new aspect to her.
She said nothing, and in the course of the day she saw a great deal
more. Among other things, she observed small men and small women going
in and out, following a variety of occupations. But their movements were
as light as the morning breeze. To move about was no trouble to them,
and they brought things into the room with the greatest quickness. They
prepared dainty food for the confined lady with the utmost order and
skill, and the air of kindness and affection with which they served her
was truly remarkable. In the evening, as she was dressing the baby, the
midwife said to the lady, 'You have had a great many visitors to-day.'
To this she replied, 'How do you know that? Have you been putting the
ointment to your eyes?' Thereupon she jumped out of bed, and blew into
her eyes, saying, 'Now you will see no more.' She never afterwards could
see the fairies, however much she tried, nor was the ointment entrusted
to her after that day. According, however, to another version which I
heard, she was told, on being found out, not to apply the ointment to
her eyes any more. She promised she would not; but

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

the narrator thought she broke that promise, as she continued to see the
fairies as long as she lived.

Mr. D. Ll. Davies has also a version like the North Wales ones. He
obtained it from a woman of seventyeight at Bronnant, near Aberystwyth,
who had heard it from one of her ancestors. According to her, the
midwife went to the fair called Ffair Rhos, which was held between
Ystrad Meurig and Pont Rhyd Fendigaid <span
id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91.md) There she saw a great many of the
*Tylwyth* very busily engaged, and among others the lady she had been
attending upon. That being so, she walked up to her and saluted her. The
fairy lady angrily asked how she saw her, and spat in her face, which
had the result of putting an end for ever to her power of seeing her or
anybody of her race.

The same aged woman at Bronnant has communicated to Mr. D. Ll. Davies
another tale which differs from all those of the same kind that I happen
to know of. On a certain day in spring the farmer living at ------ (Mr.
Davies does not remember the name of the farm) lost his calves; and the
servant man and the servant girl went out to look for them, but as they
were both crossing a marshy flat, the man suddenly missed the girl. He
looked for her, and as he could not see her he concluded that she was
playing a trick on him.

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

\[paragraph continues\] However, after much shouting and searching about
the place, he began to think that she must have found her way home, so
he turned back and asked if the girl had come in, when he found to his
surprise that nobody had seen her come back. The news of her being lost
caused great excitement in the country around, since many suspected that
he had for some reasou put an end to her life: some accounted for it in
this way, and some in another. But as nothing could be found out about
her, the servant man was taken into custody on the charge of having
murdered her. He protested with all his heart, and no evidence could be
produced that he had killed the girl. Now, as some had an idea that she
had gone to the fairies, it was resolved to send to 'the wise man' (*Y
dyn hysbys*). This was done, and he found out that the missing girl was
with the fairies: the trial was delayed, and he gave the servant man
directions of the usual kind as to how to get her out. She was watched
at the end of the period of twelve months and a day coming round in the
dance in the fairy ring at the place where she was lost, and she was
successfully drawn out of the ring; but the servant man had to be there
in the same clothes as he had on when she left him. As soon as she was
released and saw the servant she asked about the calves. On the way home
she told her master, the servant man, and the others, that she would
stay with them until her master should strike her with iron, but they
went their way home in great joy at having found her. One day, however,
when her master was about to start from home, and whilst he was getting
the horse and cart ready, he asked the girl to assist him, which she did
willingly; but as he was bridling the horse, the bit touched the girl
and she disappeared instantly, and was never seen from that day forth.

I cannot explain this story, unless we regard it as

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

made up of pieces of two different stories which had originally nothing
to do with one another; consistency, however, is not to be expected in
such matters. Mr. D. Ll. Davies has kindly given me two more tales like
the first part of the one I have last summarized, also one in which the
missing person, a little boy sent by his mother to fetch some barm for
her, comes home of himself after being awaya year or more playingwith
the *Tylwyth Teg*, whom he found to be very nice, pleasant people; they
had been exceedingly kind to him, and they even allowed him to take the
bottle with the barm. home at the last. This was somewhere between Swydd
Ffynnon and Carmarthen.

Mr. D. IL. Davies finds, what I have not found anywhere else, that it
was a common idea among the old people in Cardiganshire, that once you
came across one of the fairies you could not easily be rid of him; since
the fairies were little beings of a very devoted nature. Once a man had
become friendly with one of them, the latter would be present with him
almost everywhere he went, until it became a burden to him. However,
popular belief did not adopt this item of faith without another to
neutralize it if necessary: so if one was determined to get rid of the
fairy companion, one had in the last resort only to throw a piece of
rusty iron at him to be quit of him for ever. Nothing was a greater
insult to the fairies. But though they were not difficult to make
friends of, they never forgave those who offended them: forgiveness was
not an element in their nature. The general account my informant gives
of the outward appearance of the fairies as he finds them in the popular
belief, is that they were a small handsome race, and that their women
dressed gorgeously in white, while the men were content with garments of
a dark grey colour, usually including knee-breeches. As

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

might be expected, the descriptions differ very much in different
neighbourhoods, and even in different tales from the same neighbourhood:
this will surprise no one. It was in the night they came out, generally
near water, to sing and dance, and also to steal whatever took their
fancy; for thieving was always natural to them; but no one ever
complained of it, as it was supposed to bring good luck.

### XII

Mr. Richard L. Davies, teacher of the Board School at Ystalyfera, in the
Tawe Valley, has been kind enough to write out for me a budget of ideas
about the Cwm Tawe Fairies, as retailed to him by a native who took
great delight in the traditions of his neighbourhood, John Davies (*Shôn
o'r Bont*), who was a storekeeper at Ystalyfera. He died an old man
about three years ago. I give his stories as transmitted to me by Mr.
Davies, but the reader will find them a little hazy now and then, as
when the fairies are made into ordinary conjurer's devils:--

Rhywbeth rhyfed yw yr hen Gastell yna (gan olygu Craig Ynys Geinon): yr
wyf yn cofio yr amser pan y byda'i yn dychryn gan bobl fyned yn agos
ato--yn enwedig y nos: yr oed yn dra pheryglus rhag i dyn gael ei
gymeryd at Bendith eu Mamau. Fe dywedir fod wmred o'r rheiny yna, er na
wn ipa le y meant yn cadw. 'R oed yr hen bobl yn arferol o dweyd fod
pwll yn rhywle bron canol y Castell, tua llathen o led, ac yn bump neu
chwech llath o dyfnder, a charreg tua thair tynnell o bwysau ar ei wyneb
e', a bod ffordd dan y daear gandynt o'r pwll hynny bob cam i ogof Tan
yr Ogof, bron blaen y Cwm (yn agos i balas Adelina Patti, sef Castel?
Craig y Nos), mai yno y maent yn treulio eu 

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

hamser yn y dyd, ac yn dyfod lawr yma i chwareu eu tranciau yx y nos.

Mae gandynt, mede nhw, ysgol aur, o un neu dwy ar hugain o ff;; ar hyd
honno y maent yn tramwy i fyny ac i lawr. Mae gandynt air bach, a dim
ond I'r blaenaf ar yr ysgol dywedyd y gair hynny, mae y garreg yn codi o
honi ei hunan; a gair arall, ond i'r olaf wrth fyned i lawr ei dywedyd,
mae yn cauad ar eu hol.

Dywedir i was un o'r ffermydd cyfagos wrth chwilio am wningod yn y
graig, dygwydd dyweyd y gair pan ar bwys y garreg, idi agor, ac ido
yntau fyned i lawr yr ysgol, ond am na wydai y gair i gauad ar ei ol, fe
adnabu y Tylwyth wrth y draught yn diffod  y canwyllau fod rhywbeth o
le, daethant am ei draws, cymerasant ef atynt, a bu gyda hwynt yn byw ac
yn bod am saith mlynedd; ymhen y saith mlyned fe diangod a llon'd ei het
o guineas gando.

Yr oedd efe erbyn hyn wedi dysgu y dau air, ac yn gwybod llawer am eu
cwtches nhw. Fe dywedod hwn y cwbl wrth ffarmwr o'r gymdogaeth, fe aeth
hwnnw drachefn i lawr, ac yr oedd rhai yn dyweyd ido dyfod a thri llon'd
cawnen halen o guineas, hanner guineas, a darnau saith-a:chwech, odiyno
yr un diwrnod. Ond aeth yn rhy drachwantus, ac fel llawer un trachwantus
o'i flaen, bu ei bechod yn angeu ido.

Canys fe aeth i lawr y bedwaredd waith ynguyll y nos, ond fe daeth y
Tylwyth am ei ben, ac ni welwyd byth o hono. Dywedir fod ei bedwar
cwarter e' yn hongian mewn ystafell o dan y Caslell, ond pwy fu yno iw
gwel'd nhw, wn i dim.

Mae yn wir ei wala i'r ffarmwr crykoylledig fyned ar goll, ac na
chlybwyd byth am dano, ac mor wir a hynny i'w dylwyth dyfody abl iawn,
bron ar unwaith yr amser hynny. A chi wydoch gystal a finnau, eu bod nhw
yn dywedyd fod ffyrrd tandaearol gandynt i ogofau 

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

\[paragraph continues\]

Ystrad Fellie, yn agos i Benderyn. A dyna y Garn Goch ar y Drum (Onllwyn
yn awr) maent yn dweyd fod cannoedd o dynelli o aur yn stor ganddynt
yno; a chi glywsoch am y stori am un o'r Gethings yn myned yno i glodio
yn y Garn, ac ido gael ei drawsffurfio gan y Tylwyth i olvyn o dan, ac
ido' fethu caell llonyd gandynt, hyd nes ido eu danfon i wneyd rhaff o
sand!

Fe fu gynt hen fenyw yn byw mewn ty bychan gerllaw i Ynys Geinon, ac yr
oedd hi yn gallu rheibo, mede nhw, ac yr oedd son ei bod yn treulio
saith diwrnod, saith awr, a saith mynyd gyda y Tylwyth Teg bob blwydyn
yn Ogof y Castell Yr oed y gred yn lled gyffredinol ei bod hi yn cael
hyn a hyn o aur am bob plentyn a allai hi ladrata idynt hwy, a dodi un
o'i hen grithod hwy yn ei le: 'doedd hwnnw byth yn cynydu. Y fford y
bydai hi yn gwneyd oed myned  i'r ty dan yr esgus o ofyn cardod, a hen
glogyn llwyd-du maw ar ei chefn, ac o dan hwn, un o blant Bendith y
Mamau; a bob amser os bydai plentyn bach gwraig y ty yn y cawell, hi
gvmerai y swyd o siglo y cawell, a dim ond I'r fam droi ei chefin am
fynyd neu dwy, hi daflai y lledrith I'r cawell, ai ymaith a'r plentyn yn
gyntaf byth y gallai hi. Fe fu plentyn gan dyn o'r gym'dogaeth yn
lingran am flynydau heb gynyddu dim, a barn pawb oed mai wedi cael ei
newid gan yr hen wraig yr oedd; fe aeth lad y plentyn i fygwth y gwr
hysbys arni: fe da'eth yr hen wraig  yno am saith niwrnod i esgus bado y
bachgen bach mewn dwfir oer, a'r seithfed bore cyn ei bod yn oleu, hi a
gas genad i fyned ag ef dan rhyw bistyll, mede hi, ond medair gm'dogion,
myned ag ef i newid a wnaeth. Ond, beth bynag, fe wett loddy plen!\~vn
fel cyw yr uydd o hynny i maes. Ond gorfu i fam e' wneyd cystal a ffw
wrth yr hen wraig, y gwnai ei dwco mewn dwfir oer bob bore dros gwarter
blwydyn, ac yn mhen y chwarter hynny 'doed' dim brafach plentyn yn y
Cwm. 

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

'That is a wonderful thing, that old castle there, he would say,
pointing to the Ynys Geinon Rock. I remember a time when people would be
terrified to go near it, especially at night. There was considerable
danger that one might be taken to *Bendith eu Mamau*. It is said that
there are a great many of them there, though I know not where they
abide. The old folks used to say that there was a pit somewhere about
the middle of the Castle, about a yard wide and some five or six yards
deep, with a stone about three tons in weight over the mouth of it, and
that they had a passage underground from that pit all the way to the
cave of Tan yr Ogof, near the top of the Cwm, that is, near Adelina
Patti's residence at Craig y Nos Castle: there, it was said, they spent
their time during the day, while they came down here to play their
tricks at night. They have, they say, a gold ladder of one or two and
twenty rungs, and it is along that they pass up and down. They have a
little word; and it suffices if the foremost on the ladder merely utters
that word, for the stone to rise of itself; while there is another word,
which it suffices the hindmost in going down to utter so that the stone
shuts behind him. It is said that a servant from one of the neighbouring
farms, when looking for rabbits in the rock, happened to say the word as
he stood near the stone, that it opened for him, and that he went down
the ladder; but that because he was ignorant of the word to make it shut
behind him, the fairies discovered by the draught putting out their
candles that there was something wrong. So they found him out and took
him with them. He remained living with them for seven years, but at the
end of the seven years he escaped with his hat full of guineas. He had
by this time learnt the two words, and got to know a good deal about the
hiding places of their treasures. He told everything to

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

a farmer in the neighbourhood, so the latter likewise went down, and
some used to say that he brought thence thrice the fill of a salt-chest
of guineas, half-guineas, and seven-and-sixpenny pieces in one day. But
he got too greedy, and like many a greedy one before him his crime
proved his death; for he went down the fourth time in the dusk of the
evening, when the fairies came upon him, and he was never seen any more.
It is said that his four quarters hang in a room under the Castle; but
who has been there to see them I know not. It is true enough that the
above-mentioned farmer got lost, and that nothing was heard respecting
him; and it is equally true that his family became very well to do
almost at once at that time. You know as well as I do that they say,
that the fairies have underground passages to the caves of Ystraffelle,
near Penderyn. There is the Garn Goch also on the Drum (now called
Ollwyn); they say there are hundreds of tons of gold accumulated by them
there, and you have heard the story about one of the Gethings going
thither to dig in the Garn, and how he \[sic\] was transformed by the
fairies into a wheel of fire, and that he could get no quiet from them
until he sent them to manufacture a rope of sand!--A more intelligible
version of this story has been given at pp. [19](cf105.htm#page_19.md)-20
above.

'There was formerly an old woman living in a small house near Ynys
Geinon; and she had the power of bewitching, people used to say: there
was a rumour that she spent seven days, seven hours, and seven minutes
with the fairies every year in the cave at the Castle. It was a pretty
general belief that she got such and such a quantity of gold for every
child she could steal for them, and that she put one of those old
urchins of theirs in its place: the latter never grew at all. The way
she used to do it was to enter people's houses

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

with the excuse of asking for alms, having a large darkgrey old cloak on
her back, and the cloak concealed one of the children of *Bendith eu
Mamau*. Whenever she found the little child of the good woman of the
house in its cradle, she would take upon herself to rock the cradle, so
that if the mother only turned her back for a minute or two, she would
throw the sham child into the cradle and hurry away as fast as she could
with the baby. A man in the neighbourhood had a child lingering for
years without growing at all, and it was the opinion of all that it had
been changed by the old woman. The father at length threatened to call
in the aid of " the wise man," when the old woman came there for seven
days, pretending that it was in order to bathe the little boy in cold
water; and on the seventh day she got permission to take him, before it
was light, under a certain spout of water: so she said, but the
neighbours said it was to change him. However that was, the boy from
that time forth got on as fast as a gosling. But the mother had all but
to take an oath to the old woman, that she would duck him in cold water
every morning for three months, and by the end of that time there was no
finer infant in the Cwm.'

Mr. Davies has given me some account also of the annual pilgrimage to
the Fan mountains to see the Lake Lady: these are his words on the
subject--they recall pp. [15](cf105.htm#page_15.md)-16 above:--

'It has been the yearly custom (for generations, as far as I can find)
for young as well as many people further advanced in years to make a
general excursion in carts, gambos, and all kinds of vehicles, to Llyn y
Fan, in order to see the water nymph (who appeared on one day only, viz.
the first Sunday in August). This nymph was said to have the lower part
of her body resembling that of a dolphin, while the upper part was that
of a

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

beautiful lady: this anomalous form appeared on the first Sunday in
August (if the lake should be without a ripple) and combed her tresses
on the reflecting surface of the lake. The yearly peregrination to the
abode of the Fan deity is still kept up in this valley--Cwmtawë; but not
to the extent that it used to formerly!

### XIII

Mr. Craigfryn Hughes has sent me another tale about the fairies: it has
to do with the parish of Llanfabon, near the eastern border of
Glamorganshire. Many traditions cluster round the church of Llanfabon,
beginning with its supposed building by Saint Mabon, but which of the
Mabons of Welsh legend he was, is not very certain. Not very far is a
place called Pant y Dawns, or the Dance Hollow, in allusion to the
visits paid to the spot by *Bendith y Mamau*, as the fairies are there
called. In the same neighbourhood stand also the ruins of Castell y Nos,
or the Castle of the Night <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92.md), which
tradition represents as uninhabitable because it had been built of
stones from Llanfabon Church, and on account of the ghosts that used to
haunt it. However, one small portion of it was usually tenanted formerly
by a 'wise man' or by a witch. In fact, the whole country round
Llanfabon Church teemed with fairies, ghosts, and all kinds of uncanny
creatures:--

Mewn amaethdy ag sydd yn aros yn y plwyf a elwir y Berth Gron,
trigiannai gweddw ieuanc a'i phlentyn 

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

bychan. Yr oedd wedi colli ei gwr, a'i hunig gysur yn ei hamddifadrwydd
a'i hunigrwydd oedd Gruff, ei mab. Yr oedd ef yr amser hwn oddeutu tair
blwydd oed, ac yn blentyn braf ar ei oedran. Yr oedd y plwyf, ar y pryd,
yn orlawn o 'Fendith y Mamau'; ac, ar amser llawn lloer, bydent yn cadw
dynion yn effro a'u cerddoriaeth hyd doriad gwawr. Rhai hynod ar gyfrif
eu hagrwch oedd 'Bendith' Llanfabon, ac yr un mor hynod ar gyfrif eu
castiau. Lladrata plant o'r cawellau yn absenoldeb eu mamau, a denu
dynion trwy eu swyno a chereddoriaeth i ryw gors afiach a diffaith, a
ymddangosai yn gryn ddifyrrwch idynt. Nid rhyfedd fod y mamau beunydd ar
eu gwyliadwriaeth rhag ofn colli eu plant. Yr oedd y wedw o dan sylw yn
hynod ofalus am ei mab, gymaint nes tynnu rhai o'r cmydogion i dywedyd
wrthi ei bod yn rhy orofalus, ac y byddai i ryw anlwc orddiwes ei mab.
Ond ni thalai unrhyw sylw i'w dywediadau. Ymddan-gosai fod ei holl
hyfrydwch a'i chysur ynghyd a'i gobeithion yn cydgyfarfod yn ei mab.
Modd bynnag, un diwrnod, clywodd ryw lais cwynfannus yn codi o
gymydogaeth y beudy; a rhag bod rhywbeth wedi digvydd i un o'r gwartheg
rhedodd yn tuag yno, gan adael y drws heb ei gau, a'i mab bychan yn y
ty. Ond pwy a fedr desgnfio ei gofid ar ei gwaith yn dyfod Pr b, wrth
weled eisiau ei mab? Chwiliodd bob man am dano, ond yn aflwydiannus.
Odeutu machlud haul, wele lencyn bychan yn gwneuthur ei ymddangosiad o'i
blaen, ac yn dywedyd, yn groyw, 'Mam!' Edrychodd y fam yn janwl arno, a
dywedod o'r diwed, 'Nid fy mhlentyn i wyt ti!'  'Le, yn sicr,' atebai y
bychan.

Nid ymdangosai y fam yn fodlon, na'i bod yn credu mai ei phlentyn hi
ydoedd. Yr oedd rhywbeth yn sisial yn barhaus wrthi mai nid ei mab hi
ydoedd Ond beth bynnag, bu gyda hi am flwyddyn gyfan, ac nid ymdangosai
ei fod yn cnydu dim, tra yr oedd Gruff, ei mab hi, yn 

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

blenlyn

cynydfawr iawn. Yr oedd y gwr bychan yn myned yn fwy hagr bob dydd
hefyd. O'r diwedd penderfynodd fyned at y 'dyn hysbys,' er cael rhyw
wybodaeth a goleuni ar y mater. Yr oedd yn dikwydd bod ar y pryd yn
trigfannu yn Nghastell y Nos, wr ag oedd yn hynod ar gyfrif ei
ymwybydiaeth drwyadl o 'gyfrinion y fall' Ar ol idi osod ei hachos ger
ei fron, ac ynlau ei holi, sylwodd, 'Crimbil ydyw, ac y mae dy blentyn
di gyd a'r hen Fendith yn rhywle; ond i ti d'ilyn fy nghyfarwyddiadau i
yn ffyddlon a manwl, fe adferir dy blentyn i ti yn fuan. Yn awr, oddeutu
canol dydd y foru, tor wy yn y canol, a thafl un hanner ymaith
oddiwrrthyd, a chadw y llall yn dy law, a dechreu gymysg ei gynwysiad yn
ol a blaen. Cofia fod y gwr bychan gerllaw yn gwneuthur sylw o'r hyn ag
a fyddi yn ei wneuthur. Ond cofia di a pheidio galw ei sylw--rhaid
ennill ei sylw at y weithred heb ei alw: ac odid fawr na ofynna i ti
beth fydi yn ei wneuthur. A dywed wrtho mai cymysg pastai'r fedel yr
wyt. A rho wybod i mi beth fydd ei ateb.'

Dychwelodd y wraik, a thrannoeth dilynodd gyfarwyddyd y 'dyn cynnil' I'r
llythyren. Yr oedd y gwr bychan yn sefyll yn ei hymyl, ac yn sy/wi arn i
yw fanwl. Ym mhen ychydig, gofynnodd, 'Mam, beth "i ch'i 'neuthur?'
 'Cymysg pastai'r fedel, machgen I! ' O felly. Mi glywais gan fy nhad,
fe glywodd hwnnw gan ei dad, a hwnnw gan ei dad ynlau, fod mesen cyn
derwen, a derwen mewn dar <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93.md)

; ond ni chlywais i na gweled neb yn un man yn cymysg pastai'r fedel
mewn masgal wy iar.' Sylwodd y wraig ei fod yn edrych yn hynod o sarug
arni pan yn siarad, ac yr oedd hynny yn ychwanegu at ei hagrwch, nes ei
wneuthur wrthun i'r pen.

Y prydnawn hwnnw al y wraig at y 'dyn cynnil'

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

er ei hysbysu o'r hyn a lefarwyd gan y cor. ' O,' ebai hwnnw, 'un o'r
hen frid ydyw! '  'Yn awr, bydd Mawn fiber nesafym mhen pedwar diwrnod;
mae yn rhaid i ti fyned i ben y pedair heol sydd cydgyfarfod wrth ben
Rhyd y Gloch; am deudeg o'r glock y nos y bydd y lleuad yn llawn. Cofia
guddio dy hun mewn man ag y cei lawn olwg ar bennau y croesffyrdd, ac os
gweli rywbeth a bair i ti gynhyrfu, cofia fod yn ffonydd, ac ymatal rhag
rhocti ffrwyn?th deimladau, neu fe ddisbywir y cnyllun, ac ni chei dy
fab yn ol byth.'

Nis gwydai y fam anffodus beth oedd I'w deall wrth ystori ryfedd y 'dyn
cynnil.' Yr oedd mewn cymaint o dywyllwch ag erioed. O'r diwedd daeth yr
amser i ben; ac aryr awr a payntiedik yr oeddyn ymgudio yn ofalus lu
cefn i luyn mawr yn ymyl, o ba le y caffai olwg ar bob beth o gylch. Bu
am hir amser yno yn gwylio heb ddim i'w glywed na'i weled--dim ond
distawrwyet dwfn a phruddglwyfus yr hanner nos yn teyrnasu. O'r diwedd
dwai sain cerddoriaelh yn dynesu ati o hirbett. Nis, nis yr oetty sain
felusber yn dyfod o hyd; a gwrandawai hithai gyda dyclbrdeb arni. Cyn
hir yr oedd yn ei hymyl a deallodd mai gorymdaith o 'Fendith y Mamau'
oeddynt yn myned i rywle. Yr oeddynt yn gannoedd mewn rhif. Tua chanol
yr orymdaith canfyddodd olygfa ag a drywanodd ei chalon, ac a berodd i'w
gwaed sefyll yn ei rhedweliau. Yn cerded rhwng pedwar o'r 'Bendith' yr
oedd ei phlentyn bychan anwyl ei hun. Bu bron a llwyr anghofio ei hun, a
llamu tuag ato er ei gipio ymaith oddiarnynt truy drais os gaffai. Ond
pan ar neidio allan di hymguctfan i'r diben hwnnw meddyliodd am gynghor
y 'dyn cynnil,' sef y bydai i unrhyw gynhyrfiad o'i heido ddistrywio y
cwbl, ac na byclai idi gad ei fihlenbn yn ol byth.

Ar ol i'rorymdaith ddirwyn i'r pen, ac i sain eu cerddoriaeth ddistewi
yn y peffder, daeth aflan o'i hym-gudf'an, 

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

gan gyfeirio ei chamrau tua 'i chartref. Os oedd yn hiraethol o'r blaen
ar ol ei mab, yr oedd yn llawer mwy erbyn hyn; a'I hadgasrzvydd at y cor
bychan oedd yn hawlio ei fod yn fab idi wedi cynyddu yn fawr iawn, waith
yr oedd yn sicr yn awr yn ei meddwl mai un o'r henfrid ydoed. Nis
gwyddai pa fodd i'w oddef am fynud yn hwy yn yr un ty a hi, chwaithach
goddef ido alw i 'mam' arni hi. Ond beth bynnag, cafodd digon o ras
ataliol i ymddwyn yn wed'aidd at y gwr bychan hagr oect gyda hi yn ty.
Drannoeth aeth ar ei hunion at y 'dyn cynnil' i adrodd yr hyn yr oedd
wedi bod yn llygad dyst o hono y noson gynt, ac i ofyn am gyfarwyddyd
pellach. Yr oedd y 'gwr cynnil' yn ei disguyl, ac ar ei gwaith yn dyfod
i'r ty adnabyddodd wrthi ei bod wedi gweled rhywbeth oedd wedi ei
chyffrot. Adroddodd wrtho yr hyn ag oedd wedi ei ganfod ar ben y
croesffyrdd; ac wedi ido glywed hynny, agorodd lyfr mawr ag oedd gando,
ac wedi hir syllu arno hysbysodd hi 'fod yn angenrheidiol idi cyn cael
ei phlentyn yn ol gael idr d'u heb un plufyn guyn nac o un lliw arall
arni, di lladd; ac ar ol ei lladd, ei gosod o flaen tan coed, pluf a
chwbl, er ei phobi. Mor .gynted ag y buasai yn ei gosod o flaen y tan,
idi gau pob twll a myneddfa yn yr adeilad ond un, a theidio a dal sylw
manwl ar ol y 'crimbil,' hyd -nes byddai y iir yn digon, a'r pluf i
syrthio ymaith odiarni bob un, ac yna i edrych ym mha le yr oedd ef.

Er mor rhyfedd oedd cyfarwyddyd y 'gwr,' penderfynodd et gynnyg; a
thrannoeth aeth i chwilio ym mhlith y ieir oedd yno am un o'r desgrifiad
angenrheidiol; ond er ei siomedigaeth methodd a chad yr un. Aeth o'r
naill ffermdy i'r llall i chwilio, ond ymddangosai ffawdfel yn,azvgu
arni-waith method'a chad yr un. Pan ym mron digaloni gan ei haflwyddiant
daeth ar draws un mewn amaethdy yng nghwr y pliv f, a phrynod hi yn
ddioedi. Ar ol dychwelyd adref, gosododd y tan mewn trefn, a 

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

lladdodd yr idr, gan ei gosod o flaen y tan disglaer a losgai ar yr
alch. Pan yn edrych arni yn pobi, anghofiocty 'crimbil' yn hoffol, ac yr
oedd wedi syrthio i rywfath o bruaddlewyg, pryd y synnwyd hi gan sain
cerd'oriaelh y tu altan t'r ty, yn debyg I'r hyn a glywoct  whydik
nosweithiazi cyn hynny ar ben y croesffyrd. Yr oeddy pluf erbyn hyn wedi
syrthio ymaith oddiar y iar, ac erbyn edrych yr oeddy 'crtinbil' wedi
diflannu. Edrychai y fam yn wyfft o'i deutu, ac er ei ffaweigd'clywai
lais ei mab coftedik yn ga1w arni y tu affan. Rhedodd i'w rfod, gan ei
gofleidio yn wresog; a phan ofynoddym Mha le yr oedd wedi bod cyhyd, nid
oedd ganddo gyfrif yn y byd Pw rodi ond mai yn gwrando ar ganit hyfryd
yr oedd wedi bod. Yr oedd yn deneu a threulieudig iawn ei wedd pan
adferwyd ef. Dyna ystori 'Y Plentyn Colledig.'

'At a farm house still remaining in the parish of Llanfabon, which is
called the Berth Gron, there lived once upon a time a young widow and
her infant child. After losing her husband her only comfort in her
bereavement and solitary state was young Griff, her son. He was about
three years old and a fine child for his age. The parish was then
crammed full of *Bendith y Mamau*, and when the moon was bright and full
they were wont to keep people awake with their music till the break of
dayThe fairies of Llanfabon were remarkable on account of their
ugliness, and they were equally remarkable on account of the tricks they
played. Stealing children from their cradles during the absence of their
mothers, and luring men by means of their music into some pestilential
and desolate bog, were things that seemed to afford them considerable
amusement. It was no wonder then that mothers used to be daily on the
watch lest they should lose their children. The widow alluded to was
remarkably careful about her son, so much so, that it made some of the
neighbours say that she was

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

too anxious about him and that some misfortune would overtake her child.
But she paid no attention to their words, as all her joy, her comfort,
and her hopes appeared to meet together in her child. However, one day
she heard a moaning voice ascending from near the cow-house, and lest
anything had happened to the cattle, she ran there in a fright, leaving
the door of the house open and her little son in the cradle. Who can
describe her grief on her coming in and seeing that her son was missing?
She searched everywhere for him, but it was in vain. About sunset,
behold a little lad made his appearance before her and said to her quite
distinctly, "Mother." She looked minutely at him, and said at last,
"Thou art not my child." "I am truly," said the little one. But the
mother did not seem satisfied about it, nor did she believe it was her
child. Something whispered to her constantly, as it were, that it was
not her son. However, he remained with her a whole year, but he did not
seem to grow at all, whereas Griff, her son, was a very growing child.
Besides, the little fellow was getting uglier every day. At last she
resolved to go to the "wise man," in order to have information and light
on the matter. There happened then to be living at Castell y Nos,
"Castle of the Night," a man who was remarkable for his thorough
acquaintance with the secrets of the evil one. When she had laid her
business before him and he had examined her, he addressed the following
remark to her: "It is a *crimbil'*  <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94.md)
and thy own child is with those old Bendith somewhere or other: if thou
wilt follow my directions faithfully and minutely thy child will be
restored to thee soon. Now, about noon to-morrow cut an egg through the
middle; throw the one half away from thee, but keep the other in thy
hand, and proceed to mix it backwards and forwards.

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

\[paragraph continues\] See that the little fellow be present paying
attention to what thou art doing, but take care not to call his
attention to it--his attention must be drawn to it without calling to
him-and very probably he will ask what thou wouldst be doing. Thou art
to say that it is mixing a pasty for the reapers that thou art. Let me
know what he will then say." The woman returned, and on the next day she
followed the cunning man's <span id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95.md) advice to
the letter: the little fellow stood by her and watched her minutely;
presently he asked, "Mother, what are you doing?" "Mixing a pasty for
the reapers, my boy." Oh, that is it. I heard from my father--he had
heard it from his father and that one from his father--that an acorn was
before the oak, and that the oak was in the earth; but I have neither
heard nor seen anybody

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

mixing the pasty for the reapers in an egg-shell." The woman observed
that he looked very cross as he spoke, and that it so added to his
ugliness that it made him highly repulsive.

'That afternoon the woman went to the cunning man in order to inform him
of what the dwarf had said. "Oh," said he, "he is of that old breed; now
the next full moon will be in four days--thou must go where the four
roads meet above Rhyd y Gloch <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96.md), at
twelve o'clock the night the moon is full. Take care to hide thyself at
a spot where thou canst see the ends of the crossroads; and shouldst
thou see anything that would excite thee take care to be still and to
restrain thyself from giving way to thy feelings, otherwise the scheme
will be frustrated and thou wilt never have thy son back." The
unfortunate mother knew not what to make of the strange story of the
cunning man; she was in the dark as much as ever. At last the time came,
and by the appointed hour she had concealed herself carefully behind a
large bush close by, whence she could see everything around. She
remained there a long time watching; but nothing was to be seen or
heard, while the profound and melancholy silence of midnight dominated
over all. At last she began to hear the sound of music approaching from
afar; nearer and nearer the sweet sound continued to come, and she
listened to it with rapt attention. Ere long it was close at hand, and
she perceived that it was a procession of *Bendith y* 

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

Mamau going somewhere or other. They were hundreds in point of number,
and about the middle of the procession she beheld a sight that pierced
her heart and made the blood stop in her veins-walking between four of
the *Bendith* she saw her own dear little child. She nearly forgot
herself altogether, and was on the point of springing into the midst of
them violently to snatch him from them if she could; but when she was on
the point of leaping out of her hiding place for that purpose, she
thought of the warning of the cunning man, that any disturbance on her
part would frustrate all, so that she would never get her child back.
When the procession had wound itself past, and the sound of the music
had died away in the distance, she issued from her concealment and
directed her steps homewards. Full of longing as she was for her son
before, she was much more so now; and her disgust at the little dwarf
who claimed to be her son had very considerably grown, for she was now
certain in her mind that he was one of the old breed. She knew not how
to endure him for a moment longer under the same roof with her, much
less his addressing her as " mother." However, she had enough
restraining grace to behave becomingly towards the ugly little fellow
that was with her in the house. On the morrow she went without delay to
the "wise man" to relate what she had witnessed the previous night, and
to seek further advice. The cunning man expected her, and as she entered
he perceived by her looks that she had seen something that had disturbed
her. She told him what she had beheld at the cross-roads, and when he
had heard it he opened a big book which he had; then, after he had long
pored over it, he told her, that before she could get her child back, it
was necessary for her to find a black hen without a single white
feather, or one of any other

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

colour than black: this she was to place to bake before a wood <span
id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97.md) fire with its feathers and all intact.
Moreover, as soon as she placed it before the fire, she was to close
every hole and passage in the walls except one, and not to look very
intently after the *crimbil* until the hen was done enough and the
feathers had fallen off it every one: then she might look where he was.

'Strange as the advice of the wise man sounded, she resolved to try it;
so she went the next day to search among the hens for one of the
requisite description; but to her disappointment she failed to find one.
She then walked from one farm house to another in her search; but
fortune appeared to scowl at her, as she seemed to fail in her object.
When, however, she was nearly disheartened, she came across the kind of
hen she wanted at a farm at the end of the parish. She bought it, and
after returning home she arranged the fire and killed the hen, which she
placed in f\~ont of the bright fire burning on the hearth. Whilst
watchinor the hen baking she altogether forgot the *crimbil*; and she
fell into a sort of swoon, when she was astonished by the sound of music
outside the house, similar to the music she had heard a few nights
before at the crossroads. The feathers had by this time fallen off the
hen, and when she came to look for the crimbil he had disappeared. The
mother cast wild looks about the house, and to her joy she heard the
voice of her lost son calling to her from outside. She ran to meet him,
and embraced him fervently. But when she asked him where he had been so
long, he had no account in the world to give but that he had been
listening to pleasant music. He was very thin and worn in appearance
when he was restored. Such is the story of the Lost Child.'

Let me remark as to the urchin's exclamation concerning

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

the cooking done in the egg-shell, that Mr. Hughes, as the result of
further inquiry, has given me what he considers a more correct version;
but it is no less inconsequent, as will be seen:--

Mi glywais gan fy nhad ac yntau gan ei dad, a hwnnw gan ei dad yntau,  
Fod mesen cyn denven a'i phlannu mwn ddr:  
Ni chlywais yn unman am gymysg y bastai yn masgal wy itir.

I heard from my father and he from his father, and that one from his
father,  
That the acorn exists before the oak and the planting of it in the
ground:  
Never anywhere have I heard of mixing the pasty in the shell of a hen's
egg.

In Dewi Glan Ffrydlas' story from the Ogwen Valley, in Carnarvonshire,
above, it is not the cooking of a pasty but the brewing of beer in an
egg-shell. However what is most remarkable is that the egg-shell is
similarly used in stories from other lands. Mr. Hartland cites one from
Mecklenburg and another from Scandinavia. He also mentions stories in
which the imp measures his own age by the number of forests which he has
seen growing successively on the same soil, the formula being of the
following kind: 'I have seen the Forest of Ardennes burnt seven times,'
'Seven times have I seen the wood fall in Lesso Forest,' or 'I am so
old, I was already in the world before the Kamschtschen Wood (in
Lithuania) was planted, wherein great trees grew, and *that* is now laid
waste again <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98.md). From these and the like
instances it is clear that the Welsh versions here in question are
partially blurred, as the fairy child's words should have been to the
effect that he was old enough to remember the oak when it was yet but an
acorn; and an instance of this explicit kind is given by Howells--it
comes from Llandrygam in Anglesey--where his words run thus: 'I can
remember yon oak an acorn, but I never saw in my life people brewing in
an egg-shell before.' I may add

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

that I have been recently fortunate enough to obtain from Mr. Llywarch
Reynolds another kind of estimate of the fairy urchin's age. He writes
that his mother remembers a very old Merthyr woman who used to tell the
story of the egg-shell cookery, but in words differing from all the
other versions known to him, thus:--

Wy'n hin y dyd hedy,  
Ag yn byw cyn 'y ngmi:  
Eriod ni welas ferwi  
Bwyd I'r fedal mwn cwcwll <span id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99.md) *wy idr*.

I call myself old this day,  
And living before my birth:  
Never have I seen food boiled  
For the reapers in an egg-shell.

As to the urchin's statement that he was old and had lived before, it is
part of a creed of which we may have something to say in a later
chapter. At this point let it suffice to call attention to the same idea
in the Book of Taliessin, poem ix:--

Hynaf uyd dyn pan anher  
A ieu int pop amser.

A man is wont to be oldest when born,  
And younger and younger all the time.

 

### XIV

Before closing this chapter, I wish to touch on the question of the
language of the fairies, though fairy tales hardly ever raise it, as
they usually assume the fairies to speak the same language as the
mortals around them. There is, however, one well-known exception,
namely, the story of Eliodorus, already mentioned, as recorded by
Giraldus Cambrensis, who relates how Eliodorus, preferring at the age of
twelve to play the truant to undergoing a frequent beating by his
teacher, fasted two days in hiding in the hollow of a river bank, and
how he was then accosted by two little men who

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

induced him to follow them to a land of sports and other delights. There
he remained long enough to be able, years later, to give his diocesan,
the second Menevian bishop named David <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md), a comprehensive account of the people
and realm of Faery. After Eliodorus had for some time visited and
revisited that land of twilight, his mother desired him to bring her
some of the gold of the fairies. So one day he tried to bring away the
gold ball with which the fairy king's son used to play; but he was not
only unsuccessful, but subjected to indignities also, and prevented from
evermore finding his way back to fairyland. So he had to go again to
school and to the studies which he so detested; but in the course of
time he learned enough to become a priest; and when, stricken in years,
he used to be entreated by Bishop David to relate this part of his early
history, he never could be got to unfold his tale without shedding
tears. Among other things which he said of the fairies' mode of living,
he stated that they ate neither flesh nor fish, but lived for the most
part on various kinds of milk food cooked after the fashion of
stirabout, flavoured as it were with saffron <span
id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_101.md). But one of the most curious portions of
Eliodoru s'yarn was that relating to the language of the fairies; for he
pretended to have learnt it and to have found it to resemble his own
*Britannica Lingua*, '*Brythoneg*, or Welsh.' In the words instanced
Giraldus perceived a similarity to Greek <span
id="fr_102"></span>[3](#fn_102.md), which he accounted

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

for by means of the fabulous origin of the Welsh from the Trojans and
the supposed sojourn made in Greece by those erring Trojans on their way
to Britain. Giraldus displays quite a pretty interest in comparative
philology, and talks glibly of the *Lingua Britannica*; but one never
feels certain that he knew very much more about it than the author of
the *Germania*, the first to refer to it under that name. Tacitus,
however, had the excuse that he lived at a distance and some eleven
centuries before the advent of Gerald the Welshman.

Giraldus' words prove, on close examination, to be of no help to us on
the question of language; but on the other hand I have but recently
begun looking out for stories bearing on it. It is my impression that
such are not plentiful; but I proceed to subjoin an abstract of a
phantom funeral tale in point from *Ysten Sioned* (Aberystwyth, 1882),
pp. 8-16*. Ystên Sioned*, I ought to explain, consists of a number of
stories collected and edited in Welsh by the Rev. Chancellor Silvan
Evans, though he has not attached his name to it:--The harvest of 1816
was one of the wettest ever known in Wales, and a man and his wife who
lived on a small farm in one of the largest parishes in the Hundred of
Moedin (see above) in the Demetian part of Cardiganshire went out in the
evening of a day which had been comparatively dry to make some reaped
corn into sheaves, as it had long been down. It was a beautiful night,
with the harvest moon shining brightly, and the field in which they
worked had the parish road passing along one of its sides, without a
hedge or a ditch to separate it from

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

the corn. When they had been busily at work binding sheaves for half an
hour or more, they happened to hear the hum of voices, as if of a crowd
of people coming along the road leading into the field. They stopped a
moment, and looking in the direction whence the sounds came, they saw in
the light of the moon a number of people coming into sight and advancing
in their direction. They bent them again to their work without thinking
much about what theyhad seen and heard; for they fancied it was some
belated people making for the village, which was about a mile off. But
the hum and confused sounds went on increasing, and when the two binders
looked up again, they beheld a large crowd of people almost opposite and
not far from them. As they continued looking on they beheld quite
clearly a coffin on a bier carried on the shoulders of men, who were
relieved by others in turns, as usual in funeral processions in the
country. 'Here is a funeral,' said the binders to one another,
forgetting for the moment that it was not usual for funerals to be seen
at night. They continued looking on till the crowd was right opposite
them, and some of them did not keep to the road, but walked over the
corn alongside of the bulk of the procession. The two binders heard the
talk and whispering, the noise and hum as if of so many real men and
women passing by, but they did not understand a word that was said: not
a syllable could they comprehend, not a face could they recognize. They
kept looking at the procession till it went out of sight on the way
leading towards the parish church. They saw no more of them, and now
they began to feel uneasy and went home leaving the corn alone as it
was; but further on the funeral was met by a tailor at a point in the
road where it was narrow and bounded by a fence (*clawdd*) on either
side. The procession filled the road

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

from hedge to hedge, and the tailor tried to force his way through it,
but such was the pressure of the throng, that he was obliged to get out
of their way by crossing the hedge. He also failed to understand a word
of the talk which he heard. In about three weeks after this sham
funeral <span id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103.md), there came a real one
down that way from the upper end of the parish.

Such, in brief, is the story so charmingly told by Silvan Evans, which
he got from the mouths of the farmer and his wife, whom he considered
highly honest and truthfill persons, as well as comparatively free from
superstition. The last time they talked to him about the incident they
were very advanced in years, and both died within a few weeks of one
another early in the year 1852. Their remains, he adds, lie in the
churchyard towards which they had seen the *toeli* slowly making its
way. For *toeli* is the phonetic spelling in *Ystn Sioned* of the word
which is *teulu* in North Cardiganshire and in North Wales, for Old
Welsh *toulu*. The word now means 'family,' though literally it should
mean 'house-army' or 'house-troops,' and it is practically a synonym for
*tylwyth*, 'family or household,' literally 'house-tribe.' Now the
*toeli* or *toulu* is such an important institution in Demetian
Cardiganshire and some parts of Dyfed proper, that the word has been
confined to the phantom, and for the word family in its ordinary
significations one has there to have recourse to the non-dialect form
*teulu*  <span id="fr_104"></span>[2](#fn_104.md). In North Cardiganshire
and North Wales the

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

toeli is called simply a *cladledigaeth*, 'burial,' or *anglad*
'funeral'; in the latter also *cynhebrwng* is a funeral. I may add that
when I was a child in the neighbourhood of Ponterwyd, on the upper
course of the Rheidol, hardly a year used to pass without somebody or
other meeting a phantom funeral. Sometimes one got entangled in the
procession, and ran the risk of being carried off one's feet by the
throng. There is, however, one serious difference between our phantom
funerals and the Demetian *toeli*, namely, that we recognize our
neighbours' ghosts as making up the processions, and we have no trouble
in understanding their talk. At this point a question of some difficulty
presents itself as to the *toeli*, namely, what family does it mean?--is
it the family and friends of the departed on his way to the grave, or
does it mean the family in the sense of *Tylwyth Teg*, 'Fair Family,' as
applied to the fairies? I am inclined to the latter view, but I prefer
thinking that the distinction itself does not penetrate very deeply,
seeing that a certain species of the *Tylwyth Teg*, or fairies, may, in
point of origin, be regarded as deceased friends and ancestors of the
*tylwyth*, in the ordinary sense of the word. In fact all this kind of
rehearsal of events seems to have been once looked at as friendlv to the
men and women whom it concerned. This will be seen, for instance, in the
Demetian account of the

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

canwyll gorf or corpse candle, as granted through the intercession of
St. David to the people of his special care, as a means of warning each
to get ready in time for his death; that is to say, to prevent death
finding him unprepared. It is hard to guess why it was assumed that the
*canwyll gorff* was unknown in other parts of Wales. One or two
instances in point occur in Owen's Welsh *Folklore*, pp. 298-301; and I
have myself heard of them being seen in Anglesey, while they were quite
well known to members of Mrs. Rhys' mother's family, who lived in the
parish of Waen Fawr, in the neighbourhood of Carnarvon. Nor does it
appear that phantom funerals were at all confined to South Wales. Proof
to the contrary is supplied to some extent in Owen's Folklore, p. 30l:;
but there is no doubt that in recent times the belief in them, as well
as in the canwyllgorff, has been more general and more vivid in South
Wales than in North Wales, especially Gwyned.

I have not been fortunate enough to come across anything systematic or
comprehensive on the origin and meaning of ghostly rehearsals like the
Welsh phantom funeral or coffin making. But the subject is an
interesting one which deserves the attention of our leading folklore
philosophers, as does also the cognate one of second sight, by which it
is widely overlapped.

Quite recently-at the end of 1899 in fact--I received three brief
stories, for which I am indebted to the further kindness of Alaw Lleyn
(p. 228), who lives at Bynhadlog near Edern in Lleyn, and two out of the
three touch on the question of language. But as the three belong to one
and the same district, I give the substance of all in English as
follows:--

\(1\) There were at a small harbour belonging to Nefyn some houses in
which several families formerly lived; the houses are there still, but
nobody lives in them now.

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

\[paragraph continues\] There was one family there to which a little
girl belonged: they used to lose her for hours every day; so her mother
was very angry with her for being so much away. 'I must know,' said she,
'where you go for your play.' The girl answered that it was to Pin y
Wig, 'The Wig Point,'which meant a place to the west of the Nefyn
headland: it was there, she said, she played with many children. I Whose
children?' asked the mother. 'I don't know,' she replied; 'they are very
nice children, much nicer than I am.' ' I must know whose children they
are,' was the reply; and one day the mother went with her little girl to
see the children: it was a, distance of about a quarter of a mile to Pin
y Wig, and after climbing the slope and walking a little along the 'Lop
they came in sight of the Pin. It is from this Pin that the people of
Pen yr Allt got water, and it is fr-om. there they get it still. Now
after coming near the Pin the little girl raised her hands with joy at
the sight of the children. 'O mother,' said she, 'their father is with
them to-day: he is not with them always, it is only sometimes that he
is.' The mother asked the child where she saw them. 'There they are,
mother, running down to the Pin, with their father sitting down.' 'I see
nobody, my child,' was the reply, and great fear came upon the mother:
she took hold of the child's hand in terror, and it came to her mind at
once that they were the *Tylwyth Teg*. Never afterwards was the little
girl allowed to go to Pin y Wig: the mother had heard that the *Tylwyth
Teg* exchanged people's children.

Such is the first story, and it is only remarkable, perhaps, for its
allusion to the father of the fairy children.

\(2\) There used to be at Edern an old woman who Occupied a small farm
called Glan y Gors: the same family lives there still. One day this old
woman had gone to a fair at Criccieth, whence she returned through

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Pwllheli. As she was getting above Gors Geirch,
which was then a turbary and a pretty considerable bog, a noise reached
her ears: she sto,pped and heard the sound of much talking. By-and-by
she beheld a great crowd of men and women coming to meet her. She became
afraid and stepped across the fence to let them go by. There she
remained a while listening to their chatter, and when she thought that
they had gone far enough she returned to the road and began to resume
her way home. But before she had gone many steps she heard the same sort
of noise again, and saw again the same sort of crowd coming; so she
recrossed the fence in great fear, saying to herself, 'Here I shall be
all night!' She remained there till they also had gone, and she wondered
what they could be, and whether they were people who had been to visit
Plas Madrun -afterwards, on inquiry, she found that no such people had
been there that day. Now the old woman was near enough to the passers-by
to hear them talking (*clebran*) and chattering (*bregliach*), but not a
word could she understand of what they uttered: it was not Welsh and she
did not think that it was English-it is, however, not supposed that she
knew English. She related further that the last crowd shouted all
together to the other crowd in advance of them *Wi*, and that the latter
replied *Wi Wei* or something like that.

This account Alaw Lleyn has got, he says, from a great-granddaughter of
the old woman, and she heard it all from her father, Bardd Llechog, who
always had faith in the fairies, and believed that they will come again
to be seen of men and women. For he thought that they had their periods,
a belief which I have come across elsewhere, and more especially in
Carnarvonshire Now what are we to make of such a story? I recollect

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

reading somewhere of a phantom wedding in Scotland, but in Wales we seem
to have nothing more closely resembling this than a phantom funeral.
Nevertheless what the old woman of Glan y Gors thought she saw looks by
no means unlike a Welsh wedding marching on foot, especially when, as I
have seen done, one party tried--seemingly in good earnest--to escape
the other and to take the bride away from it. Moreover, that the figures
making up the two crowds in her story are to be regarded as fairies is
rendered probable by the next story, which describes the phantoms
therein expressly as little men and little women.

\(3\) The small farm of Perth y Celyn in Edern used to be held by an old
man named Griffith Griffiths. In his best days he stood six foot, and he
has left behind him a double reputation for bodily strength and great
piety. My informant can well remember him walking to chapel with the aid
of his two sticks. The story goes that one day, when he was in his
prime, he set out from Perth y Celyn at two in the morning to walk to
Carnarvon to pay his rent: there was no talk in those days of a carriage
for anybody. After passing through Nefyn and Pistylt, he came in due
time to Bwlch Trwyn Swncwll <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105.md): he
writes this name also Bwlch Drws Wncwl, with the suggestion that it
ought to be BwIch Drws Encil, and that the place must have been of
importance in the wars of the ancient Kymry. The high-road, he goes on
to say, runs through the Bwlch, and as Griffith was entering this gap
what should he hear but a great deal of talking. He stopped and

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

listened, when to his surprise he saw coming towards him, devoid of all
fear, a crowd of little men and little women. They talked aloud, but he
could not understand a single word they said: he thought that it was
neither Welsh nor English. They passed by him on the road, but he moved
aside to the ditch lest they should knock against him; but no feeling of
fear came upon him. The old man believed them to have been the *Tylwyth
Teg*.

In the story of the Moedin funeral the language of the *toeli* was not
intelligible to the farmer and his wife, or to the tailor, and here in
two stories from Lleyn we have it clearly stated that it was neither
Welsh nor, probably, English. Since the fairies are always represented
as old-fashioned in their ways, it is quite possible that they were once
regarded as talking a more ancient language of the country. Which was
it? An early version of these legends might perhaps have supplied the
answer, and told us that it was *Gwydelig* or Goidelic, if not an
earlier idiom, to wit that of the Aborigines before they learnt Goidelic
from the Celts of the first wave of Aryan invasion,, whether it was in
the region of the Eifl or in the Demetian half of Keredigion. As to the
former it is worthy of note that when Griffith had reached BwIch Trwyn
Swncwl he was in the outskirts of the Eifl Mountains, on one of whose
heights, not very far off, is the extensive prehistoric fortress of
Tre'r Ceiri, or the Town of the Keiri, a vocable which may be
provisionally rendered by 'giants.' In any case it dissociates that
stronghold from the Brythonic people of Wales. We shall fi.nd, however,
that a Goidel, or Pict, buried in a cairn on Snowdon, is known as Rhita
Gawr, 'Rhita the Giant'; and it is possible that in the Keiri of *Tre'r
Ceiri* we have no other race than that of mixed Goidels and Picts whom
the encroaching Brythons

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

found in possession of the west of our island. Nay, one may say that
this is rendered probable by-the use made of the word *ceiri* in
medieval Welsh: thus in some poetry composed by a certain Dafydd
Offeiriad, and copied by Thomas Williams of Trefriw, we have a line
alluding to Britain in the words:--

Coy-on ynys y Cesiri <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106.md).

The Crown of the Giants' Island.

Here Ynys y Cefiri inevitably recalls the fact that Britain is called
*Ynys y Kedyrn*, or Island of the Mighty, in the *Mabinogion*, and also,
in effect, in the story of Kulhwch and Olwen. But such stories as these,
which enabled Geoffrey to say, i. 16, when he introduced his banal brood
of Trojans, that up to that time Britain had only been inhabited by a
few giants, are the legends, as will be pointed out later, of the
Brythonicized Goidels of Wales. So one may infer that their ancestors
had given this country the name of the Island of the Mighty, unless it
should prove more accurate to suppose them to have somehow derived the
term from the Aborigines.

This last surmise is countenanced by the fact that in the Kulhwch story,
the British Isles as a group are called Islands of the Mighty. The words
are *Teir ynys y kedyrn ae their rac ynys*; that is, the Three Islands
of the Mighty and their Three outpost Islands. That is not all, for in
the same story the designation is varied thus: *Teir ynys prydein ae
their rac ynys*  <span id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_107.md), or

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Prydain's Three Islands and Prydain's Three
outpost Islands; and the substantial antiquity of the designation I the
Islands of Prydain,' is proved by its virtual identity with that used by
ancient Greek authors like Ptolemy, who calls both Britain and Ireland a
νῆσος Πρετανική, where *Pretanic* and *Prydain* are closely related
words. Now our *Prydain* had in medieval Welsh the two forms *Prydein*
and Prydyn. But some time or other there set in a tendency to
desynonymize them, so as to make Ynys Prj,dein, 'the Picts' Island,'
mean Great Britain, and Prydyn mean the Pictland of the North. But just
as Cyniry meant the plural Welshmen and the singular Wales, so Prydyn
meant Picts <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108.md) and the country of the
Picts. Now the plural Prydyn has its etymological Goidelic equivalent in
the vocable Critithni, which Is well known to have meant the Picts or
the descendants of the *Picti* of Roman historians. Further, this last
name cannot be severed from that of the *Pictones* <span
id="fr_109"></span>[2](#fn_109.md) in Gaul, and it is usually supposed to
have referred to their habit of tattooing themselves. At all events this
agrees with the apparent meaning of the names *Prydyn* and *Cruithni*,
from *bryd* and *cruth*, the words in Welsh and Irish respectively for
form or shaft, the designation being supposed to refer to the forms or
pictures of various animals punctured on the skins of the Picts. So much
as to the practical identity of the terms *Prydyn*, *Cruithni*, and the
Greeks' *Pretanic*; but how could

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

Cedyrrn and *Prydein* correspond in the terms *Ynys y Kedyrn* and *Ynys
Prydein*? This one is enabled to understand by means of *ceuri* or
*ceiri* as a middle term. Now *cadarn* means strong or valiant, and
makes the plural *cedyrn*; but there is another Welsh word cadr <span
id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_110.md) which has also the meaning of valiant or
powerful, and may have yielded some such a medieval form as *ceidyr* in
the plural. Now this *cadr* is proved by its cognates <span
id="fr_111"></span>[2](#fn_111.md) not to have always had the meaning of
valiant or strong: its original signification was more nearly fine,
beautiful, or beautified.' Thus what seems to have happened is, that
*cadarn*,'strong, powerful, mighty,' influenced the meaning of cadr,
'beautiful,' and eventually usurped its place in the name of the island,
which from being *Ynys y Ceidyr* became *Ynys y Cedyrn*. But the former
meant the 'Island of the fine or beautiful men,'which was closely enough
the meaning also of the words Prydain, Cruithni, and Picts, as names of
a people who delighted to beautify their persons by tattooing their

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

skins and making themselves *distingué* in that savage fashion. That is
not all, for on examination it turns out that the word *ceiri*, which
has been treated up to this point as meaning giants, is but a double, so
to say, of the word cadr in the plural, both as to etymology and
original meaning of beautiful. It is a word in constant use in
Carnarvonshire, where it is ironically applied to pretentious men fond
of showing themselves off, especially in the matter of clothes. *'D ydi
nhw 'n geiri*! 'Aren't they swells! ' *Dyna i ch'i gawr*! 'There's a
fine fellow for you!' and so also with the feminine cawres. Of course
the cawr of standard Welsh is familiar enough in the sense of giant to
Carnarvonshire people, so the meaning can be best ascertained in the
case of the plural ceiri, which they hardly ever meet with in print;
and, so far as I have been able to ascertain, by ceiri they mean-in an
ironical sense it is true-fine fellows, with reference not to great
stature or strength but to their get-up. Thus one arrives at the true
interpretation of the name *Tre'r Ceiri* as the Town of the *Prydyn* or
*Cruithni*; that is to say, the Town of the Picts or the Aborigines, who
showed themselves off decorated with pictures. So far also from *Ynys y
Ceiri* being an echo of *Ynys y Cedyrn*, it turns out to be really the
more original of the two. Such names, when they are closely examined,
are apt to prove old beyond all hastily formed expectation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[196:1](cf107.htm#fr_71.md) This chapter, except
where a later date is suggested, may be regarded as written in the
summer of 1883.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[198:1](cf107.htm#fr_72.md) *Trefriw* means the
town of the slope or hillside, and stands for *Tref y Riw*, not *tref y
Rhiw*, which would have yielded *Treffriw*, for there is a tendency in
Gwynedd to make the mutation after the definite article conform to the
general rule, and to say *y law*, 'the hand,' and *y raw*, 'the spade,'
instead of what would be in books *y llaw* and *y rhaw* from *yr llaw*
and *yr rhaw*.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[201:1](cf107.htm#fr_73.md) Why the writer spells
the name Criccieth in this way I cannot tell, except that he was more or
less under the influence of the more intelligible spelling *Crugcailh*,
as where Lewis Glyn Cothi, I. xxiv, sang

Rhys ab Sion â'r hysbys iaith,  
Gwr yw acw o Grugcaith.

This spelling postulates the interpretation *Crag-Caith*, earlier *Crug
y Ceith*, 'the mound or barrow of the captives; in reference to some
forgotten interment; but when the accent receded to the first syllable
the second was slurred almost out of recognition, so that *Crug-ceilth*,
or *Cruc-ceith*, became *Crúeth*, whence *Crúcieth* and *Cricieth*. The
*Bruts* have *Crugyeith* the only time it occurs, and the *Record of
Carnarvon* (several times) *Krukyth*.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[203:1](cf107.htm#fr_74.md) Out of excessive
fondness for our Arthur English people translate this name into Arthur's
Seat instead of ldris' Seat; but Idris was also somebody: he was a giant
with a liking for the study of the stars. But let that be: I wish to say
a word concerning his name: *ldris* may be explained as meaning
'War-champion,'or the like; and, phonologically speaking, it comes from
*Iudd-rys*, which was made successively into *Id-rys, Idris*. The
syllable *<u>i</u>udd* meant battle or fight, and it undergoes a variety
of forms in Welsh names. Thus before *n, r, l*, and *w*, it becomes
*id*, as in *Idnerth, Idloes*, and *Idwal*, while *Iudd-hael* yields
*Ithel*, whence Ab Ithel anglicized *Bethel*. At the end, however, it is
*ydd* or *udd*, as in *Gruffudd* or *Gruffydd*, from Old Welsh
*Gripp<u>i</u>udd*, and *Maredudd* or *Meredydd* for an older
*Marget-<u>i</u>udd*. By itself it is possibly the word which the poets
write *udd*, and understand to mean lord; but if these forms are
related, it must have originally meant rather a fighter, soldier, or
champion.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[204:1](cf107.htm#fr_75.md) 'There is a special
similarity between this and an Anglesey story given by Howells: It
consists in the sequence of seeing the fairies dance and finding money
left by them. Why was the money left?

<span id="fn_76"></span>[206:1](cf107.htm#fr_76.md) It was so called by the
poet D. ab Gwilym, cxcii. 12 when he sang:

I odi ac i luchio  
Oddiar lechwdd Moel Eilo.

To bring snow and drifting flakes  
From off Moel Eilio's slope.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[210:1](cf107.htm#fr_77.md) This is commonly
pronounced 'Y Gath Dorwen,' but the people of the neighbourhood wish to
explain away a farm name which could, strangely enough, only mean 'the
white-bellied cat'; but *y Garth Dorzwn*, 'the white-bellied garth or
hill,' is not a very likely name either.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[211:1](cf107.htm#fr_78.md) The hiring time in
Wales is the beginning of winter and of summer; or, as one would say in
Welsh, at the Calends of Winter and the Calends of <span
id="page_212">p. 212</span>\[paragraph continues\] May respectively. In
North Cardiganshire the great hiring fair was held at the former date
when I was a boy, and so, as I learn from my wife, it was in
Carnarvonshire.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[213:1](cf107.htm#fr_79.md) In a Cornish story
mentioned in *Choice Notes*, p. 77, we have, instead of ointment, simply
soap. See also Mrs. Bray's *Banks of the Tamar*, pp. 174-7, where she
alludes to H. Cornelius Agrippa's statement how such ointment used to be
made--the reference must, I think, be to his book *De Occulta
Philisophica Libri III* (Paris, 1567), i. 45 (pp. 81-2).

<span id="fn_80"></span>[217:1](cf107.htm#fr_80.md) See the *Mabinogion*,
pp. 1-2; Evans *Facsimile of the Black Book of Carmarthen*, fol.
49<sup>b</sup>-50<sup>a</sup>; Rhys' *Arthurian Legend*, pp. 155-8;
Edmund Jones' *Spirits in the County of Monmouth*, pp. 39, 71, 82; and
in this volume, I may mention that the Cornish also have had their *Cam
Annwn*, though the name is a different one, to wit in the phrase, 'the
Devil and his Dandy-dogs': see *Choice Notes*, pp. 78-80.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[219:1](cf107.htm#fr_81.md) As it stands now this
would be unmutated *Césel Gýfarch*, 'Cyfarch's Nook,' but there never
was such a name. There was, however, *Elgýfarch* or *Aelgýfarch* and
*Rhygýfarch*, and in such a combination as *Césel Elgýfarch* there would
be every temptation to drop one unaccented *el*.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[222:1](cf107.htm#fr_82.md) Owing to some oversight
he has 'a clean or a dirty *cow*' instead of *cow-yard* or *cow-house*,
as I understand it.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[225:1](cf107.htm#fr_83.md) *Cwta* makes *cota* in
the feminine in North Cardiganshire; the word is nevertheless only the
English *cutty* borrowed. *Du*, 'black,' has corresponding to it in
Irish, *dubh*. So the Welsh word seems to have passed through the stages
*dyv*, *dyw*, before *yw* was contracted into *u*, which was formerly
pronounced like French *û*, as proved by the grammar already mentioned
(p. 22) of J. D. Rhys, published in London in 1592; see p. 33, to which
my attention has been called by Prof. J. Morris Jones. In Old or
pre-Norman Welsh *m* did duty for *m* and *v*, so one detects *dyv* as
*dim* in a woman's name *Penardim*, 'she of the very black head'; there
was also a *Penarwen*, 'she of the very blonde head.' The look of
*Penardim* having baffled the redactor of the *Branwen*, he left the
spelling unchanged: see the (Oxford) *Mabinogion*, p. 26. The same sort
of change which produced *du* has produced *cnu*, 'a fleece,' as
compared with *cneifo*, 'to fleece'; *lluarth*, 'a kitchen garden,' as
compared with its Irish equivalent *lubhghort*. Compare also *Rhiwabon*,
locally pronounced *Rhuabon*, and *Rhiwallon*, occurring sometimes as
*Rhuallon*. But the most notable role of this phonetic process is
exemplified by the verbal nouns ending in *u*, such as *caru*, 'to
love,' *credu*, 'to believe,' *tyngu*, 'to swear,' in which the *u*
corresponds to an *m* termination in Old Irish, as in *sechem*, 'to
follow,' *cretem*, 'belief,' *sessam* or *sessom*, 'to stand.'

<span id="fn_84"></span>[226:1](cf107.htm#fr_84.md) In medieval Welsh
poetry this name was still a dissyllable; but now it is pronounced
*Llŷnn*, in conformity with the habit of the Gwyndodeg, which makes into
*porfŷdd* what is written *porfeydd*, 'pastures,' and pronounced
*porféidd* in North Cardiganshire. So in the Leyn name *Sarn Fyllteyrn*
the second vocable represents *Maelteyrn*, in the *Record of Carnarvon*
(p. 38) *Maylterñ*: it is now sounded *Mylltyrn* with the second *y*
short and accented. *Lleyn* is a plural of the people (genitive *Llaën*
in *Porth Dinllaën*), used as a singular of their country, like *Cymru*
*= Cymry, and Prydyn*. The singular is *llain,* 'a spear,' in the *Book
of Aneurin*: see Skene, ii. 64, 88, 92.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[230:1](cf107.htm#fr_85.md) A it is also called
*dolur byr*, or the 'short disease'; I believe I have been told that it
is the disease known to 'the vet' as anthrax.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[233:1](cf107.htm#fr_86.md) Here the writer seems
to have been puzzled by the *mh* ofA*mh*eirchion, and to have argued
back to a radical form *Parch*; but he was on the wrong
tack--Amheirrhibn comes from *Ap-Meirchion*, where the *p* helped to
make the *m* a surd, which, with the syllabic accent on the succeeding
vowel, became fixed as *mh*, while the *p* disappeared by assimilation.
We have, later on, a similar instance in *Owen y Mhaxen* for Owen
Amhacsen = O. ap Macsen, Another instance will be found at the opening
of the *Mabinogi* of Branwen, to wit, in the word *prynhawngweith*,
'once on an afternoon,' from *prynhawn*, 'afternoon,' for which our
dictionaries substitute *prydnawn*, with the accent on the ultima,
though D. ab Gwilym used *pyrnhawn*, as in poem xl, 30. But the ordinary
pronunciation continues to be *prynháwn* or *pryháwn*, sometimes reduced
in Gwynedd to *pnawn*. Let me add an instance which has reached me since
writing the above: In the *Archæologia Cambrensis* for 1899, pp. 325--6,
we have the pedigree of the *Ameridiths* from the Visitation of
Devonshire in 1620: in the course of it one finds that luan ap Merydeth
has a son Thomas *Amerideth*, who, knowing probably no Welsh, took to
writing his patronymic more nearly as it was pronounced. The line is
brought down to Ames Ameriddh, who was created baronet in 1639.
*Amerideth* of course = Ap Meredydd, and the present member of the
family who writes to the *Archæologia Cambrensis* spells his patronymic
more correctly, *Ameridith*; but if it had survived in Wales it might
have been *Amheredydd*. For an older instance than any of these see the
*Book of Taliessin*, poem xlix (= Skene, ii. 204), where one reads of
*Beli Amhanogan*, 'B. ab Mynogan'.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[235:1](cf107.htm#fr_87.md) This is pronounced
*Rhiwan* though probably made up of Rhiw-wen, for it is the tendency of
the Gwyndodeg to convert *e* and *a*i of the unaccented ultima into *a*,
and so with e in Glamorgan; see such instances as *Cornwan* and *casag*,
above. It is possibly a tendency inherited from Goidelic. as Irish is
found to proceed in the same way.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[238:1](cf107.htm#fr_88.md) may mention that some
of the Francises of Anglesey are supposed to be descendants of Frazers,
who changed their name on finding refuge in <span id="page_239">p.
239</span> the island in the time of the troubles which brought there
the ancestor of the Frazer who, from time to time, claims to be the
rightful head of the Lovat family.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[245:1](cf107.htm#fr_89.md) According to old Welsh
orthography this would be written *Moudin*, and in the book Welsh of the
present day it would have to become *Meudin*. Restored, however, to the
level of Gallo-Roman names, it would be *Mogodunum* or *Magodunum*. The
place is known as Castell Moedin, and includes within it the end of a
hill about halfway between Lannarth and Lampeter.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[245:2](cf107.htm#fr_90.md) For other mentions of
the colours of fairy dress above, where red prevails, and contrast the
Lake Lady of Lyn Barfog clad in green, [p. 145](cf106.htm#page_145.md).

<span id="fn_91"></span>[248:1](cf107.htm#fr_91.md) This name means the
Bridge of the Blessed Ford, but how the ford came to be so called I know
not. The word *bendigaid*, 'blessed,' comes from the Latin verb
*benedico*, 'I bless,' and should, but for the objection to tatt in book
Welsh, be bendigaid, which, in fact, it is approximately in the northern
part of the county, where it is colloquially sounded Pont Rhyd
*Fyntfiged*, *Fydiged*, or even *Fdiged*, also Pont Rhyd *mdiged*, which
represents the result of the unmutated form *Bdiged* coming directly
after the *d* of *rhyd*. Somewhat the same is the case with the name of
the herb *Dail y Fendigaid*, literally 'the Leaves of the Blessed' (in
the feminine singular without any further indication of the noun to be
supplied). This name means, I find,, *hypericum androsarmum*, tutsan,'
and in North Cardiganshire we call it Dail *y Fydiged* or *Fdiged*, but
in Carnarvonshire the adjective is made to qualify *dail*, so that it
sounds Dail *Bydigad* or *Bdigad*. ' Blessed Leaves.'

<span id="fn_92"></span>[257:1](cf107.htm#fr_92.md) I am far from certain
what y nos, 'the night,' may mean in such names as this and *Craig y
Nos*, 'the Rock of the Night', to which perhaps might be added such an
instance as *Blaen Nos*, 'the Point of (the?) Night,' in the
neighbourhood of Randovery, in Carmarthenshire. Can the allusion be
merely to thickly overshadowed spots where the darkness of night might
be said to lurk in defiance of the light of day? I have never visited
the places in point, and leading questions addressed to local
authorities are too apt to elicit misleading answers: the poetic faculty
is dangerously rampant in the Principality.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[259:1](cf107.htm#fr_93.md) *Dâr* is a Glamorgan
pronunciation, *metri gratiâ* of what is written *daear*, 'earth':
compare *d'ar fochyn* in Glamorgan for a badger, literally 'an earth
pig.' The dwarfs answer was probably in some sort of verse, with *dâr*
and *iâr* to rhyme.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[263:1](cf107.htm#fr_94.md) Applied in Glamorgan to
a child that looks poorly and does not grow.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[264:1](cf107.htm#fr_95.md) In Cardiganshire a
conjurer is called *dyn hybys*, where *hysbys* (or, in older
orthography, *hyspys*) means 'informed': it is the man who is *informed*
on matters which are dark to others; but the word is also used of
*factsY mae 'r Peth yn hysbys*, I the thing is known or manifest.' The
word is divisible into hy-spys, which would be in Irish, had it existed
in'the language, so-*scese* for an early *su-squestia-s*, the related
Irish words being *ad-chiu*, I I see,' pass. preterite *ad-chess*, 'was
seen,' and the like, in which *ci* and *ces* have been equated by Zimmer
with the Sanskrit verb *caksh*, 'to see,'from a root *quas*. The
adjective *cynnil* applied to the *dyn hyspys* in Glamorgan means now,
as a rule, 'economical' or 'thrifty,' but in this instance it would seem
to have signified 'shrewd,' 'cunning,' or 'clever,' though it would
probably come nearer the original meaning of the word to render it by
'smart,' for it is in Irish *conduail*, which is found applied to
ingenious work, such as the ornamentation on the hilt of a sword.
Another term for a wizard or conjurer is *gwr cyfanvyd*, with which the
reader is already familiar. Here *cyfarwyd* forms a link with the
kyvar6yd of the *Mabinogion*, where it usually means a professional man,
especially one skilled in story and history; and what constituted his
knowledge was called *kyvar6ydyl*, which included among other things
acquaintance with boundaries and pedigrees, but it meant most frequently
perhaps story; see the (Oxford) Mabinogion, pp. 51 61, 72, 93. All these
terms should, strictly speaking, have *gwr*-*gwr kyspys*, *gwr cynnil*,
and *gwr cyfarwyd*--but for the fact that modern Welsh tends to restrict
*gwr* to signify 'a husband' or 'a married man,' while *dyn*, which only
signifies a mortal, is made to mean man, and provided with a feminine
dynes, I woman,' unknown to good Welsh literature. Thus the spoken
language is in this matter nearly on a level with English and French,
which have quite lost the word for *vir* and ἀνήρ.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[265:1](cf107.htm#fr_96.md) *Rhyd y Gloch* means
'the Ford of the Bell,' in allusion, as the story goes, to a silver bell
that used in former ages to be at Llanwonno Church. The people of
Llanfobon took a liking to it, and one night a band of them stole it;
but as they were carrying it across the Taff the moon happened to make
her appearance suddenly, and they, in their fright, taking it to be
sunrise, dropped the bell in the bed of the river, so that nothing has
ever been heard of it since. But for ages afterwards, and even at the
present day indeed, nothing could rouse the natives of Llanfabon to
greater fury than to hear the moon spoken of as *haul Llanfabon* ' the
sun of Llanfabon.'

<span id="fn_97"></span>[267:1](cf107.htm#fr_97.md) It was peat fires that
were usual in those days even in Glamorgan.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[268:1](cf107.htm#fr_98.md) See *Hartland's Science
of Fairy Tales*, pp. 112--6.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[269:1](cf107.htm#fr_99.md) In no other version has
Mr. Reynolds heard *cwcwll wy iar*, but either phsgyn or *cibyn wy iar*,
to which I may add *masgal* from Mr. Craigfryn Hughes' versions. The
word cwcwll usually means a cowl, but perhaps it is best here to treat
cwcwll as a distinct word derived somehow from *conchylium* or the
French *coquille*, 'a shell.'

<span id="fn_100"></span>[270:1](cf107.htm#fr_100.md) The whole passage
will be found in the *Itinerarium Kambriae*, i. 8 (pp. 75-8), and
Giraldus fixes the story a little before his time somewhere in the
district around Swansea and Neath. With this agrees closely enough the
fact that a second David, *Dafyd ab Gerallid* *or David Fitzgerald*,
appears to have been consecrated Bishop of St. David's in 1147, and to
have died in 1176.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[270:2](cf107.htm#fr_101.md) The words in the
original are*: Nec carne vescebantur, nec pisce; lateis plerumque
cibariis utentes, et in pultis modum quasi croco confectis*.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[270:3](cf107.htm#fr_102.md) Perhaps it is this
also that suggested the name Eliodorus, as it were Ἡλιόδωρος for the
original name was probably the medieval Welsh one of <span
id="page_271">p. 271</span> *Elidyr* = Irish *Ailithir*, *ailither*, 'a
pilgrim': compare the Pembrokeshire name *Pergrin* and the like. It is
curious that *Elidyr* did not occur to Glasynys and prevent him from
substituting *Elfodd*, which is quite another name, and more correctly
written *El-fodw* found not only as *Elbodu* but also *Elbodug- o,*
*Elboag*, *Elbot* and *Elfod*; see above.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[273:1](cf107.htm#fr_103.md) For one or two more
instances from Wales see Howells, 131). 54-7. Brittany also is a great
country for death portents: see A. Le Braz, *Légende do la Mort on
Basse-Bretagne* (Paris, 1893), also Sébillot's Traditions *of
Superstitions do la Haute-Bretagne* (Paris, 1882), i. pp. 270-1. For
Scotland see *The Ghost Lights of the West Highlands* by Dr. R. C.
Maclagan in Folk-Lore for 1897, pp. 203-256, and for the cognate subject
of second sight see *Dalyell's Darker Superstitions of Scotland*, pp.
466-88.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[273:2](cf107.htm#fr_104.md) Another word for the
*toeli* is given by Silvan Evans as used in certain parts of South
Wales, namely, *tolaeth* or *dolath*, as to which he <span
id="page_274">p. 274</span> mentions the opinion that it is a corruption
of *tylwyth*, a view corroborated by Howells using, p. 31, the plural
*tyloethod*; but it could not be easily explained except as a corruption
through the medium of English. Elias Owen, p. 303, uses the word in
reference to the hammering and rapping noise attending the joinering of
a phantom coffin for a man about to die, a sort of rehearsal well known
throughout the Principality to every one who has ears spiritually tuned.
Unfortunately I have not yet succeeded in locating the use of the word
*tolaeth*, except that I have been ssured by a Carmarthen man that it is
current in Welsh there as *toleth*, and by a native of Pumsant that it
is in use from Abergwili up to Llanbumsant.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[278:1](cf107.htm#fr_105.md) Mrs. Williams-Ellis
of Glasfryn writes to me that the place is now called Bwlch Trwyn
Swnewl, that it is a gap on the highest part of the road crossing from
Lanaelhaearn to Pistyll, and that it is quite a little mountain pass
between bleak hcather-covered hillsides, in fact a very lonely spot in
the outskirts of the Eifl, and with Carnguwch blocking the horizon in
the direction of Cardigan Bay.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[280:1](cf107.htm#fr_106.md) For this I am
indebted to Mr. Gwenogvryn Evans' *Report on MSS. in the Welsh
Language*, i. 585 k. The words were written by Williams about the
beginning of the seventeenth century, and his *u* does not mean *w*. He
was, however, probably thinking of cawr, cewri, and such instances as
*tawaf*, '*taceo'*, and *tau*,*'tacet*.' At all events there is no trace
of *u* in the local pronunciation of the name *Tre'r Ceiri*. I have
heard it also as *Tre' Ceiri* without the definite article; but had this
been ancient one would expect it softened into *Tre' Geiri*.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[280:2](cf107.htm#fr_107.md) See the Oxford
*Mabinogion*, pp. 110, 113, and 27-9, 36-41, 44, also 309, where a Triad
explains that the outposts were Anglesey, Man, and Lundy. <span
id="page_281">p. 281</span>\[paragraph continues\] But the other Triads,
i. 3 = iii. 67, make them Orkney, Man, and Wight, for which we have the
older authority of Nennius, &sect; 8. The designation Tair Ynys Brydain,
'The Three Isles of Prydain,' was known to the fourteenth century poetp
Iolo Goch: see his works edited by Ashton, p. 669.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[281:1](cf107.htm#fr_108.md) For Prydyn in the
plural see Skene's *Four Ancient Books of Wales*, ii. 209, also 92,
where *Pryden* is the form used. In modern Welsh the two senses of
Cynyry are distinguished in writing as *Cymry* and *Cymru*, but the
difference is merely one of spelling and not very ancient.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[281:2](cf107.htm#fr_109.md) So Geoffrey (i.
12-15) brings his Trojans on their way to Britain into Aquitania, where
they fight with the *Pictavienses*, whose king he calls Goffarius
*Pictus*.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[282:1](cf107.htm#fr_110.md) *Cadarn* and *cadr*
postulate respectively some such early forms as catrno-s and cadro-s,
which according to analogy should become *cadarn* and *cadr*, Welsh,
however, is not fond of dr; so here begins a bifurcation: (1) retaining
the d unchanged *cadro-s* yields *cadr*, or (2) *dr* is made into *dr*,
and other changes set in resulting in the *ceir* of *ceiri*, as in Welsh
and *aneirif*, 'numberless,' from *eirif*, 'number,'of the same origin
as Irish *áram* from \**ad-rim* = \**ad-rimd*, and Welsh *eiliw*,
*'species*,, colour,'for *ad-liw*, in both of which *i* follows *d*
combinations; but that is not essential, as shown by *cader*, *cadair*,
for Old Welsh *cateir*, 'a chair,' from Latin *cat\[h\]edra*. The word
that serves as our singular, namely *cawr*, is far harder to explain;
but on the whole I am inclined to regard it as of a different origin, to
wit, the Goidelic word *caur*, 'a giant or hero,' borrowed. Ile plural
crumi or cawri is formed from the singular cawr, which means a giant,
though, associated in the plural with aiii, it has sometimes to follow
suit with that vocable in connoting dress.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[282:2](cf107.htm#fr_111.md) The most important of
these are the old Breton *kazr*, now *kaer*, 'beautiful or pretty,' and
old Cornish *caer* of the same meaning; elsewhere we have, as in Greek,
the Doric κέκαδμαύ and, κεκαδένος to be found used in reference to
excelling or distinguishing one's self; also κόρμος, 'good order,
ornament,' while in Sanskrit there is the theme çad, "to excel or
surpass.' The old meaning of 'beautiful,' 'decorated,' or 'loudly
dressecd' is not yet lost in the case of *ceirs*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Manx Folklore](cf108.md)
