[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cf201)  [Next](cf203) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter VIII

### Welsh Cave Legends

 IN previous chapters sundry allusions have been made to treasure caves
besides that of Marchlyn Mawr, which has been given above. Here follow
some more, illustrative of this kind of folklore prevalent in Wales:
they are difficult to classify, but most of them mention treasure with
or without sleeping warriors guarding it. The others are so
miscellaneous as to baffle any attempt to characterize them generally
and briefly. Take for instance a cave in the part of Rhiwarth rock
nearest to Cwm LLanhafan, in the neighbourhood of \]Langynog in
Montgomeryshire. Into that, according to Cyndelw in the *Brython* for
180, p. 57, some men penetrated as far as the pound of candles lasted,
with which they had provided themselves; but it appears to be tenanted
by a hag who is always busLly washing clothes in a brass pan.  
  
Or take the following, from J. H. Roberts' essay, as given in Welsh in
Edwards' *Cymru* for 1897, p. 190: it reminds one of an ordinary fairy
tale, but it is not quite like any other which I happen to know:--In the
western end of the Arennig Fawr there is a cave: in fact there are
several caves there, and some of them are very large too; but there is
one to which the finger of tradition points as an ancient abode of the
*Tylwyth Teg*. About two generations ago, the shepherds of that country
used to be enchanted by one of them called Mary, who was remarkable for
her beauty. Many an effort was made to catch her or to meet her face to
face, but without success, as she was too quick on her feet. She used to
show herself day after day, and she might be seen, with her little harp,
climbing the bare slopes of the mountain. In misty weather when the days
were longest in summer, the music she made used to be wafted by the
breeze to the ears of the love-sick shepherds. Many a time had the boys
of the Filltir Gerrig heard sweet singing when passing the cave in the
full light of day, but they were subject to some spell, so that they
never ventured to enter. But the shepherd of Boch y Rhaiadr had a better
view of the fairies one Allhallows night (*ryw noson Galangaeaf*) when
returning home from a merry-making at Amnodd. On the sward in front of
the cave what should he see but scores of the Tylwyth Teg singing and
dancing! He never saw another assembly in his life so fair, and great
was the trouble he had to resist being drawn into their circles.  
  
Let us now come to the treasure caves, and begin with Ogof Arthur,
'Arthur's Cave,' in the southern side of Mynydd y Cnwc \[a\] in the
parish of Llangwyfan, on the south-westem coast of Anglesey. The foot of
Mynydd y Cnwc is washed by the sea, and the mouth of the cave is closed
by its waters at high tide, but the cave, which is spacious, has a
vent-hole in the side of the mountain \[b\] . So it is at any rate
reported in the *Brython* for 1859, p. 138, by a writer who explored the
place, though not to the end of the mLle which it is said to measure in
length. He mentions a local tradition, that it contains various
treasures, and that it temporarLly afforded Arthur shelter in the course
of his wars with the *Gwyddelod* or Goidels. But he describes also a
cromlech on the top of Mynydd y Cnwc, around which there was a circle of
stones, whLle within the latter there lies buried, it is believed, an
iron chest full of ancient gold. Various attempts are said to have been
made by the more greedy of the neighbouring inhabitants to dig it up,
but they have always been frightened away by portents. Here then the
guardians of the treasure are creatures of a supernatural kind, as in
many other instances, and especially that of Dinas Emrys to be mentioned
presently.  
  
Next comes the first of a group of cave legends involving treasure
entrusted to the keeping of armed warriors. It is taken from Elijah
Waring's *Recollections and Anecdotes of Edward Williams*, lolo
Morgannwg (London, 1850), pp. 95-8 where it is headed 'A popular Tale in
Glamorgan, by Iolo Morgannwg'; a version of it in Welsh wLll be found in
the *Brython* for 1858, p. 162, but Waring's version is in several
respects better, and I give it in his words:--'A Welshman walking over
London Bridge, with a neat hazel staff in his hand, was accosted by an
Englishman, who asked him whence he came. "I am from my own country,"
answered the Welshman, in a churlish tone. " Do not take it amiss, my
friend," said the Englishman; "if you will only answer my questions, and
take my advice, it will be of greater benefit to you than you imagine.
That stick in your hand grew on a spot under which are hid vast
treasures of gold and silver; and if you remember the place, and can
conduct me to it, I will put you in possession of those treasures."  
  
'The Welshman soon understood that the stranger was what he called a
cunning man, or conjurer, and for some time hesitated, not willing to go
with him among devils, from whom this magician must have derived his
knowledge; but he was at length persuaded to accompany him into Wales;
and going to Craig-y-Dinas \[Rock of the Fortress\], the Welshman
pointed out the spot whence he had cut the stick. It was from the stock
or root of a large old hazel: this they dug up, and under it found a
broad flat stone. This was found to close up the entrance into a very
large cavern, down into which they both went. In the middle of the
passage hung a bell, and the conjurer earnestly cautioned the Welshman
not to touch it. They reached the lower part of the cave, which was very
wide, and there saw  
many thousands of warriors lying down fast asleep in a large circle,
their heads outwards, every one clad in bright armour, with their
swords, shields, and other weapons lying by them, ready to be laid hold
on in an instant, whenever the bell should ring and awake them. All the
arms were so highly polished and bright, that they Lllumined the cavern,
as with the light of ten thousand flames of fire. They saw amongst the
warriors one greatly distinguished from the rest by his arms, shield,
battle-axe, and a crown of gold set with the most precious stones, lying
by his side.  
  
'In the midst of this circle of warriors they saw two very large heaps,
one of gold, the other of silver. The magician told the Welshman that he
might take as much as he could carry away of either the one or the
other, but that he was not to take from both the heaps. The Welshman
loaded himself with gold: the conjurer took none, saying that he did not
want it, that gold was of no use but to those who wanted knowledge, and
that his contempt of gold had enabled him to acquire that superior
knowledge and wisdom which he possessed. In their way out he cautioned
the Welshman again not to touch the bell, but if unfortunately he should
do so, it might be of the most fatal consequence to him, as one or more
of the warriors would awake, lift up his head, and ask *if it was day*.
"Should this happen," said the cunning man, "you must, without
hesitation, answer *No, sleep thou on*; on hearing which he will again
lay down his head and sleep." In their way up, however, the Welshman,
overloaded with gold, was not able to pass the bell without touching
it-it rang-one of the warriors raised up his head, and asked, "Is it
day?" "No," answered the Welshman promptly, "it is not, sleep thou on;"
so they got out of the cave, laid down the stone over its entrance, and
replaced the hazel tree. The cunning man, before he parted from his
companion, advised him to be economical in the use of his treasure;
observing that he had, with prudence, enough for life: but that if by
unforeseen accidents he should be again reduced to poverty, he might
repair to the cave for more; repeating the caution, not to touch the
bell if possible, but if he should, to give the proper answer, that it
was not day, as promptly as possible. He also told him that the
distinguished person they had seen was ARTHUR, and the others his
warriors; and they lay there asleep with their arms ready at hand, for
the dawn of that day when the *Black Eagle* and the *Golden* *Eagle*
should go to war, the loud clamour of which would make the earth tremble
so much, that the bell would ring loudly, and the warriors awake, take
up their arms, and destroy all the enemies of the Cymry, who afterwards
should repossess the Island of Britain, re-establish their own king and
government at Caerlleon, and be governed with justice, and blessed with
peace so long as the world endures.  
  
'The time came when the Welshman's treasure was all spent: he went to
the cave, and as before over-loaded himself. In his way out he touched
the bell: it rang: a warrior lifted up his head, asking if it was day,
but the Welshman, who had covetously overloaded himself, being quite out
of breath with labouring under his burden, and withal struck with
terror, was not able to give the necessary answer; whereupon some of the
warriors got up, took the gold away from him, and beat him dreadfully.
They afterwards threw him out, and drew the stone after them over the
mouth of the cave. The Welshman never recovered the effects of that
beating, but remained almost a cripple as long as he lived, and very
poor. He often returned with some of his friends to Craig-y-Dinas; but
they could never  afterwards find the spot, though they dug over,
seemingly, every inch of the hill.'

This story of Iolo's closes with a moral, which I omit in order to make
room for what he says in a note to the effect, that there are two hLlls
in Glamorganshire called Craig-y-Dinas-nowadays the more usual
pronunciation in South Wales is Craig y Dinas-one in the parish of
Llantrissant and the other in Ystrad Dyfodwg. There was also a hLll so
called, Iolo says, in the Vale of Towy, not far from Carmarthen. He adds
that in Glamorgan the tale is related of the Carmarthenshire hill, while
in Carmarthenshire the hill is said to be in Glamorgan.  
  
According to Iolo's son, Taliesin WLlliams \[c\] or Taliesin ab Iolo,
the Craig-y -Dinas with which the Cave of Arthur (or Owen Lawgoch) is
associated is the one on the borders of Glamorgan and Brecknockshire.
That is also the opinion of my friend Mr. Reynolds, who describes this
*craiq* and *dinas* as a very bold rocky eminence at the top of the
Neath Valley, near Pont Nedd Fechan. He adds that in this tale as
related to his mother 'in her very young days' by a very old woman,
known as Mari Shencin y Clochydd, 'Jenkin the Sexton's Mary,' the place
of Arthur was taken by Owen Lawgoch, 'Owen of the Red Hand,'of whom more
anon.  
  
The next Arthurian story is not strictly in point, for it makes no
allusion to treasure; but as it is otherwise so similar to lolo's tale I
cannot well avoid introducing it here. It is included in the composite
story of *Bwca 'r Trzwyn*, 'the Bogie of the Nose,' written out for me
in Gwentian Welsh by Mr. Craigfryn Hughes. The cave portion relates how
a Monmouthshire farmer, whose house was grievously troubled by the
bogie, set out one morning to call on a wizard who lived near Caerleon,
and how he on his way came up with a very strange and odd man who wore a
three-cornered hat. They fell into conversation, and the strange man
asked the farmer if he should like to see something of a wonder. He
answered he would. 'Come with me then,' said the wearer of the cocked
hat, 'and you shall see what nobody else alive to-day has seen.' When
they had reached the middle of a wood this spiritual guide sprang from
horseback and kicked a big stone near the road. It instantly moved aside
to disclose the mouth of a large cave; and now said he to the farmer,
'Dismount and bring your horse in here: tie him up alongside of
mine, and follow me so that you may see something which the eyes of man
have not beheld for centuries! The farmer, having done as he was
ordered, followed his guide for a long distance: they came at length to
the top of a flight of stairs, where two huge bells were hanging. I Now
mind,' said the warning voice of the strange guide, 'not to touch either
of those bells! At the bottom of the stairs there was a vast chamber
with hundreds of men lying at full length on the floor, each with his
head reposing on the stock of his gun. 'Have you any notion who these
men are?'   'No,' replied the farmer, 'I have not, nor have I any idea
what they want in such a place as this! ' Well,' said the guide, 'these
are Arthur's thousand soldiers reposing and sleeping till the Kymry have
need of them. Now let us get out as fast as our feet can carry us! When
they reached the top of the stairs, the farmer somehow struck his elbow
against one of the bells so that it rang, and in the twinkling of an eye
all the sleeping host rose to their feet shouting together, 'Are the
Kymry in straits?' ' Not yet: sleep you on,' replied the wearer of the
cocked hat, whereupon they all dropped down on their guns to resume
their slumbers at once. 'These are the valiant men,' he went on to say,
'who are to turn the scale in favour of the Kymry when the time comes
for them to cast the Saxon yoke off their necks and to recover
possession of their country! When the two had returned to their horses
at the mouth of the cave, his guide said to the farmer, 'Now go in
peace, and let me warn you on the pain of death not to utter a syllable
about what you have seen for the space of a year and a day: if you do,
woe awaits you.' After he had moved the stone back to its place the
farmer lost sight of him. When the year had lapsed the farmer happened
to pass again that way, but, though he made a long and careful search,
he failed completely to find the stone at the mouth of the cave.  
  
To return to Iolo's yarn, one may say that there are traces of his story
as at one time current in Merionethshire, but with the variation that
the Welshman met the wizard not on London Bridge but at a fair at Bala,
and that the cave was somewhere in Merioneth: the hero was Arthur, and
the cave was known as Ogof Arthur. Whether any such cave is still known
I cannot tell; but a third and interestingly told version is given in
the *Brython* for 1858, p. 179, by the late Gwynionydd, who gives the
story as the popular belief in his native parish of Troed yr Aur,
halfway between Newcastle Emlyn and Aber Porth, in South Cardiganshire.
In this last version the hero is not Arthur, but the later man as
follows:--Not the least of the wonders of imagination wont to exercise
the minds of the old people was the story of Owen Lawgoch. One sometimes
hears sung in our fairs the words:--

Yr Otuain hwn yw Harri'r Nawfed  
This Owen is Henry the Ninth,

Sydd .yn trigo 'ngwlad estronied, &c.  
Who tarries in a foreign land, &c.

But this Owen Lawgoch, the national deliverer of our ancient race of
Brythons, did not, according to the Troed yr Aur people, tarry in a
foreign land, but somewhere in Wales, not far from Offa's Dyke. They
used to say that one Dafydd Meirig of Bettws Bledrws, having quarrelled
with his father, left for Lloegr \[d\], 'England.' When he had got a
considerable distance from home, he struck a bargain with a cattle
dealer to drive a herd of his beasts to London. Somewhere at the corner
of a vast moor Dafyd cut a very remarkable hazel stick; for a good staff
is as essential to the vocation of a good drover as  teeth are to a dog.
So while his comrades had had their sticks broken before reaching
London, Dafydds remained as it was, and whilst they were conversing
together on London Bridge a stranger accosted Dafyd, wishing to know
where he had obtained that wonderful stick. He replied that it was in
Wales he had had it, and on the stranger's assuring him that there were
wondrous things beneath the tree on which it had grown, they both set
out for Wales. When they reached the spot and dug a little they found
that there was a great hollow place beneath. As night was spreading out
her sable mantle, and as they were getting deeper, what should they find
but stairs easy to step and great lamps illumining the vast chamber!
They descended slowly, with mixed emotions of dread and invincible
desire to see the place. When they reached the bottom of the stairs,
they found themselves near a large table, at one end of which they
beheld sitting a tall man of about seven foot. He occupied an
old-fashioned chair and rested his head on his left hand, while the
other hand, all red, lay on the table and grasped a great  
sword. He was withal enjoying a wondrously serene sleep; and at his feet
on the floor lay a big dog. After casting a glance at them, the wizard
said to Dafyd: 'This is Owen Lawgoch, who is to sleep on till a special
time, when he will wake and reign over the Brythons. That weapon in his
hand is one of the swords of the ancient kings of Prydain. No battle was
ever lost in which that sword was used.' Then they moved slowly on,
gazing at the wonders of that subterranean chamber; and they beheld
everywhere the arms of ages long past, and on the table thousands of
gold pieces bearing the images of the different kings of  
Prydain. They got to understand that it was permittedthem to take a
handful of each, but not to put any in their purses. They both visited
the cave several times, but at last Dafydd put in his purse a little of
the gold bearing the image of one of the bravest of Owen's ancestors.
But after coming out again they were never able any more to find Owen's
subterranean palace.  
  
Those are, says Gwynionydd, the ideas cherished by the old people of
Troed yr Aur in Keredigion, and the editor adds a note that the same
sort of story is current among the peasantry of Cumberland, and perhaps
of other parts of Britain. This remark wLll at once recall to the
reader's mind the well-known verses \[e\] of the Scottish poet, Leyden,
as to Arthur asleep in a cave in the Eildon Hills in the neighbourhood
of Melrose Abbey. But he will naturally ask why London Bridge is
introduced into this and Iolo's story, and in answer I have to say,
firstly, that London Bridge formerly loomed very large in the popular
imagination as one of the chief wonders of London, itself the most
wonderful city in the world. Such at any rate was the notion cherished
as to London and London Bridge by the country people of Wales, even
within my own memory. Secondly, the fashion of selecting London Bridge
as the opening scene of a treasure legend had been set, perhaps, by a
widely spread English story to the following effect:A certain peddler of
Swaftham in Norfolk had a dream, that if he went and stood on London
Bridge he would have very joyful news; as the dream was doubled and
trebled he decided to go. So he stood on the bridge two or three days,
when at last a shopkeeper, observing that he loitered there so long,
neither offering anything for sale nor asking for alms, inquired of him
as to his business. The pedlar told him his errand, and was heartily
laughed at by the shopkeeper, who said that he had dreamt that night
that he was at a place called Swaffham in Norfolk, and that if he only
dug under a great oak tree in an orchard bepedlar's house there, he
would find a vast treasure; but the place was utterly unknown to him,
and he was not such a fool as to follow a sLlly dream. No, he was wiser
than that; so he advised the pedlar to go home to mind his business. The
pedlar very quietlytook in the words as to the dream, and hastened home
to Swaffham, where he found the treasure in his own orchard. The rest of
the story need not be related here, as it is quite different from the
Welsh ones, which the reader has just had brought under his notice
\[f\].  
  
To return to Owen Lawgoch, for we have by no means done with him: on the
farm of Cil yr Ychen there stands a remarkable limestone hill called *y
Dinas*, 'the Fortress,' hardly a mile to the north of the village of
Llandybie, in Carmarthenshire. This *dinas* and the lime-kilns that are
gradually consuming it are to be seen on the right from the railway as
you go from LLandeilo to lLandybie. It is a steep high rock which forms
a very good natural fortification, and in the level area on the top is
the mouth of a very long cavern, known as *Ogo'r Dinas*, 'the Dinas
Cave.' The entrance into it is small and low, but it gradually widens
out, becoming in one place lofty and roomy with several smaller branch
caves leading out of it; and it is believed that some of them connect
Ogo'r Dinas with smaller caves at Pant y Llyn, 'the Lake Hollow,' where,
as the name indicates, there is a small lake a little higher up: both
Ogo'r Dinas and Pant y Llyn are within a mile of the vLllage of
Llandybie \[g\]. Now I am informed, in a letter written in 1893 by one
native, that the local legend about Ogo'r Dinas is that Owen Lawgoch and
his men are lying asleep in it, while another native, Mr. Fisher,
writing in the same year, but on the authority of somewhat later
hearsay, expresses himself as follows:--' I remember hearing two
traditions respecting Ogo'r Dinas: (1) that King Arthur and his warriors
lie sleeping in it with their right hands clasping the hilts of their
drawn swords ready to encounter anyone who may venture to disturb their
repose-is there not a dinas somewhere in Caernarvonshire with a similar
legend? (2) That Owen Lawgoch lived in it some time or other: that is
all that I remember having heard about him in connection with this
*ogof*.' Mr. Fisher proceeds, moreover, to state that it is said of an
*ogof* at Pant y Llyn, that Owen Lawgoch and his men on a certain
occasion took refuge in it, where they were shut up and starved to
death. He adds that, however this may be, it is a fact that in the year
1813 ten or more human skeletons of unusual stature were discovered in
an ogof there \[h\]  
  
To this I may append a reference to the *Geninen* for 1896, p. 84, here
Mr. LLeufer Thomas, who is also a native of the district, alludes to the
local belief that Owen Lawgoch and his men are asleep, as already
mentioned, in the cave of Pant y R.,yn, and that they are to go on
sleeping there tLll a trumpet blast and the clash of arms on Rhiw Goch
rouse them to sally forth to combat the Saxons and to conquer, as set
forth by Howells: see above. It is needless to say that there is no
reason, as wLll be seen presently, to suppose Owen Lawgoch to have ever
been near any of the caves to which allusion has here been made; but
that does not appreciably detract from the fascination of the legend
which has gathered round his personality; and in passing I may be
allowed to express my surprise that in such stories as these the earlier
Owen has not been eclipsed by Owen Glyndwr: there must be some
historical reason why that has not taken place. Can it be that a habit
of caution made Welshmen speak of Owen Lawgoch when the other Owen was
really meant?  
  
The passage I have cited from Mr. Fisher's letter raises the question of
a *dinas* in Caernarvonshire, which that of his native parish recalled
to his mind; and this is to be considered next. Doubtless he meant
*Dinas Emrys* formerly called *Din Emreis* \[i\],  'the Fortress of
Ambrosius,' situated near Beddgelert, and known in the neighbourhood
simply as *y Dinas*, 'the Fort.' It is celebrated in the Vortigern
legend as the place where the dragons had been hidden, that frustrated
the building of that king's castle; and the spot is described in Lewis'
Topographical *Dictionary of Wales*, in the article on Bethgelart
(Bedd-Gelert), as an isolated rocky eminence with an extensive top area,
which is defended by walls of loose stones, and accessible only on one
side. He adds that the entrance appears to have been guarded by two
towers, and that within the enclosed area are the foundations of
circular buildings of loose stones forming walls of about five feet in
thickness. Concerning that Dinas we read in the *Brython* for 1861, p.
329, a legend to the following effect:--Now after the departure of
Vortigern, Myrdin, or Merlin--as he is called in English, remained
himself in the Dinas for a long time, until, in fact, he went away with
Emrys Ben-aur, 'Ambrosius the Gold-headed'-evidently Aurelius Ambrosius
is meant. When he was about to set out with the latter, he put all his
treasure and wealth into a *crochan aur*, 'a gold cauldron,' and hid it
in a cave in the Dinas, and on the mouth of the cave he rolled a huge
stone, which he covered up with earth and sods, so that it was
impossible for any one to find it. He intended this wealth to be the
property of some special person in a future generation, and it is said
that the heir to it is to be a youth with yellow hair and blue eyes.
When that one comes near to the Dinas a bell will ring to invite him to
the cave, which will open of itself as soon as his foot touches it. Now
the fact that some such legend was once currently believed about
Bedgelert and Nanhwynain is proved by the curious stories as to various
attempts made to find the treasure, and the thunderstorms and portents
which used to vanquish the local greed for gold. For several instances
in point see the *Brython*, pp. 329-30; and for others, showing how
hidden treasure is carefully reserved for the right sort of heir, see
above. To prove how widely this idea prevailed in Caernarvonshire,

I may add a short story which Mrs. Williams-Ellis of Glasfryn got from
the engineer who told her of the sacred eel of Llangybi:--There was on
Pentyrch, the hill above Ilangybi, he said, a large stone so heavy and
fixed so fast in the ground that no horses, no men could move it: it had
often been tried. One day, however, a little girl happened to be playing
by the stone, and at the touch of her little hand the stone moved. A
hoard of coins was found under it, and that at a time when the little
girl's parents happened to be in dire need of it. Search had long been
made by undeserving men for treasure supposed to be hidden at that spot;
but it was always unsuccessful untLl the right person touched the stone
to move. The failure of the wrong person to secure the treasure, even
when discovered, is Illustrated by a story given by Mr. Derfel Hughes in
his *Antiquities of Llandegai and Llanllechid*, pp. 35-6, to the effect
that a servant man, somewhere up among the mountains near Ogwen Lake,
chanced to come across the mouth of a cave with abundance of vessels of
brass (*pres*) of every shape and description within it. He went at once
and seized one of them, but, alas! it was too heavy for him to stir it.
So he resolved to go away and return early on the morrow with a friend
to help him; but before going he closed the mouth of the cave with
stones and sods so as to leave it safe. WhLle thus engaged he remembered
having heard how others had like him found caves and faLled to refind
them. He could procure nothing readLly that would satisfy him as a mark,
so it occurred to him to dot his path with the chippings of his stick,
which he whittled all the way as he went back untLl he came to a
famLliar track: the chips were to guide him back to the cave. So when
the morning came he and his friend set out, but when they reached the
point where the chips should begin, not one was to be seen: the *Tylwyth
Teg* had picked up every one of them. So that discovery of articles of
brass-more probably bronze--was in vain. But, says the writer, it is not
fated to be always in vain, for there is a tradition in the valley that
it is a Gwyddel, 'Goidel, Irishman,' who is to have these treasures, and
that it wLll happen in this wise:--A Gwyddel will come to the
neighbourhood to be a shepherd, and one day when he goes up the mountain
to see to the sheep, just when it pleases the fates a black sheep with a
speckled head wLll run before him and make straight for the cave: the
sheep will go in, with the Gwyddel in pursuit trying to catch him. When
the Gwyddel enters he sees the treasures, looks at them with surprise,
and takes possession of them; and thus, in some generation to come, the
Gwyddel will have their own restored to them. That is the tradition
which Derfel Hughes found in the vale of the Ogwen, and he draws from it
the inference which it seems to warrant, in words to the following
effect:--Perhaps this shows us that the Gwyddel had some time or other
something to do with these parts, and that we are not to regard as
stories without foundations all that is said of that nation; and the
sayings of old people to this day show that there is always some spite
between our nation and the Gwyddel. Thus, for instance, he goes on to
say, if a man proves changeable, he is said to have become a Gwyddel (*Y
mae wedi troi'n Wyddel)*, or if one is very shameless and cheeky he is
called a Gwyddel and told to hold his tongue (*Taw yr hen Wyddel*; and a
number of such locutions used by our people proves, he thinks, the
former prevalence of much contention between the two sister-nations.
Expressions of the kind mentioned by Mr. Hughes are well known in all
parts of the Principality, and it is difficult to account for them
except on the supposition  
that Goidels and Brythons lived for a long time face to face, so to say,
with one another over large areas in the west of our island.

  
The next story to be mentioned belongs to the same Snowdonian
neighbourhood, and brings us back to Arthur and his Men. For a writer
who has already been quoted from the *Brython* for 1861, p.  331, makes
Arthur and his following set out from Dinas Emrys and cross Hafod y
Borth mountain for a place above the upper reach of Cwmllan, called
Tregalan, where they found their antagonists. From Tregalan the latter
were pushed up the *bwlch* or pass, towards Cwm Dyli; but when the
vanguard of the army with Arthur leading had reached the top of the
pass, the enemy discharged a shower of arrows at them. There Arthur
fell, and his body was buried in the pass so that no enemy might march
that way so long as Arthur's dust rested there. That, he says, is the
story, and there to this day remains in the pass, he asserts, the heap
of stones called Carnedd Arthur, 'Arthur's Cairn': the pass is called
*Bwlch y Saethau*, 'the Pass of the Arrows.' Then *Ogof Llanciau Eryri*
is the subject of the following story given at p. 371 of the same
volume:--After Arthur's death on Bwlch y Saethau, his men ascended to
the ridge of the Lliwed and descended thence into a vast cave called
*Ogof Llanciau Eryri*, 'the young Men of Snowdonia's Cave,' which is in
the precipitous cliff on the left-hand side near the top of *Llyn
Llydaw*. This is in Cwm Dyli, and there in that cave those warriors are
said to be stLll, sleeping in their armour and awaiting the second
coming of Arthur to restore the crown of Britain to the Kymry. For the
saying is:--  
  
*Llancia 'Rri a'u gwyn gyll a'i hennll hi  
*Snowdonia's youths with their white hazels will win it.  
  
As the local shepherds were one day long ago collecting their sheep on
the Lliwedd, one sheep fell down to a shelf in this precipice, and when
the Cwm Dyli shepherd made his way to the spot he perceived that the
ledge of rock on which he stood led to the hidden cave of Llanciau
Eryri. There was light within: he looked in and beheld a host of
warriors without number all asleep, resting on their arms and ready
equipped for battle. Seeing that they were all asleep, he felt a strong
desire to explore the whole place; but as he was squeezing in he struck
his head against the bell hanging in the entrance. It rang so that every
corner of the immense cave rang again, and all the warriors woke
uttering a terrible shout, which so frightened the shepherd that he
never more enjoyed a day's health; nor has anybody since dared as much
as to approach the mouth of the cave.  
  
Thus far the *Brython*, and I have only to remark that this legend is
somewhat remarkable for the fact of its representing the Youths of Eryri
sleeping away in their cave without Arthur among them. In fact, that
hero is described as buried not very far off beneath a *carnedd* or
cairn on Bwlch y Saethau. As to the exact situation of that cairn, I may
say that my attention was drawn some time ago to the following lines by
Mr. WLlliam Owen, better known as Glaslyn, a living bard bred and born
in the district:--

  
*Gerflaw Carnect Arthur ar ysgwydd y Wydfa  
Y gorwvedd gwedillion y ea wr enwog Ricca  
*Near Arthur's Cairn on the shoulder of Snowdon  
Lie the remains of the famous giant Ricca.

These words recall an older couplet in a poem by Rhys Goch Eryri, who is
said to have died in the year 1420. He was a native of the parish of
Beddgelert, and his words in point run thus:--

  
*Ar y drum oer dramawr,  
*On the ridge cold and vast,

Yno gorwedd Ricca Gawr.  
There the Giant Ricca lies.

 From this it is clear that Rhys Goch meant that the cairn on the top of
Snowdon covered the remains of the giant whose name has been variously
written Ricca, Ritta, and Rhita. So I was impelled to ascertain from
Glaslyn whether I had correctly understood his lines, and he has been
good enough to help me out of some of my difficulties, as I do not know
Snowdon by heart, especially the Nanhwynain and Beddgelert side of the
mountain:--The cairn on the summit of Snowdon was the Giant's before it
was demolished and made into a sort of tower which existed before the
hotel was made. Glaslyn has not heard it called after Ricca's name, but
he states that old people used to call it Carnedd y Cawr, 'the Giant's
Cairn.' In 1850 *Carnedd Arthur*, 'Arthur's Cairn,' was to be seen on
the top of Bwlch y Saethau, but he does not know whether it is still so,
as he has not been up there since the building of the hotel. Bwlch y
Saethau is a lofty shoulder of Snowdon extending in the direction of
Nanhwynain, and the distance from the top of Snowdon to it is not great;
it would take you half an hour or perhaps a little more to walk from the
one *carnedd* to the other. It is possible to trace Arthur's march from
Dinas Emrys up the slopes of Hafod y Borth, over the shoulder of the
Aran and Braich yr Oen to Tregalan -or Cwm Tregalan, as it is now
called-but from Tregalan he would have to climb in a north-easterly
direction in order to reach BwIch y Saethau, where he is related to have
fallen and to have been interred beneath a cairn. This may be regarded
as an ordinary or commonplace account of his death. But the scene
suggests a far more romantic picture; for down below was Llyn Llydaw
with its sequestered isle, connected then by means only of a primitive
canoe with a shore occupied by men engaged in working the ore of Eryri.
Nay with the eyes of Malory we seem to watch Bedivere making, with
Excalibur in his hands, his three reluctant journeys to the lake ere he
yielded it to the arm emerging from the deep. We fancy we behold how,
'euyn fast by the banke houed a lytyl barge wyth many fayr ladyes in
hit,' which was to carry the wounded Arthur away to the accompaniment of
mourning and loud lamentation; but the legend of the Marchlyn bids us
modify Malory's language as to the barge containing many ladies all
wearing black hoods, and take our last look at the warrior departing
rather in a coracle with three wondrously fair women attending to his
wounds \[j\]  
  
Some further notes on Snowdon, together with a curious account of the
Cave of Llanciau Eryri, have been kindly placed at my disposal by Mr.
Ellis Pierce (Elis \[k\] o'r Nant) of Dolwyddelan:--In the uppermost
part of the hollow called Cwmltan is Tregalan, and in the middle of Cwm.
Tregalan is a green hill, or rather an eminence which hardly forms a
hill, but what is commonly called a *boncyn* \[l\] in Caernarvonshire,
and between that green *boncyn* and the *Clogwyn Du*, 'Black Precipice,'
is a bog, the depth of which no one has ever succeeded in ascertaining,
and a town-inferred perhaps from *trein Tregalan*--is fabled to have
been swallowed up there. Another of my informants speaks of several
hillocks or *boncyns* as forming one side of this little *cwm*; but he
has heard from geologists, that these green mounds represent moraines
deposited there in the glacial period. From the bottom of the Clogwyn Du
it is about a mile to Bwlch y Saethau. Then as to the cave of Llanciau
Eryri, which nobody can now find, the slope down to it begins from the
top of the Lliwedd, but ordinarily speaking one could not descend to
where it is supposed to have been without the help of ropes, which seems
incompatible with the story of the Cwm Dyli shepherd following a sheep
until he was at the mouth of the cave; not to mention the difficulty
which the descent would have offered to Arthur's men when they entered
it. Then Elis o'r Nant's story represents it shutting after them, and
only opening to the shepherd in consequence of his having trodden on a
particular sod or spot. He then slid down unintentionally and touched
the bell that was hanging there, so that it rang and instantly woke the
sleeping warriors. No sooner had that happened than those men of
Arthur's took up their guns-never mind the anachronism--and the shepherd
made his way out more dead than alive; and the frightened fellow never
recovered from the shock to the day of his death. When these warriors
take up their guns they fire away, we are told, without mercy from where
each man stands: they are not to advance a single step till Arthur comes
to call them back to the world.

To swell the irrelevancies under which this chapter labours already, and
to avoid severing cognate questions too rudely, I wish to add that Elis
o'r Nant makes the name of the giant buried on the top of Snowdon into
Rhitta or Rhita instead of Ricca. That is also the form of the name with
which Mrs. Rhys was familiar throughout her childhood on the Llanberis
side of the mountain. She often heard of Rhita \[m\] Gawr having been
buried on the top of Snowdon, and of other warriors on other parts of
Snowdon such as Moel Gynghorion and the Gist on that *moel* But Elis o'r
Nant goes further, and adds that from *Rhita* the mountain was called
*Wyddfa*  Rhita, more correctly *Gwyddfa Rita*, 'Rhita's Gwyddfa.'
Fearing this might be merely an inference, I have tried to cross-examine
him so far as that is possible by letter. He replies that his father was
bred and bom in the little glen called Ewybrnant \[n\], between Bettws y
Coed and Pen Machno, and that his grandfather also lived there, where he
appears to have owned land not far from the home of the celebrated
Bishop Morgan. Now Elis' father often talked, he says, in his hearing
of' Gwyddfa Rhita.' Wishing to have some more definite evidence, I wrote
again, and he informs me that his father was very fond of talking about
his father, Elis o'r Nant's grandfather, who appears to have been a
character and a great supporter of Sir Robert WLlliams, especially in a
keenly contested political election in 1796, when the latter was opposed
by the then head of the Penrhyn famLly. Sometimes the old man from
Ewybrnant would set out in his clocs, 'clogs or wooden shoes,' to visit
Sir Robert Williams, who lived at Plas y Nant, near Beclgelert. On
starting he would say to his

 Against the evidence just given, that tradition places Rhita's grave on
the top of Snowdon, a passing mention by Derfel Hughes (p. 52) is of no
avail, though to the effect that it is on the top of the neighbouring
mountain called *Carnedd Lywelyn*, 'Llewelyn's Cairn,' that Rhita's
Cairn was raised. He deserves more attention, however, when he places
*Carnedd Drystan*, 'Tristan or Tristram's Cairn,' on a spur of that
mountain, to wit, towards the east above Ffynnon y Llyffaint  \[q\[. For
it is worthy of note that the name of Drystan, associated with Arthur in
the later romances, should figure with that of Arthur in the topography
of the same Snowdon district.

Before leaving Snowdon I may mention a cave near a small stream not far
from Llyn Gwynain, about a mile and a half above Dinas Emrys. In the
Llwyd letter (printed in the Cambrian Journal for 1859, pp. 142, 209),
on which I have already drawn, it is called *Ogo'r Gwr Blew*, 'the Hairy
Man's Cave'; and the story relates how the Gwr Blew who lived in it was
fatally wounded by a woman who happened to be at home, alone, in one of
the nearest farm houses when the Gwr Blew came to plunder it. Its sole
interest here is that a later version \[r\] identifies the Hairy Man
with Owen Lawgoch, after modifying the former's designation *y Gwr
Blew*, which literally meant 'the Hair Man,' into *y Gwr Blewog,* 'the
Hairy Man.' This doubtful instance of the presence of Owen Lawgoch in
the folklore of North Wales seems to stand alone.

Some of these cave stories, it will have been seen, reveal to us a hero
who is expected to return to interfere again in the affairs of this
world, and it is needless to say that Wales is by no means alone in the
enjoyment of imaginary prospects of this kind. The same sort of poetic
expectation has not been unknown, for instance, in Ireland. In the
summer of 1894, I spent some sunny days in the neighbourhood of the
Boyne, and one morning I resolved to see the chief burial mounds dotting
the banks of that interesting river; but before leaving the hotel at
Drogheda, my attention was attracted by a book of railway advertisement
of the kind which forcibly impels one to ask two questions: why will not
the railway companies leave those people alone who do not want to
travel, and why will they make it so tedious for those who do? But on
turning the leaves of that booklet over I was inclined to a suaver mood,
as I came on a paragraph devoted to an ancient stronghold called the
Grianan of ALleach, or Greenan-Ely, in the highlands of Donegal. Here I
read that a thousand armed men sit resting there on their swords, and
bound by magic sleep till they are to be called forth to take their part
in the struggle for the restoration of Erin's freedom. At intervals they
awake, it is said, and looking up from their trance they ask in tones
which solemnly resound through the many chambers of the Grianan: 'Is the
time come?' A loud voice, that of the spiritual caretaker, is heard to
reply: 'The time is not yet.' They resume their former posture and sink
into their sleep again. That is the substance of the words I read, and
they called to my mind the legend of such heroes of the past as
Barbarossa, with his sleep interrupted only by his change of posture
once in seven years; of Dom Sebastian, for centuries expected from
Moslem lands to restore the glories of Portugal; of the Cid Rodrigo,
expected back to do likewise with the kingdom of Castle; and last, but
not least, of the O'Donoghue who sleeps beneath the Lakes of KLllarney,
ready to emerge to right the wrongs of Erin. With my head full of these
and the like dreams of folklore, I was taken over the scene of the
Battle of the Boyne; and the car-driver, having vainly tried to interest
me in it, gave me up in despair as an uncultured savage who felt no
interest in the history of Ireland. However he somewhat changed his mind
when, on reaching the first ancient burial mound, he saw me disappear
underground, fearless of the Fomhoraigh; and he began to wonder whether
I should ever return to pay him his fare. This in fact was the sheet
anchor of all my hopes; for I thought that in case I remained fast in a
narrow passage, or lost my way in the chambers of the prehistoric dead,
the jarvey must fetch me out again. So by the time I had visited three
of these ancient places, Dowth, Knowth, and New Grange, I had risen
considerably in his opinion; and he bethought him of stories older than
the Battle of  the Boyne. So he told me on the way back several bits of
something less drearily historical. Among other things, he pointed in
the direction of a place called Ardee in the county of Louth, where, he
said, there is Garry Geerlaug's enchanted fort full of warriors in magic
sleep, with Garry Geerlaug himself in their midst. Once on a time a
herdsman is said to have strayed into their hall, he said, and to have
found the sleepers each with his sword and his spear ready to hand. But
as the intruder could not keep his hands off the metal wealth of the
place, the owners of the spears began to rouse themselves, and the
intruder had to flee for his life. But there that armed host is awaiting
the eventful call to arms, when they are to sally forth to restore
prosperity and glory to Ireland. That was his story, and I became all
attention as soon as I heard of Ardee, which is in Irish *Ath
Fhir-dheadh*, or the Ford of Ferdeadh, so called from Fer-deadh, who
fought a protracted duel with Cfichulainn in that ford, where at the
end, according to a well-known Irish story, he fell by Cfichulainn's
hand. I was stLll more exercised by the name of Garry Geerlaug, as I
recognized in Garry an Anglo-Irish pronunciation of the Norse name
Godhfreydhr, later Godhroedh, sometimes rendered Godfrey and sometimes
Godred, whLle in Man and in Scotland it has become Gorry, which may be
heard also in Ireland. I thought, further, that I recognized the latter
part of Garry Geerlaug's designation as the Norse female name Geirlaug.
There was no complete lack of Garries in that part of Ireland in the
tenth and eleventh centuries; but I have not yet found any historian to
identify for me the warrior named or nicknamed Garry Geerlaug, who is to
return blinking to this world of ours when his nap is over. Leaving
Ireland, I was told the other day of a place called Tom na Hurich, near
Inverness, where Finn and his following are resting, each on his left
elbow, enjoying a broken sleep whLle waiting for the note to be sounded,
which is to call them forth. What they are then to do I have not been
told: it may be that they will proceed at once to solve the Crofter
Question, for there will doubtless be one.

It appears, to come back to Wales, that King Cadwaladr, who waged an
unsuccessful war with the Angles of Northumbria in the seventh century,
was long after his death expected to return to restore the Brythons to
power. At any rate so one is led in some sort of a hazy fashion to
believe in reading several of the poems in the manuscript known as the
*Book of Taliessin*. One finds, however, no trace of Cadwaladr in our
cave legends: the heroes of them are Arthur and Owen Lawgoch. Now
concerning Arthur one need at this point hardly speak, except to say
that the Welsh belief in the eventual return of Arthur was at one time a
powerful motive affecting the behaviour of the people of Wales, as was
felt, for instance, by English statesmen in the reign of Henry II. But
by our time the expected return of Arthu r -*rexque futurus*--has
dissipated itself into a commonplace of folklore fitted only to point an
allegory, as when Elvet Lewis, one of the sweetest of living Welsh
poets, sings in a poem entitled *Arthur gyda ni*, 'Arthur with us':--

  
Mae Arthur Fawr yn cysgu,  
Great Arthur still is sleeping,  
  
A'I dewrion sydd oi dealu,  
His warriors all around him,  
  
A'u gafael ar y cledd:  
With grip upon the steel:  
  
Pan daw yn ddydd Nghymru,  
When dawns the day on Cambry,  
  
Daw Arihur Fawr i fynu  
Great Arthur forth will sally  
  
Yn fyw -- Fawr I fynu!  
Alive to work her weal!

Not so with regard to the hopes associated with the name of Owen
Lawgoch; for we have it on Gwynionydds testimony, p. 464, that our old
*baledwyr* or ballad men used to sing about him at Welsh fairs: it is
not in the least improbable that they still do so here and there, unless
the horrors of the ghastly murder last reported in the newspapers have
been found to pay better. At any rate Mr. Fisher (p. 379) has known old
people in his native district in the Llychwr Valley who could repeat
stanzas or couplets from the ballads in question. He traces these scraps
to a booklet entitled *Merlin's Prophecy* \[s*\], together with a brief
history of his life, taken from the Book of Prognostication*. This
little book bears no date, but appears to have been published in the
early part of the nineteenth century. It is partly in prose, dealing
briefly with the history of Merlin the Wild or Silvaticus, and the rest
consists of two poems. The first of these poems is entitled *Dechreu
Darogan Myrddin*, 'the Beginning of Merlin's Prognostication,' and is
made up of forty-nine verses, several of which speak of Owen as king
conquering all his foes and driving out the Saxons: then in the
forty-seventh stanza comes the couplet which says, that this Owen is
Henry the Ninth, who is tarrying in a foreign land. The other poem is of
a more general character, and is entitled the Second Song of Merlin's
Prognostication, and consists of twenty-six stanzas of four lines each
like the previous one; but the third stanza describes Arthur's bell at
Caerlleon, 'Caerleon,' ringing with great vigour to herald the coming of
Owen; and the seventh stanza begins with the following couplet:--

  
*Ceir gweled Owen Law-goch yn dod i Frydain Fawr,  
Ceir gweled newyn ceiniog yn nhref Gaerfieon-gawr.  
*  
Owen Lawgoch one shall to Britain coming see,  
And dearth of pennies find at Chester on the Dee.

  
It closes with the date in verse at the end, to wit, 1668, which takes
us back to very troublous times: 1668 was the year of the Triple
Alliance of England, Sweden, and Holland against Louis XIV; and it was
not long after the Plague had raged, and London had had its Great Fire.
So it is a matter of no great surprise if some people in Wales had a
notion that the power of England was fast nearing its end, and that the
*baledwyr* thought it opportune to refurbish and adapt some of Merlin's
prophecies as likely to be acceptable to the peasantry of South Wales.
At all events we have no reason to suppose that the two poems which have
here been described from Mr. Fisher's data represented either the gentry
of Wales, whose ordinary speech was probably for the most part English,
or the bardic fraternity, who would have looked with contempt at the
language and style of the Prognostication. For, apart from careless
printing, this kind of literature can lay no claim to merit in point of
diction or of metre. Such productions represent probably the *baledwyr*
and the simple country people, such as stLll listen in rapt attention to
them doing at Welsh fairs and markets what they are pleased to regard as
singing. All this fits in well enough with the folklore of the caves,
such as the foregoing stories represent it. Here I may add that I am
informed by Mr. Craigfryn Hughes of a tradition that Arthur and his men
are biding their time near Caerleon on the Usk, to wit, in a cave
resembling generally those described in the foregoing legends. He also
mentions a tradition as to Owen Glyndwr--so he calls him, though it is
unmistakably the Owen of the *baledwyr* who have been referred to by Mr.
Fisher that he and his men are similarly slumbering in a cave in Craig
Gwrtheyrn, in Carmarthenshire. That is a spot in the neighbourhood of
Llandyssil, consisting of an elevated field terminating on one side in a
sharp declivity, with the foot of the rock laved by the stream of the
Teifi. *Craig Gwrtheyrn* means Vortigern's Rock, and it is one of the
sites with which legend associates the name of that disreputable old
king. I am not aware that it shows any traces of ancient works, but it
looks at a distance an ideal site for an old fortification. An earlier
prophecy about Owen Lawgoch than any of these occurs, as kindly pointed
out to me by Mr. Gwenogvryn Evans, in the Peniarth MS. 94 (= Hengwrt MS-
412, p. 23), and points back possibly to the last quarter of the
fourteenth century. See also one quoted by him, from the Mostyn MS. 133,
in his *Report on MSS. in the Welsh Language*, i. 106. Probably many
more such prophecies might be discovered if anybody undertook to make a
systematic search for them.

But who was Owen Lawgoch, if there ever was such a man? Such a man there
was undoubtedly; for we read in one of the documents printed in the
miscellaneous volume commonly known as the *Record of Carnarvon*, that
at a court held at Conway in the forty fourth year of Edward III a
certain Gruffydd Says was adjudged to forfeit all the lands which he
held in Anglesey to the Prince of Wales--who was at that time no other
than Edward the Black Prince--for the reason that the said Gruffydd had
been an adherent Of Owen: *adherens fuisset Owino Lawegogh (or Lawgogh)
inimico et proditori predicti domini Principis et de consLlio predicti
Owyni ad mouendam guerram in Wallia contra tredictum dominum Principem*
\[t\]. How long previously it had been attempted to begin a war on
behalf of this Owen Lawgoch one cannot say, but it so happens that at
this time there was a captain called *Yeuwains, Yewains, or Yvain de
Gales or Galles*, 'Owen of Wales,' fighting on the French side against
the English in Edward's Continental wars. Froissart in his *Chronicles*
has a great deal to say of him, for he distinguished himself greatly on
various critical occasions. From the historian's narrative one finds
that Owen had escaped when a boy to the court of Phllip VI of France,
who received him with great favour and had him educated with his own
nephews. Froissart's account of him is, that the king of England, Edward
III, had slain his father and given his lordship and principality to his
own son as Prince of Wales; and Froissart gives Owen's father's name as
Aymon, which should mean *Edmond*, unless the name intended may have
been rather *Einion*. However that may have been, Owen was engaged in
the Battle of Poitiers in 1356, and when peace was made he went to serve
in Lombardy; but when war between England and France broke out again in
1369, he returned to France. He sometimes fought on sea and sometimes on
land, but he was always entrusted by the French king, who was now
Charles V, with important commands. \[u\] . Thus in 1372 he was placed
at the head of a flotilla with 3,000 men, and ordered to operate against
the English: he made a descent on the Isle of Guernsey \[v\], and while
there besieging the castle of Cornet, he was charged by the king of
France to saLl to Spain to invite the king of Castle to send his fleet
again to help in the attack on La Rochelle. Whilst staying at Santander
the earl of Pembroke was brought thither, having been taken prisoner in
the course of the destruction of the English fleet before La Rochelle.
Owen, on seeing the earl of Pembroke, asks him with bitterness if he is
come there to do him homage for his land, of which he had taken
possession in Wales. He threatens to avenge himself on him as soon as he
can, and also on the earl of Hereford and Edward Spencer, for it was by
the fathers of these three men, he said, his own father had been
betrayed to death. Edward III died in 1377, and the Black Prince had
died shortly before. Owen survived them both, and was actively engaged
in the siege of Mortagne Sur Mer in Poitou, when he was assassinated by
one Lamb, who had insinuated himself into his service and confidence,
partly by pretending to bring him news about his native land and telling
him that all Wales was longing to have him back to be the lord of his
country--*et lui fist acroire que toute li terre de Gales le desiroient
mout à ravoir à seigneur*. So Owen fell in the year 1378, and was buried
at the church of Saint-Léger \[w\],while Lamb returned to the English to
receive his stipulated pay. When this happened Owen's namesake, Owen
Glyndwr, was nearly thirty years of age. The latter was eventually to
assert with varying fortune on several fields of battle in this country
the claims of his elder kinsman, who, by virtue of his memory in France,
would seem to have rendered it easy for the later Owen to enter into
friendly relations with the French court of his day \[x\].

Now as to Yvain de Galles, the Rev. Thomas Price (Carnhuanawc) in his
*Hanes Cymru*, 'History of Wales,' devotes a couple of pages, 735-7, to
Froissart's account of him, and he points out that Angharad Llwyd, in
her edition of Sir John Wynne's History of the Gwydir Family \[y\], had
found Owen Lawgoch to have been Owen ab Thomas ab Rhodri, brother to
Llewelyn, the last native prince of Wales. One of the names, however,
among other things, forms a difficulty: why did Froissart call Yvain's
father Aymon? So it is clear that a more searching study of Welsh
pedigrees and other documents, including those at the Record Office
\[z\], has to be made before Owen can be satisfactorily placed in point
of succession. For that he was in the right line to succeed the native
princes of Wales is suggested both by the eagerness with which all Wales
was represented as looking to his return to be the lord of the country,
and by the opening words of Froissart in describing what he had been
robbed of by Edward III, as being both lordship and principality--*la
signourie et princeté*. Be that as it may, there is, it seems to me,
little doubt that Yvain de Galles was no other than the Owen Lawgoch,
whose adherent Gruffyd Says was deprived of his land and property in the
latter part of Edward's reign. In the next place, there is hardly room
for doubt that the Owen Lawgoch here referred to was the same man whom
the baledwyr in their jumble of prophecies intended to be Henry the
Ninth, that is to say the Welsh successor to the last Tudor king, Henry
VIII, and that he was at the same time the hero of the cave legends of
divers parts of the Principality, especially South Wales, as already
indicated.

Now without being able to say why Owen and his analogues should become
the heroes of cave legends contemplating a second advent, it is easy to
point to circumstances which facilitated their doing so. It is useless
to try to discuss the question of Arthur's disappearance; but take Garry
Geerlaug, for instance, a roving Norseman, as we may suppose from his
name, who may have suddenly disappeared with his followers, never more
to be heard of in the east of Ireland. In the absence of certain news of
his death, it was all the easier to imagine that he was dozing quietly
away in an enchanted fortress. Then as to King Cadwaladr, who was also,
perhaps, to have returned to this world, so little is known concerning
his end that historians have no certainty to this day when or where he
died. So much the readier therefore would the story gain currency that
he was somewhere biding his time to come back to retrieve his lost
fortunes. Lastly, there is Owen Lawgoch, the magic of whose name has
only been dissipated in our own day: he died in France in the course of
a protracted war with the kings of England. It is not likely, then, that
the peasantry of Wales could have heard anything definite about his
fate. So here also the circumstances were favourable to the cave legend
and the dream that he was, whether at home or abroad, only biding his
time. Moreover, in all these cases the hope-inspiring delusion gained
currency among a discontented people, probably, who felt the sore need
of a deliverer to save them from oppression or other grievous hardships
of their destiny.  
  
The question can no longer be prevented from presenting itself as to the
origin of this idea of a second advent of a hero of the past; but in
that form it is too large for discussion here, and it would involve a
review, for instance, of one of the cardinal beliefs of the Latter-day
Saints as to the coming of Christ to reign on earth, and other doctrines
supposed to be derived from the New Testament. On the other hand, there
is no logical necessity why the expected deliverer should have been in
the world before: witness the Jews, who are looking forward not to the
return but to the birth and first coming of their Messiah. So the
question here may be confined more or less strictly to its cave-legend
form; and though I cannot answer it, some advance in the direction
whence the answer should come may perhaps be made. In the first place,
one wLll have noticed that Arthur and Owen Lawgoch come more or less in
one another's way; and the presumption is that Owen Lawgoch has been to
a certain extent ousting Arthur, who may be regarded as having the prior
claim, not to mention that in the case of the Gwr Blew cave, p. 481,
Owen is made by an apparently recent version of the story to evict from
his lair a commonplace robber of no special interest. In other words,
the Owen Lawgoch legend is, so to say, detected spreading itself \[aa\].
That is very possibly just what had happened at a remoter period in the
case of the Arthur legend itself. In other words, Arthur has taken the
place of some ancient divinity, such as that dimly brought within our
ken by Plutarch in the words placed at the head of this chapter. He
reproduces the report of a certain Demetrius, sent by the emperor of
Rome to reconnoitre and inspect the coasts of Britain. It was to the
effect that around Britain lay many uninhabited islands, some of which
are named after deities and some after heroes; and of the islands
inhabited, he visited the one nearest to the uninhabited ones. Of this
the dwellers were few, but the people of Britain treated them as
sacrosanct and inviolable in their persons. Among other things, they
related to him how terrible storms, diseases, and portents happened on
the occasion of any one of the mighty leaving this life. He adds:--'
Moreover there is, they said, an island in which Cronus is imprisoned,
with Briareus keeping guard over him as he sleeps; for, as they put it,
sleep is the bond forged for Cronus. They add that around him are many
divinities, his henchmen and attendants \[ab\].'

What divinity, Celtic or pre-Celtic, this may have been who recalled
Cronus or Saturn to the mind of the Roman officer, it is impossible to
say. It is to be noticed that he sleeps and that his henchmen are with
him, but no allusion is made to treasure. No more is there, however, in
Mr. Fisher's version of the story of Ogo'r.-Dinas, which, according to
him, says that Arthur and his warriors there lie sleeping with their
right hands clasping the hLlts of their drawn swords, ready to encounter
any one who may venture to disturb their repose. On the other hand,
legends about cave treasure are probably very ancient, and in some at
least of our stories the safe keeping of such treasure must be regarded
as the original object of the presence of the armed host.

The permission supposed to be allowed an intruder to take away a
reasonable quantity of the cave gold, I should look at in the light of a
sort of protest on the part of the story-teller against the
niggardliness of the cave powers. I cannot help suspecting in the same
way that the presence of a host of armed warriors to guard some pLles of
gold and sLlver for unnumbered ages must have struck the fancy of the
story-tellers as disproportionate, and that this began long ago to cause
a modification in the form of the legends. That is to say, the treasure
sank into a mere accessory of the presence of the armed men, who are not
guarding any such thing so much as waiting for the destined hour when
they are to sally forth to make lost causes win. Originally the armed
warriors were in some instances presumably the henchmen of a sleeping
divinity, as in the story told to Demetrius; but perhaps oftener they
were the guardians of treasure, just as much as the invisible agencies
are, which bring on thunder and lightning and portents when any one
begins to dig at Dinas Emrys or other spots where ancient treasure lies
hidden. There is, it must be admitted, no objection to regarding the
attendants of a divinity as at the same time the guardians of his
treasure. In none, however, of these cave stories probably may we
suppose the principal figure to have originally been that of the hero
expected to return among men: he, when found in them, is presumably to
be regarded as a comparatively late interloper. But it is, as already
hinted, not to be understood that the notion of a returning hero is
itself a late one. Quite the contrary; and the question then to be
answered is, Where was that kind of hero supposed to pass his time till
his return? There is only one answer to which Welsh folklore points, and
that is, In fairyland. This is also the teaching of the ancient legend
about Arthur, who goes away to the Isle of Avallon to be healed of his
wounds by the fairy maiden Morgen; and, according to an anonymous poet
\[ac\], it is in her charms that one should look for the reason why
Arthur tarries so long --  
  

Immodice lasus Arihurus tendit ad aulam  
Regis Avallonis, ubi virgo regia, vulnus  
Illius traelans, sanali membra reservat  
Ipsa sibi: vivuntque simul, si credcrefas est.

  
Avallon's court see suffering Arthur reach:  
His wounds are healed, a royal maid the leech;  
His pains assuaged, he now with her must dwell,  
If we hold true what ancient legends tell.

Here may be cited by way of comparison Walter Mapes' statement as to the
Trinio, concerning whom he was quoted in the first chapter, p.  72
above. He says, that as Trinio was never seen after the losing. battle,
in which he and his friends had engaged with a neighbouring chieftain,
it was believed in the district around lyn Syfadon, that Trinio's fairy
mother had rescued him from the enemy and taken him away with her to her
home in the lake. In the case of Arthur it is, as we have seen, a fairy
also or a lake lady that intervenes; and there cannot be much room for
doubt, that the story representing him going to fairyland to be healed
is far older than any which pictures him sleeping in a cave with his
warriors and his gold all around him. As for the gold, however, it is
abundantly represented as nowhere more common than in the home of the
fairies: so this metal treated as a test cannot greatly help us in
essaying the distinction here suggested. With regard to Owen Lawgoch,
however, one is not forced to suppose that he was ever believed to have
sojourned in Faery: the legendary precedent of Arthur as a cave sleeper
would probably suffice to open the door for him to enter the recesses of
Craig y Dinas, as soon asthe country folk began to grow weary of waiting
for his return. In other words, most of our cave legends have combined
together two sets of popular belief originally distinct, the one
referring to a hero gone to the world of the fairies and expected some
day to return, and the other to a hero or god enjoying an enchanted
sleep with his retinue all around him. In some of our legends, however,
such as that of LLanciau Eryri, the process of combining the two sets of
story has been left to this day incomplete.

Celtic Folklore              ..  ..   ...

\[a\] This seems to be the Goidelic word borrowed, which in Mod. Irish
is written *cnocc* or *cnoc*, 'a hill': the native Welsh form is
*cnwach*, as in *Cnwch Coch* in Cardiganshire, *Cnwch Dernog* (corrupted
into *Clwch Dernog*) in Anglesey, printed *Kuwgh Dernok* in the Record
of Carnarvon, p. 59, where it is associated with other interesting names
to be noticed later.

\[b\] All said by natives of Anglesey about rivers and mountains in
their island must be taken relatively, for though the country has a very
uneven surface it has no real mountain: they are apt to call a brook a
river and a hillock a mountain, though the majestic heights of Arfon are
within sight.

\[c\] See pp. 13-Y6 of his essay on the Neath Valley, referred to in a
note above, where Craig-y -Dinas is also mentioned.

\[d\] This is an interesting word of obscure origin, to which I should
like our ingenious etymologists to direct their attention.

\[e\] See the Poetical Works of John Leyden (Edinburgh, x875),p.  36
(*Scenes of Infamy*, part ii); also my *Arthurian Legend*, p. 18.

\[f\] I am indebted for the English story to an article entitled '*The
Two PedIar Legends of Lambeth and Swaffham*,' contributed by Mr. Gomme
to the pages of the *Antiquary*, x. 202-5, in which he gives local
details and makes valuable comparisons. I have to thank Mr. Gomme also
for a cutting from the weekly issue of the *Leeds Mercury* for Jan. 3,
1885, devoted to '*Local Notes and Queries'* (No. cccxii), where
practically the same story is given at greater length as located at
Upsall Castle in Yorkshire.

\[g\]I have never been to the spot, and I owe these particulars partly
to Mr. J. P. Owen, Of 72 Comeragh Road, Kensington, and partly to the
Rev. John Fisher, already quoted. This is the parish where some would
locate the story of the sin-eater, which others stoutly deny, as certain
periodical outbursts of polemics in the pages of the Academy and
elsewhere have shown. Mr. Owen, writing to me in 1893, states, that,
when he last visited the Anas some thirty years previously, he found the
mouth of the cave stopped up in order to prevent cattle and sheep
straying into it.

  
\[h\] Mr. Fisher refers me to an account of the discovery published in
the Cambrian newspaper for Aug. 14, 1813, a complete file of which
exists, as he informs me, in the library of the Royal Institution of
South Wales at Swansea. Further, at the Cambrians' meeting in 1892 that
account was discussed:nd corrected by Mr. Stepney-Gulston: see the
*Archæologia Cambrensis* for 1893, pp. 163-7. He also I pointed out that
on the opposite side of the gap in the ridge the noted cave of Owain Law
Goch was to be found. Near the Pant-y-llyn bone caves is a place called
Craig Derwydon, and close by is the scene of the exploits of Owain Law
Goch, a character who appears to have absorbed some of the features of
Arthurian romance. A cave in the locality bears Owain's name.'

\[i\] As in Iewelyn's charter to the Monks of Aberconwy, where we have,
according to Dugdale's *Monasticon*, v. 673e, a *Subordynemreis*, that
is *Scubor Dyn Emreis*, 'Din-Emreis Barn,' supposed to be Hafod y Borth,
near Beddgelert: see Jenkins' *Bedd Gelert*, p. z198. In the Myvyrian,
i. 195a, it has been printed Din Emrais,

\[j\] See Somer's Malory's Morte Darthur, xxi. V (= vol- i. p.  849),
and as to the Marchlyn story see above. Lastly some detaLls concerning
Lyn Lydaw wLll be found in the next chapter.

  
\[k\] The oldest spellings known of this name occur in manuscript *A* of
the Annales *Cambriae* and in the *Book of Llan Dov* as *Elized* and
*Elised*, doubtless pronounced *Elissedd*. until it became, by dropping
the final dental, *Elisse*. This in time lost its identity by
assimilation with the English name *Ellis*. Thus, for example, in
Wynne's edition of Powell's Caradog of Llancarfan's *History of Wales*
(London, 1774), pp. 221,24, *Elised* is reduced to *Elis*. In the matter
of dropping the *d* compare our *Dewi*, 'St. David,' for *Dewidd*, for
an instance of which see Duffus Hardy's *Descriptive Catalogue*, i. 119.
The form *Eliseg* with a final *g* has no foundation in fact. Can the
English name Ellis be itself derived from *Elisedd*?  
'

\[l\] *Boncyn* is derived from *bonc* of nearly the same meaning, and
bonc is merely the English word bank borrowed: in South Wales it is
pronounced banc and used in North Cardiganshire in the sense of hill or
mountain.

\[m\] The name occurs twice in the story of Kulhwch and Olwen: see the
*Mabinogion*, p. 1107, where the editors have read *Ricca* both times in
'Gormant, son of Ricca.' This is, however, more than balanced by Rita in
the *Book of Llan Dov*, namely in Tref Rita, 'Rita's town or stead,'
which occurs five times as the name of a place in the diocese of
Llandaff; see pp.  32, 43, 90, 272. The uncertainty is confined to the
spelling, and it has arisen from the difficulty of deciding in medieval
manuscripts between t and c: there is no reason to suppose the name was
ever pronounced *Ricca*. family, Mi *a'i hyibio troed Gwyddfa Rhita ag
mi ddo'n ol rwbrud cin nos*, or sometimes *foru*. That is, 'I'll go
round the foot of Rhita's *Gwyddf'a* and come back some time before
night': sometimes he would say to-morrow.'  Elis also states that his
father used to relate how Rhita's *Gwyddfa* was built, namely by the
simple process of each of his soldiers taking a stone to place on
Rhita's tomb. However the story as to Rhita Gawr being buried on the top
of Snowdon came into existence, there can be no doubt that it was
current in comparatively recent times, and that the Welsh name of *y
Wydfa*, derived from it, refers to the mountain as distinguished from
the district in which it is situated. In Welsh this latter is Eryri, the
habitat, as it were, of the *eryr*, 'eagle,' a bird formerly at home
there as many local names go to prove, such as *Carreg yr Eryr* \[o\],
'the Stone of the Eagle,' mentioned in the boundaries of the lands on
Snowdon granted to the Abbey of Aberconwy in Llewelyn's charter, where
also Snowdon mountain is called *Wedua vawr*, 'the Great Gwyddfa.' Now,
as already suggested, the word *gwyddfa* takes us back to Rhita's
*Carnedd* or Cairn, as it signified a monument, a tomb or barrow: Dr.
Davies gives it in his Welsh-Latin Dictionary as *Locus Sepulturae,
Mausoleum*. This meaning of the word may be Lllustrated by a reference
in passing to the mention in *Brut y Tywysogion* of the burial of Madog
ab Maredydd. For under the year 1159 we are told that he was interred at
Meifod, as it was there his tomb or the vault of his famLly, the one
intended also for him (y 6ydua \[p\], happened to be.

\[n\] This can hardly be the real name of the place, as it is pronounced
*Gwybrnant* (and even *Gwybrant*), which reminds me of the *Gwybr
fynydd* on which Gwyn ab Nudd wanders about with his hounds: see Evans'
facsimile of the *Black Book of Carmarthen*, p.  50a, where the words
are, *dy gruidir ar wibir winit*.

\[o\] Dugdale has printed this (v. 6731) *Carrecrereryr* with one or too
much, and the other name forms part of the phrase *ad capud.Pud
Weddua-Vaur*, 'to the top of the Great Gwddfa'; but I learn from Mr.
Edward Owen, of Gray's Inn, that the reading of the manuscript is *Wedua
vawr* and *Carrecrereryr*.  
  
\[p\] The MSS. except *B* have *y 6ylva*, which is clearly not the right
word, as it could only mean I his place of watching!

\[q\] See Derfel Hughes' Llandegai and Llanllechid, p. 53. As to Drystan
it is the Pictish name *Drostan*, but a kindred form occurs in Cornwall
on a stone near Fowey, where years ago I guessed the ancient genitive
*Drustagni*; and after examining it recently I am able to confirm my
original guess. The name of Drystan recalls that of Essyllt, which
offers some diffi, culty. It first occurs in Welsh in the Nennian
Genealogies in the Harleian MS. 3859: see Pedigree I in the *Cymmrodor*,
ix. 169, where we read that Mermin (Merfyn) was son of Etthil daughter
of Cinnan (Cynan), who succeeded his father Rhodri Molwynog in the
sovereignty of Gwynedd in 754. The spelling *Etthil* is to be regarded
like that of the Welsh names in Nermius, for some instances of which see
§ 73 (quoted in the next chapter) and the Old Welsh words *calaur,
nouel, Patel*, so spell in the Juvencus Codex: see Skene, ii. 2: in all
these I does duty for *Il.* So *Elthil* is to be treated as pronounced
*Ethill* or *Ethyll*; but Jesus College MS. 20 gives a more ancient
pronunciation (at least as regards the consonants) when it calls Cynan's
daughter *Ethellt*: see the *Cymmrodor*, viil 87--Powell, in his
*History of Wales* by Caradog of Llancarfan, as edited by Wynne, writes
the name *Esylht*; and the Medieval Welsh spelling has usually been
*Essyllt* or *Esyllt*, which agrees in its sibilant with the French
*Iselt* or *Iseut*; but who made the Breton-looking change from Eth to
Es or Is in this name remains a somewhat doubtful point. Professor
Zimmer, in the *Zeitscrift  fur franzosische Sprache und Lttteratur*,
xiii. 73-5, points out that the name is an Anglo-Saxon *Ethylda*
borrowed, which he treats as a I Kurzform for *Eihelhild'*: see also the
*Revue Celtique*, xii- 397, xiii. 495. The adoption of this name in
Wales may be regarded as proof of intermarriage or alliance between an
English family and the royal house of Gwynedd as early as the eighth
century.

\[r\] See the *Brython* for 1861, pp.  331-2, also *Cymru Fu*, p. 468,
where Glasynys was also inclined to regard the Hairy Fellow as being
Owen.

\[s\] I have never seen a copy, but Mr. Fisher gives me the title as
follows: *Prophwydoliaeth Myrddin Wyllt* *yn nghyda ber Hanes o'i
Fywyd*, *wedi eu iynu alYlan o Lyfr y Daroganau . . . Caerfyrdim ... Prs
dwy Geiniog*. It has no date, but Mr. Fisher once had a copy with the
date 1847. Recently he has come across another versified prophecy
written in the same style as the printed ones, and referring to an Owain
who may have been Owen Lawgoch. The personage meant is compared to the
most brilliant of pearls, *Owain glain golyaf*. The prophecy is to be
found at the Swansea Public Library, and occurs in a seventeenth century
manuscript manual of Roman Catholic Devotion, Latin and Welsh. It gives
1440 as the year of the deliverance of the *Brytanaid*. It forms the
first of two poems (fo. 37), the second of which is ascribed to
Taliessin. Such is Mr. Fisher's account of it, and the lines which he
has copied for me cling to the same theme of the ultimate triumph of the
Kymry. Quite recently I have received further information as to these
prophecies from Mr. J. R. Davies, of Lincoln's Inn (p. 354), who will,
it is to be hoped, soon publish the results of his intimate study of
their history in South Wales.

\[t\] Record of Carnarvon, p. 133, to which attention was called by me
in the Report of the *Welsh Land Commission*, p. 648: see now *The Welsh
People*, pp. 343-4, 593-4.

\[u\] Nor was Owen the only Welshman in the king of France's service:
there was Owen's chaplain, who on one occasion distinguished himself
greatly in battle. He is called in Froissart's text David House, but the
editor has found from other documents that the name was Honvel Flinc,
which is doubtless Howel, whatever the second vocable may have been: see
Froissart, viiij pp. xxxviii, 69.

\[v\] As to the original destination of the flotilla, see Kervyn de
Lettenhove's edition of Froissart (Brussels, 1870-7), viii. 435-7, where
the editor has brought together several notes, from which it appears
that Owen tried unsuccessfully to recruit an army in Spain, but that he
readily got together in France a considerable force. For Charles V, on
May 8, 1372, ordered the formation of an army, to be placed under Owen's
command for the reconquest of his ancestors' lands in Wales, and two
days later Owen issued a declaration as to his Welsh claims and his
obligations to the French king; but the flotilla stopped short with
Guernsey. It is not improbable, however, that the fear in England of a
descent on Wales by Owen began at least as early as 1369. In his
declaration Owen calls himself *Evain de Gales*, which approaches the
Welsh spelling *Ewein*, more frequently *Ywein* modern *Ywain*, except
that all these forms tended to be supplanted by Owain or Owex. This last
is, strictly speaking, the colloquial form, just as *Howel* is the
colloquial form of *Hywel*, and *bowyd* of *bywyd*, 'life.'

\[w\] For the account of Owen's life see the *Chroniques do J. Froissart
publiies pour la Société de l'Hisloire de France*, edited with abstracts
and notes by Siméon Luce, more especially vols. viii. pp... 44-9, 64,
66-71, 84y 122, x9o, and ix. PP. 74-9, where a summary is given of his
life and a complete account of his death. In Lord Berners' translation,
published in Henry VIll's time, Owen is called Yuan of Wales, as if
anybody could even glance at the romances without finding that *Owen ab
Urien*, for instance, became in French *Ywains* or *Ivains le finds
Urien* in the nominative, and *Ywain* or *Ivain* in régime. Thomas
Johnes of Hafod, whose translation was published in 1803-6, betrays
stLll greater ignorance by giving him the modern name Evan; but he had
the excuse of being himself a Welshman.

\[x\] For copies of some of the documents in point see Rymer's
*Ferdera*, viii. 356, 365, 382.

\[y\] I have not been able to find a copy of this work, and for drawing
my attention to the passage in *Hanes Cymru* I have again to thank Mr.
Fisher. The pedigree in question will be found printed in Table 1 in
Askew Roberts' edition of Sir John Wynne's *History of the Gwydir
Family* (Oswestry, 1878); and a note, apparently copied from Miss Llwyd,
states that it was in a Hengwrt MS. she found the identification of Owen
Lawgoch. The editor surmises that to refer to p. 865 of Hengwrt  MS.
351, which he represents as being a copy of Hengwrt MS. 96 in the
handwriting of Robert Vaughan the Antiquary.

\[z\]' This has already been undertaken: on Feb. 7, 1900, a summary of
this chapter was read to a meeting of the Hon. Society of Cymmrodorion,
and six weeks later Mr. Edward Owen, of Gray's Inn, read an elaborate
paper in which he essayed to fix more exactly Yvain de Galles'place in
the history of Wales. It would be impossible here to do justice to his
reasoning, based as it was on a careful study of the records in point.
Let it suffice for the present, however, that the paper will in due
course appear in the Society's Transactions. Mr. J. H. Davies also
informs me that he is bringing together items of evidence, which tend,
as he thinks, to show that Miss Lwyd's information was practically
correct. Before, however, the question can be considered satisfactorily
answered, some explanation will have to be offered of Froissart's
statement, that Yvain's father's name was Aymon.

\[aa\] We seem also to have an instance in point in Carmarthenshire,
where legend represents Owen and his men sleeping in *Ogof Myrddin*, the
name of which means Merlin's Cave, and seems to concede priority of
tenancy to the great magician: see the extinct periodical *Golud yr Oes*
(for 1863), I, 253, which I find to have been probably drawing on
Eliezer Williams' *English Works* (London, 1840), p. 156.

\[ab\] For the Greek text of the entire passage see the Didot edition of
Plutarch, vol. iii. P. 511 (*De Defectu Oraculorum*, xviii); also my
*Arthurian Legend*, pp. 367-8. It is curious to note that storms have,
in a way, been associated in England with the death of her great men as
recently as that of the celebrated Duke of Wellington; see *Choice
Notes*, P. 270.

\[ac\] See my *Arthurian Legend*, p. 335. I am indebted to Professor
Morfill for rendering the hexameters into English verse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: Place-Name Stories](cf203)
