[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Celtic Folklore](../celt/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cf200)  [Next](cf202) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter VII

### Triumphs of the Water-World

Une des légendes les plus répandues en Bretagne est celle d'une
prétendue ville d'ls, qui, à une époque inconnue, aurait  été' engloutie
par la. mer. On montre, à divers endroits de \]a côte, l'emplacement de
cette cité fabuleuse, et les pěcheurs vous en font d'étranges récits.
Les jours de tempéte, assurent-ils, on voit, dans les creux des vagues,
le sommet des fléches de ses églses; les jours de calme, on entend
mointer de I'ablme Ie son de ses cloches, modulant l'hymne du
jour.-RENAN.

MORE than once in the last chapter was the subject of submersions and
cataclysms brought before the reader, and it may be convenient to
enumerate here the most remarkable cases, and to add one or two to their
number, as well as to dwell at somewhat greater length on some instances
which may be said to have found their way into Welsh literature. He has
already been told of the outburst of the Glasfryn Lake and Ffynnon
Gywer, of Llyn Llech Owen and the Crymlyn, also of the drowning of
Cantre'r Gwaelod; not to mention that one of my informants had something
to say of the submergence of Caer Arianrhod, a rock now visible only at
low water between Celynmog Fawr and Dinas Dintle, on the coast of Arfon.
Rut, to put it briefly, it is an ancient belief in the Principality that
its lakes generally have swallowed up habitations of men, as in the case
of Llyn Syfacton (p. 73) and the Pool of Corwrion (p. 57). To these I
now proceed to add other instances, to wit those of Bala Lake, Kenfig
Pool Llynclys, and Helig ab Glannog's territory including Traeth
Lafan.  
  
Perhaps it is best to begin with historical events, namely those implied
in the encroachment of the sea and the sand on the coast of
Glamorganshire, from the Mumbles, in Gower, to the mouth of the Ogmore,
below Bridgend. It is believed that formerly the shores of Swansea Bay
were from three to five miles further out than the present strand, and
the oyster dredgers point to that part of the bay which they call the
Green Grounds, while trawlers, hovering over these sunken meadows of the
Grove Island, declare that they can sometimes see the foundations of the
ancient homesteads overwhelmed by a terrific storm which raged some
three centuries ago. The old people sometimes talk of an extensive
forest called *Coed Arian*, 'Silver Wood,' stretching from the foreshore
of the Mumbles to Kenfig Burrows, and there is a tradition of a longlost
bridle path used by many generations of Mansels, Mowbrays, and Talbots,
from Penrice Castle to Margam Abbey. All this is said to be corroborated
by the fishing up every now and then in Swansea Bay of stags' antlers,
elks' horns, those of the wild ox, and wild boars' tusks, together with
the remains of other ancient tenants of the submerged forest. Various
references in the registers of Swansea and Aberavon mark successive
stages in the advance of the desolation from the latter part of the
fifteenth century down. Among others a great sandstorm is mentioned,
which overwhelmed the borough of Cynffig or Kenfig, and encroached on
the coast generally: the series of catastrophes seems to have culminated
in an inundation caused by a terrible tidal wave in the early part of
the year 1607  \[a\]

To return to Kenfig, what remains of that old town is near the sea, and
it is on all sides surrounded by hillocks of finely powdered sand and
flanked by ridges of the same fringing the coast. The ruins of several
old buildings half buried in the sand peep out of the ground, and in the
immediate neighbourhood is Kenfig Pool, which is said to have a
circumference of nearly two miles. When the pool formed itself I have
not been able to discover: from such accounts as have come in my way I
should gather that it is older than the growing spread of the sand, but
the island now to be seen in it is artificial and of modem make \[b\].
The story relating to the lake is given as follows in the volume of the
*Iolo Manuscripts*, p. 194, and the original, from which I translate, is
crisp, compressed, and, as I fancy, in Iolo's own words:--

'A plebeian was in love with Earl Clare's daughter: she would not have
him as he was not wealthy. He took to the highway, and watched the agent
of the lord of the dominion coming towards the castle from collecting
his lord's money. He killed him, took the money, and produced the coin,
and the lady married him. A splendid banquet was held: the best men of
the country were invited, and they made as merry as possible. On the
second night the marriage was consummated, and when happiest one heard a
voice: all ear one listened and caught the words, "Vengeance comes,
vengeance comes, vengeance comes," three times. One asked, " When? " "
In the ninth generation (jch)," said the voice. " No reason for us to
fear," said the married pair; "we shall be under the mould long before."
They lived on, however, and a goresgynnydd that is to say, a descendant
of the sixth direct generation, was born to them, also to the murdered
man a *goresgynnydd*, who, seeing that the time fixed was come, visited
Kenfig. This was a discreet youth of gentle manners, and he looked at
the city and its splendour, and noted that nobody owned a furrow or a
chamber there except the offspring of the murderer: he and his wife were
still living. At cockcrow he heard a cry, " Vengeance is; come, is come,
is come." It is asked, " On whom?" and answered, "On him who murdered my
father of the ninth *âch*." He rises in terror: he goes towards the
city; but there is nothing to see save a large lake with three chimney
tops above the surface emitting smoke that formed a stinking . . . \[c\]
On the face of the waters the gloves of the murdered man float to the
young man's feet: he picks them up, and sees on them the murdered man's
name and arms; and he hears at dawn of day the sound of praise to God
rendered by myriads joining in heavenly music. And so the story ends'  
  
On this coast is another piece of water in point, namely Crymlyn, or
'Crumlin Pool,' now locally called the Bog. It appears also to have been
sometimes called Pwll Cynan, after the name of a son of Rhys ab T-ewdwr,
who, in his flight after his father's defeat on Hirwaen Wrgan, was
drowned in its waters \[d\]. It lies on Lord Jersey's estate, at a
distance of about one mile east of the mouth of the Tawe, and about a
quarter of a mile from high-water mark, from which it is separated by a
strip of ground known in the neighbourhood as Crymlyn Burrows. The name
Crymlyn means Crooked Lake, which, I am told, describes the shape of
this piece of water. When the bog becomes a pool it encloses an island
consisting of a little rocky hillock showing no trace of piles, or
walling, or any other handiwork of man \[e\]. The storv about this pool
also is that it covers a town buried beneath its waters. Mr. Wirt Sikes'
reference to it has already been mentioned, and I have it on the
evidence of a native of the immediate neighbourhood, that he has often
heard his father and grandfather talk about the submerged town. Add to
this that Cadrawd, to whom I have had already (pp. 23, 376) to
acknowledge my indebtedness, speaks in the columns of the South Wales
Daibi News for February 15, 1899, of Crymlyn as follows:--

'It was said by the old people that on the site of this bog once stood
the old town of Swansea, and that in clear and calm weather the chimneys
and even the church steeple could be seen at the bottom of the lake, and
in the loneliness of the night the bells were often heard ringing in the
lake. It was also said that should any person happen to stand with his
face towards the lake when the wind is blowing across the lake, and if
any of the spray of that water should touch his clothes, it would be
only with the greatest difficulty he could save himself from being
attracted or sucked into the water. The lake was at one time much larger
than at present. The efforts made to drain it have drawn a good deal of
the water from it, but only to convert it  into a bog, which no one can
venture to cross except in exceptionally dry seasons or hard frost.'

On this I wish to remark in passing, that, while common sense would lead
one to suppose that the wind blowing across the water would help the man
facing it to get away whenever he chose, the reasoning here is of
another order, one characteristic in fact of the ways and means of
sympathetic magic. For specimens in point the reader may be conveniently
referred above, where he may compare the words quoted from Mr. Hartland,
especially as to the use there mentioned of stones or pellets thrown
from one's hands. In the case of Crymlyn, the wind blowing off the face
of the water into the onlooker's face and carrying with it some of the
water in the form of spray which wets his clothes, howsoever little, was
evidently regarded as establishing a link of connexion between him and
the body of the water-or shall I say rather, between him and the
divinity of the water?-and that this link was believed to be so strong
that it required the man's utmost effort to break it and escape being
drawn in and drowned like Cynan. The statement, supremely silly as it
reads, is no modern invention; for one finds that Nennius-or somebody
else-reasoned in precisely the same way, except that for a single
onlooker he substitutes a whole army of men and horses, and that he
points the antithesis by distinctly stating, that if they kept their
backs turned to the fascinating flood they would be out of danger. The
conditions which he had in view were, doubtless, that the men should
face the water and have their clothing more or less wetted by the spray
from it. The passage (§ 69) to which I refer is in the *Mirabilia*, and
Geoffrey of Monmouth is found to repeat it in a somewhat better style of
Latin (ix. 7): the following is the Nennian version:--  
  
*Aliud miraculum est, idest Oper Linn Liguan. Ostium fluminis illius in
Sabrina et quando Sabrina inundatur ad sissam, et mare inundatur
similiter in ostio supra dicti fluminis et in stagno ostii recipitr in
modum voraginis et mare non vadit sursum et est litus juxta flumen et
quamdiu Sabrina inundatur ad sissam, istud litus non tegitur et quando
recedit mare et Sabrina, tunc Stagnum Liuan eructat omne quod devoravit
de mari et litus istud tegifur et instar montis in una unda eruclat et
rumpit. Et si fuerit exercitus totius regionis, in qua est, et direxerit
faciem contra undam, et exercitum trahit unda per vim humore repletis
vestibus et equi similiter  trahuntur. Si autem exercitus terga
versusfuerit contra eam-, non nocet ei unda.  
*  
'There is another wonder, to wit Aber Llyn Lliwan. The water from the
mouth of that river flows into the Severn, and when the Severn is in
flood up to its banks, and when the sea is also in flood at the mouth of
the above-named river and is sucked in like a whirlpool into the pool of
the Aber, the sea does not go on rising: it leaves a margin of beach by
the side of the river, and all the time the Severn is in flood up to its
bank, that beach is not covered. And when the sea and the Severn ebb,
then ILyn ILiwan brings up all it had swallowed from the sea, and that
beach is covered while ILyn ILiwan discharges its contents in one
mountain-like wave and vomits forth. Now if the army of the whole
district in which this wonder is, were to be present with the men facing
the wave, the force of it would, once their clothes are drenched by the
spray, draw them in, and their horses would likewise be drawn. But if
the men should have their backs turned towards the water, the wave would
not harm them'.\[f\]  
  
One story about the formation of Bala Lake, or Llyn Tegid \[g as it is
called in Welsh, has already been given, here is another which I
translate from a version in Hugh Humphreys' *Llyfr Gwybodaeth
Gyffredinol* (Carnarvon), second series, vol. i, no. 2, P. I. I may
premise that the contributor, whose name is not given, betrays a sort of
literary ambition which has led him to relate the story in a confused
fashion; and among other things he uses the word *edifeirwch*,
'repentance,' throughout, instead of *dial*, 'vengeance.' With that
correction it runs somewhat as follows:--Tradition relates that Bala
Lake is but the watery tomb of the palaces of iniquity; and that some
old boatmen can on quiet moonlight nights in harvest see towers in ruins
at the bottom of its waters, and also hear at times a feeble voice
saying, *Dial a daw, dial a itaw*, 'Vengeance will come'; and another
voice inquiring, *Pa bryd y daw*, 'When will it come?' Then the first
voice answers, *Yn y drydedd genhedlaeth*, 'In the third generation.'
Those voices were but a recollection over oblivion, for in one of those
palaces lived in days of yore an oppressive aud cruel prince,
corresponding to the well-known description of one of whom it is said,
'Whom he would he slew; and whom he would he kept alive.' The oppression
and cruelty practised by him on the poor farmers were notorious far and
near. This prince, while enjoying the morning breezes of summer in his
garden, used frequently to hear a voice saying, 'Vengeance will come.'
But he always laughed the threat away with reckless contempt. One night
a poor harper  from the neighbouring hills was ordered to come to the
prince's palace. On his way the harper was told that there was great
rejoicing at the palace at the birth of the first child of the prince's
son. When he had reached the palace the harper was astonished at the
number of the guests, including among them noble lords, princes, and
princesses: never before had he seen such splendour at any feast. When
he had begun playing the gentlemen and ladies dancing presented a superb
appearance. So the mirth and wine abounded, nor did he love playing for
them any more than they loved dancing to the music of his harp. But
about midnight, when there was an interval in the dancing, and the old
harper had been left alone in a comer, he suddenly heard a voice singing
in a sort of a whisper in his ear, 'Vengeance, vengeance!' He turned at
once, and saw a little bird hovering above him and beckoning him, as it
were, to follow him. He followed the bird as fast as he could, but after
getting outside the palace he began to hesitate. But the bird continued
to invite him on, and to sing in a plaintive and mournful voice the word
I Vengeance, vengeance!' The old harper was afraid of refusing to
follow, and so they went on over bogs and through thickets, whilst the
bird was all the time hovering in front of him and leading him along the
easiest and safest paths. But if he stopped for a moment the same
mournful note of 'Vengeance, vengeance!' would be sung to him in a more
and more plaintive and heartbreaking fashion. They had by this time
reached the top of the hill, a considerable distance from the palace. As
the old harper felt rather fatigued and weary, he ventured once more to
stop and rest, but he heard the bird's warning voice no more.
Helistened, but he heard nothing save the murmuring of the little burn
hard by. He now began to think how foolish he had been to allow himself
to be led away from the feast at the palace: he turned back in order to
be there in time for the next dance. As he wandered on the hill he lost
his way, and found himself forced to await the break of day. In the
morning, as he turned his eyes in the direction of the palace, he could
see no trace of it: the whole tract below was one calm, large lake, with
his harp floating on the face of the waters.

Next comes the story of Llynclys Pool in the neighbourhood of 0swestry.
That piece of water is said to be of extraordinary depth, and its name
means the ' swallowed court.' The village of Llynclys is called after
it, and the legend concerning the pool is preserved in verses printed
among the compositions of the local poet, John F. M. Dovaston, who
published his works in 1825. The first stanza runs thus:--  
  
Clerk Willin he sat at king Alaric's board,  
And a cunning clerk was he;  
  
For he'd lived in the land of Oxenford  
With the sons of Grammarie.  
  
How much exactly of the poem comes from Dovaston's own muse, and how
much comes from the legend, I cannot tell. Take for instance the king's
name, this I should say is not derived from the story; but as to the
name of the clerk, that possibly is, for the poet bases it on
Croes-Willin, the Welsh form of which has been given me as Croes-Wylan,
that is Wylan's Cross, the name of the base of what is supposed to have
been an old cross, a little way out of Oswestry on the north side; and I
have been told that there is a farm in the same neighbourhood called
Tre' Wylan, 'Wylan's Stead.' To return to the legend, Alaric's queen was
endowed with youth and beauty, but the king was not happy; and when he
had lived with her nine years he told Clerk Willin how he first met her
when he was hunting 'fair Blodwell's rocks among! He married her on the
condition that she should be allowed to leave him one night in every
seven, and this she did without his once knowing whither she went on the
night of her absence. Clerk Willin promised to restore peace to the king
if he would resign the queen to him, and a tithe annually of his cattle
and of the wine in his cellar to him and the monks of the White Minster.
The king consented, and the wily clerk hurried away with his book late
at night to the rocks by the Giant's Grave, where there was an ogo' or
cave which was supposed to lead down to Faery. While the queen was
inside the cave, he began his spells and made it irrevocable that she
should be his, and that his fare should be what fed on the king's meadow
and what flowed in his cellar. When the clerk's potent spells forced the
queen to meet him to consummate his bargain with the king, what should
he behold but a grim ogress, who told him that their spells had clashed.
She explained to him how she had been the king's wife for thirty years,
and how the king began to be tired of her wrinkles and old age. Then, on
condition of returning to the Ogo to be an ogress one night in seven,
she was given youth and beauty again, with which she attracted the king
anew. In fact, she had promised him happiness

  
Till within his hall the flag-reeds tall  
And the long green rushes grow.

The ogress continued in words which made the clerk see how completely he
had been caught in his own net:

Then take thy bride to thy cloistered bed,  
As by oath and spell decreed,  
And nought be thy fare but the pike and the dare,  
And the water in which they feed.

The clerk had succeeded in restoring peace at the king's banqueting
board, but it was the peace of the dead;

For down went the king, and his palace and all,  
And the waters now o'er it flow,  
And already in his hall do the flag-reeds tall  
And the long green rushes grow

  
But the visitor will, Dovaston says, find Willin's peace relieved by the
stories which the villagers have to tell of that wily clerk, of
Croes-Willin, and of 'the cave called the Grim Ogo'; not to mention that
when the lake is clear, they will show you the towers of the palace
below, the Llynclys, which the Brython of ages gone by believed to be
there..  
  
We now come to a different story about this pool, namely, one which has
been preserved in Latin by the historian Humfrey Lhuyd, or Humphrey
Llwyd, to the following effect:--  
  
'After the description of *Gwynedh*, let us now come to *Powys*, the
seconde kyngedome of *Wales*, which in the time of German
Altisiodorensis \[St. Germanus of Auxerre\], which preached sometime
there, agaynst Pelagius Heresie: was of power, as is gathered out of his
life. The kynge wherof, as is there read, bycause he refused to heare
that good man: by the secret and terrible iudgement of God, with his
Palace, and all his householde: was swallowed vp into the bowels of the
Earth, in that place, whereas, not farre from 0swastry, is now a
standyng water, of an vnknowne depth, called *Lhunclys*, that is to say:
the deuouryng of the Palace. And there are many Churches founde in the
same Province, dedicated to the name of German \[h\]'  
  
 I have not succeeded in finding the story in any of the lives of St.
Germanus, but Nennius, § 32, mentions a certain Benli, whom he describes
as *rex iniquus atque tyrannus valde*, who, after refusing to admit St.
Germanus and his following into his city, was destroyed with all his
courtiers, not by water, however, but by fire from heaven. But the name
Benli, in modem Welsh spelling Benlli \[i\], points to the Moel Famau
range of mountains, one of which is known as Moel FenIti, between Ruthin
and Mold, rather than to any place near Oswestry. In any case there is
no reason to suppose that this story with its Christian and ethical
motive is anything like so old as the substratum of Dovaston's verses.  
  
The only version known to me in the Welsh language of the Llynclys
legend is to be found printed in the *Brython* for 1863, p. 338, and it
may be summarized as follows:--The ILynclys family were notorious for
their riotous living, and at their feasts a voice used to be heard
proclaiming, 'Vengeance is coming, coming,'but nobody took it much to
heart. However, one day a reckless maid asked the voice, I When?' The
prompt reply was to the effect that it was in the sixth generation: the
voice was heard no more. So one night, when the sixth heir in descent
from the time of the warning last heard was giving a great drinking
feast, and music had been vigorously contributing to the entertainment
of host and guest, the harper went outside for a breath of air; but when
he turned to come back, lo and behold! the whole court had disappeared.
Its place was occupied by a quiet piece of water, on whose waves he saw
his harp floating, nothing more.  
  
Here must, lastly, be added one more legend of submergence, namely, that
supposed to have taken place some time or other on the north coast of
Carnarvonshire. In the *Brython* for 1863, pp. 393--4, we have what
purports to be a quotation from Owen jones' *Aberconwy a'i Chyffiniau*,
'Conway and its Environs,' a work which Y have not been able to find.
Here one reads of a tract of country supposed to have once extended from
the Gogarth \[j\], 'the Great Orrne,' to Bangor, and from Llanfair
Fechan to Ynys Seiriol, 'Priestholme or Puffin Island,' and of its
belonging to a wicked prince named Helig ab Glannawc or Glannog.\[k\],
from whom it was called *Tyno Helig*, 'Helig's Hollow.' Tradition, the
writer says, fixes the spot where the court stood about halfway between
Penmaen Mawr and Pen y Gogarth, 'the Great Orme's Head,' over against
Trwyn yr Wylfa; and the story relates that here a calamity had been
foretold four generations before it came, namely as the vengeance of
Heaven on Helig ab Glannog for his nefarious impiety. As that ancient
prince rode through his fertile heritage one day at the approach of
night, he heard the voice of an invisible follower warning him that
'Vengeance is coming, coming.' The wicked old prince once asked
excitedly,, When?' The answer was, 'In the time of thy grandchildren,
great-grandchildren, and their children.' Per-adventure Helig calmed
himself with the thought, that, if such a thing came, it would not
happen in his lifetime. But on the occasion of a great feast held at the
court, and when the family down to the fifth generation were present
taking part in the festivities, one of the servants noticed, when
visiting the mead cellar to draw more drink, that water was forcing its
way in. He had only time to warn the harper of the danger he was in when
all the others, in the midst of their intoxication, were overwhelmed by
the flood.'  
  
These inundation legends have many points of similarity among
themselves: thus in those of ILynclys, Syfaddon, Llyn Tegid, and Tyno
Helig, though they have a ring of austerity about them, the harper is a
favoured man, who always escapes when the banqueters are all involved in
the catastrophe. The story, moreover, usually treats the submerged
habitations as having sunk intact, so that the ancient spires and church
towers may still at times be seen: nay the chimes of their bells may be
heard by those who have ears for such music. In some cases there may
have been, underlying the legend, a trace of fact such as has been
indicated to me by Mr. Owen M. Edwards, of Lincoln College, in regard to
Bala Lake. When the surface of that water, he says, is covered with
broken ice, and a south-westerly wind is blowing, the mass of fragments
is driven towards the north-eastern end near the town of Bala; and he
has observed that the friction produces a somewhat metallic noise which
a quick imagination may convert into something like a distant ringing of
bells. Perhaps the most remarkable instance remains to be mentioned: I
refer to Cantre'r Gwaelod, as the submerged country of Gwyc1no Garanhir
is termed, see above. To one portion of his fabled realm the nearest
actual centres of population are Aberdovey and Borth on either side of
the estuary of the Dovey. As bursar of Jesus College I had business in
1892 in the Golden Valley of Herefordshire, and I stayed a day or two at
Dorstone enjoying the hospitality of the rectory, and learning
interesting facts from the rector, Mr. Prosser Powell, and from Mrs.
Powell in particular, as to the folklore of the parish, which is still
in several respects very Welsh. Mrs. Powell, however, did not confine
herself to Dorstone or the Dore Valley, for she told me as follows:--'I
was at Aberdovey in 1852, and I distinctly remember that my childish
imagination was much excited by the legend of the city beneath the sea,
and the bells which I was told might be heard at night. I used to lie
awake trying, but in vain, to catch the echoes of the chime. I was only
seven years old, and cannot remember who told me the story, though I
have never forgotten it.' Mrs. Powell added that she has since heard it
said, that at a certain stage of the tide at the mouth of the Dovey, the
way in which the waves move the pebbles makes them produce a sort of
jingling noise which has been fancied to be the echo of distant bells
ringing.  
  
These clues appeared too good to be dropped at once, and the result of
further inquiries led Mrs. Powell afterwards to refer me to The *Monthly
Packet* for the year 1859, where I found an article headed 'Aberdovey
Legends,' and signed M. B., the initials, Mrs. Powell thought, of Miss
Bramston of Winchester. The writer gives a sketch of the story of the
country overflowed by the neighbouring portion of Cardigan Bay,
mentioning, p. 645, that once on a time there were great cities on the
banks of the Dovey and the Disynni. 'Cities with marble wharfs,' she
says, 'busy factories, and churches whose towers resounded with
beautiful peals and chimes of bells.' She goes on to say that 'Mausna
 is the name of the city on the Dovey; its eastern suburb was at the
sand-bank now called Borth, its western stretched far out into the sea.'
What the name Mausna may be I have no idea, unless it is the result of
some confusion with that of the great turbary behind Borth, namely
Mochno, or *Cors Fochno*, 'Bog of Mochno.' The name Borth stands for *Y
Borth*,,the Harbour,' which, more adequately described, was once *Porth
Wyddno*, 'Gwydno's Harbour.' The writer, however, goes on with the story
of the wicked prince, who left open the sluices of the sea-wall
protecting his country and its capital: we read on as follows:--' But
though the sea will not give back that fair city to light and air, it is
keeping it as a trust but for a time, and even now sometimes, though
very rarely, eyes gazing down through the green waters can see not only
the fluted glistering sand dotted here and there with shells and tufts
of waving sea-weed, but the wide streets and costly buildings of that
now silent city. Yet not always silent, for now and then will come
chimes and peals of bells, sometimes near, sometimes distant, sounding
low and sweet like a call to prayer, or as rejoicing for a victory. Even
by day these tones arise, but more often they are heard in the long
twilight evenings, or by night. English ears have sometimes heard these
sounds even before they knew the tale, and fancied that they must come
from some church among the hills, or on the other side of the water, but
no such church is there to give the call; the sound and its connexion is
so pleasant, that one does not care to break the spell by seeking for
the origin of the legend, as in the idler tales with which that
neighbourhood abounds.'  
  
The dream about the wide streets and costly buildings of that now silent
city' seems to have its counterpart on the western coast of
Erin-somewhere, let us say, off the cliffs of Moher \[l\], in County
Clare-witness Gerald Griffin's lines, to which a passing allusion has
already been made,  
  
A story I heard on the cliffs of the West,  
That oft, through the breakers dividing,  
A city is seen on the ocean's wild breast,  
 In turreted majesty riding.  
But brief is the glimpse of that phantom so bright:  
Soon close the white waters to screen it.

The allusion to the submarine chimes would make it unpardonable to pass
by unnoticed the well-known Welsh air called *Clychau Aberdyfi*, \[16\]
'The Bells of Aberdovey,' which I have always suspected of taking its
name from fairy bells \[m\].. This popular tune is of unknown origin,
and the words to which it is usually sung make the bells say *un, dau,
tri, bedwar, fump, chwech*, 'one, two, three, four, five, six'; and I
have heard a charming Welsh vocalist putting on saith, i seven,'in her
rendering of the song. This is not to be wondered at, as her instincts
must have rebelled against such a commonplace number as six in a song
redolent of old-world sentiment. But our fairy bells ought to have
stopped at five: this would seem to have been forgotten when the melody
and the present words were wedded together. At any rate our stories seem
to suggest that fairy counting did not go beyond the fingering of one
hand. The only Welsh fairy represented counting is made to do it all by
fives: she counts *un, dau, tri, joedwar, pumb; un, dau, tri, pedwar,
pump*, as hard as her tongue can go. For on the number of times she can
repeat the five numerals at a single breath depends the number of the
live stock of each kind, which are to form her dowry: see p. 8 above,
and as to music in fairy tales.

Now that a number of our inundation stories have been passed in review
in this and the previous chapter, some room may be given to the question
of their original form. They separate themselves, as it will have been
seen, into at least two groups: (1) those in which the cause of the
catastrophe is ethical, the punishment of the wicked and dissolute; and
(2) those in which no very distinct suggestion of the kind is made. It
is needless to say that everything points to the comparative lateness of
the fully developed ethical motive; and we are not forced to rest
content with this theoretical distinction, for in more than one of the
instances we have the two kinds of story. In the case of ILyn Tegid, the
less known and presumably the older story connects the formation of the
lake with the neglect to keep the stone door of the well shut, while the
more popular story makes the catastrophe a punishment for wicked and
riotous living. So with the older story of Cantre'r Gwaelod, on which we
found the later one of the tipsy Seithennin as it were grafted, p. 395.
The keeping of the well shut in the former case, as also in that of
Ffynnon Gywer, was a precaution, but the neglect of it was not the cause
of the ensuing misfortune. Even if we had stories like the Irish ones,
which make the sacred well burst forth in pursuit of the intruder who
has gazed into its depths, it would by no means be of a piece with the
punishment of riotous and lawless living. Our comparison should rather
be with the story of the Curse of Pantannas, where a man incurred the
wrath of the fairies by ploughing up ground which they wished to retain
as a green sward; but the threatened vengeance for that act of culture
did not come to pass for a century, till the time of one, in fact, who
is not charged with having done anything to deserve it. The ethics of
that legend are, it is clear, not easy to discover, and in our
inundation stories one may trace stages of development from a similarly
low level. The case may be represented thus: a divinity is offended by a
man, and for some reason or other the former wreaks his vengeance, not
on the offender, but on his descendants. This minimum granted, it is
easy to see, that in time the popular conscience would fail to rest
satisfied with the cruel idea of a jealous divinity visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children. One may accordingly
distinguish the following stages:--  
  
1. The legend lays it down as a fact that the father was very wicked.  
2. It makes his descendants also wicked like him.  
3- It represents the same punishment overtaking father and sons,
ancestor and descendants.  
4. The simplest way to secure this kind of equal justice was, no doubt,
to let the offending ancestors live on to see their descendants of the  
  
generation for whose time the vengeance had been fixed, and to let them
be swept away with them in one and the same cataclysm, as in the Welsh
versions of the Syfadon and Kenfig legends, possibly also in those of
Llyn Tegid and Tyno Helig, which are not explicit on this point.

Let us for a moment examine the indications of the time to which the
vengeance is put off. In the case of the landed families of ancient
Wales, every member of them had his position and liabilities settled by
his pedigree, which had to be exactly recorded down to the eighth
generation or eighth lifetime in Gwyned, and to the seventh in Gwent and
Dyfed. Those generations were reckoned the limits of recognized family
relationship according to the Welsh Laws, and to keep any practical
reckoning of the kind, extending always back some two centuries, must
have employed a class of professional men \[n\] In any case the ninth
generation, called in Welsh *y nawfed dc*h, which is a term in use all
over the Principality at the present day, is treated as lying outside
all recognized kinship. Thus if AB wishes to say that he is no relation
to CD, he will say that he is not related *o fewn y nawfed dch,* 'within
the ninth degree,' or *hyd y nawfed ach*, 'up to the ninth degree,' it
being understood that in the ninth degree and beyond it no relationship
is reckoned. Folklore stories, however, seem to suggest another
interpretation of the word dch, and fewer generations in the direct line
as indicated in the following table. For the sake of simplicity the
founder of the family is here assumed to have at least two sons, A and
B, and each succeeding generation to consist of one son only; and lastly
the women are omitted altogether:--

 

Tad I  (Father)

I

 

Brother A

II

B Mab (Son)

2

 

 

i Cousin Aa

III

Ba Wyr (Grandson)

3

 

 

ii Cousin Ab

IV

Bb Gorwyr (Great Grandson)

4

 

 

Cousin Ac

V

Be Esgynnydd (G. G. Grandson)

5

 

 

Cousin Ad

VI

Bf Goresgynnydd (G. G. G. Grandson)

   
In reckoning the relationships between the collateral members of the
family, one counts not generations or begettings, not removes or
degrees, but ancestry or the number of ancestors, so that the father or
founder of the family only counts once. Thus his descendants Ad and Bd
in the sixth generation or lifetime, are fourth cousins separated from
one another by nine ancestors: that is, they are related in the ninth
*dch*. In other words, Ad has five ancestors and Bd has also five, but
as they have one ancestor in common, the father of the family, they are
not separated by 5 + 5 ancestors, but by 5 + 5--1, that is by 9.
Similarly, one being always subtracted, the third cousins Ac and Bc are
related in the seventh *dch*, and the second cousin in the fifth *ach*:
so with the others in odd numbers downwards, and also with the relatives
reckoned upwards to the seventh or eighth generation, which would mean
collaterals separated by eleven or thirteen ancestors respectively. This
reckoning, which is purely conjectural, is based chiefly on the Kenfig
story, which foretold the vengeance to come in the ninth dch and
otherwise in the time of the *goresgytrnydd*, that is to say in the
sixth lifetime. This works out all right if only by the ninth ach we
understand the generation or lifetime when the collaterals are separated
by nine ancestors, for that is no other than the sixth from the founder
of the family. The Welsh version of the Llynclys legend fixes on the
same generation, as it says *yn* *oes wyrion, gorwyrion, esgynnydd a
goresgynnydd*, 'in the lifetime of grandsons, great-grandsons,
ascensors, and their children,' for these last's time is the sixth
generation. In the case of the Syfaddon legend the time of the vengeance
is the ninth cenhedlaeth or gener-ation, which must be regarded as
probably a careless way of indicating the generation when the
collaterals are separated by nine ancestors, that is to say the sixth
-from the father of the family. It can hardly have the other meaning, as
the sinning ancestors are represented as then still living.

The case of the Tyno Helig legend is different, as we have the  time
announced to the offending ancestor described *as amser dy wyrion, dy
orwyrion, a dy esgynyddion*, 'the time of thy grandsons, thy
great-grandsons, and thy ascensors,' which would be only the fifth
generation with collaterals separated only by seven ancestors, and not
nine. But the probability is that goresgynyddion has been here
accidentally omitted, and that the generation indicated originally was
the same as in the others. This, however, will not explain the Bala
legend, which fixes the time for the third generation, namely,
immediately after the birth of the offending prince's first grandson.
If, however, as I am inclined to suppose, the sixth generation with
collaterals severed by nine ancestors was the normal term in these
stories, it is easy to understand that the story-teller might wish to
substitute a generation nearer to the original offender, especially if
he was himself to be regarded as surviving to share in the threatened
punishment: his living to see the birth of his first grandson postulated
no extraordinary longevity.

The question why fairy vengeance is so often represented deferred for a
long time can no longer be put off. Here three or four answers suggest
themselves:--  
  
1:. The story of the Curse of Pantarmas relates how the offender was not
the person punished, but one of his descendants a hundred or more years
after his time, while the offender is represented escaping the fairies'
vengeance because he entreated them very hard to let him go unpunished.
All this seems to me but a sort of protest against the inexorable
character of the little people, a protest, moreover, which was probably
invented comparatively late.  
2. The next answer is the very antithesis of the Pantannas one; for it
is, that the fairies delay in order to involve all the more men and
women in the vengeance wreaked by them: I confess that I see no reason
to entertain so sinister an idea.  
3. A better answer, perhaps, is that the fairies were not always in a
position to harm him who offended them. This may well have been the
belief as regards any one who had at his command the dreaded potency of
magic. Take for instance the Irish story of a king of Erin called
Eochaid Airem, who, with the aid of his magician or druid Dalan, defied
the fairies, and dug into the heart of their underground station, until,
in fact, he got possession of his queen, who had been carried thither by
a fairy chief named Mider. Eochaid, assisted by his druid and the
powerful Ogams which the latter wrote on rods of yew, was too formidable
for the fairies, and their wrath was not executed till the time of
Eochaid's unoffending grandson, Conaire Mόr, who fell a victim to it, as
related in the epic story of Bruden Diderga, so called from the palace
where Conaire was slain \[o\]  
4. Lastly, it may be said that the fairies being supposed deathless,
there would be no reason why they should hurry; and even in case the
delay meant a century or two, that makes no perceptible approach to the
extravagant scale of time common enough in our fairy tales, when, for
instance, they make a man who has whiled ages away in fairyland, deem it
only so many minutes \[p\]

 Whatever the causes may have been which gave our stories their form in
regard of the delay in the fairy revenge, it is clear that Welsh
folklore could not allow this delay to extend beyond the sixth
generation with its cousinship of nine ancestries, if, as I gather, it
counted kinship no further. Had one projected it on the seventh or the
eighth generation, both of which are contemplated in the Laws, it would
not be folklore. It would more likely be the lore of the landed gentry
and of the powerful families whose pedigrees and ramifications of
kinship were minutely known to the professional men on whom it was
incumbent to keep themselves, and those on whom they depended, well
informed in such matters.  
It remains for me to consider the non-ethical motive of the other
stories, such as those which ascribe negligence and the consequent
inundation to the woman who has the charge of the door or lid of the
threatening well. Her negligence is not the cause of the catastrophe,
but it leaves the way open for it. What then can have been regarded the
cause? One may gather something to the point from the Irish story where
the divinity of the well is offended because a woman has gazed into its
depths, and here probably, as already suggested we come across an
ancient tabu directed against women, which may have applied only to
certain wells of peculiarly sacred character. It serves, however, to
suggest that the divinities of the water-world were not disinclined to
seize every opportunity of extending their domain on the earth's
surface; and I am persuaded that this was once a universal creed of some
race or other in possession of these islands.Besides the Irish Legends
already mentioned of the formation of Lough Neagh, Lough Ree, and
others, witness the legendary annals of early Ireland, which, by the
side of battles, the clearing of forests, and the construction of
causeways, mention the bursting fort of lakes and rivers; that is to
say, the formation or the coming into existence, or else the serious
expansion, of certain of the actual waters of the country. For the
present purpose the details given by *The Four Masters* are sufficient
and I have hurriedly counted their instances as follows:

Anno Mundi 2532

2 lakes formed

Anno Mundi 2533

1 lake fomed

Anno Mundi 2535

2 lakes formed

Anno Mundi 2545

1 lake fomed

Anno Mundi 2546

1 lake fomed

Anno Mundi 2859

2 lakes formed

Anno Mundi 2860

2 lakes formed

Anno Mundi 3503

21 rivers fomed

Anno Mundi 3506

9 lakes formed

Anno Mundi 3510

5 rivers fomed

Anno Mundi 3520

9 rivers fomed

Anno Mundi 3581

9 lakes formed

Anno Mundi 3656

3 rivers fomed

Anno Mundi 3751

1 lake formed

Anno Mundi 3751

4 rivers fomed

Anno Mundi 3790

9 lakes formed

Anno Mundi 4169

5 rivers fomed

Anno Mundi 4694

1 lake forme

 

 

This makes an aggregate of thirty-five lakes and forty-six rivers, that
is to say a total of eighty-one eruptions. But I ought, perhaps, to
explain that under the heads of lakes I have included not only separate
pieces of water, but also six inlets of the sea, such as Strangford
Lough and the like. Still more to the point is it to mention that of the
lakes two are said to have burst forth at th digging of graves. Thus
A.M. 2535, *The Four Masters* have the following: 'Laighlinne, son of
Parthalon, died in this year. When his grave as dug, Loch Laighlinne
sprang forth in Ui Mac Uais nd from him it is named1. O'Donovan, the
editor and translator of *The Four Masters,* supposes it to be somewere
to the south-west of Tara, in Meath. Similarly A.M. 4694, they say of a
certain Melghe Molbthach, 'When his grave was digging, Loch Melghe burst
forth over the land in Cairbre, so that they named from him.' This is
sad to be now called Lough Mevin, on the confines of the counties of
Donegal, Leitrim, and Fermanagh. These two instances are mentioned by
*The Four Masters*; and here is one given by Stokes in the Rennes
*Dindsenchas*: see the *Revue Celtique*, xv. 428-9. It has to do with
*Loch Garman*, as Wexford Harbour was called in Irish, and it runs thus:
'*Loch Garman*, whence is it? Easy to say. Garman Glas, son of Dega, was
buried there, and when his grave was dug then the lake burst throughout
the land. Whence *Loch Garman'*. It matters not here that there are
alternative accounts of the name.

The meaning of all this seems to be that cutting the green sward or
disturbing the earth beneath was believed in certain cases to give
offence to some underground divinity or other connected with the world
of waters. That divinity avenged the annoyance or offence given him by
causing water to burst forth and form a lake forthwith. The nearness of
such divinities to the surface seems not a little remarkable,

1 It is right to say that another account is given by the Rennes
*Dindsenchas* published by Stokes in the *Revue Celtique* xvi. 164,
namely that Laiglinne with fifty warriors 'came to the well of Dera son
of Scera. A wave burst over them and drowned Laiglinne with his fifty
warriors, and thereof a lake was made. Hence we say *Loch Laiglinni,*
Laiglinne's Lake,'

and it is shown not only in the folklore which has been preserved for us
by *The Four Masters*, but also by the usual kind of story about a
neglected well door. These remarks suggest the question whether it was
not one of the notions which determined surface burials, that is,
burials in which no cutting of the ground took place, the cists or
chambers and the bodies placed in them being covered over by the heaping
on of earth or stones brought from a more or less convenient distance.
It might perhaps be said that all this only implied individuals of a
character to desecrate the ground and call forth the displeasure of the
divinities concerned; and for that suggestion folklore parallels, it is
true, could be adduced. But it is hardly adequate: the facts seem to
indicate a more general objection on the part of the powers in point;
and they remind one rather of the clause said to be inserted in mining
leases in China with the object, if one may trust the newspapers, of
preventing shafts from being sunk below a certain depth, for fear of
offending the susceptibilities of the demons or dragons ruling
underground.  
  
It is interesting to note the fact, that Celtic folklore connects the
underground divinities intimately with water; for one may briefly say
that they have access wherever water can take them. With this
qualification the belief may be said to have lingered lately in Wales,
for instance, in connexion with Llyn Barfog, near Aberdovey. 'It is
believed to be very perilous,' Mr. Pughe says,, 'to let the waters out
of the lake'; and not long before he wrote, in 1853, an aged inhabitant
of the district informed him 'that she recollected this being done
during a period of long drought, in order to procure motive power for
Llyn Pair Mill, and that long-continued heavy rains followed.' Then we
have the story related to Mr. Reynolds as to Llyn y Fan Fach, how there
emerged from the water a huge hairy fellow of hideous aspect, who
stormed at the disturbers of his peace, and uttered the threat that
unless they left him alone in his own place he would drown a whole town.
Thus the power of the water spirit is represented as equal to producing
excessive wet weather and destructive floods. He is in all probability
not to be dissociated from the afaric in the Conwy story which has
already been given. Now the local belief is that the reason why the
afanc had to be dragged oilt of the river was that he caused floods in
the river and made it impossible for people to cross on their way to
market at Llanrwst. Some such a local legend has been generalized into a
sort of universal flood story in the late Triad, iii. 97, as
follows:--'Three masterpieces of the Isle of Prydain: the Ship of Nefydd
Naf Neifion, that carried in her male and female of every kind when the
Lake of Don burst; and Hu the Mighty's *Ychen Bannog* dragging the afanc
of the lake to land, so that the lake burst no more; and the Stones of
Gwydon Ganhebon, on which one read all the arts and sciences of the
world.' A story similar to the Conwy one, but no longer to be got so
complete, as far as I know, seems to have been current in various parts
of the Principality, especially around Llyn Syfaddon and on the banks of
the Anglesey pool called *Llyn yr Wyth Eidion*, 'the Pool of the Eight
Oxen,'for so many is Hu represented here as requiring in dealing with
the Anglesey afanc. According to Mr. Pughe of Aberdovey, the same feat
was performed at lLyn Barfog, not, however, by Hu and his oxen, but by
Arthur and his horse. To be more exact the task may be here considered
as done by Arthur superseding Hu: see p. 142 above. That, however, is of
no consequence here, and I return to the afanc: the Fan Fach legend told
to Mr. Reynolds makes the lake ruler huge and hairy, hideous and
rough-spoken, but he expresses himself in human speech, in fact in two
lines of doggerel: see p. ig above. On the other hand, the Llyn Cwm
Llwch story, which puts the same doggerel into the mouth of the
threatening figure in red who sits in a chair on the face of that lake,
suggests nothing abnormal about his personal appearance. Then as to the
Conwy afanc, he is very heavy, it is true, but he also speaks the
language of the country. He is lured, be it noticed, out of his home in
the lake by the attractions of a young woman, who lets him rest his head
in her lap and fall asleep. When he wakes to find himself in chains he
takes a cruel revenge on her. But with infinite toil and labour he is
dragged beyond the Conwy watershed into one of the highest tarns on
Snowdon; for there is here no question of killing him, but only of
removing him where he cannot harm the people of the Conwy Valley. It is
true that the story of Peredur represents that knight cutting an afanc's
head off, but so much the worse for the compiler of that romance, as we
have doubtless in the afanc some kind of a deathless being. However, the
description which the Peredur story gives \[q\] of him is interesting:
he lives in a cave at the door of which is a stone pillar: he sees
everybody that comes without anybody seeing him; and from behind the
pillar he kills all comers with a poisoned spear.  
  
Hitherto we have the afanc described mostly from a hostile point of
view: let us change our position, which some of the stories already
given enable us to do. Take for instance the first of the whole series,
where it describes, P- 7, the Fan Fach youth's despair when the lake
damsel, whose love he had gained, suddenly dived to fetch her father and
her sister.

 There emerged, it says, out of the lake two most beautiful ladies,
accompanied by a hoaryheaded man of noble mien and extraordinary
stature, but having otherwise all the force and strength of youth. This
hoary-headed man of noble mien owned herds of cattle and flocks of
sheep, a number of which were allowed to come out of the lake to form
his daughter's dowry, as the narrative goes on to show. In the story of
Llyn Du'r Arclu, p. 32, he has a consort who appears with him to join in
giving the parental sanction to the marriage which their daughter was
about to make with the Snowdon shepherd. In neither of these stories has
this extraordinary figure any name given him, and it appears prima facie
probable that the term afanc is rather one of abuse in harmony with the
unlovely description of him supplied by the other stories. But neither
in them does the term *yr afanc* suit the monster meant, for there can
be no doubt that in the word afanc we have the etymological equivalent
of the Irish word abacc, 'a dwarf'; and till further light is shed on
these words one may assume that at one time afanc also meant a dwarf or
pigmy in Welsh. In modern Welsh it has been regarded as meaning a
beaver, but as that was too small an animal to suit the popular stories,
the word has been also gravely treated as meaning a crocodile \[r\]:
this is in the teeth of the unanimous treatment of him as
anthropomorphic in the legends in point. If one is to abide by the
meaning dwarf or pigmy, one is bound to regard afanc as one of the terms
originally applied to the fairies in their more unlovely aspects:
compare the use of *crimbil*, p. 263. Here may also be mentioned
*pegor*, 'a dwarf or pigmy,'which occurs in the *Book of Taliessin*,
poem  
vii (p. 135):--

Gog6n Py pegor  
I know what (sort of) pigmy

yssyd.ydan vor.  
There is beneath the sea.

Gogwn eu heissor I  
 know their kind,

pa6b yny .oscord.  
Each in his troop.

Also the following lines in the twelfth-century manuscript of the *Black
Book of Carmarthen*: see Evans' autotype facsimile, fo. 9b:--  
  
Ar gnyuer pegor  
And every dwarf

y ssit y dan mor.  
There is beneath the sea,

Ar gnyuer edeinauc  
And every winged thing

aoruc kyuoethauc.  
The Mighty One hath made,

Ac vei. vei. paup.  
And were there to each

tri trychant lauamd  
Thrice three hundred tongues-

Nyellynt ve traethaud.  
They could not relate

kyuoetheu \[y\] trindaud  
The powers of the Trinity.

I should rather suppose, then, that the pigmies in the water-world were
believed to consist of many grades or classes, and to be innumerable
like the Luchorpdin of Irish legend, which were likewise regarded as
diminutive. With the Luchorpdin were also associated \[s\] *Fomori* or
*Fomoraig* (modern Irish spelling *Fomhoraigh*), and *Goborchinn*,
'Horse-heads.' The etymology of the word *Fomori* has been indicated
aabove, but Irish legendary history has long associated it with *muir*,
' sea,' genitive *mara*, Welsh *mor*, and it has gone so far as to see
in them, as there suggested, not submarine but transmarine enemies and
invaders of Ireland. So the singular *fomor*, now written *fomhor*, is
treated in O'Reilly's *Irish Dictionary* as meaning 'a pirate, a sea
robber, a giant,' while in Highland Gaelic, where it is written
*fomhair* or *famhair*, it is regularly used as the word for giant. The
Manx Gaelic corresponding to Irish fomor and its derivative *fomorach*,
is *foawr*, 'a giant,' and *foawragh*, 'gigantic,' but also 'a
pirate.'  
  
I remember hearing, however, years ago, a mention made of the
*Fomhoraigh*, which, without conveying any definite allusion to their
stature, associated them with subterranean places:--An undergraduate
from the neighbourhood of Killorglin, in Kerry, happened to relate in my
hearing, how, when he was exploring some underground rdths near his
home, he was warned by his father's workmen to beware of the Fomhoraikh.
But on the borders of the counties of Mayo and Sligo I have found the
word used as in the Scottish Highlands, namely, in the sense of giants,
while Dr. Douglas Hyde and others inform me that the Giant's Causeway is
called in Irish *Clochán na bh-Fomhorach*.  
  
The Goborchinns or Horse-heads have also an interest, not only in
connexion with the Fornori, as when we read of a king of the latter
called Eocha Eachcheann \[t\], or Eochy Horse-head, but also as a link
between the Welsh afanc and the Highland water-horse, of whom Campbell
has a good deal to say in his *Popular Tales of the West Highlands*. See
more especially iv- 337, where he remarks among other things, that 'the
water-horse assumes many shapes; he often appears as a man,' he adds, '
and sometimes as a large bird.' A page or two earlier he gives a story
which illustrates the statement, at the same time that it vividly
reminds one of that part of the Conwy legend which (p. 13o) represents
the afanc resting his head on the lap of the damsel forming one of the
dramatis persona,. Here follows Campbell's own story, omitting all about
a marvellous bull, however, that was in the end to checkmate the
water-horse:--  
  
'A long time after these things a servant girl went with the farmer's
herd of cattle to graze them at the side of a loch, and she sat herself
down near the bank. There, in a little while, what should she see
walking towards her but a man, who asked her to *fasg* his hair \[Welsh
*lleua*\]. She said she was willing enough to do him that service, and
so he laid his head on her knee, and she began to array his locks, as
Neapolitan damsels also do by their swains. But soon she got a great
fright, for growing amongst the man's hair, she found a great quantity
of *liobhagach an locha*, a certain slimy green weed \[u\] that abounds
in such lochs, fresh, salt, and brackish. The girl knew that if she
screamed there was an end of her, so she kept her terror to herself, and
worked away till the man fell asleep as he was with his head on her
knee. Then she untied her apron strings, and slid the apron quietly on
to the ground with its burden upon it, and then she took her feet home
as fast as it was in her heart \[v\] . Now when she was getting near the
houses, she gave a glance behind her, and there she saw her *caraid*
(friend) coming after her in the likeness of a horse'.  
  
The equine form belongs also more or less constantly to the kelpie of
the Lowlands of Scotland and of the Isle of Man, where we have him in
the glashtyn, whose amorous propensities are represented as more
repulsive than what appears in Welsh or Irish legend: see above, and the
*Lioar Manninagh* for 1897, P. 139. Perhaps in Man and the Highlands the
horsy nature of this being has been reinforced by the influence of the
Norse Nykr, a Northern Proteus or old *Nick*, who takes many forms, but
with a decided preference for that of 'a gray water-horse': see
Vigfusson's *Icelandic-English* Dictionary. But the idea of associating
the equine form with the water divinity is by no means confined to the
Irish and the Northern nations: witness the Greek  legend of the horse
being of Poseidon's own creation, and the beast whose form he sometimes
assumed.  
  
It is in this sort of a notion of a water-horse one is probably to look
for the key to the riddle of such conceptions as that of March ab
Meirchion, the king with horse's ears, and the corresponding Irish
figure of Labraid Lorc \[w\] . In both of these the brute peculiarities
are reduced almost to a minimum: both are human in form save their ears
alone. The name *Labraid Lorc* is distinct enough from the Welsh
*March*, but under this latter name one detects traces of him with the
horse's ears in Wales, Cornwall, and Brittany \[x\]. We have also
probably the same name in the Morc of Irish legend: at any rate *Morc*,
*Marc*, or *Margg*, seems to be the same name as the Welsh *March*,
which is no other word than march, 'a steed or charger.' Now the Irish
Morc is not stated to have had horse's ears, but he and another called
Conaing are represented in the legendary history of early Erin as the
naval leaders of the Fornori, a sort of position which would seem to fit
the Brythonic March also were he to be treated in earnest as an
historical character. But short of that another treatment may be
suspected of having been actually dealt out to him, namely, that of
resolving the water-horse into a horse and his master. Of this we seem
to have two instances in the course of the story of the formation of
Lough Neagh in the *Book of the Dun Cow*, fo- 39-41:--  
  
There was once a good king named Maired reigning over Munster, and he
had two sons, Eochaid and Rib. He married a wife named Ebliu (genitive
*Eblinde*), who fell in love with her stepson, Eochaid. The two brothers
make up their minds to leave their father and to take Ebliu with them,
together with all that was theirs, including in all a thousand men. They
proceed northwards, but their druids persuade them that they cannot
settle down in the same district, so Rib goes westwards to a plain known
as *Tir Cluchi Midir acus Maic Oic*, 'the Play-ground of Mider and the
Mac Oc,' so called after the two great fairy chiefs of Ireland. Mider
visits Rib's camp and kills their horses, then he gives them a big horse
of his own ready harnessed with a packsaddle. They had to put all their
baggage on the big horse's back and go away, but after a while the nag
lay down and a well of water formed there, which eventually burst forth,
drowning them all: this is Loch Ri, 'Rib's Loch, or Lough Ree,'on the
Shannon. Eochaid, the other brother, went with his party to the banks of
the Boyne near the Brug, where the fairy chief Mac Oc or Mac ind Oc had
his residence: he destroyed Eochaid's horses the first night, and the
next day he threatened to destroy the men themselves unless they went
away. Thereupon Eochaid said that they could not travel without horses,
so the Mac Oc, gave them a big horse, on whose back they placed all they
had. The Mac Oc warned them not to unload the nag on the way, and not to
let him halt lest he should be their death. However, when they had
reached the middle of Ulster, they thoughtlessly took all their property
off the horse's back, and nobody bethought him of turning the animal's
head back in the direction from which they had come: so he also made a
well \[y\]. Over that well  Eochaid had a house built, and a lid put on
the well, which he set a woman to guard. In the sequel she neglected it,
and the well burst forth and formed Lough Neagh, as already mentioned
above. What became of the big horses in these stories one is not told,
but most likely they were originally represented as vanishing in a
spring of water where each of them stood. Compare the account of Undine
at her unfaithful husband's funeral. In the procession she mysteriously
appeared as a snow-white figure deeply veiled, but when one rose from
kneeling at the grave, where she had knelt nought was to be seen save a
little silver spring of limpid water bubbling out of the turf and
trickling on to surround the new grave:--

Da man sich aber wieder erhob, war die weisse Fremde verschwunden; an
der Stelle, wo sie geknieet hatte, quoll ein silberhelles BrfinnIet\*n
aus dem Rasen; das rieselte und rieselle fort, bis es den Grabhfigel des
Rittersfastganz umzogen hatte; dann rann esftirder und ergoss sich in
einen Weiher, der zur Seite des Gottesackers lag.

The late and grotesque story of the Gilla Decair may be mentioned next:
he was one of the Fornorach, and had a wonderful kind of horse on whose
back most of Finn's chief warriors were induced to mount. Then the Gilla
Decair and his horse hurried towards Corkaguiny, in Kerry, and took to
the sea, for he and his horse travelled equally well on sea and land.
Thus Finn's men, unable to dismount, were carried prisoners to an island
not named, on which Dermot in quest of them afterwards landed, and from
which, after great perils, he made his way to Tir fo Thuinn, 'Terra sub
Unda,'and brought his friends back to Erin \[z\]. Now the number of
Finn's men taken away by force by the Gilla Decair was fifteen, fourteen
on the back of his horse and one clutching to the animal's tail, and the
Welsh Triads, i. 93 = ii. II, seem to re-echo some similar story, but
they give the number of persons not as fifteen but just one half, and
describe the horse as Du (y) Moroedd, 'the Black of (the) Seas,' steed
of Elidyr Mwynfawr, that carried seven human beings and a half from Pen
Llech Elidyr in the North to Pen Llech Elidyr in Mon, 'Anglesey.' It is
explained that Du carried seven on his back, and that one who swam with
his hands on that horse's crupper was reckoned the half man in this
case. Du Moroedd is in the story of Kulhwch and Olwen called Du March
Moro, 'Black the Steed of Moro,' the horse ridden in the hunt of Twrch
Trwyth by Gwyn ab Nud, king of the other world; and he appears as a
knight with his name unmistakably rendered into Brun de Morois in the
romance of Durmart le Galois, who carries away Arthur's queen on his
horse to his castle in Morois \[aa\]. Lastly, here also might be
mentioned the incident in the story of Peredur or Perceval, which
relates how to that knight, when he was in the middle of a forest much
distressed for the want of a horse, a lady brought a fine steed as black
as a blackberry. He mounted and he found his beast marvellously swift,
but on his making straight for a vast river the knight made the sign of
the cross, whereupon he was left on the ground, and his horse plunged
into the water, which his touch seemed to set ablaze. The horse is
interpreted to have been the devil \[ab\], and this is a fair specimen
of the way in which Celtic paganism is treated by th Grail writers when
they feel in the humour to assume an edifying attitude.  
  
If one is right in setting Mόn, 'Anglesey,' over against the anonymous
isle to which the Gilla Decair hurries Finn's men away, Anglesey would
have to be treated as having once been considered one of the Islands of
the Dead and the home of Other-world inhabitants. We have a trace of
this in a couplet in a poem by the medieval poet, Dafyd ab Gwilym, who
makes Blodeuwed the Owl give a bit of her history as follows:--  
  
*Merrh i arglwyd, ail Meirrhion,  
*Daughter to a lord, son of Meirchion,

Wyf i, myn Dewi! o Foxc \[ac\].  
Am I,  by St. David! from Mona.

This, it will be seen, connects March ab Meirchion, as it were 'Steed
son of Steeding,'with the Isle of Anglesey. Add to this that the Irish
for Anglesey or was *Mόin Conaing*, ' Conaing's Swamp,' so called
apparently after Conaing associated with Morc, a name which is
practically *March* in Welsh. Both were leaders of the Fornori in Irish
tales: see my *Arthurian Legend*, p.  356.  
  
On the great place given to islands in Celtic legend and myth it is
needless here to expatiate: witness Brittia, to which Procopius
describes the souls of the departed being shipped from the shores of the
Continent, the Isle of Avallon in the Romances, that of Gwales in the
*Mabinogion*, Ynys Enllii or Bardsey, in which Merlin and his retinue
enter the Glass House \[ad\], and the island of which we read in the
pages of Plutarch, that it contains Cronus held in the bonds of
perennial sleep \[ae\]  
  
Let us return to the more anthropomorphic figure of the afanc, and take
as his more favoured representative the virile personage described
emerging from the Fan Fach Lake to give his sanction to the marriage of
his daughter with the Mydfai shepherd. It is probable that a divinity of
the same order belonged to every other lake of any considerable
dimensions in the country. But it will be remembered that in the case of
the story of Llyn Du'r Arddu two parents appeared with the lake
maiden-her father and her mother-and we may suppose that they were
divinities of the waterworld. The same thing also may be inferred from
the late Triad, iii. 13, which speaks of the bursting of the lake of
Llion, causing all the lands to be inundated so that all the human race
was drowned except Dwyfan and Dwyfach, who escaped in a mastless ship:
it was from them that the island of Prydain was repeopled. A similar
Triad, iii 97, but evidently of a different origin, has already been
mentioned as speaking of the Ship of Nefycl Naf Neifion, that carried in
it a male and female of every kind when the lake of Uon burst. This
later Triad evidently supplies what had been forgotten in the previous
one, namely, a pair of each kind of animal life, and not of mankind
alone. But from the names Dwyfan and Dwyfach I infer that the writer of
Triad iii. 13 has developed his universal deluge on the basis of the
scriptural account of it, for those names belonged in all probability to
wells and rivers: in other terms, they were the names of water
divinities. At any rate there seems to be some evidence that two
springs, whose waters flow into Bala Lake, were at one time called
Dwyfan and Dwyfach, these names being borne both by the springs
themselves and the rivers flowing from them. The Dwyfan and the Dwyfach
were regarded as uniting in the lake, while the water on its issuing
from the lake is called *Dyfrdwy*. Now *Dyfrdwy* stands for an older
*Dyfr-dwyf*, which in Old Welsh was *Dubr duiu*, 'the water of the
divinity.' One of the names of that divinity was *Donwy*, standing for
an early form *Danuvios* or *Danuvia*, according as it was masculine or
feminine. In either case it was practically the same name as that of the
*Danube* or *Danuvios*, derived from a word which is represented in
Irish by the adjective *dána*, 'audax, fortis, intrepidus.' The Dee has
in Welsh poetry still another name, Aerfen, which seems to mean a
martial goddess or the spirit of the battlefield, which is corroborated
and explained by Giraldus \[af\], who represents the river as the
accredited arbiter of the fort unes of the wars in its country between
the Welsh and the English. The name Dyfrdonwy occurs in a poem by
ILywarch Brydyd y Moch, a poet who flourished towards the end of the
twelfth century,  
as follows \[ag\]:--  
  
*Nid kywiw \[ah\] a llwfyr dwfyr dyfyr-  
*With a coward Dyfrdonwy water ill  
donwy  agrees:  
  
*Krereist oth ubyd gwryd garwy.  
*From thy boyhood hast thou loved  
Garwy's valour.  
  
The prince praised was Llywelyn ab lorwerth, whom the poet seems to
identify here with the Dee, and it looks as if the water of the Dee
formed some sort of a test which no coward could face: compare the case
of the discreet cauldron that would not boil meat for a coward \[ai\]  
  
The *dwy, dwyf, duiu*, of the river's Welsh name represent an early form
*deva* or *deiva*, whence the Romans called their station on its banks
Deva, possibly as a shortening of *ad Devam*; but that Deva should have
simply and directly meant the river is rendered probable by the fact
that Ptolemy elsewhere gives it as the name of the northern Dee, which
enters the sea near Aberdeen. From the same stem were formed the names
Dwyf-an and Dwyf-ach, which are treated in the Triads as masculine and
feminine respectively. In its course the Welsh Dee receives a river
Ceirw not far above Corwen, and that river flows through farms called
Ar-ddwyfan and H endre' Ar-ddwyfan, and adjoining Arddwyfan is another
farm called Foty Arddwyfan, 'Shielings of Arddwyfan,' while Hendre'
Arddwyfan means the old stead or winter abode of Arddwyfan. Arddwyfan
itself would seem to mean 'On Dwyfan,' and Hendre' Arddwyfan, which may
be supposed the original homestead, stands near a burn which flows into
the Ceirw. That burn I should suppose to have been the Dwyfan, and
perhaps the name extended to the Ceirw itself; but Dwyfan is not now
known as the name of any stream in the neighbourhood. Elsewhere we have
two rivers called Dwyfor or Dwyfawr and Dwyfach, which unite a little
below the village of Llan Ystumdwy; and from there to the sea, the
stream is called Dwyfor, the mouth of which is between Criccieth and
Afon Wen in Carnarvonshire. Ystumdwy, commonly corrupted into Stindwy,
seems to mean *Ystum-dwy*,'the bend of the Dwy'; so that here also we
have Dwyfach and Dwy, as in the case of the Dee. Possibly Dwyfor was
previously called simply Dwy or even Dwyfan; but it is now explained as
*Dwy-fawr*, 'great Dwy,' which was most likely suggested by Dwyfach, as
this latter explains itself to the country people as *Dwy-fach*, 'little
Dwy! However, it is but right to say that in Llywelyn ab Gruffydds
\[17\] grant of lands to the monks of Aber Conwy they seem to be called
Dwyuech and Dwyuaur \[aj\]  
  
All these waters have in common the reputation of being liable to sudden
and dangerous floods, especially the Dwyfor, which drains Cwm Straltyn
and its lake lying behind the great rocky barrier on the left as one
goes from Tremadoc towards Aber Glaslyn Bridge. Still more so is this
the case with the Dee and Bala Lake, which is wont to rise at times from
seven to nine feet above its ordinary level. The inundation which then
invades the valley from Bala down presents a sight more magnificent than
comfortable to contemplate. In fact nothing could have been more natural
than for the story elaborated by the writer of certain of the late
Triads to have connected the most remarkable inundations with the
largest piece of water in the Principality, and one liable to such
sudden changes of level: in other words, that one should treat Llyn
Llion as merely one of the names--of Bala Lake, now called in Welsh ILyn
Tegid, and formerly sometimes ILyn Aerfen.

While touching at p. 286 on Gwaen Llifon with its Llyn Pencraig as one
of those claiming to be the Llyn lifon of the Triads, it was hinted that
*Llion* was but a thinner form of *Lllifon*. Here one might mention
perhaps another Llifon, for which, however, no case could be made. I
allude to the name of the residence of the Wynns descended from GLlmin
Troedddu, namely, Glyn Llifon, which means the river Llifon's Glen; but
one could not feel surprised if the neighbouring LLyfni, draining the
lakes of Nant1te, should prove to have once been also known as a Llifon,
with the Nanttte waters conforming by being called Llyn Llifon. But
however that may be, one may say as to the flood caused by the bursting
of any such lake, that the notion of the universality of the catastrophe
was probably contributed by the author of Triad iii. 13, from a
non-Welsh source. He may have, however, not invented the vessel in which
he places Dwyfan and Dwyfach: at all events, one version of the story of
the Fan Fach represents the Lake Lady arriving in a boat. As to the
writer of the other Triad, iii-97, he says nothing about Dwyfan and his
wife, but borrows NefyddT Naf Neifion's ship to save all that were to be
saved; and here one may probably venture to identify *Nefydd* with
*Nemed* \[ak\] genitive *Nemid*, a name borne in Irish legend by a rover
who is represented as one of the early colonizers of Erin. As to the
rest, the name Neifion by itself is used in Welsh for Neptune and the
sea, as in the following couplet of D. ab Gwilym's poem Iv:--  
Nofiad a wmaeth hen Neifon  
It is old Neptune that has swam  
O Droia: fawr draw i Fon.  
From great Troy afar to Mona.  
  
In the same way *Mor Neifion*, 'Sea of Neifion,' seems to have signified
the ocean, the high seas.

To return to the Triad about Dwyfan and Dwyfach, not only does it make
them from being water divinities into a man and woman, but there is no
certainty even that both were not feminine. In modern Welsh all rivers
are treated as feminine, and even Dyfrdwyf has usually to submit, though
the modern bard Tegid, analysing the word into *Dwfr Dwyf*, 'Water of
the Divinity or Divine Water,' where *dwfr*, 'water,,' could only be
masculine, addressed LLyn Tegid thus, p.  78:

  
*Drwyot, er dydiau'r Drywon,  
*Through thee, from the days of the Druids,

Y rhwyf y Dyfrdwyf ei don.  
The Dwfr Dwyf impels his wave.

This question, however, of the gender of river names, or rather the sex
which personification ascribed them, is a most difficult one. If we
glance at Ptolemy's Geography written in the second century, we find in
his account of the British Isles that he names moire than fifty of our
river mouths and estuaries, and that he divides their names almost
equally into masculine and feminine. The modern Welsh usage has, it is
seen, departed far from this, but not so far the folklore: the afanc is
a male, and we have a figure of the same sex appearing as the father of
the lake maiden in the Fan Fach story, and in that of Llyn Du'r Arddu;
the same, too, was the sex of the chief dweller of Llyn Cwm Llwch; the
same remark is applicable also to the greatest divinity of these
islands--the greatest, at any rate, so far as the scanty traces of his
cult enable one to become acquainted with him. As his name comes dovvn
into legend it belongs here, as well as to the deities of antiquity,
just as much, in a sense, as the Dee. I refer to Nudons or Nodons, the
remains \[al\] of whose sanctuary were many years ago brought to light
on a pleasant hill in Lydney Park, on the western banks of the Severn.
In the mosaic floor of the god's temple there is a coloured inscription
showing the expense of that part of the work to have been defrayed by
the contributions (ex stipibus) of the faithful, and that it was carried
out by two men, of whom one appears to have been an officer in command
of a naval force guarding the coasts of the Severn Sea. In the midst of
the mosaic inscription is a round opening in the floor of nine inches in
diameter and surrounded by a broad band of red enclosed in two of blue.
This has given rise to various speculations, and among others that it
was intended for libations. The mosaics and the lettering of the
inscriptions seem to point to the third century as the time when the
sanctuary of Nudons was buLlt under Roman auspices, though the place was
doubtless sacred to the god long before. In any case it fell in exactly
with the policy of the more astute of Roman statesmen to encourage such
a native cult as we find traces of in Lydney Park.  
  
One of the inscriptions began with D. M. Nodonti, 'to the great god
Nudons,' and a little bronze crescent intended for the diadem of the god
or of one of his priests gives a representation of him as a crowned,
beardless personage driving a chariot with four horses; and on either
side of him is a naked figure supposed to represent the winds, and
beyond them on each of the two sides is a triton with the fore feet of a
horse. The god holds the reins in his left hand, and his right uplifted
grasps what may be a sceptre or possibly a whip, while the whole
equipment of the god recalls in some measure the Chariot of the Sun.
Another piece of the bronze ornament shows another triton with an anchor
in one of his hands, and opposite him a fisherman in the act of hooking
a fine salmon. Other things, such as oars and shell trumpets, together
with mosaic representations of marine animals in the floor of the
temple, compel us to assimilate Nudons more closely with Neptune than
any other god of classical mythology.  
  
The name of the god, as given in the inscriptions, varies between Nudons
and Nodens, the cases actually occurring being the dative Nodonti,
Nodenti, and Nudente, and the genitive Nodentis, so I should regard *o*
or *u* as optional in the first syllable, and *o* as preferable,
perhaps, to *e* in the second, for there is no room for reasonably
doubting that we have here to do with the same name as Irish *Nuadu*,
genitive *Nuadat*, conspicuous in the legendary history of Ireland. Now
the Nuadu who naturally occurs to one first, was Nuadu Argetlám or Nuadu
of the Silver Hand, from *argat*, 'silver, *argentum*,' and *lám*,
'hand.' Irish literature explains how he came to have a hand made of
silver, and we can identify with him on Welsh ground a Lludd Llawereint;
for put back as it were into earlier Brythonic, this would be Ludo(ns) 
Llam'-argenitios: that is to say, a reversal takes place in the order of
the elements forming the epithet out of *ereint* (for older *ergeint*,
'silvern, *argenteus*,' and llaw, for earlier lama, 'hand.' Then comes
the alliterative instinct into play, forcing Nudo(ns) Lamargentio(s) to
become Ludo(ms) Lamargentio(s), whence the later form, *Lludd
Llawereint*, derives regularly \[am\] Thus we have in Welsh the name
*Llud*, fashioned into that form under the influence of the epithet,
whereas elsewhere it is *Nud*, which occurs as a man's name in the
pedigrees, whLle an intermediate form was probably *Nudos* or *Nudo*, of
which a genitive NVDI occurs in a post-Roman inscription found near
Yarrow Kirk in Selkirkshire. It is worthy of note that the modification
of *Nudo* into *Ludo* must have taken place comparatively early--not
improbably while the language was still Goidelic--as we seem to have a
survival of the name in that of Lydney itself.  
  
It is very possible that we have *Ludo*, Llud, also in *Porthludd*,
which Geoffrey of Monmouth gives, iii. 20, as the Welsh for Ludesgata or
Ludgate, in London, which gate, according to him, was called after an
ancient king of Britain named Lud. He seems to have been using an
ancient tradition, and there would be nothing improbable in the
conjecture that Geoffrey's Lud was our Lludd, and that the great water
divinity of that name had another sanctuary on the hill by the Thames,
somewhere near the present site of St. Paul's Cathedral, and occupying a
post as it were prophetic of Britain's rule of the water-ways in later
times.  
  
Perhaps as one seems to find traces of Nudons from the estuary of the
Thames to that of the Severn and thence to Ireland, one may conclude
that the god was one of the divinities worshipped by the Goidels. With
regard to the Brythonic Celts, there is nothing to suggest that he
belonged also to them except in the sense of his having been probably
adopted by them from the Goidels. It might be further suggested that the
Goidels themselves had in the first instance adopted him from the
pre-Celtic natives, but in that case a goddess would have been rather
more probable \[an\]. In fact in the case of the Severn we seem to have
a trace of such a goddess in the Sabrina, Old Welsh Habren, now Hafren,
so called after a princess whom Geoffrey, ii. 5, represents drowned in
the river: she may have been the pre-Celtic goddess of the Severn, and
the name corresponding to Welsh Hafren occurs in Ireland in the form of
Sabrann, an old name of the river Lee that flows through Cork. Similarly
one now reads sometimes of *Father* Thames after the fashion of classic
phraseology, and in the Celtic period Nudons may have been closely
identified with that river, but the ancient name Tamesa or Tamesis
\[ao\]  was decidedly feminine, and it was, most likely, that of the
river divinity from times when the pre-Celtic natives held exclusive
possession of these islands. On the whole it appears safer to regard
Nudons as belonging to a race that had developed on a larger scale the
idea of a patriarchal or kingly ruler holding sway over a comparatively
wide area. So Nudons may here be treated as ruled out of the discussion
as to the origin of the fairies, to which a few paragraphs are now to be
devoted.  
  
Speaking of the rank and file of the fairies in rather a promiscuous
fashion, one may say that we have found manifold proof of their close
connexion with the waterworld. Not only have we found them supposed to
haunt places bordering on rivers, to live beneath the lakes, or to
inhabit certain green isles capable of playing hide-and-seek with the
ancient mariner, and perhaps not so very ancient either; but other
considerations have been suggested as also pointing unmistakably to the
same conclusion. Take for instance the indirect evidence afforded by the
method of proceeding to recover an infant stolen by the fairies. One
account runs thus: The mother who had lost her baby was to go with a
wizard and carry with her to a river the child left her in exchange. The
wizard would say, *Crap ar y wrach*, 'Grip the hag,' and the woman would
reply, *Rhy hwyr, gyfraglach*, 'Too late, you urchin \[ap\] \[18\]
Before she uttered those words she had dropped the urchin into the
river, and she would then return to her house. By that time the
kidnapped child would be found to have come back home \[aq\] . The words
here used have not been quite forgotten in Carnarvonshire, but no
distinct meaning seems to be attached to them now; at any rate I have
failed to find anybody who could explain them. I should however guess
that the wizard addressed his words to the fairy urchin with the
intention, presumably, that the fairies in the river should at the same
time hear and note what was about to be done. Another, and a somewhat
more intelligible version, is given in the Gwyliedyd for 1837, p. 185,
by a contributor who publishes it from a manuscript which Lewis Morris
began to write in 1724 and finished apparently in 1729. Hewasanative of
Anglesey, and it is probably to that county the story belongs, which he
gives to Lllustrate one of the phonological aspects of certain kinds of
Welsh. That account differs from the one just cited in that it
introduces no wizard, but postulates two fairy urchins between whom the
dialogue occurs, which is not unusual in our changeling stories.. After
this explanation I translate Morriswords thus:--  
  
'But to return to the question of the words approaching to the nature of
the thing intended, there is an old story current among us concerning a
woman whose children had been exchanged by the *Tylwyth Teg*. Whether it
is truth or falsehood does not much matter, rt it shows what the men of
that age thought concerning the sound of words, and how they fancied
that the language of those sprites was of a ghastly and lumpy kind. The
story is as follows:--The woman whose two  
children had been exchanged, chanced to overhear the two fair heirs,
whom she got instead of them, reasoning with one another beyond what
became their age and persons. So she picked up the two sham children,
one under each arm, in order to go and throw them from a bridge into a
river, that they might be drowned as she fancied. But hardly had the one
in his fall reached the bottom when he cried out to his comrade in the
following words:--  
  
*Grippiach greppsach  
*Grippiach Greppiach,

Dal d'afel yn y wrach,  
Keep thy hold on the hag.

Hi aeth yn rhowyr 'faglach  
It got too late, thou urchin

Mi eis i ir mwthlach \[ar\]  
I fell into the . . .

In spite of the obscurity of these words, it is quite clear that it was
thought the most natural thing in the world to return the fairies to the
river, and no sooner were they dropped there than the right infants were
found to have been sent home.  
  
The same thing may be learned also from the story of the Curse of
Pantannas, above; for when the time of the fairies' revenge is
approaching, the merry party gathered together at Pantannas are
frightened by a piercing voice rising from a black and cauldron-like
pool in the river; and after a while they hear it a second time rising
above the noise of the river as it cascades over the shoulder of a
neighbouring rock. Shortly afterwards an ugly, diminutive woman appears
on the table near the window, and had it not been for the rudeness of
one of those present she would have disclosed the future to them, but,
as it was, she said very little in a vague way and went away offended;
but as long as she was there the voice from the river was silent. Here
we have the Welsh counterpart of the *ben side*, pronounced *banshee* in
Anglo-Irish, and meaning a fairy woman who is supposed to appear to
certain Irish famLlies before deaths or other misfortunes about to
befall them. It is doubtless to some such fairy persons the voices
belong, which threaten vengeance on the heir of Pantannas and on the
wicked prince and his descendants previous to the cataclysm which brings
a lake into the place of a doomed city: witness such cases as those of
Llynclys, Syfaclon, and Kenfig.  
  
The last mentioned deserves some further scrutiny; and I direct his
attention to the fact that the voice so closely identifies itself with
the wronged famLly that it speaks in the first person, as it cries,
'Vengeance is come on him who murdered my father of the ninth
generation!' Now it is worthy of remark that the same personifying is
also characteristic of the Cyhiraeth \[as\]  
  
This spectral female used to be oftener heard than seen; but her
blood-freezing shriek was as a rule to be heard when she came to a
cross-road or to water, in which she splashed with her hands. At the
same time she would make the most doleful noise and exclaim, in case the
frightened hearer happened to be a wife, *Fy ngwr, fy ngwr*! 'my
husband, my husband!' If it was the man the exclamation would be, *Fy
ngwraig, fy ngwraig*! 'my wife, my wife!' Or in either case it might be,
*Fy mhlentyn, fy mhlentyn, fy  mhlentyn bach*! 'my child, my child, my
little child!' These cries meant the approaching death of the hearer's
husband, wife, or chLld, as the case might be; but if the scream was
inarticulate it was reckoned probable that the hearer himself was the
person foremourned. Sometimes she was supposed to come, like the Irish
banshee, in a dark mist to the window of a person who has been long
aLling, and to flap her wings against the glass, while repeating aloud
his or her name, which was believed to mean that the patient must die
\[at\].. The picture usually given of the Cyhiraeth is of the most
repellent kind: tangled hair, long black teeth, wretched, skinny,
shrivelled arms of unwonted length out of all proportion to the body.
Nevertheless it is, in my opinion, but another aspect of the
banshee-like female who intervenes in the story of the Curse of
Pantannas. One might perhaps treat both as survivals of a belief in a
sort of personification of, or divinity identified with, a family or
tribe, but for the fact that such language is emptied of most of its
meaning by the abstractions which it would connect with a primitive
state of society. So it is preferable, as coming probably near the
truth, to say that what we have here is a trace of an ancestress. Such
an idea of an ancestress as against that of an ancestor is abundantly
countenanced by dim figures like that of the Don of the *Mabinogion*,
and of her counterpart, after whom the Tribes of the goddess Donu or
Danu \[au\[ are known as *Tuatha Dé Danann* in Irish literature. But the
one who most provokes comparison is the Old Woman of Beare, already
mentioned,she figures largely in Irish folklore as a hag surviving to
see her descendants reckoned by tribes and peoples. It may be only an
accident that a poetically wrought legend pictures her not so much
interested in the fortunes of her progeny as engaged in bewailing the
unattractive appearance of her thin arms and shrivelled hands, together
with the general wreck of the beauty which had been hers some time or
other centuries before.  
  
However, the evidence of folklore is not of a kind to warrant our
buLlding any heavy superstructure of theory on the supposition, that the
foundations are firmly held together by a powerful sense of consistency
or homogeneity. So I should hesitate to do anything so rash as to
pronounce the fairies to be all of one and the same origin: they may
well be of several. For instance, there may be those that have grown out
of traditions about an aboriginal pre-Celtic race, and some may be the
representatives of the ghosts of departed men and women, regarded as
one's ancestors; but there can hardly be any doubt that others, and
those possibly not the least interesting, have originated in the demons
and divinities-not all of ancestral origin-with which the weird fancy of
our remote forefathers peopled lakes and streams, bays and creeks and
estuaries. Perhaps it is not too much to hope that the reader is
convinced that in the course of this chapter some interesting specimens
have, so to say, been caught in their native element, or else in the
enjoyment of an amphibious life of mirth and frolic, largely spent hard
by sequestered lakes, near placid rivers or babbling brooks.

\[a\] For most of my information on this subject I have to thank Mr.
David Davies, editor of the *South Wales Daily Post*, published at
Swansea.

\[b\] I am indebted for this information to Mr. J. Herbert James of
Vaynor, who visited Kenfig lately and has called my attention to an
article headed I The Borough of Kenfig,' in the *Archæologia Cambrensis*
for 1898: see more especially the maps at pp. 138-42.

\[c\] Here the Welsh has a word *edafwr*, the exact meaning of which
escapes me, and I gather from the remarks of local etymologers that no
such word is no-w in use in Glamorgan.  
\[d\] See the Book of *Aberpergwm*, printed as *Brut y Tywysogion*, in
the *Myvyrian  Archaiology*, ii, 524a, also Morgan's *Antiquarian Survey
of East Gower*, p. 66, where the incident is given from I *Brut y
Tywysogion*, A. D. 1088.' It is, however, not in what usually passes by
the name of *Brut y Tywysogion*, but comes, as the author kindly informs
me, from a volume entitled '*Brut y Tywysogion'*, the Gwentian Chronicle
of Caradoc of Llancarvan, with a translation by the late Aneurin Owen,
and printed for the Cambrian Archaeological Association, 1863': see PP-
70-1.

\[e\] For this also I have to thank Mr. Herbert James, who recently
inspected the spot with Mr. Glascodine of Swansea.

\[f\] I do not know whether anybody has identified the spot which the
writer had in view, or whether the coast of the Severn stW offers any
feature which corresponds in any way to the description.

\[g\] Supposed to be so called after a certain *Tegid Foel*, or 'Tegid
the Bald,' of Penllyn: the name Tegid is the phonetic spelling of what
might be expected in writing as *Tegyd*--it is the Latin *Tacitus*
borrowed, and comes with other Latin names in Pedigree 1. of the Cuneda
dynasty; see the *Cymmrodor*, xi. 170. In Point of spelling one may
compare Idtis for what might be expected written *ldrys*, of the same
pronunciation, for an earlier *Iudrys* or *Iudris*.

\[h\] The translation was made by Thomas Twyne, and published in 1573
under the title of The *Breuiary of Briayne*, where the passage here
given occurs, on fol. 69b The original was *entitled Commentarioli
Britannica Descriptionis Fragmentum*, published at Cologne in 1572. The
original of our Passage, fol- 57a, has Guynedhia and Llunclis. The stem
llwnc of llyncaf 'I swallow,'answers, according to Welsh idiom, to the
use of what would be in English or Latin a participle. Similarly, when a
compound is not used, the verbal noun (in the genitive) is used: thus 'a
feigned illness,' in Welsh 'a made illness,' is *saldra gwyneyd*,
literally 'an indisposition or illness of making.' So 'the deuouryng of
the Palace' is incorrect, and based on Lwyd's *vorago Palatij* instead
of

Palatium voratum.

\[i\]  For other occurrences of the name, see the Black Book, fol. 35a,
52a, and Morris' *Celtic Remains*, where, s. v. Benlli, the Welsh name
of Bardsey,  
to wit, *Yns E*lli.ys EA is treated by somebody, doubtless rightly, as
of *Ynys Fenlli*.

\[j\] The meaning of this name is not certain, but it seems to equate
with the Irish *Fochard*, anglicized *Faughard*, in County Louth: see
O'Donovan's *Four Masters*, A. D. 1595; also the *Book of the Dun Cow*,
where it is Fockerd, genitive Focherda, dative Focheird, fo. 70b, 73b,
75a, 75b, 76a 77a.

\[k\] This is sometimes given as Glannach, which looks like the Goidelic
form of the name: witness Giraldus' *Enislannach* in *Itin..Kambriae*,
ii. 7 (p. 131).

\[l\] See Choke Notes, p. 92, and Gerald Griffin's *Poetical and
Dramatic Works*, p. 106.  
  
\[m\] Failing to see this, various writers have tried to claim the
honour of owning the bells for Aberteifi, 'Cardigan,' or for Abertawe,
'Swansea'; but no arguments worthy of consideration have been urged on
behalf of either place: see *Cyfaill yr Aelwyd* for 1892, p. 184.

\[n\] For some of the data as to the reckoning of the pedigrees and
branching of a family, see the first volume of Aneurin Owen's *Ancient
Laws*--Gwyned, Ill. i. 12-5 (pp. 222-7); Dyfed, II. i. 17-29 (pp.
408-11); Gwent, II. viii. 1-7 (pp.  700-3); also *The Welsh People*  pp.
230-1.

\[o\] See the Book of the Dun Cow, fol. 99 a & seq.  
  
\[p\]  he may also consult Howells' *Cambrian Superstitions*, pp. 123-8,
141-2, 146. In one case, p. 123, he gives an instance of the contrary
kind of imagination: the shepherd who joined a fairy party on Frenni
Fach was convinced, when his senses and his memory returned, that,
I'although he thought he had been absent so many years, he had been only
so many minutes'.  The story has the ordinary setting; but can it be of
popular origin? The Frenni Fach is a part of the mountain known as the
Frenni Fawr, in the north-east of Pembrokeshire; the names mean
respectively the Little *Brerni*, and the Great *Breni*. The obsolete
word *breni* meant, in Old Welsh, the prow of a ship; local habit tends,
however, to the solecism of *Brenin Fawr*, with brenin, 'king,'
qualified by an adjective mutated feminine; but people at a distance who
call it Frenni Fawr, pronounce the *former vocable with nn. Lastly, Y
Vrrvi Va6r occurs in Maxen's Dream in the Red* Book (Oxford Nab. p. 89);
but in the *White Book* (in the Peniarth collection), col. x87, the
proper name is written Freni: for this information I have to thank Mr.
Gwenogvryn Evans.  
  
\[q\] The Oxford *Mabinogion*, p. 224, and Guest's, i. 343.

\[r\] See Afanc in the *Geiriadur* of Silvan Evans, who cites instances
in point.

\[s\] See the Revue Celtique, i. 257, and my Hibbert Letures pp. 92-3.

\[t\] The Four Masters A. M- 3520.

\[u\] In another version Campbell had found it to be sand and nothing
else.

\[v\] As to this incident of a girl and a supernatural, Campbell says
that lie had heard it in the Isle of Man also, and elsewhere.

\[w\]  See the *Revue Celtique*, ii. 197. He was also called Labraid
Longsech, and Labraid Longsech Lore. The explanation of *Labraid Lorcis*
possibly that it was originally Labraid Morc, and that the fondness for
alliteration brought it into line as *Labraid Lorc*: compare *Llud
Llaweraint* in Welsh for *Nud Llaweraint*. This is not disproved by the
fact that Labraid Lorc's grandfather is said to have been called
Loegaire Lore: Loegaire Lorc and Labraid Lorc are rather to be regarded
perhaps as duplicates of the same original.

\[x\]  See my *Arthurian Legend*, p. 70; also *Hibbert Lectures*, p..
590

\[y\] The original has in these passages respectively *siblais afual
corbo thipra*, 'minxit urinam suam so that it was a spring'; ar na
siblad aflial ar na bad fochond bais doib, 'ne mingat urinam suam lest
it should be the cause of death to them'; and *silis*, 'minxit,' fo.
39b. For a translation of the whole story see Dr. O'Grady's *Silva
Gadelica*, pp. 265-9; also Joyce's *Old Celtic Romances*, PP. 97-105.

\[z\] See the story in Dr. O'Grady's Silva Gadelica, pp. 292-311

\[aa\] See Stengel's edition of *li Romans de Durmart le Galois*
(Tabingen,  
1873), lines 4185-340, and my *Arthurian Legend*, pp. 68-9.  
  
\[ab\] See Williams' *Seint Greal*, pp.  60-1, 474-5; Nutt's *Holy
Grail*, P. 44 and my *Arthurian Legend*; pp. 69-70.

\[ac\] *Bardoniaeth D. ab Gwilym*, poem 183. A similar descent of
Blodeuwedds appears implied in the following *englyn*--one of two-by
Anthony Powel, who died in 1618: it is given by Taliesin ab lolo in his
essay on the Neath  
Valley, entitled Traelhawd ar *Gywrneindd, Hynafiaeth, a hen Bendefigion
Glynn Nedd* (Aberdare, 1886), p. 15:--

  
Crug ael, carn gadarn a godwyd yn fryn,

Yn hen fraenwaith bochlwyd;  
Main a'i llud man y lladdwyd,  
Merrh hoewen loer Meirchson lwyd.

  
It refers, with six other *englynion* by other authors, to a remarkable
rock called Craig y Dinas, with which Taliesin associated a cave where
Arthur  
or Owen Lawgoch and his men are supposed, according to him, to enjoy a
secular sleep, and it implies that Blodeuwedd whose end in the
*Mabinegi* of Math was to be converted into an owl, was, according to
another account,  
overwhelmed by Craig y -Dinas. It maybe Englished somewhat as follows:

Heaped on a brow, a mighty cairn built like a hill,  
Like ancient work rough with age, grey-cheeked

Stones that confine her where she was slain  
Grey Meirchion's daughter quick and bright as the moon

\[ad\] This comes from the late series of Triads, iii. 10, where
Merlin's nine companions are called *naw beirdd cylfeird*: *cylfeird*
should be the plural of *cylfardd*, which must be the same word as the
Irish *culbard*, name of one of the bardic grades in Ireland.  
  
\[ae\]  For some more remarks on this subject generally, see my
*Arthurian Legend*, chapter xv, on the I Isles of the Dead.'

\[af\] See his *Itinerarium Kambria*, ii. II (p.  139); also my *CeItic
Britain*, p. 68, and *Arthurian Legend*, p.  364.  
  
\[ag\] From the *Myvrian Archaiology of Wales*, i. 302.  
  
\[ah\] I  regard *nid kywiw* as a corruption of *ni chywiw* from
*cyf-ywl* an instance of the verb corresponding to *cymod* ( =
*cymbod*), 'peace, conciliation.' The preterite has, in the Oxford
*Bruts*, A.D. 1217 (p. 358), been printed *kymni* for what one may read
*kymu*: the words would then *be y kymu reinald y  bre6ys ar brenhin*, '
that Reginald de Breos was reconciled with the king, or settled matters
with him!

 \[ai\] Seethe *Book of Taliessin*, poem xxx, in Skene's *Four Ancient
Books*, ii. 18 r also Guest's *Mabinogion*, ii 354, and the *Brython*
for 1860, p. 372b, where more than one article of similar capacity of
distinguishing brave men from cowards is mentioned.

\[aj\] See Dugdale's *Monasticon*, v. 672, where they are printed
*Dwynech* and *Dwynaur* respectively

\[ak\] See my *Hibbert Lectues*, pp. 649-50.

\[al\] A full account of them will be found in a volume devoted to them,
and entitled *Roman Antquities at Lydney Park, Gloucestershire*, being a
posthumous work of the Rev. W. Hiley Bathurst, with Notes by C. W. King,
London, 1879. See also an article entitled '*Das Heilligtum des Nodon*,'
by Dr. Hubner in the *Jahrbucher des Vervins von Afterthumsfreundin int
Rheinland*e lxvii. pp. 29-46, where several things in Mr. King's book
are criticized.

\[am\]  See my *Hibbert Lectures*, pp. 122, 125.

\[an\] On this subject, see The Welsh People, especially pp. 54-61.

\[ao\] Why our dictionary makers have taken into their heads to treat it
as *Tamesis* I know not. The Welsh is *Tafwys* with a diphthong
regularly representing an earlier long *e* or *e*i in the second
syllable. There is, as far as I know, no reason to suppose *Tafwys* an
invention, rather than a genuine vocable of the same origin as the name
of the Glamorganshire river *Taff*, in Welsh *Taf*, which is also the
name of the river emptying itself at Laugbarne, in Carmarthenshire.
*Tafwyys*, however, does not appear to occur in any old Welsh document;
but no such weakness attaches to the testimony of the French *Tamise*,
which could hardly come from *Tamesis*: compare also the place-name
*Tamise* near the Scheidt in East Flanders; this, however, may be of a
wholly different origin.

\[ap\] A more difficult version has been sent me by Dewi Glan Ffrydlas,
of Bethesda: *Caffed y wrack*, 'Let him seize the hag'; *Methu'r
cryfaglach*, 'You have failed, urchin.' But he has not been able to get
any explanation of the words at the Penrhyn Quarries. *Cryfaglach* is
also the form in *Mur Y Cryfaglach*, 'the Urchin's Wall,' in Jenkins'
*Bedd Gelert* p.. 249. Heinformis me that this is the name of an old
ruin on an elevated spot some twenty or thirty yards from a swift brook,
and not far in a south -south-easterly direction from Sir Edward
Watkin's chalet.  
  
\[aq\] For this I am indebted to Mr. Wm. Davies who tells me that he
copied the original from *Chwedlau a Thraddodiadau Gwynedd*, 'Gwyned
Tales and Traditions,' published in a periodical, which I have not been
able to consult, called *Y Gordofigion*, for the year 1873.

\[ar\] The meaning of the word *mwthlach* is doubtful, as it is now
current in Gwyned only in the sense of a soft, doughy, or puffy person
who is all of a heap, so to say. Pughe gives *mwythlan* and *mwythlen*
with similar significations. But *mwthlach* would seem to have had some
such a meaning in the doggerel as that of rough ground or a place
covered with a scrubby, tangled growth. It is possibly the same word as
the Irish *mothlach*, 'rough, bushy, ragged, shaggy'; see the *Vision of
Laisrin*, edited by Professor K. Meyer, in the *Otia Nerseiana*, pp.
114, 117.

\[as\] The account here given of the Cyhiraeth is taken partly from
Choice Notes, pp. 31-2, and partly from Howells, pp. 31-4, 56-7, who
appears to have got uncertain in his narrative as to the sex of the
Cyhiraeth; but there is no reason whatsoever for regarding it as either
male or female-the latter alone is warranted, as be might have gathered
from her being called *y Cyhiraeth*, 'the Cyhiraeth,' never *y
Cyhiraeth* as far as I know. In North Cardiganshire the spectre intended
is known only by another name, that of *Gwrach y Rhibyn*, but *y
Gyhiraeth* or *yr hen Gyhiraeth* is a common term of abuse applied to a
lanky, cadaverous person, both there and in Gwyned; in books, however,
it is found sometimes meaning a phantom funeral. The word *cyhiraeth*
would seem to have originally meant a skeleton with *cyhyrau*, 'sinews;
but no flesh. However, *cyhyrau*, singular *cyhyr*, would be more
correctly written with an *i;* for the words are pronounced-even in
Gwyned, *cyhir*, *cyhirau*. The spelling *cyhyraeth* corresponds to no
pronunciation I have ever heard of the word; but there is a third
spelling, *cyhearaeth*, which corresponds to an actual *cyhoereth* or
*cyhoyreth*, the colloquial pronunciation to be heard in parts of South
Wales:  I cannot account for this variant. *Gwrach y Rhibyn* means the
Hag of the *Rhibyn*, and *rhibyn* usually means a row, streak, a line --
*ma' nhw'n mynd yn un rhibym*, 'they are going in a line.'  But what
exactly *Gwrach y Rhibyn* should connote I am unable to say. I may
mention, however, on the authority of Mr. Gwenogvryn Evans, that in
Mid-Cardiganshire the term *Gwrach y Rhibyn* means a long roll or bustle
Qf fern tied with ropes of straw and placed along the middle of the top
of a hayrick. This is to form a ridge over which and on which the thatch
is worked and supported: gwrach unqualified is, I am told used in this
sense in Glamorganshire. Something about the Gwvrach sprite will be
found in the *Brython* for 1860, p. 236, while a different account is
given in Jenkins' *Bed Gelert*, pp. 80-1 .

\[at\]  This statement I give from *Choice Notes*, p. 32; but I must
confess that I am sceptical as to the I wings of a leathery and bat-like
substance,' or of any other substance whatsoever.

\[au\]  Fo*r more about her and similar ancestral personages, see* *The
Welsh People*, pp. 54-61.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII: Welsh Cave Legends](cf202)
