[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](amm02)  [Next](amm04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486435199/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Architecture, Mysticism and Myth*, by W.R. Lethaby, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# ARCHITECTVRE, MYSTICISM AND MYTH

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### INTRODUCTORY

'*Invention, strictly speaking, is little more than a new combination of
those images, that have been previously gathered and deposited in the
memory: nothing can come of nothing: he who has laid up no materials can
produce no combinations*.'—REYNOLDS, Discourse II.

THE history of architecture, as usually written, with its theory of
utilitarian origins from the hut and the tumulus, and further
developments in that way—the adjustment of forms to the conditions of
local circumstance; the clay of Mesopotamia, the granite of Egypt, and
marble of Greece—is rather the history of building: of 'Architecture' it
may be, in the sense we so often use the word, but not the Architecture
which is the synthesis of the fine arts, the commune of all the crafts.

As the pigments are but the vehicle of painting, so is building but the
vehicle of architecture, which is the thought behind form, embodied and
realised for the purpose of its manifestation and transmission.
Architecture, then, interpenetrates building, not for satisfaction of
the simple needs of the body, but the complex ones of the intellect. I
do not mean that we can thus distinguish between architecture and

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

building, in those qualities in which they meet and overlap, but that in
the sum and polarity of them all; these point to the response of future
thought, those to the satisfaction of present need; and so, although no
hut or mound, however early or rude, but had something added to it for
thought's sake, yet architecture and building are quite clear and
distinct as ideas—the soul and the body.

Of the modes of this thought we must again distinguish; some were
unconscious and instinctive, as the desire for symmetry, smoothness,
sublimity, and the like merely æsthetic qualities, which properly enough
belong to true architecture; and others were direct and didactic,
speaking by a more or less perfect realisation, or through a code of
symbols, accompanied by traditions which explained them. The main
purpose and burthen of sacred architecture—and all architecture, temple,
tomb, or palace, was sacred in the early days—is thus inextricably bound
up with a people's thoughts about God and the universe.

Behind every style of architecture there is an earlier style, in which
the germ of every form is to be found; except such alterations as may be
traced to new conditions, or directly innovating thought in religion,
all is the slow change of growth, and it is almost impossible to point
to the time of invention of any custom or feature. As Herbert Spencer
says of ceremonial generally: 'Adhering tenaciously to all his elders
taught him, the primitive man deviates into novelty only through
unintended modifications. Every one now knows that languages are not
devised but evolve; and the same is true of usages.' It has, rightly,
been the habit of historians of architecture to lay stress on the
differences of the several styles and schools of successive ages, but;
in the far larger sense,

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

all architecture is one, when traced back through the stream of
civilisations, as they followed or influenced one another. For instance,
argue as archæologists may, as to whether the columns at Beni Hassan are
rightly called proto-Doric, it is a fact to be read as in an open book,
that a Greek temple and an Egyptian temple are substantially at one,
when we consider the infinite possibilities of form, if disassociated
from tradition.

It has often been pointed out, how early examples of stone construction
still repeat the forms of the manner of building in wood that went
before, and so is it always. How long the steamship retained survivals
of the sailing vessel, and how the vocabulary of the coachroad still
answers for the railway.

What then, I want to ask, are the ultimate facts behind all architecture
which has given it form? Mainly three: *First*, the similar needs and
desires of men; *secondly*, on the side of structure, the necessities
imposed by materials, and the physical laws of their erection and
combination; and *thirdly*, on the side of style, nature. It is of this
last that I propose to write; the influence of the known and imagined
facts of the universe on architecture, the connection between the world
as a structure, and the building, not of the mere details of nature and
the ornaments of architecture, but of the whole—the Heavenly Temple and
the Earthly Tabernacle. 'Has anyone,' says Mr Lillie in his "Buddhism in
Christendom," 'puzzled over the fact, that the only modern
representative of the initiates of the ancient mysteries should occupy
themselves entirely with the business of the hodman and builder; what is
the connection between the kingdom of heaven, and matter of fact mortar,
tee-squares and trowels? Esoteric masonry

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

occupied itself in reality, with a temple built without sound of hammer,
axe, or tool of iron. It was the temple of the skies, the Macrocosmos,
in point of fact.'

It will be necessary, not only to examine architecture in the monuments,
but the contemporary statements which relate to them, the stories about
buildings, and even the mythology of architecture, for such a mythology
there is.

If we trace the artistic forms of things, made by man, to their origin,
we find a direct imitation of nature. The thought behind a ship is the
imitation of a fish. So to the Egyptians and Greeks the 'Black Ship'
bore traces of this descent, and two eyes were painted at the prow. The
custom still lingers on the Mediterranean and on the waters of China:
the eyes are given, it is said, to enable the ship to see its way over
the pathless sea. Tables and chairs, like the beasts, are quadrupeds;
the lion's leg and foot of modern furniture come to us from the Greeks,
and, earlier, they were used in Assyria and Egypt. Thrones had beasts on
either hand, a custom traditionally followed for thrones, Hittite,
Chaldean, or Hindu, that of Solomon, the imperial throne at
Constantinople, or our own Coronation chair. The Egyptian funeral bier
seems like a joke, so frank and unmodified is the imitation: it looks,
as shown on the mummy cases, like a long, flat-backed lion, tail and
all; the example preserved in the Boulak Museum, has the ordinary
parallelogram of a bed, each leg being a lion's leg; a head is attached
to the middle of the front rail, and a tail, like a pump handle,
projects far behind in a great sweeping curve.

Where else, indeed, should we go for the highest imagination? In the
modern Greek folk stories, the hero usually has three marvellous robes;
one

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

embroidered with the heavens and its stars, the second with the sea and
fish swimming there, the third with the earth in May and all its
flowers. Could anyone produce finer designs?

The commonplaces of poetry, in which the world is likened to a building,
'heavenly vaults,' or 'azure domes,' 'gates of sunrise,' and the rest,
are survivals of a time when the earth was not a tiny ball, projected at
immeasurable speed through infinite space, one, among other fireflies of
the night, but was stable and immovable, the centre of the universe, the
floor on which the sky was built. The whole, a chamber lighted by the
sun, moon, and stars.

The ceremonial of religion during the great building ages in Chaldea,
Egypt, and India, was going through the phase of Nature worship, in
which the sky, the sun, the sea were not so much veiled, as afterwards
to the Greeks, until they became persons, not things; but open and
understood, astronomical observation was closely associated as part of
the cultus.

In all this there is enough to dispose us to receive evidence of a
cosmical symbolism in the buildings of the younger world, and we shall
find that the intention of the temple (speaking of the temple *idea*, as
we understand it) was to set up a local reduplication of the temple not
made with hands, the World Temple itself—a sort of model to scale, its
form governed by the science of the time; it was a heaven, an
observatory, and an almanack. Its foundation was a sacred ceremony, the
time carefully chosen by augury, and its relation to the heavens defined
by observation. Its place was exactly below the celestial prototype;
like that it was sacred, like that strong, its foundations could not be
moved, if they were placed foursquare to the walls of the firmament, as
are still

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

our churches—and was it not to be like the heavenly sanctuary, that
Solomon built the temple without the sound of tool?

I do not necessarily claim that this was the origin of all structures
set apart for a purpose in a sense sacred; nor possibly in every case
was this the first interpretation of some of the symbols. Customs have
many explanations. I claim that, given the idea of a universe and
universe gods, the phase here set out was a necessary one; and as this
stage certainly everywhere preceded the age, when works, worthy the name
of architecture, were produced—buildings which enshrined ideas—it is
here we shall find the formative factor in their design. And for this
there is ample authority; De la Saussaye, in his comprehensive 'Manual
of the Science of Religion' (1891), says 'the symbolism of temple
buildings sometimes seems to refer to the structure of the world,
sometimes to the religious relationship of men to the gods.'

Beginning with the form of the world in the first chapter, the three or
four which follow, deal with the relation of the building to it as a
whole, and the rest with parts and details.

We need not suppose that temples were a sum of these symbols in all
cases, if in any; but that from this common book of architecture, each
took what he would, little or much, sometimes openly, sometimes with
more or less translation, sometimes at first hand, often as a
half-remembered tradition.

The ritual side of symbolism is entirely neglected here, but there is
ample evidence that sacred ceremony, the state that surrounded a throne,
and the pageant of war, all had reference to the ritual and

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

pomp of nature; so that man might be one with her and share her
invincible strength. Ridiculous as, at first, it may seem, the Throne,
Crown, and Orb of Her Majesty Queen Victoria can only be explained in
this way: they are all symbols of a God in his temple; and hereditary
kingship has everywhere, as Mr Spencer has shown, claimed divinity, God
descent, and afterwards God consent—the right divine. As is said in the
old Chinese book, the Li Ki (Sac. Books of E. Vol. 28), 'all ceremonial
usages, looked at in their general characteristics, are the embodiment
of the ideas suggested by heaven and earth; take their laws from the
changes of the four seasons; imitate the operation of the contracting
and developing movements in nature, and are conformed to the feelings of
men. It is on this account that they are called the Rules of Propriety;
and when anyone finds fault with them, he only shows his ignorance of
their origin.'

 

Old architecture lived because it had a purpose. Modern architecture, to
be real, must not be a mere envelope without contents. As M. Cesar Daly
says in his *Hautes Etudes*, if we would have architecture excite an
interest, real and general, we must have a symbolism, immediately
comprehensible by the great majority of spectators. But this message
cannot be that of the past—terror, mystery, splendour. Planets may not
circle nor thunder roll in the temple of the future. No barbaric gold
with ruddy bloom; no jewels; emeralds half a palm over, rubies like an
egg, and crystal spheres, can again be used more for magic than for
beauty. No terraced temples of Babylon to reach the skies; no
gold-plated palaces of Ecbatana, seven-walled; no ivory palaces of Ahab;
nor golden

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

houses of Nero with corridors a mile long; no stupendous temples of
Egypt at first all embracing, then court and chamber narrowing and
becoming lower, closing in on the awed worshipper and crushing his
imagination; these, all of them, can never be built again, for the
manner and the materials are worked out to their final issue. Think of
the Sociology and Religion of all this, and the stain across it, "each
stone cemented in the blood of a human creature." Those colossal efforts
of labour forced on by an implacable will, are of the past, and such an
architecture is not for us, nor for the future.

What, then, will this art of the future be? The message will still be of
nature and man, of order and beauty, but all will be sweetness,
simplicity, freedom, confidence, and light; the other is past, and well
is it, for its aim was to crush life: the new, the future, is to aid
life and train it, 'so that beauty may flow into the soul like a
breeze.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The World Fabric](amm04)
