[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](amm06)  [Next](amm08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486435199/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Architecture, Mysticism and Myth*, by W.R. Lethaby, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### CHAPTER IV

### AT THE CENTRE OF THE EARTH

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="50%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655"><p>' . . . <em>That stellar concave spreading overhead, softly absorbed into me, rising so free interminably high, stretching east, west, north, south—and I, though but a point in the centre below, embodying all</em>.'<br />
                           —WALT WHITMAN.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

THERE would seem to be delight and mystery inherent to the ideas of a
boundary or a centre. Children show this by standing in two counties or
parishes at the same time, and being much comforted thereby—only
disappointed, like the little girl in *Punch*, that there are not pretty
colours at the division, as on the maps. Do you not remember being told
that the Town Hall 'at home' was the centre of the mileage of the
diverging roads, and being much impressed by this, the middle of the
world, which should have been specially marked by a 'golden milestone.'
Paris, London, or Boston is the 'hub' of the universe to their several
inhabitants. 'All roads lead to Rome.'

'Ah! Messer Greco,' George Eliot makes her cultured Barber, Nello, say
of his shop 'Apollo and the Razor,' 'if you want to know the flavour of
our scholarship, you must frequent my shop; it is the focus of
Florentine intellect, and in that sense the navel of the earth, as my
great predecessor Burchieilo

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

said of *his* shop, on the more frivolous pretension that his street of
the Calimara was the centre of our city.'

When the earth was a plane surface with boundaries which were certain in
form, if unknown in extent, 'the centre is with us' would be a claim
advanced in a much more definite form by different countries or rival
cities. On an Arab fountain in Sicily was the inscription, 'I am in the
centre of the garden; this garden is the centre of Sicily, and Sicily of
the whole world.'

The Mediterranean still preserves its name of the world's central sea.
Maspero tells us the Chaldeans considered themselves better than their
neighbours, and the centre of the world; and Professor Sayce that in the
forest of Eridu—into the heart whereof man had not penetrated—was the
'centre of the earth' and the 'holy house of the gods.' The Egyptians,
too considered they were the only true centre. 'The Egyptians were
particularly remarkable for their great love for their country, which is
also inherited by their successors. They considered it to be under the
immediate protection of the gods and the centre of the world; they even
called it the world itself; and it was thought to be the favoured spot
where all created beings were first generated, while the rest of the
earth was barren and uninhabited' (Wilkinson). Bunsen mentions a map of
the world under the form of a human figure in which Egypt was the heart.

In '*Voyageurs Anciens*' Charton says, '*Chaque peuple répondait avec
une assurance naïve*. "*Le centre est chez moi*"—For the Egyptians the
centre was Thebes; for the Assyrians, Babylon; for the Hindus, Mount
Meru; for the Jews, Jerusalem; for the Greeks, Olympus or the temple of
Delphi, and later, in the time of Herodotus, Rhodes.' In the same
collection

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

of travels a modern Arab view as to the form and centre of the world is
given. God created the earth square, and covered with stones; and from
the top of Mount Sinai, which is the centre of the world, traced a great
circle whose circumference touched the four sides of the square. He then
commanded the angels to throw all the stones into the corners, which
correspond with the four cardinal points. The circle thus cleared was
given to the Arabs, who are the children best beloved; then he called
the four angles France, Italy, England, and Russia.

An inscription of a king of Susa (B.C. 710, 'Records of the Past') makes
this claim for the 'Susian land, which is the first of the earth, and
the centre of all mankind.'

It was the same with Persia—'The country of Iran is better than other
places, for it is in the middle.'

China also has always been a specially favoured country, and its
position is marked in its very name—the 'Middle Kingdom.' In the letter
from the Emperor of China to the King of England in 1817 he claims that
he has received from heaven the government of the world, and that China
is 'the flourishing and central empire,' the source of good influences.
The Hindus also have a name implying that their country is the centre,
and the old Japanese poems call theirs the Middle Kingdom.

 

A confusion was likely to arise at once in regard to this centre, for
the centre of the heavenly revolutions is seen to be in the north; hence
the world mountain, the pivot of these revolutions also rose in the
north. For instance, according to the 'Encyclopædia of India,' 'The
Hindus at Bikanir Rajputana taught that the mountain Meru is in the
centre surrounded by concentric circles of land and sea. Some Hindus

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

regard Mount Meru as the north pole. The astronomical views of the
Puranas make the heavenly bodies turn round it.'

This world-mountain was Nizir to the Chaldeans, Olympus to the Greeks,
Hara Berezaiti to the Persians of the Avesta, the later Alborz and
Elburz; a transfer, as says Mme. Ragozin, of 'mythical heavenly
geography to the earth.' This mountain—the solar hill of the
Egyptians—we shall again refer to in the next two or three chapters. At
its apex springs, the heaven tree on which the solar bird is perched.
From its roots spring the waters of life—the celestial sea, which,
rushing adown the firmament, supplies the ocean which circumscribes the
earth or falls directly in rain. At their fountain these springs are
guarded by a goddess. In Egypt Nut, the goddess of the oversea, leans
from the branches of the heavenly *persea* and pours forth the celestial
water. In the Vedas, Yama, lord of the waters, sits in the highest
heaven in the midst of the heavenly ocean under the tree of life, which
drops the nectar Soma, and here, on the 'navel of the waters,' matter
first took form. In the Norse, the central tree Yggdrasil has at its
roots the spring of knowledge guarded by the Norns, the northern Fates;
two swans the parents of all those of earth, float there. In Chaldea the
mighty tree of Eridu, centre of the world, springs by the waters. The
Avesta gives a very complete picture—Iran is at the centre of the seven
countries of the world; it was the first created, and so beautiful, that
were it not that God has implanted in all men a love for their own land,
all nations would crowd into this the loveliest land. To the east
somewhere, but still at the centre of the world, rises the 'Lofty
Mountain,' from which all the mountains of the earth have grown, 'High
Haraiti;' at its

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

summit is the gathering place of waters, out of which spring the two
trees, the heavenly Haoma (Soma), and another tree which bears all the
seeds that germinate on earth. This heavenly mountain is called '*Navel
of Waters*,' for the fountain of all waters springs there, guarded by a
majestic and beneficent goddess. In Buddhist accounts, the waters issue
in four streams like the <span id="img_fig05"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/fig05.jpg"><img src="tn/fig05.jpg" alt="Figure 5. The Four Rivers and Central Tree" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

rivers of Eden from this reservoir, and flow to the cardinal points,
each making one complete circuit in its descent. In the Persian
*Bundahish* there are two of these heavenly rivers flowing east and
west. To the Hindus the Ganges is such a heavenly stream. 'The stream of
heaven was called by the Greeks Achelous.' The Nile in Egypt, the
Hoang-Ho in China, and the Jordan to the Jews, seem to have been
celestial rivers. This mountain of heaven is often figured in Christian
art with the four rivers issuing from under the Throne of God.

Sir John Maundeville gives an account of the earthly Paradise quite
perfect in its detailed scheme. It is the highest place on earth, nearly
reaching to the circle of the moon (as in Dante), and the flood did not
reach it. '*And in the highest place, exactly in the middle*, is a well
that casts out the four streams'—Ganges, Nile, Tigris, and Euphrates.
'And men there beyond say that all the sweet waters of the world above
and beneath take their beginning from the well of Paradise, and out of
that well all waters

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

come and go.' The illustration is from the Hereford Map.

In the Odyssey—which appears to be a voyage to the three worlds by a
Greek Dante, and parallel, as Mr Andrew Lang has remarked, to an old
Indian tale in which the hero sets off to find the city of gold—Ulysses,
after visiting the country of Cyclops and other lands evidently beyond
the verge of civilisation, law, and order, goes to the isle of Æolus,
King of the winds, and to the island of Circe, where is the 'dancing
place of the dawn.' He descends to the underworld and explores it;
returning, he passes the gates of the firmament, the clashing mountains,
and comes to the isle of the Sun, and shipwrecked, he alone reaches the
isle of Calypso, and remains eight years; but then leaving her, comes at
last to divine Scheria, paradise, and city of gold, 'far off from men
that live by bread.' Then asleep in a magic bark he is conveyed to earth
and home.

This island of the lone goddess Calypso is Ogygia, 'where *is the navel
of the sea*,' far removed on a 'wondrous space of brine whereby is no
city of mortals;' 'and, lo, there about the hollow cave trailed a
gadding garden vine all rich with clusters. *And fountains four set
orderly were running with clear water hard by one another, turned each
to his own course*. And all around soft meadows bloomed of violets and
parsley.' Can we doubt that Calypso is the guardian goddess of the
heavenly spring, of the four streams that supply the earth? Can we doubt
that this 'outer zone' of Ulysses’ voyages is on the oversea, thus
making a complete pendant to the underworld. As a parallel let us remark
how closely Lucian follows all this in his Satire, reaching upperworld
and lower world in a ship. The heavenly spring is, of course, the
fountain of the water of life, and Ulysses ought

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

certainly to have drunk of it like the traveller of the Egyptian Ritual
of the Dead. What did the hero of the Odyssey go there for if not to
bring back a true report of such a remarkable place? Duncker says of
Athene, 'She is the spirit of this fountain itself.'

All the scheme is rational enough; men wanting to explain the rain, the
moving tides and flowing rivers of earth, supposed a perennial fountain
rose in the heavens, four streams from which flowed down the heavenly
vault, and entering by certain openings, circled round the ocean stream,
and then fell into the abyss: Acheron, Pyriphlegethon, Cocytus, and
Styx, probably have their origin in this thought.

 

To return to the Middleworld. Sung-Yun, the Chinese traveller in India
to collect Buddhist records (518 A.D.), speaking of the great mountain
country, the watershed of the Indus and Oxus, still called the Roof of
the World, says: ‘After entering the Tsung-Ling mountains step by step,
we crept upwards for four days, and reached the highest point of the
range. From this point as a centre, looking downwards, it seemed just as
though we were poised in mid-air. *Men say that this is the middle point
of heaven and earth*. The people of this region use the water of the
rivers for irrigating their lands; and when they were told that in the
*Middle Kingdom* (China) the fields were watered by the rain, they
laughed and said, 'How could heaven produce enough for all?' Hiuen
Tsiang (A.D. 629) says that at the central point of the world, in the
mountains of Pamir, there was a lake blue and bottomless; out of it
flowed two streams to east and west, supplying the waters of the world.

When China received Buddhism there arose a difficulty as to the Middle
Kingdom; for the orthodox said that India, where Buddha lived, was the
middle

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

land, 'as shown *by the gnomon which at the summer solstice in that
latitude casts no shadow*. China, they say, cannot so well be called the
central kingdom, because there is a shadow on the day mentioned'
(Edkins). Fa-Hian was disliked by his countrymen for admitting the
superior claim of India. It shows how the human mind works in fixed
grooves to find Sir John Maundeville giving the same 'proof' of the
gnomon for the central position of Jerusalem.

The Greeks seem to have attached great mystic and ritual importance to
the centre. Delphi was the navel of all Greece, but Crete had an
omphalos, and a story was attached regarding the birth of Jupiter.
Pausanias mentions an omphalos at Phlius marking the centre of the
Peloponnese. In Sicily the modern Castro Giovanni occupies the site of
Enna, *Umbilicus Siciliæ*, and this was the place where Persephone was
carried away from the upper world. In Babylon also it was at the world's
centre that Tammuz made his descent, for here is the lid stone of the
lower world. Each separate worship appears to have its 'Kibleh,' Delos
for Apollo, Paphos for Venus, and Delphi the ancient hearth of Hestia.
At Megara the altar was the omphalos.

Mount Cronios in Olympia, Lenormant says, 'was the omphalos of the
sacred city of Elis, the primitive centre of worship.' It is easy to see
that this 'centre of worship,' this 'centre of the earth where is the
holy house of the gods,' was likely to become identified with a
building, the ancient mother temple of a people, be it at Babylon, at
Delphi, or at Mecca. Brugsch says, 'The Egyptians, like the ancients in
general, commenced the foundation of their towns by the construction of
a temple, which formed the centre of the town that was to be built.'

Delphi to the Greeks was pre-eminently the centre

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

of the world; here was the famous and ancient temple of Apollo, the god
who, as Plato has it, 'sits in the centre on the navel of the earth.'

Has Delphi taken over this tradition as being seated on Parnassus, the
mountain of the flood of Deucalion? And do the other stories of
Parnassus and the spring of poesy arise from its being associated with
another tradition of the earthly paradise?

<span id="img_fig06"></span>

[![Figure 6. The Central Stone of Delphi](tn/fig06.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig06.jpg)  
  

In the description before given of the peplos representing the universe
woven by Harmonia, we have seen how 'she first represented the earth
with its omphalos in the centre:' but this centre of the world is not
only to be found in ideal poet-made designs, it was realised in
architecture. On the floor of the temple of Delphi was a stone 'called
by the Delphians the Navel, according to their tradition, the centre of
the world' (Pausanias). The story was told, that to determine the true
centre of the earth, Jupiter sent out two eagles, one from the east, the
other from the west, and they met at this spot.

According to Strabo, two gold eagles were placed at the sides of the
omphalos. This composition is

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

preserved to us by a marble found in Sparta. As early as Pindar these
golden birds of Zeus are mentioned, but later marble sculpture or mosaic
represented them. On the vases we have many contemporary drawings of
this composition (*see* T. H. Middleton in Jour. Hellenic Soc., vol.
ix.): in most of these the sacred stone is shown of the form of half an
egg, raised on a step on which the birds stood 'affronted;' other
representations show the egg form complete: it was decorated by fillets,
leafy branches, and netted work.

<span id="img_fig07"></span>

[![Figure 7. The Central Stone of Delphi](tn/fig07.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig07.jpg)  
  

This centre stone of the whole world seems to have profoundly touched
the Greek imagination; and among the multitude of references to it, it
has a part in the tragedies of Æschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. The
first scene of the 'Eumenides' takes place in the outer court of the
oracle—A priestess passes into the Adytum, but returns crouching with
fear, supporting herself against the walls:—

'Lo! Into yon recess  
 With garlands hung I go, and there I see  
 Upon the central stone a God-loathed man  
 Sitting as suppliant, and with hands that dripped  
 Blood drops, and holding sword but newly drawn.'  
                                            —*Plumptre*.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Orestes, pursued
by the Furies, has taken sanctuary in the temple of Apollo, and the
matricide is thus

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

discovered on the centre-stone of the world, of the universe, a
'God-loathed man,' while his sword still drips with his mother's blood.

We may see embodied in this myth of the centre stone the result of the
general direction of thought; as each people were certainly 'the people'
first born and best beloved of the gods, so their country occupied the
centre of the world. It would be related how the oldest and most sacred
city, or rather temple, was erected exactly on the navel. A story like
this told of a temple would lead to the marking in the centre of its
area the true middle point by a circular stone, a stone which would
become most sacred and ceremonial in its import. Such a tendency seems
to lie close to the root of ideas; Professor Smyth in his interpretation
of the great Pyramid thought that it marked in a special way the world's
centre.

 

In the rites of Greece and Rome it was the hearth that was specially
identified with the omphalos and so in Latin we have 'focus,' and in
French 'foyer,' at once hearth and centre.

'According to Pythagoras, the fire of Hestia (*foyer du monde*) was at
the centre of the earth and the world.'

'In this sanctuary of Apollo at Delphi (formerly dedicated to Hestia),
near the stone omphalos was the altar of the sacred fire of Hestia, the
goddess who symbolised the stability of the earth. In the primitive
Greek houses of a circular form the hearth was at the centre, and the
smoke found its way out at the apex. Each Greek city had its prytaneum
in form of a rotunda (*tholos*), an edifice consecrated to Hestia; and
the hearth sacred to the city was placed under the centre of the vault,
in the same way that the foyer of Delphi—foyer common to all Greeks—

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

was under the summit of the heavenly vault' (*Dictionnaire des
Antiquités*).

The Prytaneum was the civic hall, the pole of the city life, and here,
on the focus of the town, was kept alight the undying fire of Hestia;
for just as the family life centred around the hearth, so political life
surrounded the city hearth, from which colonists going from the mother
town took of the sacred central fire to establish their own prytaneum;
and if in after time it ceased to burn, the metropolis was again the
source of new fire. So it was that, according to tradition, Æneas
brought from Troy the sacred fire, which was maintained by the Vestals
in the circular temple of the Forum.

A mystery still clings to the hearth, and it still is the centre of the
world. It seems a part of the Aryan inheritance; for while the nations
were as yet unseparated, 'the hearth was in the midst of the dwelling;
that hearth was to each member of the household, as it were, an
*umbilicus orbis*, or navel of the earth. . . Hearth being only another
form of earth, as in the German *erde* and *herde*' (Keary, 'Dawn of
History'). It has been suggested that this early home was a circular
roofed hut, and thus a sky-like canopy to the central fire.

A central circle was found in the palace at Tiryns. Dr Schliemann
writes: 'In the exact centre of the hall, and therefore within the
square enclosed by the four pillars, there is found in the floor a
circle of about 3.30 m. diameter. There can be little doubt that this
circle indicates the position of the hearth in the centre of the
megaron. The hearth was in all antiquity the centre of the house, about
which the family assembled, at which food was prepared, and where the
guest received the place of honour. Hence it is frequently indicated by
poets and philosophers as the navel or

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

centre of the house. In the oldest time it was not only symbolically,
but actually the centre of the house, and especially of the megaron. It
was only in later days, in the great palaces of the Romans, that it was
removed from the chief rooms and established in a small by-room. . . .
It is hardly an accidental circumstance that, in the middle of the
largest hall in the pergamos of the Homeric Troy, a large circle is to
be seen in the centre of the floor. . . . There can be no doubt that at
Troy too the spacious hall, with its vestibule, was the megaron, and the
circle in its centre marked the place of the hearth.'

The imperial palace at Constantinople, which must have been the topstone
of the world's art in building—embodying as it did all knowledge and
tradition, Classic and Christian, and gathering for material all the
splendours of the earth—had on the floors of those wonderful rooms, the
design of which we can still follow in the descriptions collated by
Labarte (*Palais Imp. Cons*.), sacred hearth or navel stones. 'The floor
of *Chalce* was composed of beautiful marble mosaic; below the dome in
the pavement was a large slab of porphyry, of circular form, to which
they gave the name of Omphalion.' The Emperor, after having bought back
for a large sum certain bonds, to which citizens of Constantinople had
put their hands, burnt these bonds upon the omphalion of porphyry in
Chalce. We also find an omphalion encased in the pavement of the grand
triclinium of Justinian; they existed in other rooms of the palace, and
notably in front of the thrones. The Emperor stood on these slabs of
porphyry at certain ceremonies, and his passing over or pausing on them
seems to have been the occasion for those present to prostrate
themselves before him.

On the floor of St Peter's, in Rome, there is a

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

circular slab of antique porphyry, 8 ft. 6 in. in diameter, on which,
tradition says, every emperor since Charlemagne stood at coronation. The
Popes also on it performed certain official acts. Ducange mentions an
*omphalos* in Sancta Sophia; it was directly under the dome, and called
meso-naos, omphalos, or mes-omphalos.

 

Whether the temple of Vesta in Rome, close to the Forum, was or was not
at any time actually a geographical centre, it is certain that the Forum
contained such an one in the *Milliarum aureum Umbilicus Urbis*, which
had on it the names and distances of the towns on the roads which here
met at a centre from all Italy. As some late writers speak of the
omphalos as distinct from the golden milestone, and as the foundations
of two circular structures have been discovered in the Forum, Mr.
Middleton is inclined to look on one as the milestone, and the other as
the omphalos. The sacred stone on the Palatine, mentioned in the last
chapter, would seem to have been the omphalos of primitive Rome, 'the
city of Romulus.' Mr Gomme tells us a stone was always set up at the
establishment of primitive villages, and that London Stone is an
example.

If we go to the west, the centre is there. 'The historian of Yucatan
describes a celebrated sanctuary known as "the centre and foundation of
heaven," which was the object of great veneration' (Charnay); and M.
Réville quotes Garcilasso, the native historian of Peru, who says that
Cuzco, the sacred city, was founded by the gods, and 'its name signifies
navel.' 'Splendid roads stretched from Cuzco towards the four quarters
of the heavens.' And again, 'The great Teocalli of Mexico commanded the
four chief roads that parted from its base to unite the capital to all
the countries beneath the sceptre of its rulers. It was

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

the palladium of the empire.' The roads diverge in this way from the
great Lamassary of the holy city of Thibet, which is also a world
centre. The 'four cross roads' of old English customs were probably of
so much consequence, because such a situation established a sympathetic
magic with the universe.

If we go to the far East, the stone of foundation is there. In Japan the
world is carried on an enormous leviathan the Earthquake fish
(*Jishin-uwo*), and when it moves there is an earthquake; one god only
can then quiet it, and this he does 'by pinning it down with the
*Kaua-mi-ishi*, or 'rivet rock of the world.' As every Japanese knows,
this stone is in the province of Hitachi' (The 'Century,' Jan. 1890).
Two temples at Isé form the kibleh of Shintoism, toward which the people
turn in prayer.

There appears from Grimm (*Teut. Myth*.) to have been such a stone known
to the Northern nations as the 'Dille-Stein,' or Lid of Hell; he
compares it with the *lapis manalis* that closed the mouth of the
Etruscan Mundus. In the Talmud there was access to the lower world at
Jerusalem, although the whole world was but a 'pot-lid' to hell.

In India the great iron pillar of Delhi, standing amidst the ruins of
the old capital, was set up in the fourth century; later, in the twelfth
century, the great Mohammedan Mosque of the Imperial City was built
round it as the exact middle point of its vast court. The pillar
commemorated the power of a Raja who, as the inscription reads,
'obtained with his own arm an undivided sovereignty over the earth.' A
Holy Braman assured a Raja of the eighth century that the pillar had
been driven so deeply into the earth that it rested on the head of
Vasuki, the serpent king, who supports the world, and consequently had
become immovable, whereby the dominion was insured for

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

ever to the dynasty of its founder as long as the pillar stood. The
incredulous Raja ordered the monument to be dug up, when it was found to
be reddened with the blood of the serpent king (Hunter's Gaz. of India).
We have here probably a Braman centre in opposition to the sacred site
of the Buddhists. In Southern India the Temple of Mandura is the centre
of the Tamil people; here in the inmost sanctuary a rock, symbol of
Siva, crops out of the floor. 'Its roots are said to be in the centre of
the earth, and to have been there since the Creation.' Here the kings
were taken when about to die (Clements Markham).

In China, the centre of the ancient royal cult is the altar or temple of
heaven, in the old city of Pekin. One stone circular and flawless forms
the centre of zone after zone of marble steps and terraces. 'Here the
Emperor kneels, and is surrounded first by the circles of the terraces
and their enclosing walls, and then by the circle of the horizon. He
thus seems to himself and his court to be in the centre of the universe,
and, turning to the north, assuming the attitude of a subject, he
acknowledges in prayer that he is inferior to heaven and to heaven
alone' (Edkins. see Williamson's Journeys).

Gaya is the great Holy Place of Buddhism, the Mecca of its sites; here
Buddha sat under the Bodhi tree when he reached complete enlightenment.
While he was yet seeking there came to him a voice saying that he was to
find a Pipal tree, under which was a 'diamond throne.' All the past
Buddhas seated on this throne have obtained true enlightenment (Beal).

The Bodhi tree itself as described by Hiuen Tsiang was surrounded by an
enclosure which was long east and west, and narrow north and south, with
four gates to the cardinal points. 'In the middle of the enclosure is
the diamond throne, when the great earth

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

arose this also appeared. It is the middle of the great *Chiliocosm;* it
goes down to the limits of the golden wheel, and upwards it is flush
with the ground. It is composed of diamonds; in circuit it is a hundred
paces or so. . . . It is the place where the Buddhas attain the sacred
path of Buddahood. When the great earth is shaken this spot alone is
unmoved. Therefore when Tathagata was about to reach the condition of
enlightenment, and he went successively to the four angles of this
enclosure, the earth shook and quaked; but afterwards coming to this
spot, all was still and at rest. When the true law decays and dies it
will be no longer visible.'

The Chiliocosm is not this world alone, but the whole assemblage of
worlds—the universe. Sir M. Williams tells us a stone marked with nine
concentric circles is still shown at Gaya as the Diamond Throne.

 

Jerusalem has been to Jews and Christians the centre of the world,
'beautiful for situation, joy of the whole earth.' What the Temple was
as a centre of worship is shown by Solomon's dedicatory prayer and by
Daniel's open window toward Zion. The following is the direction as to
prayer in the Talmud: 'Those who are in foreign countries beyond the
borders of Palestine ought in praying to turn their faces towards the
sacred land as it is written, "They shall address their prayer to Thee
by the way of the land which Thou hast given to their ancestors" (1
Kings viii. 48). Those who dwell in Palestine direct their countenance
towards Jerusalem, for it is written, "They shall pray unto Thee towards
the city which Thou hast chosen." Those who make their prayer in
Jerusalem turn towards the mount of the Temple, as it is said in the
same verse, "And the house which I have builded in Thy name." Those who
are upon the mount of the

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

temple turn towards the Holy of Holies. "They shall address their prayer
to Thee in this place, and Thou wilt hear it in heaven Thy
dwelling-place, Thou wilt hear it and will pardon." Hence it follows
that those of the north should turn towards the south, those of the
south towards the north, the men of the east towards the west, the men
of the west towards the east, so that all Israel shall turn in the act
of prayer.'

But not only was it a ceremonial centre; it was geographically the midst
of the earth; and the following from the Talmud (Hershon) shows that to
the Rabbis the Temple had an omphalion stone, and that it was built not
only on *a* rock, but on *the rock*.

'The world is like the eyeball of man; the white is the ocean that
surrounds the world, the black is the world itself, and the pupil is
Jerusalem, and the image in the pupil is the Temple.'

'The world's "foundation stone" sank to the depths under the Temple of
the Lord, and upon this the sons of Korah used to stand and pray.'

'The land of Israel is situated in the centre of the world, and
Jerusalem in the centre of the land of Israel, and the Temple in the
centre of Jerusalem, and the Holy of Holies in the centre of the Temple,
and *the foundation stone on which the world was grounded is situated in
front of the ark*.'

'When the ark was removed a stone was there from the days of the first
prophets; it was called Foundation. It was three digits high above the
earth.'

The great temple of Bel, the most ancient, most sacred temple at
Babylon, was called, Professor Sayce tells us, in his Hibbert Lectures,
'the house of *the foundation stone of heaven and earth*.' In Jerusalem
the 'Dome of the Rock,' *El Sakhrah*, occupying the traditional site of
the temple

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

sanctuary, surrounds a mass of the living rock, the bare summit of Mount
Moriah, which for about sixty by forty feet crops out of the beautiful
paving; under it is the 'Well of Souls;' and the Turkish Pacha told Sir
Charles Warren 'it lay on the top leaves of a palm tree, from the roots
of which spring all the rivers of the world.' Nusir-i-Khusran, who
visited the sites in 1033 A.D., says that God commanded Moses to make

<span id="img_fig08"></span>

[![Figure 8. Plan of the Dome of the Rock](tn/fig08.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig08.jpg)  
  

this stone the kibleh, and later Solomon built the temple about it as a
centre. From it the four doors open, as an early pilgrim says, to the
four quarters of the world. In Mohammedan tradition this rock is the
world's foundation stone. It is known to them as the *kibleh* (point of
adoration, centre) of Moses. Mahomet thought at first of adopting it in
the place of the old Arab centre of Mecca,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

well understanding the religious need of such an omphalos to Eastern
thought, as in it the idea of separation from others is most forcibly
expressed. The Prophet says, 'Verily although thou shouldest show unto
those to whom the Scripture hath been given all kinds of signs, yet they
will not follow thy kibleh, neither shalt thou follow their kibleh; nor
will one part of them follow the kibleh of the other.' At the last day,
however, even the black stone of Mecca will come as a bride to the rock
of Jerusalem, and thus arises any confusion there may be as to the world
centre of Islam. The late Professor Palmer tells us what the rock is to
those in Jerusalem: 'This Sakhrah is the centre of the world, and on the
day of resurrection the angel Israfil will stand upon it to blow the
last trumpet; it is also eighteen miles nearer heaven than any other
place in the world; and beneath it is the source of every drop of sweet
water that flows on the face of the earth; it is supposed to be
suspended miraculously between heaven and earth. The effect upon the
spectators was, however, so startling that it was found necessary to
place a building round it and conceal the marvel.'

The Samaritans still look to Gerizim as their holy mountain. 'This is
their kibleh, to which they turn in prayer wherever they may be'
(Warren). 'Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say that in
Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.'

Of Hermon Miss Beaufort wrote: 'It is remarkable that Hermon was
anciently encompassed by a circle of temples all facing the summit. Can
it be that this mountain was the great sanctuary of Baal, and that it
was to the old Syrians what Jerusalem was to the Jews, and what Mecca is
to the Moslems?' One of these temples has sculptured on the side towards
the

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

mountain a huge watching face. Another Syrian temple, that of Mabog
(Hierapolis), seems to have been a world centre and well of the abyss;
this city occupied the site of Carchemish, the capital of the Hittites,
and it is probably their rites and legends that were continued here. The
temple stood in the very centre of the 'Holy City,' and it was built (so
went the legend) by their Noah directly over the chasm where the waters
of the Deluge had been swallowed up (Sayce Hittites). At Jerusalem also
there was a cleft in which the waters of the flood disappeared'
(Robertson Smith, Semites). Pausanias says there was a cavity in the
precincts of the temple of Olympia where the waters of the deluge
escaped.

To the Mohammedans generally the Caaba at Mecca is the true centre,
lowered as it was directly from Paradise under which it stands, and to
it all Islam turns in prayer, 'Turn thy face towards the temple of
Mecca, and whenever ye pray, turn your faces towards that place'
(*Koran*). In an account of modern schools in Cairo, Mr Loftie says,
'The children learn that it takes five hundred years of travelling to
get round the mighty plain, while perhaps a few yards from the school
door hangs one of Mr Cook's placards offering to do the whole business
in ninety days. The one important fact which the children retain is,
that Mecca is the centre of the earth.' All mosques look to this kibleh.

To the early Christians and throughout the Middle Ages Jerusalem was the
centre. Jerome calls it the navel of the world, and Clement of
Alexandria remarks that the outer court of the Tabernacle was, 'they
say,' the middlemost point of heaven and earth. Arculf in 670 A.D. tells
us that Jerusalem being in the middle, was called the 'navel of the
earth,' and he gives the proof of the shadowless pillar. In the time of
Abbot

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Daniel's visit
(1106) the centre was canopied by a small dome on pillars. The Hereford
map of the thirteenth century shows the world as a plane circle
surrounded by ocean, round whose borders are the eaters of men and the
one-eyed, the half men and 'those whose heads do grow beneath their
shoulders.' Within this border we find everything that heart could
desire, the red sea is very red, the pillars of Hercules are pillars
indeed; there is the [terrestrial](errata.htm#1) paradise enclosed by a
battlemented wall; and unicorns, manticoras, salamanders, and other
beasts of fascinating habits are clearly shown on the lands where they
live. The centre of all is Jerusalem, a circular walled town, within
which again is a smaller circle, the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. The
central position of Jerusalem was not given up when it became accepted
as a fact that the earth was a sphere. Dante holds both for true, and
this is how Sir John Maundeville reconciles any difficulty: 'In going
from Scotland or from England towards Jerusalem, men go always upwards,
for our land is in the low part of the earth, towards the west; and the
land of Prester John is in the low part of the world towards the east;
and they have the day when we have the night, and, on the contrary, they
have the night when we have the day; for the earth and sea are of a
round form, as I have said before; and as men go upward towards one
part, they go downward to another. Also you have heard me say that
Jerusalem is in the middle of the world; and that may be proved and
shown there by a spear which is fixed in the earth at the hour of
mid-day, when it is equinoctial, which gives no shadow on any side.'

The Greek Church still accepts Jerusalem as the middle of the world, and
in their portion of the Holy Sepulchre point it out to unbelieving
tourists to-day.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

'The Greeks,' says Curzon, 'have possession of the choir of the church
which is opposite the door. This part of the building is of great size,
and is magnificently decorated with gold and carving and stiff pictures
of the saints. In the centre is a globe of black marble on a pedestal,
under which they say the head of Adam was found; and you are told also
that this is the exact centre of the globe.'

His plan shows this by the sign <span id="img_09300"></span>
![](img/09300.jpg)

 

'THE CENTRE OF THE WORLD.'

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Jewel-Bearing Tree](amm08)
