[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](amm09)  [Next](amm11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486435199/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Architecture, Mysticism and Myth*, by W.R. Lethaby, \[1892\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

### CHAPTER VII

### THE LABYRINTH

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| '*Hast thou left thy blue course in heaven, golden-haired son of the sky! The west opened its gates, the bed of thy repose is there. The waves cone to behold thy beauty. They lift their trembling heads. They see thee lovely in thy sleep. They shrink away with fear. Rest in thy shadowy cave, O sun! Let thy return be in joy*.'—OSSIAN. |

</div>

IN 'The Bible of Amiens' Mr Ruskin describes the labyrinth once inlaid
on the floor of the nave of the cathedral, and in 1825 'removed to make
the old pavement more polite.' In that outburst of fervour, from the
middle of the twelfth to the end of the thirteenth century, wrought into
the stones of the great cathedrals—speaking particularly of France—when
the scheme of imagery and symbolism had been consummated, so that no
part of the building should be without its teaching, one of these
labyrinths belonged by right to the floor: 'a recognised emblem of many
things to the people.'

This one of Amiens was octagonal, and forty-two feet across; the effigy
of the architect was at the centre, and a legend containing the date
1288. There was another, similar, at St Quentin; and one at Rheims,
square, and thirty-five feet across, was laid down in 1240 and destroyed
in 1779. Another, about the same time, was broken up in the Cathedral at
Arras. At St Omer, in the Abbey of St Bertin, mountains,

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

animals, and towns were depicted on the pathway, and the Temple of
Jerusalem in the centre. It has been suggested that the maze was a
symbol of life and of the coil of sin. 'The whole device was deemed to
be indicative of the complicated folds of sin by which man is
surrounded, and how impossible it would be to extricate himself from
them except through the assisting hand of Providence' (Didron's
*Annales*).

At Bayeux there is a maze formed by patterned tiles in the
chapter-house. At Sens there was a fine example; and another still
exists in St Stephen's Abbey at Caen. One, especially beautiful, at
Chartres, inlaid with dark stone on light, has a pathway of some six
hundred and sixty feet round and round to the centre. In the thirteenth
century sketch book of the architect Viliars de Honecourt, there is a
drawing of a maze like this of Chartres, indeed, it is identical in
planning. These French labyrinths appear to have been called '*la
lieue*' or '*Chemin de Jerusalem;*' they were placed at the west end of
the nave, and people made a pilgrimage on their knees, following the
windings of the pathway to the centre, which is said to have been called
*Sancta Ecclesia* or *Ciel*.

There is a German example in the Church of St Severius, Cologne.

In England there was one at Canterbury, but none now remain in our
churches. There are, however, a great number cut in turf. One of these,
at Saffron Walden, is a hundred and ten feet across: wholly overgrown
with grass, its form is made out by alternate ridge and furrow. Others
are at Wing, in Rutlandshire; Alkborough, in Lincolnshire; Boughton
Green, Northants; St Catharine's Hill, Winchester; Sneiton,
Nottinghamshire; and Pimpern, near Blandford. They were given the names
of Miz-Maze, Julian's Bower, Troy Town, or Shepherd's Race.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Their age is not
known, but, according to the country historian, some sort of spring
festival seems to have been held at that of Saffron Walden. Those formed
by clipped hedges, 'green mazes,' are an ordinary part of ornamental
gardening, and designs for them may be found in Serlio and other
writers. There was a fine

<span id="img_fig14"></span>

[![Figure 14. Floor Labyrinth at Ravenna](tn/fig14.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig14.jpg.md)  
  

regular one at Theobald's old palace, and the maze at Hampton Court is
known to everybody. One, of water, in the *Hypnerotomachia*, on which
tiny shallops floated and seven gate-towers divided the stream, is
evidently symbolical of life.

In Italy some beautiful examples are found—one

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

at Ravenna, in St Vitale, is here represented; another is in St Michele,
Pavia; and two others are in Rome, at S.M. in Trastevere, and S.M. in
Aquiro.

Through Roman examples on pavements and gems we are led back to the
Greek coins of Crete, where, in the fifth or sixth century B.C. the
device first appears. (For illustrations see Didron's *Annales*, De
Caumont, 'Archæological Journal,' and 'The Architectural Dictionary.')

Of course the varieties in the mere design of mazes would be infinite;
their resemblance is the striking fact, so that, considered merely as a
device or pattern, the tradition is one for the two thousand years from
the Greek coin of Gnossus to Botticelli's print in the Renaissance, and
we wonder how it passed from place to place. There are no false paths,
not a single *cul-de-sac*, but simply the longest involved path, from
the entrance to the eye; you follow far enough, and necessarily reach
the centre. When the root of tradition was broken away from at the
Renaissance, all this was altered, and mazes became inventions, every
one different from the others—spiders’ webs of enticing false paths.

The windings and doublings of the inlaid one at St Quentin are identical
beyond all possibility of merely fortuitous coincidence with the one on
the green at Alkborough, as is also that of Sens with that at Boughton
Green. The Chartres labyrinth is absolutely the same in design as one on
the door jamb at Lucca, with this difference, that the former, thirty
feet across, is ornamented at the centre, and the latter is but a
scratched line. This one in turn is exactly like that on the Hereford
Map of the World, and that one also in the sketch book of Viliars de
Honecourt, with the only exception that this last is reversed. These
four, then, severally

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

in Italy, France, and England, are absolutely related—in form and
proportion, number of walls and planning of their revolutions, they are
transcripts of one another or a common original. Those at Ravenna, on
Botticelli's engraving, and on a picture at Cambridge, are but slight
variations from this typical form, or from a Roman one scratched on a
wall at Pompeii, and the original Cretan examples here given from the
coins.

All the time it was understood <span id="img_fig15"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/fig15.jpg"><img src="tn/fig15.jpg" alt="Figure 15. Early Coins of Crete" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

to be the labyrinth of Dædalus, in Crete, into which, aided by Ariadne's
thread, Theseus penetrated and safely returned. This is the subject of
Botticelli's engraving. On the Hereford Map the plan of the labyrinth
nearly fills the whole map of Crete: it is inscribed *Labarintus id est
domus Dealli* (see [next page](#img_fig16).md). The great floor labyrinth
at Amiens was inscribed *Maison de Dalus*. In the Lucca example there is
also an inscription—'This is the labyrinth which Cretan Dædalus built,
out of which nobody could get who was inside, except Theseus; nor could
he have done it unless he had been helped with a thread by Ariadne, all
for love' ('Fors Clavigera').

At Pavia the Minotaur is represented at the vortex in the form of a
centaur. That at Pompeii had written against it, '*Labyrinthus hic
habitat Minotaurus*.' Those on the Greek coins belong to the town
founded by Minos himself, where the labyrinth was said to have been
built; and the reverses of the coins have the head of Theseus, who thus

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

accompanies the symbol of his 'life's problem.' So, from the earliest
Greek to the Renaissance there is an unbroken sequence of examples
giving this form to the house of the Minotaur. We can well understand
that, once existing and associated with rites of pilgrimage or penance,
they would easily acquire different local names—'The way to Jerusalem,'
and the rest—but the form and the rite <span id="img_fig16"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/fig16.jpg"><img src="tn/fig16.jpg" alt="Figure 16. Isle of Crete, from the Hereford Map" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />
<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

existed before any such titles.

That in Roman times they were marked out on turf as well as inlaid in
pavements, and that there was a popular custom of following the windings
of the pathway, is shown by Pliny, who, speaking of the underground
assemblage of chambers, the so-called labyrinth of Moeris in Egypt,
says,—'Nor is it as we sometimes see drawn in the country games of boys,
where a small strip contains passages several miles long.'

In the reign of Commodus, Q. Julius Miletus built a labyrinth as an
institution for the amusement of the people. (C. O. Müller.)

The *choros*, or dancing-place, built by Dædalus for Ariadne—as it
existed in story, of course, not in stone—was probably such a labyrinth.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

The Hindu dance in honour of Krishna, as the sun-god, is described as a
'circular sunwise dance, in which the dancers twisted, and turned, and
wheeled round about in supposed imitation of the sun, moon, and
planets.'

This is repeated in the sevenfold star-wise procession around the temple
of Jagannatha, or the Caaba of Mecca. M. Réville, writing of similar
dances in Mexico, says, that worshippers entered into union with the
deity by imitating his movements. 'There were several sacred dances
having the character of imitating the movements of the stars.' Knowing
the right form of these involutions was of the greatest importance. Mr
A. Lang tells us that to savages 'those who don't dance our dance are
foreigners.' And the plot of one of our folk stories—'Child Rowland'—is
the awful consequences of running round a church 'widershins' or contra
sunwise.

Here in England 'the boys to this day divert themselves with running in
it one after another, the first leading them by many windings quite
through and back again. Stukeley supposes that it is called Julian from
Iulus and the Trojan games in Virgil' (Fosbroke 'Encyc. Antiq.' 1840).
Mr Gerald Massey tells us mazes are 'still figured in the children's
games in Cornwall and Wales, and consist of seven circles round a centre
cut in the grassy sod.' In the Western Counties anything untidy and
confused is said to be 'like Troy Town.'

 

Herodotus opens with a fourfold legend of the origin of the war of
Troy—the stories of Io, Europa, Medea, and Helen, all seemingly
[variants](errata.htm#3.md) of one 'far told tale' of a princess enticed
away over sea. A hero in a foreign land is set to do a great deed and to
endure a great peril; the king of the country

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

sets the task in malice; but his daughter sees, loves, and helps the
hero; he overcomes, and they fly away over the sea together; but fate
suffers it not so for long, and then comes a sorrowful parting.
'Everywhere there is the search for the bright maiden who has been
stolen away, everywhere the long struggle to recover her: the war of
Ilion has been fought out in every Aryan land' (Sir G. Cox).

Europa's son, Minos, becomes the great king and lawgiver of Crete, and
the whole story is repeated. A vast prison-house has been built by
Dædalus to confine the Minotaur, and a tribute is imposed on Athens of
seven youths and seven maidens yearly sacrificed to the hidden monster.
On a year one of these is Theseus, the hero who is to end 'the infamy of
Crete.' 'When Theseus arrived in Crete, according to most historians and
authors, Ariadne, falling in love with him, gave him a clue of thread,
and instructed him how to pass with it through the intricacies of the
labyrinth. Thus assisted, he set sail, carrying off Ariadne.'
(Plutarch.)

Minos, the king, has three characteristics in classic lore; he is, above
all, the great administrator of law; he is the judge of the under world
of the dead; he is the lord of the labyrinth. Already, when we first
meet his name in the Homeric poems, he is the earthly king of Crete and
the ruler of the dead in Hades. Odysseus describes his descent to the
house of Hades,—'There, then, I saw Minos, glorious son of Zeus,
wielding a golden sceptre, giving sentence from his throne to the dead,
while they sat and stood around the prince, asking his dooms through the
wide-gated house of Hades. . . . And Ariadne, the daughter of Wizard
Minos, whom Theseus on a time was bearing from Crete to the hill of
sacred Athens' (Odyss. XI.)

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

The story is closely parallel to that of Osiris, in Egypt. Osiris,
overcome by the powers of evil and darkness, goes to be the judge of the
under world, in the hall of justice, which is surrounded by walls,
wherein are twelve or fifteen successive gates to be passed. This is
reached by tortuous ways past finding out, were it not for the guide
book of the departed, 'The Book of the Dead.' Isis goes in quest of her
lover, and the powers of darkness are at last overcome by Horus, the
rising sun of a new day. The Egyptian myth has been universally regarded
as solar, the House of Osiris with its seven halls being the under
world, 'the nocturnal abode' through which the sun nightly finds his way
back to the east.

'Osiris is the setting sun. Plutarch identifies him with Hades. Both, he
says, originally meant the dwellings, and came to mean the god of the
dead' (Lefébure).

'Osiris is the sun of yesterday, who was overcome by Night in the person
of Set, who, in his turn, was vanquished by Horus, the son of Osiris. .
. . Horus is the sun in full strength' (Renouf).

The power of darkness is represented as the giant serpent Apap, 'with
which,' says Lenormant, 'the sun, under the form of Ra or Horus,
contends during his nocturnal passage round the lower hemisphere, and
over which he is destined to triumph before reappearing in the east. The
conflict of Horus with Apap is ever renewed at the seventh hour of the
night, a little before sun rising.'

In his recent book, the 'Golden Bough,' Mr Frazer regards Osiris as a
god of vegetation. Should this be accepted, it will not conflict with
the conclusion reached in this chapter. Whether Sun or Vegetable Life,
it is still the dark under world to which he withdraws—house of
darkness, winter, and death.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

Theseus, it is generally allowed, is a duplication of Hercules, the
solar hero. Melkarth, the sun-god of the Phœnicians, Horus, of the
Egyptians, and the other parallels make it clear that his achievement of
the labyrinth was one of many descents into the night-land to fight the
serpent, dragon, or minotaur of death and darkness.

The story of Herodotus of the founding of the city of Ecbatana by the
great lawgiver of the Medes is closely allied to the foundation of
Gnossus and the building of the labyrinth by Minos, who instituted law
in Crete. Without necessarily questioning the existence of an actual
Ecbatana with seven walls, each dedicated to a planet, or a real Dioces,
we may see the close connection of this history with other stories of
the Just Judge in the underground, seven-walled, world of the dead. The
labyrinth of Minos, as found on the coins, is such a seven-walled
citadel.

Dioces, the first king of the Medes, says the Father of History (or of
Folk Lore), 'applied himself with great zeal to the exercise of justice,
and the people chose him for their king. And, as the Medes obeyed him in
this also, he built lofty and strong walls, which now go under the name
of Ecbatana, one placed in a circle within the other.' . . . 'He
established the following regulations:—That no man should be admitted to
the king's presence, but every one consult him by means of messengers,
and that none should be permitted to see him . . . that he might appear
to be of a different nature to those who did not see him. He was very
severe in the distribution of justice; and the parties contending were
obliged to send him their cases in writing . . . and all other things
were regulated by him; so that, if he received information that any man
had injured another, he

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

would presently send for him and punish him in proportion to his
offence; and for this purpose he had spies and eavesdroppers in every
part of his dominions.' Is not this a Minos apportioning justice to all
men in the lower world rather than a human king in an earthly city? We
must not, however, forget that kings and tyrants have secluded
themselves; Mokanna, the veiled prophet, for instance, and divine
monarchs generally.

Strabo, speaking of Avernus, near Cum, where the Italian peoples
supposed the descent to be, says:—'There is here a spring of water, near
to the sea, fit for drinking, from which, however, every one abstained,
as they thought it water from Styx. They thought, likewise, that the
oracle of the dead was situated somewhere here. Ephorus, peopling the
place with Kimmerii, tells us that they dwell in underground
habitations, and that these communicate with one another by means of
certain subterranean passages; and that they conduct strangers through
them to the oracle, which is built far below the surface of the earth.
They lived in the mines together, with the profits accruing from the
oracle and grants made to them by the king. It was a traditional custom
for the servants of the oracle never to behold the sun, and only to quit
their caverns at night. At last, however, these men were exterminated by
one of the kings, the oracle having deceived him; but the oracle is
still in existence, though removed to another place. Such were the myths
related by our ancestors.'

Duncker cites a Greek author of the second century, who, in describing
the Sabæans, gives an echo of a similar tradition. 'Their chief city,
Mariaba, lies on a mountain. Here lives the king, who pronounces justice
for the people; but he is never allowed to leave his

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

palace. If he acts otherwise, he is stoned by the people, in obedience
to an ancient oracle.'

Peoples now living in a low phase of development account for the
judgment of the dead in exactly the same way. 'It is a belief of the
Australians, as, according to Bosman, it was with the people of the Gold
Coast, that a very powerful wizard lives far inland; and the negroes
held that to this warlock the spirits of the dead went to be judged
according to the merit of their actions. Here we have a doctrine
(quoting Mr Andrew Lang in "Myth and Ritual") answering to the Greek
belief in the wizard Minos, Æacus, and Rhadamanthus, and to the Egyptian
idea of Osiris as judge of the departed.'

In Herodotus a story is related of Rhamsinitus, in whose reign, he tells
us, 'there was a perfect administration of justice.' 'He descended alive
into the place the Greeks call Hades, and there played at dice with
Ceres, and sometimes won and at other times lost.' A ceremony was
instituted imitating this descent, and in another story, this same king
possesses a wonderful treasury-house, which is ingeniously robbed by a
master of theft—a plot, as Mr Clouston has shown, which is found in the
folk tales of many peoples, even to this day, and which may, after all,
be what Sir G. Cox, approaching from another point of view, sees in
it—the sun breaking through the prison-house of the under world, always
with all people the treasury of riches.

The Greek story of Theseus and Ariadne had its Phœnician co-relative in
Adonis and Astarte, the Tammuz and Istar of the Assyrians. 'One of the
most popular of old Babylonian myths,' says Professor Sayce, 'told how
Istar had wedded the young and beautiful sun-god Tammuz, and had
descended into Hades in search of him when he had been slain by

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

the boar's tusk of winter.' Istar 'was the goddess of the evening star.'
In the narrative of her adventures in the lower world, '*the house out
of which there is no exit*,' we seem to get a clear idea of the point of
departure of these stories, in thought if not in geography. The
following is taken from Lenormant's 'Chaldean Magic':—

'The country whence none return is divided into *seven zones*, like
those of Dante's Inferno, upon the model of the seven planetary spheres.
. . . Seven gates gave admission, each guarded by a porter. . . . This
idea of the circles of the under world is also found in the Egyptian
mythology of the ritual of the dead—the deceased had to pass through
fifteen pylons in his descent.' In the centre of this grave-land was the
palace of the ruler and a temple of justice. As Istar passes through
each of the seven gates the porter requires her jewels and apparel. At
the first, her crown; at the second, the rings from her ears; at the
third, her necklace of precious stones; at the fourth, the pectoral from
her bosom; at the fifth, her girdle of gems; at the sixth, bracelets; at
the seventh, her robe.

In the version given by Perrot it is not merely a country divided into
zones, but a *city of seven walls*—a structure like the labyrinth of
Dædalus. 'We know from the narrative of Istar that they looked upon it
as an immense building situated in the centre of the earth, and bounded
on every side by the great river whose waters bathe the foundations of
the world. This country of the dead is called 'the land where one sees
nothing,' or 'the land from whence is no return.' The house is
surrounded by seven strong walls. In each there is a single door, which
is fastened by a bolt as soon as a new corner has entered.'

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

The descriptive epithets show it as very clearly imagined. 'The house in
which the evening has no morning, whence there is no return. There, too,
stand the foundations of the earth, the meeting of the mighty waters.'
The earth being convex and hollow, like an inverted bowl, the palace of
the ruler of the dead was in the void beneath, around flows the earthly
ocean, and on that rests the foundations of the over sea.

The seven spherical envelopes passing under the earth, as above in the
heavens, divide it into as many regions. Tammuz, Theseus, Horus—the
strong sun—penetrate this prison-house, and rise out of the eastern
gate, but the path is so involved that none of the dead find their way
back. This is the origin of the labyrinth, nor can we wonder that
mediæval mystics made use of its symbolism at the non-sacred end of
their churches.

This under world of seven walls is quite universal. In Origen there is
an account of the Ophites, with their invocations to seven demons, who
guarded as many gates in the passage of the soul.

The Zoroastrian fragments in Cory preserve the same plan for the under
world. Over the earth there were seven successive firmaments for the
planets, and below us: 'Stoop not down, for a precipice lies below the
earth, drawing under in a descent of seven steps, beneath which is the
throne of dire necessity.'

In the later Persian, *Shah-Nameh* of Firdausi, Rustem, the Hercules of
Iran, undertakes seven great labours in seven days, when he reaches a
place called the seven mountains, he fights a demon 'within a deep and
horrible recess.'

In India the same scheme of a labyrinthine under world would seem to
have existed from the Vedic time, for such appears to be the cave to
which the cloud cattle of the sun are driven off by a trackless

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

path. In the Hindu system, under the Olympian Mount Meru, with its seven
zones, 'there are seven lower worlds, which are all beautiful paradises,
though inhabited by demons and nagas; the latter are half men and half
serpents, and are governed by three great snakes, which reign over all
the snakes on earth.'

The Mohammedan cosmogony is very similar. According to Lane there are
seven material heavens, and seven earths, one below the other; Jahennem
is also divided into seven stages; to which, according to D’Herbelot,
there are seven great portals. In the Jewish traditions of the Cabbalah
there are seven infernal halls. The lowest Buddhist hell, called in the
Chinese 'earth prison,' is surrounded by a sevenfold iron wall. This
verse from the poetic Edda shows the thought of the Northmen, which was
also that of our old English ancestors:—

'Without and within  
 I seemed to go through all  
 The seven lower worlds.'

Professor Rhys (Hibbert Lect.) quotes a story of the descent of the
Celtic hero to the land of Shades. The words might as well be uttered by
Istar herself, so typical they are:—

'When I went to the land of Scath,  
 There was the fort of Scath, with its lock of iron;  
 I laid hands upon it.  
 Seven walls there were around this city;  
 Hateful was its stronghold.'

Dante, confessedly in the *Convito*, founds on the planetary spheres
(following Ptolemy, and to the seven adding two others, for the spheres
of the fixed stars and the *primum mobile*) his nine-fold arrangement of
the circles of Paradise and the Inferno. It is most remarkable how he
relates his descent, to that of

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Theseus in the
Labyrinth of Dædalus. Minos is the guardian and judge who assigns to
each his proper circle, and, guarding the way to the seventh circle, he
encounters the Minotaur:—

'And on the border of the broken chasm  
   The infamy of Crete was stretched along.  
 My sage towards him shouted: "Peradventure  
   Thou think’st that here may be the Duke of Athens,  
   Who in the world above brought death to thee?  
 Get thee gone, beast, for this one cometh not  
   Instructed by thy sister, but he comes  
   In order to behold your punishments."'

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Does not the
description of the Malebolge seem as if it was founded directly on such
a labyrinth as that on the floor at Ravenna, which must have been
familiar to him?

'Right in the middle of the field malign  
   There yawns a well exceeding wide and deep,  
   Of which its place the structure will recount.  
 Round then is that enclosure which remains  
   Between the well and foot of the high, hard bank,  
   And has distinct in valleys ten its bottom.  
 As where, for the protection of the walls,  
   Many and many moats surround the castles,  
   The part in which they are a figure forms  
 Just such an image those presented there;  
   And as about such strongholds, from their gates  
   Unto the outer bank are little bridges,  
 So from the precipice's base did little crags  
   Project, which intersected dykes and moats,  
 Unto the well that truncates and collect them.'  
                                                      —Canto xviii.

It has been too much the custom to see mere arbitrary inventions in
Dante's system, but he wrote in quite another temper than did Milton.
Dante embodies no fancies of his own; but follows the universe system of
his age. In the words of Dean Milman, 'Dante is the one authorised
topographer of the mediæval hell;' topographer is the word.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

In some instances we have the sun in the lower world, not obscured by
any impersonation, as in the 'Rest in thy shadowy cave, O sun,' of
Ossian, quoted under the heading of this chapter, which agrees
remarkably with what Pytheas, the traveller of Marseilles, was told in
the north regarding the sun: 'The barbarians used to point out to us the
lair or sleeping-place of the sun; for the nights at one place were only
three hours long, at another place only two hours.' (Compare Dr. Tylor's
Anthropology, pp. 332, 349).

Mr A. Lang quotes, in his 'Myth and Ritual,' an account given by the
Piute Indians: 'Down, deep under the ground, deep, deep, under all the
ground, is a great hole. At night, when he has passed over the world,
looking down on everything, and finished his work, he, the sun, goes
into his hole, and he crawls and creeps along it till he comes to his
bed in the middle part of the earth. So then he, the sun, stops there in
his bed all night. This hole is so little, and he, the sun, is so big,
that he cannot turn round in it; and so he must, when he has had all his
sleep, pass on through, and in the morning we see him come out in the
east. When he, the sun, has so come out, he begins to hunt up through
the sky to catch and eat any he can of the stars, his children, for if
he does not so catch and eat he cannot live. He, the sun, is not all
seen. The shape of him is like a snake or lizard. It is not his head
that we can see, but his belly, filled up with the stars that times and
times he has swallowed.'

The moon, it goes on to say, is his wife, and sleeps in the same hole,
but when he returns and is cross, she comes away. As in Hesiod, one home
cannot contain them both; and so sun and moon do not appear at the same
time in the upper world.

Such, then, have been the thoughts of men regarding the land peopled by
their dead, the cavernous deep

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

whose dark windings the sun has nightly to thread, to reappear in the
morning victor over the powers of darkness. Well may the Dawn, Moon, or
planet Venus furnish the clue by which the new day is won, and greet him
on his issuing from the gates; but not for long can they be
together—Ariadne must be left behind at Naxos, as the sun hastens
westward. This is the subject of the 'gest' of Theseus. Hesiod, indeed,
wrote a 'Descent of Theseus,' now lost, and such an adventure seems
interwoven in the 'Odyssey,' where Circe, the enchantress, counterpart
of Istar, furnishes Ulysses with directions for his visit to the land of
the shades.

The root of the story thus being the going down of Tammuz into the
seven-walled city of the dead, it would naturally be asked, Where is the
gate of this city? And, as it was always 'in the west,' alike to
Egyptian, Babylonian, Phœnician, and Greek, the place depended on the
country where the question was asked. The story of Europa, and of
Theseus and Ariadne, is acknowledged to be Phœnician; and we can well
understand how, looking out from the Syrian sea-board, Crete, the island
in the west, became one of the first of many such points, which, as
civilisation came westward, removed farther and farther to the setting
sun. Sicily, in the story of Persephone; and again, beyond the Pillars
of Hercules. Procopius has a story how the dead assembled on the coast
of Gaul and were ferried over to Britain; they were, indeed, invisible,
but the bark sank deep into the waters with the burden, and its speed
answered to an unknown force.

Teneriffe was another such site, so that in a Spanish map of 1346 it
bears the name of the Island of Hades; Ireland had 'St Patrick's
purgatory;' beyond, again, it is the New Atlantis of the western ocean;
and in the time of Columbus the people still

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

had a tradition of a country to which they gave the name of 'Seven
Cities.' Stories also would naturally enough arise of persons who by
accident or by enticements strayed over that threshold. Pausanias tells
us of a man of Gnossus who strayed into a cave and was overcome by a
sleep that lasted forty years; Pliny has a similar tale; and such are
the mediæval stories of Tannhauser, Thomas the Rhymer, and Ogier the
Dane, for which see Wright's 'Patrick's Purgatory,' Baring Gould's
'Curious Myths,' and Hartland's 'Science of Fairy Tales.'

 

In another set of stories entirely parallel, it is the maiden who is
carried off to the dark under world. Persephone gathering the crocuses
and the white lilies of the fields in Enna is borne off like Europa, not
to Crete, but to the dark labyrinth of the under world by its lord
Pluto, to spend a portion of her time away from the bright summer world,
'she herself the spring,' as Dante says. Such a story finds its
explanation in this other from the Romance of Alexander.

In farther India, Alexander, having seen most of the wonders of that
land of wonders, comes 'to a district where he beheld women, who being
interred during the winter sprung up to life on the approach of summer,
with renovated grace and beauty, or, as it is prettily expressed in the
metrical romance of 'Lambert li Cors,' as given by Dunlop:—

'Quant l’esté revient, et le beau temps s’ espure  
 En guise de fleur blanche revienient a nature.'

And so it comes in all the pretty stories that this imprisoned heroine
has to be awakened by the kiss of the hero, of the Theseus or Sigurd
type; and so, too, their palace is set round with ring fences, seven. In
Hindu story, Rama dreams of a peerless beauty, and

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

is told that she lives afar off in (1) a glass palace, (2) round the
palace runs a river, (3) round the river is a garden of flowers, (4-7)
and round the garden are four thick groves of trees. Thousands of
princes have failed to overcome these difficulties; all, until the
chosen hero comes. In another, *Panch-Phul Ranee*, 'The Queen of the
five flowers,' dwelt in a small house round which were seven wide
ditches and seven great hedges of spears (Old Deccan Days).

In the Russian stories the hero goes to the other world through a hole
in the ground, he slays a vast snake or composite creature, Koshchei the
deathless, and frees the captive maiden. In the Servian version he
regains earth by the flight of an eagle. The best known of all these
tales is 'The Sleeping Beauty,' '*La Belle au Bois Dormant*' of
Perrault. Grimm's 'Briar Rose,' who sleeps within a maze of briars that
none may penetrate until the hero and the time—the spring—are come.

In the Ramayana Sita, called 'daughter of the furrow,' is carried off by
Ravana the king of the under world and lord of riches; she is won back
by Rama, but the earth ever claims her again; as Professor Max Müller,
speaking of Brynhild says, 'thus we see that the awaking and budding
spring is gone, carried away by Gunnar; like Proserpina by Pluto; like
Sita by Ravana.'

A story similar to this, told of 'the Queen of the flowers,'
'Rosebriar,' or Rosa-Mundi, gets attached to a real Rosamond Clifford,
'the fairest flower in all the worlde.' The maze of Woodstock thus
appears in Stow:—'Rosamond, the fayre daughter of Walter, Lord Clifford,
concubine to Henry II. (poisoned by Queen Eleanor, as some thought),
dyed at Woodstock (A.D. 1177), where king Henry had made for her a house
of wonderful working; so that no man or

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

woman might come to her, but he that was instructed by the king, or such
as were right secret with him touching the matter. This house after some
was named Labyrinthus or Dedalus worke, which was wrought like a knot in
a garden called a maze; but it was commonly said that lastly the Queen
came to her by a clue of thridde, or silke, and so dealt with her that
she lived not long after; but when she was dead she was buried at
Godstow in an house of nunnes, beside Oxford, with these verses upon her
tomb

'Hic jacit in tumba, Rosa mundi, non Rosa munda:  
 Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet.'

We will leave the myth with the beautiful story in Maundeville of the
daughter of 'Ypocras' changed into a serpent, 'and they say that she
shall remain in that form until the time that a knight come who shall be
so bold that he dare come to her and kiss her on the mouth, and she lies
in an old castle in a cave, and appears twice or thrice in the year.'
The castle in the cave, not the maiden, is all that properly belongs to
our subject.

 

This imagery of the under world, as the labyrinth of the dead, had a
further influence on architecture than the figured mazes of the floors.
It formed the ideal plan of the tomb.

Maspero is clear as to this. 'During the day the pure soul was in no
serious danger, but in the evening, when the eternal waters which flow
along the vaulted heavens fall in vast cascades adown the west and are
engulphed in the bowels of the earth, the soul follows the escort of the
sun and the other luminary gods into the lower world bristling with
ambuscades and perils. For twelve hours the divine squadron defiles
through long and gloomy corridors,

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

where numerous genii, some hostile, some friendly, now struggle to bar
the way, and now to aid it in surmounting the difficulties of the
journey. Great doors, each guarded by a gigantic serpent, were stationed
at intervals, and led to an immense hall full of flame and fire, peopled
by hideous monsters and executioners, whose office it was to torture the
damned. Then came more dark and narrow passages, more blind gropings in
the gloom, more strife with malevolent genii, and again the welcoming of
the propitious gods. At midnight began the upward journey towards the
eastern region of the world; and in the morning, having reached the
confines of the Land of Darkness, the sun emerged from the east to light
another day.' 'The tombs of the kings were constructed upon the model of
the world of night. They had their passages, their doors, their vaulted
halls, which plunged down into the depths of the mountain.' The
wall-paintings carry farther this same intention; if the planning gives
the geography these give the very scenery of the lower world. 'At Thebes
as at Memphis the intention was to secure to the double the enjoyment of
his new abode, and to usher the soul into the company of the gods of the
Solar Osirian cycle as well as to guide it through the labyrinth of the
infernal regions. Taken as a series, these tableaux form an illustrated
narrative of the travels of the sun and the soul through the twenty-four
hours of the day and night. Each hour is represented, as also the domain
of each hour, with its circumscribing boundary, the door of which is
guarded by a huge serpent. These serpents have their various names, as
"Fire Face," "Flaming Eye," "Evil Eye." He was assailed like Dante and
Virgil at the gates of Hell, by frightful sounds and clamourings. Each
circle had its voice, not to be confounded with the voices of other
circles.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Here the sound was
as an immense humming of wasps; yonder it was as the lamentation of
women for their husbands, and the howling of she beasts for their mates;
elsewhere it was as the rolling of the thunder. The sarcophagus as well
as the walls were covered with these scenes of joyous or sinister
import.'

This interpretation is fully borne out by Perrot. 'The soul had to
appear before the tribunal of Osiris, the sun of night. . . . The tomb
had its snares and narrow passages, its gaping depths, and the mazes of
its intersecting corridors. Thus the tombs of the Theban period embody
the Egyptian solution of the problem which has always exercised mankind.
Their subterranean corridors were a reproduction upon a smaller scale of
the leading characteristics of the under world.' . . . 'A reproduction
in small of the regions of the other world.'

Miss Edwards writes of the Tombs of the Kings: 'To go down into one of
these great sepulchres is to descend one's self into the lower world,
and to tread the path of the shades; crossing the threshold we look up,
half expecting to read those terrible words in which all who enter are
warned to leave hope behind them. The passage slopes before our feet;
the daylight fades behind us. At the end of the passage comes a flight
of steps, and from the bottom of that flight of steps we see another
corridor slanting down into depths of utter darkness.'

The tomb of Seti I. penetrates 470 feet and is 180 feet deep in the
earth; another has some 24,000 square feet taken up by the passages,
halls, staircases, pits, and chambers of the tomb. The inside of the
magnificent alabaster sarcophagus of Seti I. in the Soane Museum is
entirely covered with engravings giving the course of the sun and the
passage of the gateways to reach the Hall of Justice. This is an
Egyptian atlas,

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

nor were they without a handbook to the land from which no tourist
returns, for the guide-hook for the dead was laid in the coffin, telling
them of all the turnings, and of all the *ruses* of the wicked spirits
who would entice them away from the one true path. Just as Mr Carl Bock
tells us that, when a chief dies in Borneo, directions are chanted so
that the dead shall not mistake the way and may avoid tempting but false
allurements.

On a wide comparison, important tombs are generally labyrinthine; and it
may be suggested that the carved maze-like patterns—those incised on the
Mycenæ slabs, for instance, as shown by Schliemann had sometimes the
intention of figuring the grave land. The Etruscan tomb chambers are
particularly involved, as may be seen in the plans given by Dennis. The
tomb of Lars Porsenna is thus described by Pliny:—'He was buried under
the city of Clusium, in a spot where he has left a monument of
rectangular masonry, each side whereof is three hundred feet wide and
fifty high, and within the square of the basement is an inextricable
labyrinth; out of which, no one who ventures in without a clue of
thread, can ever find an exit.'

In the initiations and mysteries, imitations of the labyrinth of the
dark world seem to have been built. Professor Sayce quotes from an
Assyrian tablet which describes the initiation of a priest of the
Sun-god Samas, who is 'made to descend into an artificial imitation of
the lower world.' And the Elusinian Mysteries embodied the same thought.
In Buddhist story we are told that Asoka in his evil days actually built
'a hell' and tortured people there.

Another widely distributed myth in connection with old buildings, that
of the underground passage would seem a parallel thought, perhaps best
explained

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

by this underway of the sun, which everyone felt assured must go under
his own particular temple. Be this as it may, we are likely to be told
in many old church and abbey in England, especially if ruined, that
'there is a passage underground which runs from here for miles and
miles; it crosses under the river, and the other end is at the castle.'
The story is told in France, in one instance, of all the way from Arles
to the amphitheatre at Nîmes. Sir H. Layard heard the same tale in the
wildest part of Persia; just as it was told Herodotus in Egypt that
there was a subterranean gallery from the Great Pyramid to the Nile; or
to the French traveller Theveniot, that it passed from the Pyramid to
come out of the head of the great Sphynx. The Euphrates Expedition spent
some time in searching for a passage which was reported to have existed
under the river (Ainsworth). A story like this, once having obtained a
hold on the imagination, seems to have an undying vitality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Golden Gate of the Sun](amm11.md)
