[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Utopia](../../utopia/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sym06) 
[Next](sym08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symzonia; Voyage of Discovery*, by Adam Seaborn (pseud. John Cleves
Symmes?), \[1820\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

<span class="small">The Author in great peril, from the vast rise and
fall of the tide in the polar sea—Brief account of his observations at
Seaborn's Land—He takes formal possession of the country, in the manner
usual in such cases, in the name and on behalf of the United
States—Leaves a sealing party on one of the islands near the coast, and
proceeds to the south, to extend his discoveries.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">I had</span> slept some hours, when I was
awakened by Mr. Boneto's order, and informed that the land appeared to
rise very much. I went immediately on deck, and was astonished to see
the land appear more than three times as high as when we came to anchor.
I at first attempted to account for it by supposing some change in the
atmosphere which caused the land to loom; but was soon undeceived. One
of the seamen called out that there was a shoal even with the water
close by. The lead was immediately cast to see if the ship was driving,
and but two fathoms water were found alongside. In half an hour more we
were high and dry. Such was the astonishing

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

rise and fall of the tide in this high latitude! The bay, which had
twenty fathoms water in the centre at [full](errata.htm#1) sea, and ten
fathoms a mile from the shore, was almost entirely emptied; a small
channel in the middle, not more than half a mile wide, being all that
was not left quite hare. There was no immediate inconvenience to be
apprehended from this circumstance; but I was aware, that a tide that
fell 70 or 80 feet perpendicular, must return in a bore with prodigious
violence, and was under more apprehension of the consequences, than at
any other period of my voyage. I however concealed my fears from my
officers and people, who were much amused with the circumstance, and my
apparent vexation at finding my vessel high and dry on a mud bank, near
the south pole. My greatest fear was, that the tide might come in in a
bore thirty or forty feet high, and, striking the vessel as she lay
aground, tumble her over and dash her to pieces, no frame of timber
being sufficient to withstand such a shock. Happily, the stream of the
ebb tide had left us exactly stern to the flood. I ordered the boats to
be hoisted in and secured, and the anchors to be

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

taken up, fastened in the dead lights, put every thing below that was
moveable, directed the men to provide themselves with strong lashings,
and ordered the engineer to raise a head of steam, and have the engine
in readiness for instant motion. Thus prepared, I awaited the return of
the tide. It came in dun time; and now my officers and men, who had been
so merry at my expense, evinced great consternation. The muscles of
Slim's face were actually convulsed with terror at the sight of a wall
of water, stretching quite across the bay, apparently 30 or 40 feet
high, rolling towards us like a tremendous breaker, and with a roaring
noise like thunder. To all appearance, it would break over our mast
head, and consign us to one common grave. In mercy to the trembling
Slim, I desired him to step below and bring me my pea jacket, well
knowing he would not come up again until the danger was over. I then
ordered the companion-way and the hatches to be secured, directed my
people to lash themselves fast, and quietly wait the result. Here, I
must confess, I put up a silent prayer to Heaven, after a sailor's
fashion, for preservation from the impending danger.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

I have always found the fears and anticipation of danger to exceed the
reality. When the bore approached us, the bottom came rather faster than
the top, and its face was not quite perpendicular. The vessel was fairly
afloat on the foot of the wave, before the main body of it struck her;
and taking it square astern, she split and rose over it in the most
beautiful manner, without sustaining the slightest injury. By backing
with the paddles, we kept clear of the shore, on which the impetus of
the wave would have driven us, and soon after anchored again in the
middle of the bay in twenty fathoms water.

And here I would recommend to all navigators of the polar seas, to avoid
anchoring in less than twenty fathoms, until they have accurately
ascertained the rise and fall of the tides, at the full and change of
the moon.

When the companion-way was unbarred, Slim came up with my pea jacket,
and coolly observed, he was glad there was no damage done, adding, "I
was really afraid it might break our paddles." In consequence of this
occurrence, I named this bay Take-in harbour.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

We were occupied until noon, in returning things to their places,
getting the boats out, and preparing for an excursion on chore. At noon
I observed the altitude of the sun, and, after making accurate allowance
for the refraction, found Take-in harbour to be in latitude 83° 3´
south. This was much further south than the distance run by log would
make us, which I attributed to a strong current setting us rapidly in
that direction; but this I soon found to be an error, and that the
difference between the latitude by observation and dead reckoning, arose
from the oblate form of the globe at the poles, lessening the degrees of
latitude.

After dinner, I landed with a strong party, leaving the vessel in charge
of Mr. Boneto. I took the horses and mules on shore, with provisions for
a week, intending to march to the highest land we could find, to gain at
once an extensive view of the coast and country. We landed on the south
side of the bay, and shaped our course. for a moderately elevated spot,
which appeared to be the highest land, due south about ten miles
distant. We found the shore much like that of the Falkland Islands, the
only

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

difference being that this was much more level, and had greater extent
of tussoc. After passing through a border of tussoc about three miles
wide, we reached an open prairie country, with grass about four inches
high. We were three hours in gaining the elevated spot, from which we
were enabled to see the coast for a great distance on our left, and the
sea along its border, studded with islands. On the right, we could see
nothing but boundless prairie, with here and there a ridge like the one
we were upon. To the south, in the horizon, appeared something like a
hill, and to that I determined to go. Having taken some refreshments, we
took up the line of march. Slim, who was with me, as I did not think it
prudent to leave him on board, had been very docile until now: on
finding me determined to push into the interior so great a distance, he
became evidently uneasy. He dared not express his fears to me, but took
care that I should overhear him say to one of the men, "I hope the
captain won't waste so much time in exploring this desert, that we shall
be obliged to go away without a full cargo of skins, or run the risk of
being obliged to

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

winter here, so near the pole, where we should certainly all freeze to
death, in spite of every thing we could do." As this was a reasonable
apprehension in the mind of an ignorant man, I endeavoured to remove his
fears by calling his attention to the tussoc grass and other plants, and
asked him how they survived the winter, if the cold was so intense as he
supposed? and advanced the opinion that wherever plants can sustain the
cold of winter, and retain their vitality, man can exist, with the aid
of good clothing and artificial heat.

A fatiguing march of 15 miles brought us to the hill, which we found to
be the highest part of a ridge of moderate elevation running from the
coast in a S. S. W. direction into the interior. We were amply
compensated for our trouble in wading through the grass, as this
eminence afforded an extensive view of the country in every direction.
The S. E. side of this ridge broke off very abruptly, in some places
perpendicularly and at its foot was a large and beautiful river, full a
mile in width, flowing from the S. S. W. Beyond it was a prairie
country, gently waving and rising into sloping hills in the distant
horizon. Far

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

up the river I could descry with my glass a few trees, towards which I
felt a strong inclination to proceed; but being excessively fatigued,
thought best to devote a few hours to refreshment. After a comfortable
meal, and a sound nap of four hours, I descended the precipice to
ascertain whether the river was an arm of the sea, or a fresh water
stream. It proved to be pure potable water, and the existence of a
continent near the south pole, was thus fully established.

I had not been long on the bank of this river, before I found cause to
doubt the prudence of venturing thus far by land into an unknown
country, in the appearance of fresh tracks of some huge land animal,
which were larger than the bottom of a water bucket. Whether they were
those of a white polar bear as big as an elephant, of a mammoth, or of
some other enormous nondescript animal, I could not guess. I re-ascended
the hill with all practicable expedition, collected my men, and hastened
towards the ship as fast as possible.

We reached the ship after six hours constant marching, all completely
tired out, our horses and mules being too feeble to

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

travel, from long confinement on shipboard.

The discoveries I had already made were so far from satisfying my
ambition, that my desire to push on and explore the internal world was
more intense than ever. I was now convinced of the correctness of Capt.
Symmes's theory, and of the practicability of sailing into the globe at
the south pole, and of returning home by way of the north pole, if no
land intervened to obstruct the passage. My first thought was to enter
the river I had seen, and ascend to its source, which must necessarily
be in the internal world; for if the poles were open, there was not room
enough for a sufficient body of land to the south of 84 degrees, to
maintain so mighty a river. But f abandoned this idea, on reflecting
that by confining myself to this river, I should at best enter the
internal world but a few hundred miles, while by entering on the open
ocean, I should be able to visit every accessible part of it.

My first business was to make such arrangements as would satisfy my
crew, and to ascertain the condition of the country in the immediate
vicinity.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

therefore landed a sealing party of thirty men, under Mr. Boneto,
assisted by Mr. Slim, on one of the islands, and proceeded with the
Explorer to the mouth of the great river: We found the access to the
river easy and safe; the chain of islands off' the mouth of it broke the
swell of the sea. Having ascertained its mouth to be in 83° 47´ south
latitude, by observation, I proceeded up with two boats ahead, taking
care to move only with the flood tide, and to anchor in deep water.

The banks for the first 30 miles were fringed with tussoc. Above that
some trees appeared; and at the distance of 40 miles, the banks were
skirted with a strip of dense forest, of moderately sized trees. We
proceeded 10 miles further up, when the country appeared to be chiefly
covered with large trees, wide apart, with no undergrowth between them,
excepting on some low spots near the river, with here and there a spot
of open prairie.

Having anchored the Explorer In a safe situation, I landed with a boat's
crew at one of the open spaces, to examine the productions of the land,
and see if I could discover any indications of inhabitants. I found

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

the timber to be mostly different from that which I was acquainted with,
excepting a species of fir resembling our spruce. I was much pleased to
see wood of this description, and immediately ordered the launch on
shore, with the axes and all our disposable force. We were busily
engaged for three days in filling the Explorer with wood for fuel, and,
after stowing her quite full, piled as much on deck as I thought she
would bear, including timber for constructing winter quarters for the
sealing party,

All fears of the consequences of wintering in this region were now done
away. Where trees could live, I could live. I determined to erect a
secure establishment for my sealing party, and pursue my discoveries as
far as practicable. While the wood-cutting was going on, I did not
venture far from the river—I had not forgotten the big tracks. I was
always on shore with the party, to be ready for events, taking the
people all on board with me when I wanted a four hours’ nap.

I employed myself in searching for curiosities, collecting geological,
mineralogical, and ornithological specimens, sea fowl and land birds
being very numerous in this

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

country, and in gathering plants to enrich my hortus siccus, for the
benefit of the learned when I should return home. My researches were
rewarded by the discovery of some enormous bones, possibly of a whale,
which being, according to very high authority, no fish, might at some
former period have got on shore in this high latitude, after the fashion
of the other visitants from the internal world. As they were very large,
I called them mammoth bones of course, had them all carefully taken on
board, and packed in boxes, as an invaluable [acquisition](errata.htm#2)
to the scientific world.

On the third day a cry of terror called my attention. I saw the men all
running for the boats, and thought it best to follow their example. We
had all got into the boats, and shoved off into deep water, before I
could ascertain the cause of the alarm, when the appearance of an
enormous animal on the ground we had left answered my inquiries. The
huge beast walked to the edge of the water at a moderate pace, and
stopped to survey us new corners with great composure. I ordered Jack
Whiffle, who was an excellent marksman, to give him a shot from a
three-pounder,

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

mounted in the bow of the launch, and at the same time gave him a volley
of musketry. Whether the shot took effect or not, could not be
discovered. He returned to the woods without haste or fright, and thus
deprived me of the pleasure of securing his skin and skeleton, for the
examination of the learned, and the benefit of Scudder's Museum.

There was nothing to be gained by a longer continuance in this river,
and I felt no disposition to penetrate into forests, frequented by
animals large enough to be called mammoth, a name which appears to be
applicable to all big things. At this place, fifty miles from its mouth,
the river was full a mile in width, and twenty fathoms deep at low tide.
Taking into consideration its unusual magnitude and depth, and the large
animal seen upon its bank, I named it Mammoth River.

We arrived at Take-in harbour next day. Mr. Boneto's party had been
actively employed, and had already secured seven thousand seal skins. I
collected all my officers on board, and acquainted them with such of my
plans as I thought it prudent to disclose. The first was to land thirty
of

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

the crew at a group of islands which formed a snug harbour near the
mouth of Mammoth River; to erect on one of the islands sufficient
buildings to protect them from the severity of the winter, in case it
should become necessary to remain there until another season, and large
enough to contain a fair share of all the stores on board, in proportion
to their numbers, so that they might fare as well as those who remained
in the ship. I told them that I should proceed to the S. E. along the
coast, to ascertain where was the best sealing ground to remove to when
these Islands should be cleared of seals, and to discover whether the
land extended a sufficient distance on the other side of the pole to
open a passage for us to sail over the pole, and thus proceed to Canton
by steering due north, which would save a great deal of time. This was
all according to their notions of things; but I was well aware that when
they would suppose we were sailing northward on the other side of the
globe, we should in fact be sailing directly into it through the
opening. No objections were made to this plan, as it all seemed feasible
enough. But I was at a loss as to the officers

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I should leave
with this party. In exploring the internal regions, I should want all my
best officers; and although Slim was an excellent sealer, it would not
do to leave him with the command of the party, for I should be sure to
find the men all ripe for mutiny on my return. I at last determined to
give Mr. Boneto the charge of the establishment, with the boatswain to
assist him; to keep Albicore, Slim, and Mackerel in the ship, and give
Jack Whiffle the birth of acting boatswain.

We were a week briskly engaged in carrying these arrangements into
effect. Extensive buildings were erected of stone and wood, having a
centre room, to which no external air could gain access, without passing
through the flue of a stove. The store rooms were detached from the
dwelling, that the stores might he saved in case of fire. A covered way
quite around all the buildings, as well as from one to the other, was
constructed, and the whole covered four feet thick on the sides and roof
with the bog of the tussoc, timber and stone being placed on it to keep
it from being forced off by high winds.

Having thus prepared for the safety and

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

comfort of my people, I gave Mr. Boneto written instructions how to
proceed in all imaginable cases, but especially cautioned him against
going on to the main land, lest he should be destroyed by the mammoth
animal.

Aware that there was a *possibility* that I might miscarry, and never
get back to this place, I devoted a day to the performance of a
necessary duty to my country, namely, taking possession of the country I
had discovered, in the name and on behalf of the people of the United
States of America. I first drew up a manifesto, setting forth, that I,
Adam Seaborn, mariner, a citizen of the United States of America, did,
on the 5th day of November, Anno Domini one thousand eight hundred and
seventeen, first see and discover this southern continent, a part of
which was between 78° and 84° south latitude, and stretching to the N.
W., S. E., and S. W., beyond my knowledge; which land having never
before been seen by any civilized people, and having been occupied for
the full term of eighteen days by citizens of the said United States,
whether it should prove to be in possession of any other people or not,
provided they

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

were not *Christians*, was and of right ought to be the sole property of
the said people of the United States, by right of discovery and
occupancy, according to the usages of Christian nations.

Having completed this important paper, which I composed with great care,
knowing that many wars had been waged for a less cause than a right to
so valuable a continent, I had it engraved on a plate of sheathing
copper, with a spread eagle at the top, and at the bottom a bank, with
100 dollar bills tumbling out of the doors and windows, to denote the
amazing quantity and solidity of the wealth of my country. When it was
completed by the blacksmith, who was something of a proficient in the
fine arts, I went on shore with all the officers and men that could be
spared from the ship, taking my music, two pieces of cannon, some wine
for my officers, and plenty of grog for the men. We marched up the shore
with great pomp, the music playing and colours flying, to a convenient
spot, where I buried the copper plate, and rolled upon it as large a
stone as the whole ship's company could move, and ordered the blacksmith
to engrave upon it, in large deep letters, "Seaborn's Land. A. D. 1817."

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

A liberty pole was then erected on the spot, and the standard of the
United States displayed upon it; all of which being accomplished, I
ordered a salute to be fired of one gun for every State. "How many will
that be, sir?" asked Mr. Boneto, adding, that they came so fast be could
not keep the run of them. Slim said it was twenty-one. I objected to
that number, as being the royal salute of Great-Britain, and settled the
matter by telling them to fire away till they were tired of it, and
finish off with a few squibs for the half-made States. We completed the
ceremony with a plenty of grog, and reiterated huzzas, as usual, and
thus established the title of the United States to this newly discovered
country, in the most incontestible manner, and strictly according to
rule.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](sym08)
