[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Utopia](../../utopia/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sym16) 
[Next](sym18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symzonia; Voyage of Discovery*, by Adam Seaborn (pseud. John Cleves
Symmes?), \[1820\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

### CHAPTER XIV.

<span class="small">The Author examines the records of the
Assembly.—Grounds of proposal for admittance to the order of
Worthies—Shell fish of Symzonia.—Great quantities of Pearls, and the use
to which they are applied.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">I was</span> allowed free access to the records
of the Assembly: and, having made such proficiency in the Symzonian
language as to read it with facility, I derived much amusement and
instruction from the various recommendations for admittance to the
distinguished orders which had been stated to the Grand Council and
placed on record during a long course of ages. These records were much
too voluminous to admit of my reading them in course. I therefore
contented myself with opening them at hazard, and reading whatever
chanced to present itself.

One man was proposed to be admitted to the order of Worthies by the
title "<span class="smallcaps">Wise</span>," because he had given
evidence of superior imagination and ingenuity; he having fancied that
he had discovered by

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

studying the laws of *matter and motion*, that the Internals were
inhabitants of the concave side of a hollow sphere; and, reasoning from
analogy, that the convex or outer side of that sphere must be inhabited
by a people enjoying a wider range of action, and more extended views of
objects floating in unlimited space: that the suns, moons and stars,
which they saw imperfectly by refraction and reflection, were only
visible through a dense atmosphere in their world, but must of necessity
be directly visible to the inhabitants of the External World in all
their effulgence. He had written a book to explain his ingenious theory
of an External World, in which he had endeavoured to show by various
calculations, that his extravagant hypothesis was not absolutely beyond
the limit of possibility.

This man was not proposed as one designated by the popular voice, but
was named by a certain *Wise* man as one of retired habits and uncommon
genius. The council unanimously rejected the application, and passed a
vote of censure on him for troubling them with the dreams of a maniac or
an enthusiast. The members of the council were generally of opinion that
to

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

suppose the outside of such a world to be inhabited was as absurd as to
suppose men to dwell on the outside of their houses.

Another man was proposed as *Wise*, for devising a scheme to relieve the
government from the trouble of superintending the distribution of things
useful, in order to preserve equality in the comforts of the people
throughout the land; and from constant attention to the emission and
withdrawal of tokens, to maintain their regular value, and insure their
proper effect. His plan was to substitute in place of the tokens a
system of promissory obligations, to be issued by an association of
individuals who should be always bound to *redeem* them. This plan, he
contended, would greatly facilitate exchanges, and contribute to the
convenience of government.

His scheme was promptly condemned, as a device to cheat the people, by
causing perpetual fluctuations in the nominal price of things; and he
was recorded as a designing man, unfit to be of the order of Worthies.

Another was proposed for admission as *Wise*, for composing a code of
written laws, and writing a book to prove that the adoption

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

of his project of numerous and particular laws in writing would conduce
to the welfare of society, by enabling every one to know, with technical
precision, what lie might and what he might not do.

This man's scheme, and the proposition founded upon it were both
rejected. The council said, that as to all the matters embraced in this
proposed system, public opinion, the established principles and habits
of the people, the prevalent sense of rectitude and benevolence, had
been and still was sufficient. Laws, if in accordance with these
principles, could add nothing to their efficacy; and if inconsistent
with them, they could not be enforced. The whole subject was at present
plain; technical phrases would but darken and perplex it. Language was
imperfect; words had different meanings; those who violated the spirit
of these laws would contrive to evade the letter; the people would
disagree in their judgments; the influence of public opinion would be
destroyed; bad passions would be generated; more laws would be required;
contest, disorder, and innumerable evils would be the consequence. The
education and discipline to

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

which the people were accustomed, the examples of the Good, the dictates
of enlightened consciences, the sense of accountability to God, the
simplicity, temperance, and practical piety of the people,—these formed
the basis of good conduct, and upon these dependance might be safely
placed.

The most frequent grounds of recommendation for the distinguished orders
were regular and useful industry, temperate and exemplary lives, and
constant endeavours to improve themselves and others.

Many were admitted for discoveries in botany, whereby the people were
enabled to derive increased enjoyment from the vegetable world; many
also became Worthies by advancing the knowledge of entomology, and
finding how to guard against the ravages of insects, and how to turn the
efforts of the myriads of almost invisible beings to harmless or useful
ends.

I observed nothing of the nature of animals in use amongst this people
as food, except oysters and other testaceous creatures, which have so
little visible animation as to be considered by the Symzonians on an
equality with vegetables, and to be provided like them for the
nourishment of a

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

higher order of life. They were probably led to this conclusion, by the
vast profusion of shell-fish which abound in their waters. They are
caught in astonishing quantities. The shells are employed in building,
and to promote vegetation.

The pearls, which they afford in great abundance, and of large size, are
used to glaze the walls of their apartments, being dissolved in a
liquid, and laid on like paint. This process gives a smooth and elegant
surface, like the inside of the pearl oyster-shell, which is
inexpressibly delicate and agreeable in the soft light of this country,
and at the same time renders the walls more durable.

I visited a maker of this pearl wash. My cupidity, I must confess, was
greatly excited by the sight of large heaps of pearls, which would be of
incalculable value in the external world. Even in the atmosphere of this
pure region, I could not prevent my imagination from figuring the
splendid palace, dashing equipage, and choice wines I should enjoy, and
the unbounded respect and obsequious attention which would be paid to me
by the great men of Gotham, on my return there with

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

the enormous wealth which a cargo of these pearls would produce. I asked
the workman for a specimen of the pearls, and he gave me a handful that
were as large as peas, which I put in my pocket, intending to show them
to the Best Man, as a sample of the article with which I should be glad
to load my ship.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](sym18)
