[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Utopia](../../utopia/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sym15.md) 
[Next](sym17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Symzonia; Voyage of Discovery*, by Adam Seaborn (pseud. John Cleves
Symmes?), \[1820\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

### CHAPTER XIII.

<span class="small">Recreations of the Symzonians.—Wonderful provision
of nature for supplying the internal world with light.—Character and
employments of the women of Symzonia.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">I visited</span> the place of recreation, a neat
plain rotunda, in the centre of an extensive flower garden, where the
young people, the middle aged, and the old occasionally convened, to
extend their knowledge of one another, interchange their thoughts by
conversation, listen to the most exquisite music, and practise a variety
of graceful and elegant exercises. Being all very fond of music, they
all join in that, by turns, as in other performances. Sometimes an
hundred instruments, and many hundreds of the most exquisite voices,
filled the whole place with the most enchanting sounds.

The exquisite beauty of the women, the graceful dignity of the men, the
chaste decorum

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

and sincere politeness of all, charmed the mind, and delighted the
heart. Here there were no temptations to vice by offers of seducing
cordials, wines, agreeable decoctions, or other intoxicating drinks, as
in our places of resort for recreation. The enjoyments of this refined
people were intellectual and pure—not the debasing gratifications of
animal passions and sensual appetites.

The soft reflected light of the sun, which was now no longer directly
visible, gave a pleasing mellowness to the scene, that was inexpressibly
agreeable, being about midway between a bright moonlight and clear
sunshine. I had great cause to admire the wonderful provision of nature,
by which the internal world enjoyed almost perpetual light, without
being subject at any time to the scorching heats which oppress the
bodies and irritate the passions of the inhabitants of the external
surface.

When the sun has great southern declination, it is seen directly through
the opening at the south pole, a little above the horizon—this gives an
interval of bright light; and as the rays of heat are more refrangible

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

than those of light <span id="fr_3"></span>[\*](#fn_3.md), a sufficient
degree of heat is experienced to ripen the most delicate fruits.

At this season, during night, the rays of the sun are reflected from the
opposite rim of the polar opening, and afford so much light as to render
the stars invisible. The full moon is never seen at this period; for
while the sun is in south declination, the moon fulls to the north of
the equator, to give light to the north polar region, and the northern
internal hemisphere.

March and September are the darkest months. Both the sun and full moon
are then in the equator, and shine very obliquely by refraction, into
both polar openings. Yet, by reflection from side to side, they afford a
faint light quite to the internal equator, where two reflected suns and
moons are dimly seen at the same time. This circumstance had led the
internals to suppose that there were actually duplicates of those
luminaries. Their situation, it should be considered, did not admit of
such observations

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

of the celestial bodies, as were necessary to correct that error.

During this season, the planets and stars of the southern hemisphere are
visible, some directly, and others by reflection. This occasions great
mistakes in their astronomical calculations, which they ascribe to the
aberrations of the heavenly bodies. It never occurred to them that their
field of vision was a limited internal concave sphere, and a great part
of their firmament nothing but a reflection of the external heavens.

When the sun is in north declination, it is not seen at all to the
south; but as it then shines into the north polar opening, its influence
is felt at Symzonia by a repeated reflection, and being aided both by
the powerful light of the moon, (which always fulls in high south
declination, when the sun is near the northern tropic, and shines
directly into the southern opening,) and by the direct and reflected
light of the planets and stars of the southern hemisphere, gives light
enough for all necessary purposes.

The women of Symzonia are not regarded as inferior in intellectual
capacity, or

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

moral worth, to the other sex. The female character is there respected,
for the qualities of the female mind are developed and employed. Their
personal beauty exceeds my powers of description. I can liken their
complexion to nothing but alabaster slightly tinged with rose. Compared
with them the fairest of our fair are dingy. This may not be readily
credited by some of our beauties but they have only to place themselves
near the alabaster ornaments in their drawing rooms to realize the fact.

The domestic duties of the Symzonian women are very simple, pleasing,
and easily performed. To prepare the frugal family meal requires no
roasting heat, nor black array of pots, kettles, spits, and gridirons.
The little culinary preparation which vegetables and fruits require; is
neatly and conveniently done in silver vessels; for silver is abundant,
and well adapted for utensils for household use. To arrange their basins
of milk and honey, and set out their baskets of fruit for a family
united in esteem and love, is a pleasurable exercise.

The preparation of clothing for a people

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

of such simple habits requires comparatively little labour. The garden
occupies a portion of their time, but the greater part is devoted to the
instruction of their children, the improvement of their own minds,
religion, and social intercourse.

Their parterres are not designed for the idle gratification of the eye,
but to support innumerable swarms of honey making insects; the
Symzonians being as fond of the sweet which nature has provided as the
Externals are of that which is wrung from the bloody sweat of slavery.

Symmetry in form, and elegance in arrangement, are much attended to by
this people; they do not attempt to surpass nature in the creation of
beauties, but endeavour to heighten the enjoyment of what is placed
before them, and make a right use of whatever they possess.

Vessels of gold for domestic purposes are sometimes used by those who
cannot easily procure silver. Gold is abundant in the beds of rivers
near the mountains, but it is not esteemed, because of its softness and
great weight. It is chiefly employed in the fastening of their vessels,
in place of

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

iron, which is very rare, and much valued for its strength, and fitness
for all the purposes of agriculture and mechanics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[183:\*](sym16.htm#fr_3.md) See Dr. Herschel's
Experiments on the refrangibility of the rays of light and heat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](sym17.md)
