[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Utopia](../../utopia/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sym12.md) 
[Next](sym14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Symzonia; Voyage of Discovery*, by Adam Seaborn (pseud. John Cleves
Symmes?), \[1820\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

### CHAPTER X.

<span class="small">Containing some account of the strange rationality
of the Symzonians.—Their simplicity of dress.—Manner of making
cloth.—Circulating medium.—Taxes.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> friendly reception which had been
given to me by the Best Man, and his commands that information should be
freely communicated to the stranger, were a sufficient introduction for
me to the notice and kind offices of this benevolent people. They
required no other evidence that my rank was sufficiently elevated to
render me a fit associate for them, than the fact that the Best Man had
found my conversation so interesting as to induce him to pass several
hours in my company. I was visited by all classes of the community, and
gave scope to my eager desire to possess myself of all the useful
knowledge and science possessed by the most intelligent of the people.

I gave my attention in the first instance almost exclusively to the
Wise, in expectation of finding their conversation most instructive;

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

but I soon found that like our *philosophers* they were more given to
abstract theories than to practical knowledge, and would contend for
hours to establish some fanciful hypothesis, to the neglect of plain and
practical subjects of inquiry. I therefore turned my attention to the
Good and the Useful, who never spoke on subjects they did not
understand, and whose information, though not so abstruse as that of the
Wise, extended to all matters of established utility. Moreover they
could be implicitly relied on; for having no favourite hypotheses to
maintain, and no selfish ends to answer, they explained every thing to
me frankly and in an intelligible manner.

In this way, and by frequent interviews with the Best Man, as also by
actual observation, I ascertained the following, among numberless other
interesting facts:

That the fatal sin *cupidity*, which drove our first parents out of
Paradise, is almost wholly unknown to the pure and uncontaminated
Internals. They view the gifts of a bountiful Providence as an abundant
supply of good things for the benefit of all, and sufficient to gratify
all the rational

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

wants of all the creatures for whom they are provided. They admire and
adore the beneficence which could find pleasure in creating intelligent
beings, and in providing for all their wants; and are emulous to
approximate towards the spirit of love and goodness to which they are
indebted for all their blessings. They are continually striving to
improve themselves in this respect, by unceasing efforts to render one
another, and all creatures within the sphere of their influence, happier
and better; instead of exerting all their faculties, like the Externals,
to gain advantages over their fellow men, to acquire the means of
gratifying the worst passions of their nature, or to advance their own
pleasures by rendering others miserable.

All the real wants of men in society are provided for in the most simple
and natural manner. Usefulness is the test of value. That artificial
wealth which exists amongst the Externals, and depends for its support
upon their capricious passions, has no place with the Symzonians; our
whole list of fancy articles, all our ornaments, every description of
things which are only calculated to gratify pride or vanity, are
considered

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

by them as worse than useless. They wear garments because they defend
the body, and are necessary to decency; but it never occurred to their
simple minds, that the fairest work of an Infinite Being could be
unproved by trinkets and fripperies of man's device. Their judgments are
not so much perverted, nor their tastes so much depraved. Therefore,
having ascertained a mode of providing necessary raiment in the most
convenient manner, they one and all adopted it, and, by dressing alike,
they maintain a perfect equality in their wants in that respect.

Their cloth is a beautiful substance, manufactured in a peculiar manner,
by a process resembling that employed by the natives of the South Sea
Islands, and not unlike our mode of making paper.

The material is found in caves and amongst the rocks of the mountains,
where a species of insects, larger than our spider, produce it in great
abundance. They form webs somewhat like those of spiders, but of a
firmer texture, and more compactly woven. These webs have the properties
of asbestos, owing probably to the insects

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

subsisting upon that or some similar substance. The inhabitants collect
them with great care, and lay them in a mould of the dimensions of the
piece of cloth to be made, placing so many of them one upon another as
the intended thickness of the cloth requires. This done, a fluid
preparation which hardens by the influence of fire, without losing its
elasticity, is poured over it. It is then pressed firmly together, and
passed over a heated cylinder, which completes the operation.

This cloth is extremely convenient. Being incombustible, like asbestos,
it is only necessary to pass a garment through the fire to purify it
perfectly. It is also very durable; and being exquisitely white, it
corresponds admirably with the delicate complexions of the people, and
the mild light of the region they inhabit.

All the divisions of labour necessary to the convenience and welfare of
society, are here perfectly understood. The community is not bewildered
by a voluminous and complex system of political economy, consisting of
abstract principles, buried in abstract and unintelligible words, and
rendered

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

too intricate to be understood by those who have common sense, or too
inapplicable to civilized society to be adopted by those who have any
sort of sense—invented by the *Wise* men of one country to mislead the
politicians of another, and to depress the Good and the Useful.

Their circulating medium consists of tokens for every variety of things,
and every description of services. These tokens are originally issued by
the government, for services performed and articles supplied for the
national benefit. One description represents one day's labour; a second,
a standard measure of grain; a third, a small measure of pulse; a
fourth, a given quantity of a particular fruit; a fifth, a measure of
cloth, and so forth. There being a sufficient variety to represent all
the articles which are in common use, they have all the advantages of
exchange, without the trouble of delivery when the things are not wanted
for actual consumption.

When, by any circumstances, the supply of any particular article in any
district falls short of the demand to such a degree, that

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

the tokens will not command what they represent, it is the business of
the government to draw from the more fruitful districts a sufficiency to
equalize the value, either by direct purchase, or by requiring the
contributions of the fruitful districts in kind, and sending the
articles to the place of scarcity, or by receiving the contributions of
the district in which scarcity prevails, in tokens, and thus raising
their value, or by both these operations in extreme cases.

Commerce is practised only for the common convenience of society. The
accumulation of wealth, and indulgence in luxury, being disreputable,
and a bar to admission to the distinguished orders, an overreaching and
avaricious spirit is not generated by traffic, as in the external world,
but every operation of trade and transfer is performed on the most
reasonable terms, which will enable him who performs it to live upon an
equality with his fellow-men.

All contributions are required directly from the people, that every one
may know the full extent of his proportion of the expense of government.
Every man under

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

the age of one hundred years, is rated at the same amount, unless he
have young children; in which case the tax is reduced in proportion to
the number of such children, according to a graduated scale. This tax is
so light that nothing but a criminal want of industry or frugality can
hinder any one from paying it.

The whole revenue of government requires no more than one or two days
labour of each man per annum; and as the government exists for the sole
purpose of preserving the freedom of the citizens, in the pursuit of
happiness, and in the enjoyment of all those privileges and immunities
which are compatible with the well-being of society, all are equally
indebted for its benefits. Property being altogether a matter of
secondary consideration, is not considered a proper object of taxation.
In case of an accumulation of good things in the hands of an individual,
beyond his wants, the surplus is in general voluntarily devoted by him
to the use and benefit of his fellow-beings, in some shape or other, for
the promotion of his own happiness. Doing good is here considered as the
highest of earthly

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

gratifications. When a man is more than one hundred years of age. he is
considered to have performed his full share of public service, and to be
entitled to exemption for the remainder of his days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](sym14.md)
