[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Utopia](../../utopia/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sym22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Symzonia; Voyage of Discovery*, by Adam Seaborn (pseud. John Cleves
Symmes?), \[1820\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

### CHAPTER XX.

<span class="small">The Author arrives in the United States—Consigns his
cargo to Mr. Slippery—Is reduced to poverty by the failure of Mr.
Slippery.—His great distress.—Inducement to publish this brief account
of his discoveries.—Conclusion.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">On</span> my arrival in port, I felt the
importance which an ample fortune gives a man in this external world.
The arrival of a South Sea ship from Canton, with a valuable China
cargo, was no unusual occurrence, and excited no extraordinary interest;
but it was speedily rumoured that the Explorer had made a splendid
voyage, and that Capt. Seaborn was as rich as a nabob. Abundant
civilities were proffered to me, and numberless invitations to dinner
were politely given.

I had now to select some merchant to assist in disposing of my cargo, my
long absence, and consequent ignorance of dealers, rendering it
imprudent for me to transact my own business; besides which, I found
that, notwithstanding the whole of my merchandise was as much the
product of

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> American industry,
as though I and my people had dug it out of the soil, (for instead of
obtaining it with specie, we had procured it by our own manual labour,)
I was required to pay or secure the enormous sum of one hundred and
ninety thousand dollars duties to government. A strange thing surely,
that the same tax should be levied on the privilege of bringing the
fruits of our own industry into the country, as on cargoes bought with
silver dollars, the carrying away of which impoverishes the nation. This
did not seem altogether right either for individuals or the country; but
there was no use in reasoning about it—it was required by law.

My own bonds for these duties could not be received, because I was not a
permanent resident. In this exigency my friend, Mr. Worthy, occurred to
my mind as a very fit man to act as my factor. He was an old
acquaintance, a well informed merchant, and a man of strict integrity;
but, unhappily, at this time, rather low in credit, in consequence of
having lost a great part of his capital by endorsing for his friends. It
was doubtful whether his bonds would be thought sufficient at the
Custom-house, and

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I was assured that
he could not raise cash enough to answer the heavy demands which would
be immediately made upon me by my crew, and my own expenses. Moreover,
as I was now very rich, and had daughters nearly grown up, it was proper
that I should gain a place in genteel society, whereas my friend Worthy,
being a plain frugal citizen, did not mix with the *haut ton*, and could
give me no assistance in that particular. All my friends (and they were
now very numerous) protested against so foolish a step as that of
putting all my affairs into his hands, for the sake of giving an honest
man a commission of ten or twelve thousand dollars, when there were so
many *great* merchants who would readily manage my concerns for a
moderate per centage, and introduce me to stylish society into the
bargain.

I confess that the Symzonian doctrines had left so much impression on my
mind, as to cause me some compunction at the thought of neglecting an
opportunity to render my friend Worthy's family comfortable, by giving
him my business, instead of bestowing the advantages of it upon a
merchant rolling in wealth, who, after being

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

roundly paid, would consider me under obligations for his services. My
external habits and sentiments, however, got the better of my sympathies
for my old friend, and, by the advice of my new friends, I addressed
myself to Mr. Slippery.

Mr. Slippery was undoubtedly a great merchant. He lived in a spacious
house in Broadway, rode in a splendid coach, walked like a man of
consequence in Wall-street, was a bank director, and had the handsomest
carpeted compting room in the city, and I know not how many clerks
writing in the next room. I knew him by sight, and did not altogether
like to apply to him, because of his haughty manners. I remembered that
when, some years before, I called at his compting room to offer myself
as a master for one of his ships, he kept me standing half an hour, with
my hat in my hand, before he condescended to notice me, and was no ways
pleased that I took the liberty to draw a chair to seat myself until he
might be at leisure. But he was certainly a great merchant, and to him I
went.

I was delighted on entering his room, to observe a visible improvement
in his deportment

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

and manners. Instead of the distant, haughty reserve I had expected, he
met me halfway, with both hands extended, and gave me a hearty welcome
to my country after so long an absence; inquired after my wife and
children in the most touching manner; was rejoiced to hear that I had
made a great voyage, and should be extremely happy to render me any
service in his power. He finished his preliminary address with, "I am a
great admirer, Captain Seaborn, of you men of enterprise, who draw
riches from the great deep to the benefit of the revenue, the extension
of trade. and all that sort of thing: you understand me, Sir?"

A hearty invitation to dinner, and a request to be permitted to
introduce me to his friends, followed in a breath. I was charmed with
him, poor fool that I was, little dreaming that it was the prospect of
handling the half million of dollars, which my cargo would produce, that
excited his cupidity.

There was no difficulty in settling terms. Mr. Slippery agreed to take
charge of my business for half a commission, a simple two and an half
per centum. He was

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

aware, he said, that after a long voyage, I must be disposed to devote
my time to my family and my friends, and he would take all the trouble
of business off my hands. I had only to endorse over my bills of lading,
and direct Mr. Boneto to deliver the cargo to his order; and, as for
money, I might draw for what sums I pleased, taking care, when I should
draw for large amount.; to make my bills at four or six months, as the
goods must be sold on credit, and it would be a long time before be
should be in funds from the actual proceeds.

A few months flew on delightfully;—I had no cares, no perplexities. Mr.
Slippery recommended that the goods should be sold at auction, to make
sure of the best of endorsed paper, and I consented. He paid my officers
and men their shares, as I desired; and although the auction sales did
not produce for the goods, clear of charges, auction expenses, and Mr.
Slippery's commission and guarantee, the actual .cost in Canton, I
flattered myself that I should still be rich enough, and at all events,
I could send the Explorer on another voyage, whenever I should want more
wealth. I purchased a handsome house for thirty

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

thousand dollars, paid fifteen thousand dollars cash, and gave a
mortgage for fifteen thousand; relieved the wants of all my poor
relations; assisted many old acquaintances, who had been unfortunate;
and still felt myself perfectly secure of all the good things of this
world for the remainder of my days.

But, alas! we are short-sighted creatures. I was soon called to lament
the loss of my vessel, the partner of my adventures. Mr. Boneto not
being satisfied with a life of idleness on shore, and having a wish to
visit Europe, I permitted him to take the Explorer, without her
machinery, for a voyage to New-Orleans, and thence to Europe. He took
his money with him to purchase a cargo. On his way, he knocked that
charming vessel to pieces on the Bahama Banks, for want of Blunt's
chart, improved by recent surveys, to warn him of all the dangers.

This misfortune grieved me not only for my own loss, but for Boneto's,
who was plundered by the Providence wreckers of every dollar. Yet it was
but the beginning of affliction. A few days after, I was thunderstruck

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

by a rumour that my friend the great merchant, Mr. Slippery, had stopped
payment. But there was some comfort—I was assured that it was no
failure, nothing but a suspension. For some time I was kept at bay by
promises and plausible statements. The whole truth, however, burst upon
me at the appearance of Mr, Slippery's name in the Gazette, as an
applicant for the benefit of the insolvent act.

My situation could no longer be concealed even from myself. I was
utterly ruined. Many of my drafts on Mr. Slippery remained unpaid, and
came back upon me. I was sued, and called a rascal for not paying my
debts. No one would believe that the Nabob was actually poor. I pressed
Mr. Slippery for assistance, but got no other comfort than a cool
recommendation to take the benefit of the act, as the most judicious
course I could pursue.

I went to my family in a state bordering upon distraction. The troubles,
mortifications, and miseries which followed, I forbear to dwell on. I
endeavoured to sell my house, but was told that property had depreciated
so much, it was worth no more

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

than the mortgage, for which the holder kindly took it off my hands. At
length I was constrained to take Mr. Slippery's advice, and apply for
the benefit of the act abolishing imprisonment for debt.

I was now reduced to great straits, being *confined* to the *Liberties*,
as they are called—for the enjoyment of which *restrained liberty* I
found great difficulty in obtaining sufficient bail, my *friends* having
entirely disappeared. Fortunately I met with an old school-fellow, who,
on hearing of my distress, proffered his bail, notwithstanding that the
forfeiture of it would utterly ruin him.

At this period, when I frequently rose in the morning, without knowing
how I should provide food for my children through the day, I found it
difficult to feel and believe that it was all for the best. With neither
the means of subsistence for my family, nor liberty to go in pursuit of
them, my misfortunes and privations often weighed down my spirits, and
became almost insupportable. When I thought of my situation, I felt no
longer like a man. But the remembrance of the pious resignation, the
humility,

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

the contentment, the peacefulness and happiness of the Symzonians,
recalled me to a conviction of the truth, that with a temper of calm and
cordial submission to the will of Providence, a man may be happy under
any circumstances, but without it must be wretched.

At this period of pecuniary distress, Will Mackerel accidentally heard
of the misfortunes of his old commander, and hastened to see me. He
could not comprehend why my being possessed of the *Liberties* should
prevent me from going to sea, to acquire the means of subsistence for my
family. The worthy fellow was wholly incompetent to understand the
policy of depriving a man of liberty, preventing him from supplying the
wants of those dependant on him, and compelling him to cast them as
paupers upon the community, because he had, through misfortune, lost all
his property.

Will had spent most of the money obtained by his voyage with me; but
after hearing my story, and an account of the embarrassments under which
I laboured, he threw every dollar that remained to him

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

upon the table, and declared he would never touch a shilling of it
whilst his old commander was in distress, but would go to sea to render
me further aid. I accepted this generous bounty with the frankness with
which it was offered, and recorded Will in my heart as a true-hearted
sailor. It was but little that he had left to bestow upon me, but it
preserved me from the extremity of want for some time.

I was cheering myself with the prospect of obtaining my *real liberty*,
and of persuading some man of capital to equip a suitable vessel for a
second voyage to Seaborn's land, on terms which would give me a fair
share of the advantages of the undertaking, when I was informed that Mr.
Slippery had neither paid nor provided for the duties on the Explorer's
cargo; that the bonds which he had given, owing to the long credits on
China goods, were not yet due; and that, as I was the importer, I was
responsible for the whole amount, and should be required to pay the
uttermost farthing, or lie in jail during the pleasure of government, no
insolvent act being considered of sufficient force to impair that
*prerogative* of government,

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

by which citizens were deprived of their liberty when misfortune had
deprived them of every thing else.

I had now no chance of freedom left, unless an opportunity should offer
to fly the country before the bonds became due, for even should
government relinquish the duties, the costs of suit, which amount in
most cases to a large proportion of the debt, would not be relinquished
till doomsday. To avail myself, however, of this only expedient, seemed
impracticable. Even the shawls and trinkets which I had bestowed upon my
wife in the days of our prosperity, were already sold, and the proceeds
expended for bread. I was a fortnight in arrears to my landlady, and had
not a friend on earth from whom I could obtain a dollar. How then could
I get away with nothing to pay my expenses, or those of my wife and
children in my absence?

At this moment of difficulty I heard that Captain Riley had obtained
some pecuniary relief, by publishing a book of Travels, containing
accounts not much more marvellous than those which I could relate of
Symzonia. I therefore determined to make

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

a brief extract from my journal for publication, to raise the wind,
reserving most of the details of minute circumstances for my *personal
narrative*, and my scientific researches in statistics, geography,
botany, aerology, geology, mineralogy, zoology, ornithology,
ichthyology, conchology, entomology, horticulture, agriculture, &c. &c.
&c. to be digested hereafter under appropriate titles. The authenticity
and genuineness of these researches, since all the autographs and
specimens collected to corroborate them were lost by the bursting open
of the ship's paddle port, must rest upon the authority of my extracts,
translations, journal, and memory. Should they even be questioned and
disputed about by the *Scavans* of the external world, the generality of
readers will probably trouble their heads very little on that score.

And now, kind reader, having transcribed thus much of my journal, in a
manner which, I hope, will not be thought derogatory to the importance
and dignity of the subject, I submit it to your inspection, with an
intimation, that I am ready to undertake a second voyage to Seaborn's

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

land, or a voyage to Belzubia and the place of exile, by the northern
route, or another visit to Symzonia, and an ærial excursion thence to
the inner spheres, as soon as I am furnished with the funds necessary to
my escape from my present uncomfortable situation on the *Liberties*, in
the garret of a lofty house, where, it being about the middle of
dog-days, the sun exerts its utmost power upon the roof, within eighteen
inches of my head.

 

 

 

<span class="small">FINIS</span>.

 

 

 

 
