[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20035)  [Next](sbe20037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 21.

1\. Now the Blessed One, when he had stayed at Vesâlî as long as he
thought fit, set out on his journey toward Bhaggâ <span
id="fr_327"></span>[1](#fn_321). And journeying straight on he arrived
in due course at Bhaggâ. And there at Bhaggâ the Blessed One resided on
the Dragon's Hill, in the hermitage in the Bhesaka*l*â Wood <span
id="fr_328"></span>[2](#fn_322).

Now at that time Bodhi the king's son's mansion, which was called
Kokanada, had just been finished, and had not as yet been used <span
id="fr_329"></span>[3](#fn_323) by Sama*n*a, or by Brâhman, or by any
human being. And Bodhi the king's son gave command to the young Brahman,
the son of the Sa*ñg*ika woman <span id="fr_330"></span>[4](#fn_324),
saying, 'Come

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

now, my friend Sa*ñg*ikâ-putta, go thou to the place where the Blessed
One is, and when you have come there, bow down in salutation at his feet
on my behalf, and enquire in my name whether he is free from sickness
and suffering, and is in the enjoyment of ease and comfort and vigorous
health, saying, "Bodhi the king's son, Lord, bows down in salutation at
thy feet, and enquires \[as I have said\] <span
id="fr_331"></span>[1](#fn_325), and asks: 'May my Lord the Blessed One
consent to take his to-morrow's meal with Bodhi the king's son, together
with the Sa*m*gha of Bhikkhus.''

'Even so, Sir!' said the young Brahman Sa*ñg*ikâ-putta, in assent to
Bodhi the king's son. And he went up to the place where the Blessed One
was, and when he had come there he exchanged with the Blessed One the
greetings and compliments of friendship and civility. And when he had
done so, he took his seat on one side, and se seated he \[delivered to
him the message even as me king's son had commanded\]. And the Blessed
One gave, by silence, his consent.

2\. And when the young Brahman Sa*ñg*ikâ-putta had perceived that the
Blessed One had consented, he arose from his seat, and went up to the
place where Bodhi the king's son was. And when he had come there, he
said to him: 'We have spoken, Sir, in your behalf to that venerable
Gotama, saying (&c., as before), and have received the consent of the
Sama*n*a Gotama.'

Then Bodhi the king's son made ready at the end

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

of that night sweet food, both hard and soft; and had the mansion
Kokanada spread over with white cloths even unto the last planks in the
flight of steps (at the entrance) <span id="fr_332"></span>[1](#fn_326);
and gave command to the young Brahman Sa*ñg*ikâ-putta, saying, 'Come
now, my friend Sa*ñg*ikâ-putta, go thou up to the place where the
Blessed One is; and when you have come there, announce the time, saying,
"The meal, Lord, is ready, and the time has come."'

'Even so, Lord,' said Sa*ñg*ikâ-putta in assent \[and went to the
Blessed One and announced accordingly\].

Now the Blessed One, having dressed himself early in the morning, went,
duly bowled and robed, to Bodhi the king's son's mansion. And Bodhi the
king's son stood at that time at the portico over the outer door to
welcome the Blessed One. And he saw the Blessed One coming from afar;
and on seeing him he went forth thence to meet him, and when he had
saluted the Blessed One, he returned again to the mansion Kokanada.

Now the Blessed One stopped at the last plank on the flight of steps at
the entrance. And Bodhi the king's son said to the Blessed One, 'May my
Lord the Blessed One walk over the cloths. May the Happy One walk over
the cloths, that the same may be to me for a long time for a weal and
for a joy.'

And when he had thus spoken, the Blessed One remained silent. And a
second time he \[preferred the same request in the same words with the
same

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

result\]. And a third time he \[preferred the same request\]. Then the
Blessed One looked round at the venerable Ânanda.

And the venerable Ânanda said to Bodhi the king's son, 'Let them gather
up, O prince, these cloths. The Blessed One will not walk on a, strip of
cloth (laid down for ceremonial purposes) <span
id="fr_333"></span>[1](#fn_327). The Tathâgata has mercy even on the
meanest thing.'

3\. Then Bodhi the king's son had the cloths gathered up, and spread out
a seat on the top of Kokanada. And the Blessed One ascended up into
Kokanada, and sat down on the seat spread out there with the Sa*m*gha of
Bhikkhus. And Bodhi the king's son satisfied the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha with
the Buddha at their head with the sweet food, both hard and soft,
waiting upon them with his own hand <span
id="fr_334"></span>[2](#fn_328). And when the Blessed One had cleansed
his bowl and his hands, he (Bodhi) took his seat on one side. And the
Blessed One instructed, and roused, and incited, and gladdened him thus
sitting with religious discourse. And when he had been thus instructed,
and roused, and incited, and gladdened

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

with religious discourse, Bodhi the king's son rose from his seat and
departed thence.

Then the Blessed One, on that occasion and in that connection, convened
an assembly of the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha, and after he had delivered a
religious discourse, he addressed the Bhikkhus and said:

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to walk upon cloth laid down (for ceremonial
purposes). Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a.'

4\. Now at that time a certain woman who had had a miscarriage, and had
invited the Bhikkhus, and spread cloths in their honour, said to them.
'Step, Sirs, over the cloth.'

The Bhikkhus, fearing to offend, would not do so.

'Step, Sirs, over the cloth, for good luck's sake.'

The Bhikkhus, fearing to offend, would not do so.

Then that woman murmured, was annoyed, and was indignant, saying, 'How
can their reverences refuse to step over the cloth when they are asked
to do so for good luck's sake?'

The Bhikkhus heard of that woman's murmuring, and being annoyed, and
indignant. And they told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, when asked to do so for the sake of good luck
to laymen, to step over cloth laid down for ceremonial purposes.'

Now at the time the Bhikkhus were afraid to step on to a mat to be used
for wiping the feet <span id="fr_335"></span>[1](#fn_329).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to step on to a mat to be used for wiping the
feet.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the second Portion <span id="fr_336"></span>[1](#fn_330) for
Recitation.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_321"></span>[125:1](sbe20036.htm#fr_327) Bhaggesu. Compare
Buddhaghosa's note on a similar plural at Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta III, 5,
quoted in Rh. D.'s 'Buddhist Suttas from the Pâli,' p. 24.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[125:2](sbe20036.htm#fr_328) This place is also
mentioned in the Sutta-vibhaṅga on the 55th and 56th Sekhiyas.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[125:3](sbe20036.htm#fr_329) Ana*ggh*âvuttho,
literally, no doubt, 'dwelt in.' But it is clear that the meal
afterwards taken in it by the Buddha was supposed to be the dedication,
so to say, or the house-warming, after which it was a*ggh*âvuttho.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[125:4](sbe20036.htm#fr_330) On this habit of
naming people after the family or tribal (not the personal) name of
their mothers, see Rh. D.'s note in his Buddhist Suttas,' p. 1.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[126:1](sbe20036.htm#fr_331) So far this
conversation is the stock phrase for a message from a royal personage to
the Buddha. See 'Book of the Great Decease,' I, 2 (Rh. D.'s 'Buddhist
Suttas,' p. 2).

<span id="fn_326"></span>[127:1](sbe20036.htm#fr_332) Sopâna-kaliṅgarâ.
Compare the Sanskrit Ka*d*aṅkara (also written ka*d*aṅgara). The correct
reading is doubtless *l*, not l.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[128:1](sbe20036.htm#fr_333) *K*ela-pattikâ ti
*k*ela-santhara*m*, says Buddhaghosa. See pa*tt*ikâ in Childers, and
compare pa*ñk*a-pa*tth*ika*m* at V, 11, 6. *K*ela is not merely ordinary
cloth; it is cloth regarded as a means of giving a decorative or festive
appearance to a house by spreading canopies, &c. See *G*âtaka I, 178,
and Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta VI, 26 (p. 64). On such festive occasions the
whole house (or the Ma*nd*apa erected in special honour of the guest) is
covered with lengths of clean cotton cloth--the same as are otherwise
used for ordinary apparel--white being the colour signifying peculiar
respect. It is such lengths of cloth so used honoris causâ that are
called *k*ela-pattikâ. Compare Rh. D.'s note in 'Buddhist Suttas,' p.
122.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[128:2](sbe20036.htm#fr_334) See the note above
on Mahâvagga I, 8, 4.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[129:1](sbe20036.htm#fr_335) Dhota-pâdaka.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[130:1](sbe20036.htm#fr_336) There is no
mention in the text of where the first such Portion (Bhâ*n*avâra) ends.
There is also no division into Bhâ*n*avâras in the previous books of the
*K*ullavagga.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](sbe20037)
