[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20107)  [Next](sbe20109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

### 17.

1\. Now at that time there were found among the Bhikkhunîs some who were
\[deformed in one or other of eleven ways\] <span
id="fr_919"></span>[1](#fn_905).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that a woman on whom the upasampadâ initiation
is being conferred, is to be questioned as touching the four-and-twenty
Disqualifications <span id="fr_920"></span>[2](#fn_906). And thus, O
Bhikkhus, is she to be questioned:

(1-11) "Have you any one or other of the eleven deformities \[each
repeated as above\]?"

(12-16) "Have you any of the following diseases--leprosy, boils, dry
leprosy, consumption, or fits?"

\(17\) "Are you a human being <span id="fr_921"></span>[3](#fn_907)?"

\(18\) "Are you a female?"

(.19) "Are you a free woman?"

\(20\) "Are you free from debts?"

\(21\) "Are you not in the king's service?"

\(22\) "Have your father and mother given their consent?"

\(23\) "Are you full twenty years of age?"

\(24\) "Are you duly provided with robes and alms-bowl?"

"What is your name?"

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

"What is the name of your proposer <span
id="fr_922"></span>[1](#fn_908)?"'

2\. Now at that time Bhikkhus put the questions as touching the
Disqualifications to Bhikkhunîs <span id="fr_923"></span>[2](#fn_909),
and they who were seeking after the upasampadâ initiation became
disconcerted and perplexed, and were unable to answer.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that initiation is to be conferred in the
Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha upon a Bhikkhunî who has been initiated on the one side
in the Bhikkhunî-sa*m*gha, and has there cleared herself (from the
Disqualifications).'

Now at that time the Bhikkhunîs questioned those who desired to receive
the upasampadâ initiation about the Disqualifications, without having
had them instructed beforehand (how to answer). The persons who desired
to be ordained became disconcerted and perplexed, and were not able to
answer <span id="fr_924"></span>[3](#fn_910).

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that you first instruct the women about to be
initiated (how to answer), and that you then question them as to the
Disqualifications.'

Then they instructed the candidates in the midst of the assembly, and
they still became disconcerted, and could not answer.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that they be instructed aside, and then
questioned in the midst of the assembly.

And thus, O Bhikkhus, ought they to be instructed:--First they ought to
be made to choose an instructor <span id="fr_925"></span>[1](#fn_911);
when they have chosen an instructor their robes and bowl must be shown
to them: "This is your alms-bowl, this is your waist-cloth, this is your
upper garment, this is your under garment, this is your vest, this is
your bathing dress <span id="fr_926"></span>[2](#fn_912). Go and stand
in such and such a place."'

3\. Ignorant and incompetent (Bhikkhunîs) instructed them, and they
became disconcerted, perplexed, and unable to answer.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'They are not to be instructed, O Bhikkhus, by unlearned, incompetent
Bhikkhunîs. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a. I
prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that they be instructed by learned and competent
Bhikkhunîs.'

4\. Bhikkhunîs not appointed (to the office of doing so) instructed
them.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, instruct them without

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

having been appointed thereto. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a
dukka*t*a. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that a Bhikkhunî appointed to the
office instruct them.

'And thus, O Bhikkhus, ought she to be appointed--one may either appoint
herself, or one may be appointed by another. And how is a Bhikkhunî to
appoint herself? Let a learned, competent Bhikkhunî lay the following
motion (*ñ*atti) before the Sa*m*gha "Let the Sa*m*gha, reverend Ladies,
hear me. N. N. desires to receive the upasampadâ initiation from the
venerable lady, M. M. If it seem meet to the Sa*m*gha, I will instruct
N. N." Thus may a Bhikkhunî appoint herself.

And how is a Bhikkhunî to be appointed by another? Let a learned,
competent Bhikkhunî lay the following resolution before the Sa*m*gha:
"Let the Sa*m*gha, reverend Ladies, hear me. N. N. desires to receive
the upasampadâ initiation from the venerable lady, M. M. If it seem meet
to the Sa*m*gha, let A. A. instruct N. N." Thus may one Bhikkhunî be
appointed by another.

5\. 'Then let that so appointed Bhikkhunî go to the person who is
seeking to be initiated, and thus address her: "Listen to me, N. N. This
is the time for you to speak the truth, to declare that which is. When
you are asked about what has happened before the Sa*m*gha, you ought, if
it is so, to answer: "That is so;" if it is not so, to answer: "That is
not so," Be not perplexed, be not disconcerted. I shall ask you thus:
"Are you deformed (&c., down to the end of the twenty-six questions in §
1)."'

(After the instruction was over, the instructor and the candidate)
returned together to the assembly.

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

'They are not to return together. Let the instructor return first, and
lay the following resolution before the Sa*m*gha: "Let the Sa*m*gha,
reverend Ladies, hear me. N. N. desires to receive the upasampadâ
initiation from the venerable lady, M. M.; and she has been instructed
by me. If it seem meet to the Sa*m*gha, let N. N. come forward." Then
let her be told to come forward. Then let her be told to adjust her
upper robe over one shoulder only, to bow down before the Bhikkhunîs, to
sit down on her heels, and stretching forth her joined palms, to ask for
the upasampadâ initiation, saying: "I ask the Sa*m*gha, reverend Ladies,
for initiation. May the Sa*m*gha, reverend Ladies, raise me up (out of
the worldly life), having pity on me." And a second and a third time is
she to repeat that request.

6\. 'Then let a learned and competent Bhikkhunî lay the following
resolution before the Sa*m*gha: "Let the Sa*m*gha, reverend Ladies, hear
me. This person, N. N., desires to receive the upasampadâ initiation
from M. M.; and she has been instructed by me. If it seem meet to the
Sa*m*gha, let me question N. N. as touching the Disqualifications.
Listen to me, N. N. \[as before, down to the end of the questions\]."

7\. 'Then let a learned and competent Bhikkhunî lay the following motion
before the Sa*m*gha: "Let the Sa*m*gha, reverend Ladies, hear me. This
person, N. N., desires to receive the upasampadâ initiation from the
venerable lady, M. M. She is free from the Disqualifications, and is
duly provided with alms-bowl and robes. This person, N. N., asks the
Sa*m*gha for the upasampadâ initiation, the venerable

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

lady, M. M., being her proposer. If it seem meet to the Sa*m*gha, let
the Sa*m*gha receive N. N., the venerable lady, M. M., being her
proposer. That, then, is the motion.

'"Let the Sa*m*gha, venerable Ladies, hear me. N. N. desires to receive
the upasampadâ, the lady, M. M., being her proposer. The Sa*m*gha
confers the upasampadâ upon N. N., the lady, M. M., being her proposer.
Whosoever of the venerable ones agrees thereto, let her keep silence;
whosoever agrees not thereto, let her speak. A second time I say the
same thing." \[The whole of this paragraph repeated.\] And a third time
I say the same thing. \[Paragraph repeated.\]

'The Sa*m*gha has conferred the upasampadâ upon N. N., the lady, M. M.,
being her proposer. The Sa*m*gha agrees thereto. Therefore is it silent.
Thus do I understand.'

8\. 'Then, further, let her be taken before the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha, and
there told to arrange her robe over one shoulder only, to bow down
before the Bhikkhus, and, sitting down on her heels, to stretch forth
her joined palms, and say: "I, Sirs, N. N., who, being desirous of
receiving the upasampadâ initiation from M. M., have received it on the
one side (of the Sa*m*gha, from the Bhikkhunîs), and have there been
declared free (from the Disqualifications), do hereby ask the Sa*m*gha
for the upasampadâ." \[The rest of the proceedings are the same as
before the Bhikkhunî-sa*m*gha.\] "May the Sa*m*gha, reverend Sirs, raise
me up (out of the worldly life), having pity on me." And a second time
do I hereby ask \[&c., repeated\]. And a third time do I hereby ask
\[the same repeated\].

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

\[The rest of the proceedings are the same as in the last sections 6 and
7, putting 'Bhikkhu' for 'Bhikkhunî,' and 'reverend Sirs' for 'reverend
Ladies.\]

'Then, further, let them (the Bhikkhus) measure the shadow, tell (the
newly-received Bhikkhunî) what season and what date it is, tell her what
part of the day it is, tell her the whole formula <span
id="fr_927"></span>[1](#fn_913), and tell the Bhikkhunîs: "You are to
teach her what are the three things allowed <span
id="fr_928"></span>[2](#fn_914), and what are the eight things
interdicted <span id="fr_929"></span>[3](#fn_915)."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_905"></span>[349:1](sbe20108.htm#fr_919) Here follow a
number of abnormities, deformities, or diseases, all of which have
reference to the womb or its accessories. Some of them are
unintelligible to us. Compare the corresponding section in respect to
Bhikkhus at Mahâvagga I, 68.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[349:2](sbe20108.htm#fr_920) Of these
twenty-four, eleven are the deformities just referred to, and the rest
are the same as those for Bhikkhus at Mahâvagga I, 76. The number of
questions is, in fact, twenty-six, but the last two do not refer to
Disqualifications.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[349:3](sbe20108.htm#fr_921) For the reason of
this, see Mahâvagga I, 63.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[350:1](sbe20108.htm#fr_922) Pavattinî;
corresponding to upa*ggh*âya in the case of Bhikkhus.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[350:2](sbe20108.htm#fr_923) This is in
accordance with the rule laid down in X, 2, 2, that Bhikkhus, and not
Bhikkhunîs, are to confer the upasampadâ.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[350:3](sbe20108.htm#fr_924) This paragraph is
word for word the same as Mahâvagga I, 76, 2 of the Bhikkhus.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[351:1](sbe20108.htm#fr_925) Upa*ggh*a*m*. It
should be observed that this expression is found only here, and in the
corresponding section for the Bhikkhus, at Mahâvagga I, 76, 3.
Elsewhere, throughout, Upa*ggh*âya is the form used for Bhikkhus, and
Pavattinî for Bhikkhunîs. The word is probably here also, as in the
Mahâvagga I, 76, 3, to be taken as a masculine.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[351:2](sbe20108.htm#fr_926) These last two are
omitted in the corresponding section for the Bhikkhus, Mahâvagga I, 76,
3. On Sa*m*ka*kkh*ika*m*, see the note of the Old Commentator on the
96th Bhikkhunî Pâ*k*ittiya, and on Udaka-sâ*t*ikâ, the same on the 22nd
Bhikkhunî Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[355:1](sbe20108.htm#fr_927) Sa*m*gîti. On the
meaning of this curious use of the word, see our note on the
corresponding section for the Bhikkhus (Mahâvagga I, 77).

<span id="fn_914"></span>[355:2](sbe20108.htm#fr_928) The three
Nissayas, which are doubtless the same as the 1st, 2nd, and 4th of the
four Resources mentioned in the corresponding paragraph for Bhikkhus
(Mahâvagga I, 77). The third is forbidden to Bhikkhunîs, below, X, 23.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[355:3](sbe20108.htm#fr_929) A*tth*a
akara*n*îyâni. These must bear he same relation to the eight Bhikkhunî
Pârâ*g*ikas as the four Interdicts in the corresponding paragraph for
the Bhikkhus (Mahâvagga I, 78) do to the four Bhikkhu Pârâ*g*ikas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](sbe20109)
