[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20120)  [Next](sbe20122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2.

1\. Now the Va*gg*ian Bhikkhus of Vesâlî heard the rumour: 'Yasa, they
say, the son of Kâka*nd*aka, wishing to take this legal question in
hand, is seeking about for support, and support they say he is
succeeding in getting.' And they thought: 'This legal question, now, is
hard and subtle. How can we obtain such support that we may have the
greater power at the decision thereof <span
id="fr_1020"></span>[1](#fn_1002)?'

And they thought: 'The venerable Yasa, who dwells at Soreyya, is wise in
the traditions, and is one who has learnt the Agamas, who knows by heart
the Dhamma, the Vinaya, the Mâtikâs, is intelligent, discreet, and wise,
modest, conscientious, and devoted to the precepts. If we could gain him
over to our side, we should attain our end.'

Then the Va*gg*ian Bhikkhus of Vesâlî got together much property,
requisites, a number of things of the Sama*n*as' life--to wit, bowls and
robes, and rugs, and needlecases, and girdles, and filters, and
regulation-pots <span id="fr_1021"></span>[2](#fn_1003). And, taking
this property with

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

them, they went up stream by boat to Saha*g*âti, and there disembarked,
and took their meal at the foot of a certain tree.

2\. Now to the venerable Sâ*lh*a, who retired apart and was plunged in
meditation, there occurred this doubtful problem: 'Are the Bhikkhus of
the East, or the Bhikkhus of the West, the more in accordance with the
Dhamma in the opinion that they hold?' And having gone over the Dhamma
and the Vinaya in his mind, he came to the conclusion, 'The Bhikkhus of
the East are not, and the Bhikkhus of the West are, in accordance with
the Dhamma in the opinion that they hold.'

And a certain one of the deities in the Pure Abode <span
id="fr_1022"></span>[1](#fn_1004) perceived how this doubtful problem
had arisen in the venerable Sâ*lh*a's mind, and as quickly as a strong
man could stretch forth his bent arm, or draw it in again when it was
outstretched, so quickly did that deity vanish from the Pure Abode, and
appeared before the venerable Sâ*lh*a; saying to him: 'Thou art quite
right, Sâ*lh*a; it is the Eastern Bhikkhus whose opinions are against
the Dhamma, and the Western Bhikkhus whose opinions accord therewith. Do
thou, therefore, O Sâ*lh*a, even as the Dhamma is, so take thy stand!'

'Both formerly, O deity, and now, also, do I take my stand even as the
Dhamma is. Notwithstanding, I shall not make manifest my opinion until
(the Sa*m*gha) shall have appointed me (judge) over this question <span
id="fr_1023"></span>[2](#fn_1005).'

3\. Now the Va*gg*ian Bhikkhus of Vesâlî, taking with them the aforesaid
property, went to the place

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

where the venerable Revata was, and said to him: 'Let the venerable
Thera receive at our hands these requisites of a Sama*n*a's life.'

But he refused to receive it, saying, 'Not so, my friends. I have all
the things <span id="fr_1024"></span>[1](#fn_1006) I want.'

Now at that time a Bhikkhu named Uttara, who had been twenty years
admitted into the Order <span id="fr_1025"></span>[2](#fn_1007), was the
attendant upon the venerable Revata. And the Va*gg*ian Bhikkhus of
Vesâlî went to him, and said: 'Let your reverence receive at our hands
these requisites of a Sama*n*a's life.'

But he made the same reply.

Then they said: 'People used to offer such requisites to the Blessed
One. If he received them, they were happy. If he did not receive them,
they used to offer them to the venerable Ânanda, saying, "Let the
venerable Thera receive these requisites of a Sama*n*a's life: that will
be just as if the Blessed One had received them." Let the venerable
Uttara receive these things: that will be as if the Thera had received
them.'

Then the venerable Uttara, being thus importuned by the Va*gg*ian
Bhikkhus of Vesâlî, accepted one robe, saying, 'You may tell me,
friends, what you want.'

'Let the venerable Uttara say thus much for us to the Thera: "Let the
venerable Thera say thus much in the meeting of the Sa*m*gha--'It is in
the regions of the East that the Buddhas, the Blessed Ones, are born. It
is the Bhikkhus of the East who hold opinions in accord with the Dhamma,
whereas the Bhikkhus of the West do not.'"'

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

'Even so, Sirs,' said the venerable Uttara, in assent to the Va*gg*ian
Bhikkhus of Vesâlî. And he went to Revata, and told him what they had
said.

'Thou urgest me, O Bhikkhu, to that which is against the Dhamma,' said
the Thera, and sent away the venerable Uttara <span
id="fr_1026"></span>[1](#fn_1008).

And the Va*gg*ian Bhikkhus of Vesâlî said to the venerable Uttara:
'What, fiend Uttara, did the Thera say?'

'It is an evil you have wrought me, Sirs. The Thera has sent me away,
saying, "Thou urgest me, O Bhikkhu, to what is against the Dhamma."'

'Are you not, Sir, of full age, of twenty years (since your
upasampadâ)?'

'Yes, Sirs, I am.'

'Then do we take the nissaya under you as your pupils <span
id="fr_1027"></span>[2](#fn_1009).'

4\. Now the Sa*m*gha met together with the intention of deciding the
legal question. And the venerable Revata laid a resolution before the
Sa*m*gha, saying,

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. If we were to settle this question,
it might be that those Bhikkhus who had at first taken the matter in
hand might raise it again <span id="fr_1028"></span>[3](#fn_1010). If it
seem meet to the Sa*m*gha, let the Sa*m*gha settle it at that place
where it arose.'

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

Then the Thera Bhikkhus went to Vesâlî, with the intention of settling
the matter there.

Now at that time the eldest Thera in the world, Sabbakâmî by name, one
who was of a hundred and twenty years' standing from the date of his
upasampadâ, and who had been a pupil <span
id="fr_1029"></span>[1](#fn_1011) of the venerable Ânanda, was living at
Vesâlî. And the venerable Revata said to the venerable Sambhûta
Sâ*n*avâsî:

'I shall go to that Vihâra in which the Thera Sabbakâmî dwells. Do you
go betimes to the venerable Sabbakâmî, and question him as touching
these ten points.'

'Even so, Lord,' said the venerable Sambhûta Sâ*n*avâsî, in assent to
the venerable Revata.

And the venerable Revata came to that Vihâra in which the venerable
Sabbakâmî lived; and a sleeping-place was made ready for the former in
the inner chamber, and for the latter in front thereof. And the
venerable Revata, thinking, 'This Thera, though so old, does not care to
sleep,' did not go to rest. And the venerable Sabbakâmî, thinking, 'This
Bhikkhu, though a traveller and tired, does not care to sleep,' did not
go to rest.

5\. Then when the night was far spent, the venerable Sabbakâmî said to
the venerable Revata:

'By what manner of life, beloved one, have you lived now these so many
years?'

'By continuing in the sense of love, honoured friend, have I continued
thus so many years.'

'They say that you have continued thus, beloved one, by easiness of
life: and that indeed, beloved one, is an easy life, (I mean) the
continuing in love.'

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

'Even long ago, Sir, when I was a layman, was much love laid up in my
heart, therefore is it that now also I live much in the sense of love,
and indeed since long I have attained to Arahatship. And by what manner
of life have you lived now these many years?'

'By continuing in the sense of the emptiness (of worldly things) have I,
beloved one, lived these many years.'

'They say that you, honoured friend, have continued thus by the sense of
being a man born to greatness <span id="fr_1030"></span>[1](#fn_1012);
and that indeed, honoured friend, is the same feeling, (I mean) the
sense of the emptiness of things.'

'Even long ago, beloved one, when I was a layman, had I a strong sense
of the emptiness of things, therefore is it that now also I live much in
that feeling, and indeed since long I have attained to Arahatship.'

6\. Now <span id="fr_1031"></span>[2](#fn_1013) this conversation
between the Thera Bhikkhus was still unfinished when the venerable
Sambhûta Sâ*n*avâsî arrived there. And he went up to the venerable
Sabbakâmî, and saluted him, and took his seat beside him. And, so
seated, he said to the venerable Sabbakâmî:

'These Va*gg*ian Bhikkhus of Vesâlî have put forth in Vesâlî these ten
points;' and he told them all <span id="fr_1032"></span>[3](#fn_1014).
'Now you, O Thera, have mastered much Dhamma and Vinaya at the feet of
your preceptor.

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> What, then, is the
conclusion to which you, O Thera, come as you lay over in your mind the
Dhamma and the Vinaya;--whose opinion is in accordance with the Dhamma,
that of the Bhikkhus of the East, or that of the Bhikkhus of the West?'

'You also, Sir, have mastered much Dhamma and Vinaya at the feet of your
preceptor. What, then, is the conclusion to which you, Sir, come as you
lay over in your mind the Dhamma and the Vinaya;--whose opinion is in
accordance with the Dhamma, that of the Bhikkhus of the East, or that of
the Bhikkhus of the West?'

'The conclusion to which I come, Lord, as I so lay over in my mind the
Dhamma and the Vinaya, is this--that the Bhikkhus of the East hold an
opinion that is not in accord with the Dhamma, while the Bhikkhus of the
West are in accord with the Dhamma. Notwithstanding, I do not intend to
make manifest my opinion until (the Sa*m*gha) shall have appointed me
(referee) over this question <span id="fr_1033"></span>[1](#fn_1015).'

'The conclusion to which I also have come, Sir, as I lay over in my mind
the Dhamma and the Vinaya, is this--that the Bhikkhus of the East hold
an opinion that is not in accordance with the Dhamma, while the Bhikkhus
of the West are in accord with the Dhamma. Notwithstanding, I do not
intend to make manifest my opinion until (the Sa*m*gha) shall have
appointed me (referee) over this question.'

7\. Then the Sa*m*gha met together with the intention of enquiring into
this legal question. But while they were enquiring into it, both was
much pointless speaking brought forth and also the sense

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

in no single speech was clear <span id="fr_1034"></span>[1](#fn_1016).
Then the venerable Revata laid a resolution before the Sa*m*gha:

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. Whilst we are discussing this legal
question, there is both much pointless speaking, and no sense is clear
in any single speech. If it seem meet to the Sa*m*gha, let the Sa*m*gha
settle this legal question by referring it (to a jury) <span
id="fr_1035"></span>[2](#fn_1017).'

And he chose four Bhikkhus of the East and four Bhikkhus of the
West--from the Bhikkhus of the East the venerable Sabbakâmî, and the
venerable Sâ*lh*a, and the venerable Khu*gg*a-sobhita, and the venerable
Vâsabha-gâmika--and from the Bhikkhus of the West, the venerable Revata,
and the venerable Sambhûta Sâ*n*avâsî, and the venerable Yasa, the son
of Kâka*nd*aka, and the venerable Sumana. Then the venerable Revata laid
a resolution before the Sa*m*gha:

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. During the enquiry into this matter
there has been much pointless talk among us, and in no single utterance
is the sense clear. If it seem meet to the Sa*m*gha, let the Sa*m*gha
delegate four Bhikkhus of the East and four Bhikkhus of the West to
settle this question by reference. This is the resolution.

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. During the enquiry into this matter
there has been much pointless talk among us, and the sense in any single
utterance is not clear. The Sa*m*gha delegates four Bhikkhus of the East
and four Bhikkhus of the West to settle this question by reference.
Whosoever

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

of the venerable ones approves thereof, let him keep silence. Whosoever
approves not thereof, let him speak. The delegation is made accordingly.
The Sa*m*gha approves thereof. Therefore is it silent. Thus do I
understand.'

Now at that time a Bhikkhu named A*g*ita, of ten years' standing, was
the reciter of the Pâtimokkha to the Sa*m*gha. Him did the Sa*m*gha
appoint as seat regulator <span id="fr_1036"></span>[1](#fn_1018) to the
Thera Bhikkhus.

Then the Thera Bhikkhus thought, 'At what place, now, ought we to settle
this legal question?' And it occurred to them: 'This Vâlika Ârâma is a
pleasant place, quiet and undisturbed. Let us settle the matter there.'
And thither the Thera Bhikkhus proceeded to enquire into the question.

8\. Then the venerable Revata laid a resolution before the
Sa*m*gha <span id="fr_1037"></span>[2](#fn_1019): 'Let the venerable
Sa*m*gha hear me. If it seem meet to the Sa*m*gha, I will question the
venerable Sabbakâmî as touching the Vinaya.' And the venerable Sabbakâmî
laid a resolution before the Sa*m*gha: 'If it seem meet to the Sa*m*gha,
I, when asked by Revata touching the Vinaya, will give reply.'

And the venerable Revata said to the venerable Sabbakâmî: 'Is the
horn-salt-license, Lord, allowable?'

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

'What, Sir, is this horn-salt-license?'

'Is it allowable, Lord, to carry about salt in a horn with the intention
of putting it into food which has not been salted?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Where was such a claim rejected?'

'At Sâvatthi, in the Sutta Vibhaṅga.'

'Of what offence is the person, who does so, guilty?'

'Of Pâ*k*ittiya, in eating food which has been put by <span
id="fr_1038"></span>[1](#fn_1020).'

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. This first point, having been
examined into by the Sa*m*gha, has been found to be. false Dhamma and
false Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the Master. Thus do I
cast the first vote.'

'Is the two-inch-license, Lord, allowable?'

'What, Sir, is this two-inch-license?'

'Is it allowable, Lord, to eat the midday meal beyond the right time,
provided only that the shadow of the sun has not yet turned two inches?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Where has such a claim been rejected?'

'At Râ*g*agaha, in the Sutta Vibhaṅga.'

'Of what offence is he, who does so, guilty?'

'Of Pâ*k*ittiya, in eating at the wrong time <span
id="fr_1039"></span>[2](#fn_1021).'

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. This second point, having been
examined into by the Sa*m*gha, has been found to be false Dhamma and
false Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the Master. Thus do I
cast the second vote.'

'Is the village-trip-license, Lord, allowable?'

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

'What, Sir, is this village-trip-license?'

'Is it allowable for one who has once finished his meal, and has refused
any more, to eat food which has not been left over, on the ground that
he is about to proceed into the village?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Where was such a claim rejected?'

'At Sâvatthi, in the Sutta Vibhaṅga.'

'Of what offence is he, who does so, guilty?'

'Of Pâ*k*ittiya, in eating food which has not been left over <span
id="fr_1040"></span>[1](#fn_1022).'

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. This third point, having been
examined into by the Sa*m*gha, has been found to be false Dhamma and
false Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the Master. Thus do I
cast the third vote.'

'Is the circuit-license, Lord, allowable?'

'What, Sir, is this circuit-license?'

'Is it allowable, Lord, for a number of Bhikkhus who dwell within the
same circuit, within the same boundary, to hold separate Uposathas?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Where was such a claim rejected?'

'At Râ*g*agaha, in the Uposatha Sa*m*yutta <span
id="fr_1041"></span>[2](#fn_1023)'

'Of what offence is he, who does so, guilty?' 'Of Dukka*t*a, in
neglecting the Vinaya.'

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. This fourth point, having been
examined into by the Sa*m*gha, has been found to be false Dhamma and
false Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the Master. Thus do I
cast the fourth vote.'

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

'Is the indemnity-license, Lord, allowable?'

'What, Sir, is this indemnity-license?'

'Is it allowable, Lord, for a Sa*m*gha which is not legally constituted
to perform an official act, on the ground that they will afterwards
obtain the sanction of such Bhikkhus as subsequently arrive?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Where was such a claim rejected?'

'In the *K*ampeyyaka section, in the body of the Vinaya <span
id="fr_1042"></span>[1](#fn_1024).'

'Of what offence is he, who does so, guilty?'

'Of Dukka*t*a, in neglecting the Vinaya.'

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. This fifth point, having been
examined into by the Sa*m*gha, has been found to be false Dhamma and
false Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the Master. Thus do I
cast this fifth vote.'

'Is the precedent-license, Lord, allowable?'

'What, Sir, is this precedent-license?'

'Is it allowable, Lord, to do a thing on the ground that "My preceptor
(upa*ggh*âya) has practised this," or "My teacher (â*k*ariya) has
practised that?"'

'In some cases, Sir, it is allowable, and in some not <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[2](#fn_1025)'

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. This sixth point, having been
examined into by the Sa*m*gha, has been found to be false Dhamma and
false Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the Master. Thus do I
cast this sixth vote.'

'Is the churn-license, Lord, allowable?'

'What, Sir, is this churn-license?'

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

'Is it allowable, Lord, for one who has once finished his meal, and has
refused any more, to drink milk not left over from the meal, on the
ground that it has left the condition of milk and has not yet reached
the condition of curds?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Where was such a claim rejected?'

'At Sâvatthi, in the Sutta Vibhaṅga.'

'Of what offence is he, who does so, guilty?'

'Of Pâ*k*ittiya, in eating food which has not been left over <span
id="fr_1044"></span>[1](#fn_1026).'

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. This seventh point, having been
examined into by the Sa*m*gha, has been found to be false Dhamma and
false Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the Master. Thus do I
cast this seventh vote.'

'Is it allowable, Lord, to drink toddy?'

'What, Sir, is this toddy?'

'Is it allowable, Lord, to drink spirits which have not yet become
spirits and have not yet acquired intoxicating properties?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Where was it rejected?'

'At Kosambî, in the Sutta Vibhaṅga:

'Of what offence is he, who does so, guilty?'

'Of Pâ*k*ittiya, in the drinking of fermented liquors and strong
drink <span id="fr_1045"></span>[2](#fn_1027).'

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. The eighth point, having been
examined into by the Sa*m*gha, has been found to be false Dhamma and
false Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the Master. Thus do I
cast this eighth vote.'

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

'Is the unfringed-seat, Lord, allowable <span
id="fr_1046"></span>[1](#fn_1028)?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Where has it been rejected?'

'At Savatthi, in the Sutta Vibhaṅga.'

'Of what offence is he, who uses such a seat, guilty?'

'Of Pâ*k*ittiya, in using a thing which ought to be cut down (to the
proper size) <span id="fr_1047"></span>[2](#fn_1029).'

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. This ninth point, having been
examined into by the Sa*m*gha, has been found to be false Dhamma and
false Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the Master. Thus do I
cast this ninth vote.'

'Is gold and silver, Lord, allowable?'

'No, Sir, it is not allowable.'

'Where was it forbidden?'

'At Râ*g*agaha, in the Sutta Vibhaṅga.'

'Of what offence is he, who takes it, guilty?'

'Of Pâ*k*ittiya, in accepting gold and silver <span
id="fr_1048"></span>[3](#fn_1030).'

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. This tenth point, having been
examined into by the Sa*m*gha, has been found to be false Dhamma and
false Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the Master. Thus do I
cast this tenth vote.'

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. These ten points, having been
examined into by the Sa*m*gha, have been found to be false Dhamma and
false Vinaya, and not contained in the teaching of the Master.'

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

' <span id="fr_1049"></span>[1](#fn_1031)This legal question, Sir, has
been concluded; and being settled, it is settled once for all.
Nevertheless, Sir, do you question me on these ten points in the midst
also of the Sa*m*gha  <span id="fr_1050"></span>[2](#fn_1032), in order
to persuade those Bhikkhus <span id="fr_1051"></span>[3](#fn_1033).'

So the venerable Revata questioned the venerable Sabbakâmî on the ten
points also in the midst of the Sa*m*gha, and as he was questioned on
one after the other, the venerable Sabbakâmî gave reply.

9\. Now whereas at this rehearsal of the Vinaya seven hundred Bhikkhus,
without one more, without one being wanting, took part, therefore is
that rehearsal of the Vinaya called 'That of the seven hundred <span
id="fr_1052"></span>[4](#fn_1034).'

=====================

Here ends the Twelfth Khandhaka, on the Rehearsal by the Seven Hundred.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[400:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1020) Compare above,
XII, 1, 9.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[400:2](sbe20121.htm#fr_1021) On
Dhamma-karaka, see our note at *K*ullavagga V, 13, I.

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[401:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1022) The Heaven, so
called.

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[401:2](sbe20121.htm#fr_1023) Compare below, §
6.

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[402:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1024) Literally, 'I
have the three robes.'

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[402:2](sbe20121.htm#fr_1025) Vîsativasso;
that is, since his upasampadâ.

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[403:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1026) Pa*n*âmesi. That
is, permanently from attendance upon him. Compare Mahâvagga I, 27. 2,
where the word is used of the formal dismissal or turning away of a
pupil.

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[403:2](sbe20121.htm#fr_1027) Garu-nissaya*m*
ga*n*hâma; on which Buddhaghosa has nothing, though the phrase does not
occur elsewhere in the Khandhakas.

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[403:3](sbe20121.htm#fr_1028) Compare the 63rd
Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[404:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1029) Literally, 'had
dwelt in the same Vihâra with.'

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[405:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1030) Mahâpurisa. On
the subsequent history of which word, see Senart's 'Légende du Buddha,'
pp. 54, 127,

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[405:2](sbe20121.htm#fr_1031) *K*arahi.
Compare 'Book of the Great Decease,' III, 53; Childers, p. 32.

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[405:3](sbe20121.htm#fr_1032) The text repeats
XII, 1, 1.

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[406:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1033) Compare above, §
2.

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[407:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1034) So above in
*K*ullavagga IV, 24, 19, where the proceeding adopted in the subsequent
sentences is laid down for use on such an occasion.

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[407:2](sbe20121.htm#fr_1035) Ubbâhikâya. See
the passage quoted in the last note.

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[408:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1036)
Âsana-pa*ññ*âpaka*m*. This office is not mentioned in the other
Khandhakas. We should expect to find it at *K*ullavagga VI, 21, 2. The
reason of this is that it is no office of authority. The different
referees would take their seats in the order of their seniority, and all
that the âsana-pa*ññ*âpaka would have to do would be to see that they
were provided with everything they required (it was not much, chiefly
mats or rugs to sit upon) in the hall or grove where they met.

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[408:2](sbe20121.htm#fr_1037) Here, of course,
consisting of the eight referees.

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[409:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1038) Pâ*k*ittiya
XXXVIII.

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[409:2](sbe20121.htm#fr_1039) Pâ*k*ittiya
XXXVII.

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[410:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1040) Pâ*k*ittiya
XXXV.

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[410:2](sbe20121.htm#fr_1041) Sa*m*yutta must
here be used for Khandhaka. The passage referred to is Mahâvagga II (the
Uposatha Khandhaka), 8, 3.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[411:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1042) Vinaya-vatthu.
Here used as a title, apparently of the Khandhakas. The passage referred
to is in the Kampeyyaka Khandhaka (Mahâvagga IX, 3, 5).

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[411:2](sbe20121.htm#fr_1043) See the note
above on XII, I. 10.

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[412:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1044) Pâ*k*ittiya
XXXV.

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[412:2](sbe20121.htm#fr_1045) Pâ*k*ittiya LI.

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[413:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1046) That is, does
the fact of its being unfringed make legal a mat or rug otherwise
illegal by reason of its size? See above, XII, 1, 10.

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[413:2](sbe20121.htm#fr_1047) Pâ*k*ittiya
LXXXIX.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[413:3](sbe20121.htm#fr_1048) The 18th
Nissaggiya Pâ*k*ittiya.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[414:1](sbe20121.htm#fr_1049) It is clear from
the word tva*m* âvuso, that Sabbakâmî is here addressing Revata.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[414:2](sbe20121.htm#fr_1050) That is not only
of the referees, but of all the Bhikkhus there at Vesâlî.

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[414:3](sbe20121.htm#fr_1051) Bhikkhûna*m*
sa*ññ*attiyâ. See the use of this phrase at *K*ullavagga IV, 14, 26, and
VII, 4. I. and our note on the latter of those two passages.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[414:4](sbe20121.htm#fr_1052) Compare XI, 1,
15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note on the Bhâ*n*avâras](sbe20122)
