[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20080)  [Next](sbe20082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3.

1\. Now at that time Bhikkhus, about to leave, started without setting
the wooden articles and crockery in order, leaving doors and lattices
open, and without giving the sleeping-places in charge to any one. The
wooden articles and crockery were spoilt, and the sleeping-places were
unprotected.

The moderate Bhikkhus murmured, &c. . . . . told the Blessed One, &c . .
. . (down to) He. said to the Bhikkhus: 'Therefore, O Bhikkhus, do I
establish a rule of conduct for Bhikkhus about to leave, according to
which they ought to behave.

2\. 'A Bhikkhu about to leave should, O Bhikkhus, put the wooden
articles and earthenware in order, close the doorways and lattices, give
the sleeping-places in charge <span id="fr_798"></span>[1](#fn_784) (to
some one, and only) then set out. If there be no Bhikkhu remaining, a
Sâma*n*era should be put in charge. If there be no Sâma*n*era remaining,
the attendant who keeps the grounds in order <span
id="fr_799"></span>[2](#fn_785) should be put in charge. If

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

there be neither Bhikkhu, nor Sâma*n*era, nor Ârâmika, the bed frame
should be laid on four stones <span id="fr_800"></span>[1](#fn_786), the
other bed frames put on the top of it, the chairs should be put one on
the top of the other, the bedding piled in a bundle on the top, the
wooden articles and the earthenware should be put away in order, and the
doorways and lattices should be closed <span
id="fr_801"></span>[2](#fn_787), and then should be set out.

3\. 'If the Vihâra leaks, it should be repaired if he can, or he should
exert himself to get the Vihâra roofed. If he should thus succeed, it is
good. If not, he should put the bed frame on four stones in that part of
the Vihâra which does not leak, and then put the other bed frame (&c.,
as in last paragraph, to the end). If the whole of the Vihâra leaks, he
should if he can take all the bedding to the village, or should exert
himself to get it taken there. If he should succeed, it is good. If not,
he should lay a bed frame on four stones in the open air, put the others
on the top of it, put the chairs one on another, pile the bedding on the
top, lay the wooden and earthenware utensils in order by them, and cover
the whole up with grass or leaves, so that at least the principal
articles of furniture might remain (uninjured) <span
id="fr_802"></span>[3](#fn_788); and (only) then go away.

This, O Bhikkhus, is the rule of conduct for

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bhikkhus about to
leave, according to which they should behave themselves.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_784"></span>[282:1](sbe20081.htm#fr_798) Senâsana*m*
âpu*kkh*â. Compare the Old Commentary on the 14th and 15th Pâ*k*ittiyas.
The lengthening of the last vowel in âpu*kkh*â is noteworthy.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[282:2](sbe20081.htm#fr_799) Ârâmiko. In
Mahâvagga VI, 15, the king wishing to present a man for this purpose, it
is there laid down that the Bhikkhus <span id="page_283">p. 283</span>
may accept him; and at *K*ullavagga VI, 21, 3, a superintendent of such
slaves is mentioned as one of the officials of the Order.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[283:1](sbe20081.htm#fr_800) This is the usual
method still adopted by native servants as a safeguard against white
ants, who would eat up into the legs of furniture left standing on the
ground.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[283:2](sbe20081.htm#fr_801) This arrangement
is referred to above at VIII, 1, 3.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[283:3](sbe20081.htm#fr_802) Aṅgâni pi
seseyyu*m*. See Buddhaghosa's note as appended to the edition of the
text (p. 325).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](sbe20082)
