[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20075)  [Next](sbe20077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3.

1\. Now at that time the Blessed One was seated preaching the Dhamma,
and surrounded by a great multitude, including the king and his retinue.
And Devadatta rose from his seat, and arranging his upper robe over one
shoulder, stretched out his joined hands to the Blessed One, and said to
the Blessed One:

'The Blessed One, Lord, is now grown aged, he is old and stricken in
years, he has accomplished a long journey, and his term of life is
nearly run <span id="fr_681"></span>[1](#fn_667). Let the Blessed One
now dwell at ease in the enjoyment of happiness reached even in this
world. Let the Blessed One give up the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha to me, I will be
its leader.'

'Thou hast said enough, Devadatta. Desire not to be the leader of the
Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha.'

\[And a second time Devadatta made the same request, and received the
same reply. And a third time Devadatta made the same request.\]

'I would not give over the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha, Devadatta, even to
Sâriputta and Moggallâna.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> How much less,
then, to so vile and evil-living a person as you <span
id="fr_682"></span>[1](#fn_668).'

Then Devadatta thought: 'Before the king and his retinue the Blessed One
denies me, calling me "evil-living," and exalts Sâriputta and
Moggallâna.' And, angry and displeased, he bowed down before the Blessed
One, and keeping him on his right hand as he passed him, he departed
thence.

This was the first time that Devadatta bore malice against the Blessed
One.

2\. And the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus, 'Let then the Sa*m*gha, O
Bhikkhus, carry out against Devadatta the Act of Proclamation <span
id="fr_683"></span>[2](#fn_669) in Râ*g*agaha, to the effect that
whereas the nature of Devadatta used to be of one kind it is now of
an-other kind, and that whatsoever he shall do, either bodily or
verbally, in that neither shall the Buddha be recognised, nor the
Dhamma, nor the Sa*m*gha, but only Devadatta.

'And thus, O Bhikkhus, shall the Act be carried out. Some discreet and
able Bhikkhu (&c.,

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

in the same form as in I, I, 4, down to the end of the Kammavâ*k*â).'

And the Blessed One said to the venerable Sâriputta, 'Do you then,
Sâriputta, proclaim Devadatta throughout Râ*g*agaha.'

'In former times, Lord, I have sung the praises of Devadatta in
Râ*g*agaha, saying, "Great is the power (Iddhi) of the son of Godhi!
Great is the might of the son of Godhi!" How can I now proclaim him
throughout Râ*g*agaha?'

'Was it not truth that you spoke, Sâriputta, when you \[so\] sang his
praises?'

'Yea, Lord!'

'Even so, Sâriputta, do you now, speaking the truth, proclaim Devadatta
throughout Râ*g*agaha.'

'Even so, Lord,' said Sâriputta, in assent to the Blessed One.

3\. And the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus:

Let then the Sa*m*gha appoint Sâriputta to the office of proclaiming
Devadatta throughout Râ*g*agaha to the effect (&c., as before, § 2). And
thus, O Bhikkhus, should he be appointed. First, Sâriputta should be
asked, &c. (as usual in official appointments <span
id="fr_684"></span>[1](#fn_670), down to the end of the Kammavâ*k*â).'

Then Sâriputta, being so appointed, entered Râ*g*agaha with a number of
Bhikkhus, and proclaimed Devadatta accordingly. And thereupon those
people who were unbelievers, and without devotion or insight, spake
thus: 'They are jealous, these Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as! They are jealous
of the gain and hospitality that fall to Devadatta!' But those who were
believers, full of devotion, able, and gifted with in-

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

sight, spake thus: This cannot be any ordinary affair <span
id="fr_685"></span>[1](#fn_671), in that the Blessed One has had
Devadatta proclaimed throughout Râ*g*agaha!'

4\. And Devadatta went to A*g*âtasattu the prince, and said to him: 'In
former days, prince, people were long-lived, but now their term of life
is short. It is quite possible, therefore, that you may complete your
time while you are still a prince. So do you, prince, kill your father,
and become the Râ*g*a; and I will kill the Blessed One, and become the
Buddha.'

And prince A*g*âtasattu thought, 'This worthy Devadatta has great powers
and might; he will know (what is right).' And fastening a dagger <span
id="fr_686"></span>[2](#fn_672) against his thigh, he entered with
violence and at an unusual hour <span id="fr_687"></span>[3](#fn_673),
though fearful, anxious, excited, and alarmed, the royal chamber. And
when the ministers who were in attendance in the private chamber saw
that, they seized him. And when, on searching him, they found the dagger
fastened on his thigh, they asked him:

'What were you going to do, O prince?'

'I wanted to kill my father.'

'Who incited you to this?'

'The worthy Devadatta.'

Then some of the ministers advised 'The prince should be slain, and
Devadatta, and all the Bhikkhus.' Others of them advised 'The Bhikkhus
ought not to be slain, for they have done no wrong;

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

but only the prince and Devadatta.' Others of them again said, 'Neither
should the prince be slain, nor Devadatta, nor the Bhikkhus. But the
king should be told of this, and we should do as the king shall
command.'

5\. So these ministers, taking the prince with them, went to the Râ*g*a
of Magadha, to Seniya Bimbisâra, and told him what had happened.

'What advice, my friends, did the ministers give?'

\[When they had told him all (as before) he said\]: 'What, my friends,
can the Buddha, or the Sa*m*gha, or the Dhamma have to do with this? Has
not the Blessed One had a proclamation already made throughout
Râ*g*agaha concerning Devadatta, to the effect that whereas his nature
used to be of one kind, it is now of another; and that whatsoever he
shall do, either bodily or verbally, that shall neither the Buddha, nor
the Dhamma, nor the Sa*m*gha be required, but only Devadatta?'

Then those ministers who had advised that the prince and Devadatta and
all the Bhikkhus should be slain, them he made incapable (of ever again
holding office) And those ministers who had advised that the prince
should be slain, and Devadatta, them he degraded to lower offices. But
those ministers who had advised that neither should the prince be slain,
nor Devadatta, nor the Bhikkhus, but that the king should be informed of
it, and his command be followed, them he advanced to high positions.

And the Râ*g*a of Magadha, Seniya Bimbisâra, said to prince
A*g*âtasattu: 'Why did you want to kill me, O prince?'

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

'I wanted a kingdom, O king!'

'If you then want a kingdom, O prince, let this kingdom be thine!' And
he handed over the kingdom to A*g*âtasattu the prince <span
id="fr_688"></span>[1](#fn_674)'.

6\. Then Devadatta went to prince <span id="fr_689"></span>[2](#fn_675)
A*g*âtasattu, and said, 'Give such orders, O king, to your men that I
may deprive the Sama*n*a Gotama of life.' And A*g*âtasattu the prince
gave orders to his men: 'Whatsoever the worthy Devadatta tells you, that
do!'

Then to one man Devadatta gave command: 'Go, my friend, the Samara
Gotama is staying at such and such a place. Kill him, and come back by
this path.' Then on that path he placed other two men, telling them,
'Whatever man you see coming alone along this path, kill him, and return
by that path.' Then on that path he placed other four men \[and so on up
to sixteen men\].

7\. And that man took his sword and shield, and hung his bow and quiver
at his back, and went to the place where the Blessed One was, and when
at some little distance from the Blessed One, being

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

terrified, anxious, excited, and alarmed, he stood stark still and
stiff <span id="fr_690"></span>[1](#fn_676).

On the Blessed One seeing him so, he said to the man: 'Come hither,
friend, don't be afraid.'

Then that man laid aside his sword and his shield, took off his bow and
his quiver, and went up to the Blessed One; and falling at his feet, he
said to the Blessed One: 'Transgression, Lord, has overcome me even
according to my folly, my stupidity, and my unrighteousness, in that I
have come hither with evil and with murderous intent. May the Blessed
One accept the confession I make of my sin in its sinfulness, to the end
that in future I may restrain myself therefrom!'

'Verily, my friend, transgression has overcome thee \[&c., down to\]
intent. But since you, my friend, look upon your sin as sin, and duly
make amends for it, we do accept (your confession of) it. For this, O
friend, is progress in the discipline of the Noble One, that he who has
seen his sin to be sin makes amends for it as is meet, and becomes able
in future to restrain himself therefrom <span
id="fr_691"></span>[2](#fn_677).'

Then the Blessed One discoursed to that man in due order, that is to say
(&c., as usual in conversions <span id="fr_692"></span>[3](#fn_678),
down to) May the Blessed One accept me as a disciple, as one who, from
this day forth as long as life endures, has taken his refuge in him.

And the Blessed One said to the man: 'Do not, my friend, leave me by
that path. Go by this path.' and so dismissed him by another way.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

8\. But the two men thought, 'Where now can that man be who was to come
alone? He is delaying long.' And as they were going to meet him, they
caught sight of the Blessed One sitting at the foot of a certain tree.
On seeing him they went up to the place where he was, and saluted him,
and took their seats on one side. To them also the Blessed One
discoursed, \[and they were converted as the other man had been, and he
sent them back by another way. And the same thing occurred as to the
four, and the eight, and the sixteen men <span
id="fr_693"></span>[1](#fn_679).\]

9\. And the one man returned to Devadatta, and said to him: 'I cannot,
Lord, deprive the Blessed One of life. Great is the power (Iddhi <span
id="fr_694"></span>[2](#fn_680)) and might of the Blessed One.'

'That will do, friend. You need not do so. I will slay the Blessed One
myself.'

Now at that time the Blessed One was walking up and down (meditating) in
the shade below <span id="fr_695"></span>[3](#fn_681) the mountain
called the Vulture's Peak. And Devadatta climbed up the Vulture's Peak,
and hurled down a mighty rock with the intention of depriving the
Blessed One of life. But two mountain peaks came together and stopped
that rock and only a splinter <span id="fr_696"></span>[4](#fn_682)
falling from it made the foot of the Blessed One to bleed <span
id="fr_697"></span>[5](#fn_683).

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

Then the Blessed One, looking upwards, said to Devadatta: 'Great, O
foolish one, is the demerit you have brought forth for yourself <span
id="fr_698"></span>[1](#fn_684), in that with evil and murderous intent
you have caused the blood of the Tathâgata to flow.'

And the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus: 'This is the first time that
Devadatta has heaped up (against himself) a Karma which will work out
its effect in the immediate future <span
id="fr_699"></span>[2](#fn_685), in that with evil and murderous intent
he has caused the blood of the Tathâgata to flow.'

10\. And the Bhikkhus having heard that Devadatta was compassing the
death of the Blessed One, walked round and round the Vihâra, making
recitation in high and loud tones, for a protection and guard to the
Blessed One. On hearing that noise the Blessed One asked the venerable
Ânanda what it was. And when Ânanda \[told him\], the Blessed One said:
'Then, Ânanda, call the Bhikkhus in my

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

name, saying, "The Teacher sends for the venerable ones."'

And he \[did so\], and they came, and saluted the Blessed One, and took
their seats on one side. And when they were so seated, the Blessed One
said to the Bhikkhus: 'This, O Bhikkhus, is an impossible thing, and one
that cannot occur, that one should deprive a Tathâgata of life by
violence. The Tathâgatas, O Bhikkhus, are extinguished (in death) in due
and natural course.

'There are, O Bhikkhus, these five kinds, of teachers now living in the
world (&c., as in VII, 2, 3, 4, down to the end). And this, O Bhikkhus,
is an impossible thing, and one that cannot occur, that a Tathâgata
should be slain by any act set on foot by any one besides himself. The
Tathâgatas, O Bhikkhus, are extinguished (in death) in due course (of
nature). Go, therefore, O Bhikkhus, each one to his Vihâra, for the
Tathâgatas require no protection.'

11\. Now at that time there was at Râ*g*agaha an elephant named
Nâlâgiri, fierce, and a manslayer. And Devadatta went into Râ*g*agaha,
and to the elephant stables, and said to the elephant-keepers <span
id="fr_700"></span>[1](#fn_686): 'I, my friends, am a relative of the
raga's, and am able to advance a man occupying a low position to a high
position, and to order increase of rations or of pay. Therefore, my
friends, when the Sama*n*a Gotama shall have arrived at this
carriage-road <span id="fr_701"></span>[2](#fn_687), then loose the
elephant Nâlâgiri, and let him go down the road.'

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

'Even so, Sir,' said those elephant-keepers in assent to Devadatta.

And when the Blessed One early in the morning had dressed himself, he
entered Râ*g*agaha duly bowled and robed, and with a number of Bhikkhus,
for alms; and he entered upon that road. On seeing him the
elephant-keepers loosed Nâlâgiri, and let it go down the road. And the
elephant saw the Blessed One coming from the distance; and as soon as it
saw him, it rushed towards the Blessed One with uplifted trunk, and with
its tail and ears erect.

When those Bhikkhus saw the elephant Nâlâgiri coming in the distance,
they said to the Blessed One: 'This elephant, Lord, Nâlâgiri, is fierce,
and a manslayer, and it has got into this road. Let the Blessed One,
Lord, turn back: let the Happy One turn back.'

'Come on, O Bhikkhus. Be not alarmed. There is, O Bhikkhus, no
possibility \[&c., as in last section, down to the end\].'

\[And a second and a third time the Bhikkhus made the same appeal, and
received the same reply.\]

12\. Then at that time the people climbed up on to the upper storeys of
the houses, and on to the balconies, and on to the roofs. And those of
them who were unbelievers and without faith or insight, said, 'Truly the
countenance of the great Sama*n*a is beautiful; but the elephant will do
him a hurt <span id="fr_702"></span>[1](#fn_688).' But those who were
believers, full of

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

devotion, able, and gifted with insight, said, '’Twill be long e’er the
elephant can fight a fight with the elephant (of men)!'

And the Blessed One caused the sense of his love to pervade the elephant
Nâlâgiri <span id="fr_703"></span>[1](#fn_689); and the elephant,
touched by the sense of his love, put down his trunk, and went up to the
place where the Blessed One was, and stood still before him. And the
Blessed One, stroking the elephant's forehead with his right hand,
addressed him in these stanzas:

'Touch not, O elephant, the elephant of men; for sad, O elephant, is
such attack <span id="fr_704"></span>[2](#fn_690),  
'For no bliss is there, O elephant, when he is passed from hence, for
him who strikes the elephant of men.  
'Be not then mad, and neither be thou careless <span
id="fr_705"></span>[3](#fn_691), for the careless enter not into a state
of bliss,  
'Rather do thou thyself so act, that to a state of bliss thou mayest
go.'

And Nâlâgiri the elephant took up with his trunk the dust from off the
feet of the Blessed One, and sprinkled it over its head, and retired,
bowing backwards the while it gazed upon the Blessed One.

And Nâlâgiri the elephant returned to the elephant stables, and stood in
its appointed place, and

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

became once more the tame Nâlâgiri. And at that time the people sung
these verses:

'They can be tamed by sticks, and goads, and whips,  
'But the great Sage has tamed this elephant without a weapon or a
stick.'

13\. The people were angry, murmured, and became indignant, saying, How
wicked is this Devadatta, and how wretched <span
id="fr_706"></span>[1](#fn_692), in that he can go about to slay the
Sama*n*a Gotama, who is so mighty and so powerful.' And the gain and
honour of Devadatta fell off, while that of the Blessed One increased.

 <span id="fr_707"></span>[2](#fn_693)Now at that time, when the gain
and honour of Devadatta had fallen off, he went, surrounded by Bhikkhus,
to people's houses, appealing for alms <span
id="fr_708"></span>[3](#fn_694).

The people were angry, murmured, and became indignant, saying, 'How can
the Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as live on food that they ask for at people's
houses? Who is not fond of well-cooked food? Who does not like sweet
things?'

The Bhikkhus heard (&c., down to) the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus
'Therefore do I lay down this rule, O Bhikkhus, for the Bhikkhus that

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (not more than)
three shall enjoy an alms (together) at people's houses--and this for
the sake of three reasons; (to wit) for the restraint of the
evil-minded, and for the ease of the good <span
id="fr_709"></span>[1](#fn_695), lest those who have evil desires
should, in reliance upon a particular party (among the Bhikkhus), break
up the Sa*m*gha <span id="fr_710"></span>[2](#fn_696), and (lastly) out
of compassion for the laity <span id="fr_711"></span>[3](#fn_697). (A
Bhikkhu) who shall enjoy an alms in parties of more than three, shall be
dealt with according to law <span id="fr_712"></span>[4](#fn_698).'

14 <span id="fr_713"></span>[5](#fn_699). Now Devadatta went to the
place where Kokâlika, and Ka*t*amoraka-tissaka, and the son of
Kha*nd*a-devî and Samudda-datta were, and said to them, 'Come, Sirs, let
us stir up a division in the Sama*n*a Gotama 's Sa*m*gha, and in the
body of his adherents <span id="fr_714"></span>[6](#fn_700).'

When he had thus spoken, Kokâlika said to Devadatta, 'The Sama*n*a
Gotama, Sir, is mighty and powerful. How can we \[do such a thing\]?'

'Come, Sirs, let us go to the Sama*n*a Gotama, and make the following
five demands, saying,

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "The Blessed One,
Lord, has declared in many a figure the advantages of the man who wishes
for little, who is easy to satisfy in the matter of support and
nourishment, who has eradicated evil from his mind, has quelled his
passions, and is full of faith, of reverence, and of the exercise of
zeal <span id="fr_715"></span>[1](#fn_701). The following five things,
Lord, conduce to such a condition <span id="fr_716"></span>[2](#fn_702).
It would be good, Lord, if the Bhikkhus should be, their lives long,
dwellers in the woods--if whosoever goes to the neighbourhood of a
village should thereby commit an offence. It would be good if they
should, their lives long, beg for alms--if whosoever should accept an
invitation, should thereby commit an offence. It would be good if they
should clothe themselves, their lives long, in cast-off rags--if
whosoever should accept a gift of robes from a layman <span
id="fr_717"></span>[3](#fn_703), should thereby commit an offence. It
would be good if they should dwell, their lives long, under the
trees <span id="fr_718"></span>[4](#fn_704)--if whosoever should (sleep)
under a roof, should thereby commit an offence. It would be good if they
should, their lives long, abstain from fish <span
id="fr_719"></span>[5](#fn_705)--if whosoever should

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

eat fish, should thereby commit an offence." The Sama*n*a Gotama will
not grant these things. Then will we gain over the people by means
thereof.'

'Yes; it may be possible so to stir up divisions in the Sa*m*gha, and in
the party of the Sama*n*a Gotama. For the people believe in rough
measures.'

15\. And Devadatta went to the Blessed One, surrounded by his friends,
and made these demands \[in the words just set out\].

'No, Devadatta. Whosoever wishes to do so, let him dwell in the woods;
whosoever wishes to do so, let him dwell in the neighbourhood of a
village. Whosoever wishes to do so, let him beg for alms; whosoever
wishes to do so, let him accept invitations from the laity. Whosoever
wishes to do so, let him dress in rags; whosoever wishes to do so, let
him receive gifts of robes from laymen. Sleeping under trees has been
allowed by me, Devadatta, for eight months in the year; and the eating
of fish that is pure in the three points--to wit, that the eater has not
seen, or heard, or suspected that it has been caught for that purpose.'

And Devadatta, pleased and delighted that the Blessed One had refused
the five demands, arose from his seat, and keeping him on his right hand
as he passed him, departed thence with his friends. And he entered into
Râ*g*agaha, and urged his view upon the people by means thereof, saying,
'Such and such things did we ask, Sirs, of the Sama*n*a Gotama. He would
not allow them, but we live in accordance with them.'

16\. Then those of the people who were unbelievers, and without
reverence or insight, said. 'These Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as have
eradicated evil

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

from their minds, and have quelled their passions, while on the other
hand the Sama*n*a Gotama is luxurious, and his mind dwells on
abundance <span id="fr_720"></span>[1](#fn_706).' But those of the
people who were believers, and full of reverence and insight, were
indignant, became vexed, and murmured, saying, 'How can Devadatta go
about to stir up division in the Sa*m*gha of the Blessed One, and in the
party that is subject to him.'

The Bhikkhus, hearing them so murmuring, told the matter to the Blessed
One.

'Is it true, O Devadatta, as they say, that thou goest about to stir up
division in the Sa*m*gha, and in the body of my adherents?'

'It is true, Lord.'

'(Thou hast gone far) enough, Devadatta. Let not a division in the
Sa*m*gha seem good to thee <span
id="fr_721"></span>[2](#fn_707);--grievous is such division. Whosoever,
O Devadatta, breaks up the Sa*m*gha, when it is at peace, he gives birth
to a fault (the effect of) which endures for a kalpa <span
id="fr_722"></span>[3](#fn_708), and for a kalpa is he boiled in niraya.
But whosoever, O Devadatta, makes peace in the Sa*m*gha, when it has
been divided, he gives birth to the highest merit, and for a kalpa is he
happy in heaven <span id="fr_723"></span>[4](#fn_709). Thou hast gone
far enough,

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Devadatta. Let not
a division in the Sa*m*gha, O Devadatta, seem good to thee. Grievous, O
Devadatta, is such division.'

17\. Now the venerable Ânanda, having dressed himself early in the
morning, went duly bowled and robed into Râ*g*agaha for alms. And
Devadatta saw the venerable Ânanda proceeding through Râ*g*agaha for
alms. On seeing that he went up to the venerable Ânanda, and said to
him: 'At once, from this day forth, friend Ânanda, I intend to perform
Uposatha, and to carry out the formal proceedings of the Order, without
either the Blessed One or the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha.'

And when the venerable Ânanda had gone through Râ*g*agaha for alms, and
had returned from his rounds, and had finished his meal, he went to the
Blessed One, and bowed down before him, and took his seat on one side.
And when he was so seated, he told the Blessed One \[what Devadatta had
said, and added\], 'This very day, Lord, Devadatta will break up the
Sa*m*gha.'

Then the Blessed One, when he heard that, gave utterance at that time to
this expression of strong emotion:

'Easy is a good act to the good, a good act is hard to the wicked;

'Easy is evil to the evil, but evil is hard for the Noble Ones to do.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the Second Portion for Recitation.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_667"></span>[238:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_681) This string of
epithets recurs in Pârâ*g*ika I, 1, 2, of old and venerable Brâhmans.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[239:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_682) In the text read
*kh*avassa khe*l*âpakassa. On the first word, compare V, 2, 8. For the
second the Dhammapada commentator (Fausböll, p. 143) reads, as does the
Sinhalese MS. in our passage, khe*l*âsika. Buddhaghosa, explaining it,
says, 'In this passage (we should recollect) that those who obtain the
requisites (of a Bhikkhu) by an evil mode of life are said by the Noble
Ones to be like unto spittle. The Blessed One calls him khe*l*âpaka (to
ex-press that) he eats, (that is, 'gains a living) in sin like that.'
(For the Pâli, see the edition of the text, p. 323, where the comma
after khe*l*asadisâ should be before it.)

<span id="fn_669"></span>[239:2](sbe20076.htm#fr_683)
Pakâsaniya-kamma*m*. This is not one of the regular official acts of the
Sa*m*gha, as described in *K*ullavagga I, and is only mentioned in this
passage. It is not referred to by the Dhammapada commentator.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[240:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_684) See, for instance,
I, 22, 2.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[241:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_685) Na oraka*m*
bhavissati. See Mahâvagga I, 9, 1, and *K*ullavagga VI, 4, 10, and our
note on the latter passage.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[241:2](sbe20076.htm#fr_686) Potthanika*m*.
This word has already occurred at Mahâvagga VI, 23, 3.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[241:3](sbe20076.htm#fr_687) Divâdivassa. See
the use of this word at *G*âtaka II, 1.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[243:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_688) The early
literature already mentions that A*g*âtasattu eventually killed his
father. (See, for instance, Sâma*ññ*a-phala Sutta, p. 154.) Bigandet I,
261 (3rd edition) adds that the mode adopted was by starving him to
death in prison.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[243:2](sbe20076.htm#fr_689) The Buddhist
writers being so especially careful in their ac-curate use of titles, it
is particularly noteworthy that A*g*âtasattu is here called prince
(kumâra) and not king (râ*g*a). It is almost impossible to avoid the
conclusion that this paragraph stood originally in some other
connection; and that the events it describes must then have been
supposed to have taken place before A*g*âtasattu actually became king.
That the Dhammapada commentator says here (Fausböll, p. 143) tasmi*m*
(that is. A*g*âtasattu) ra*gg*e pati*tth*ite, is no evidence the other
way; for that account is either taken from this, or depends ultimately
upon it.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[244:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_690) Patthaddha; that
is, prastabdha. See Sutta-vibhaṅga, Pârâ*g*ika I, 10, 17, 21.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[244:2](sbe20076.htm#fr_691) This confession
and acceptance are in a standing form, which occurs, for instance, at
Mahâvagga IX, 1, g; *K*ullavagga V, 20, 5.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[244:3](sbe20076.htm#fr_692) See, for instance,
*K*ullavagga VI, 4, 5.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[245:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_693) The last two
paragraphs of § 7 are repeated in full in the text in each case.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[245:2](sbe20076.htm#fr_694) The Iddhi here
must be the power of religious persuasion.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[245:3](sbe20076.htm#fr_695) Pa*kkh*âyâya*m*.
See Mahâvagga V, 1, 5, and Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta II, 31 (p. 22 of the
text).

<span id="fn_682"></span>[245:4](sbe20076.htm#fr_696) Papatikâ. In the
text, by a misprint, this and the preceding word have been joined
together.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[245:5](sbe20076.htm#fr_697) Pâde ruhiram
uppâdesi, where ruhira is equal to lohita. <span id="page_246">p.
246</span> It is so used at *G*âtaka II, 275, in the Milinda Pa*ñ*ha in
the account of the present incident in the Dhammapada commentary (p.
144). In Mahâvagga I, 67, where it is said that one who has shed (a
Buddha's) blood cannot be received into the Order, the expression is
lohita*m* uppâdeti: and in numerous passages elsewhere it is added that
such a lohituppâdako becomes ipso facto discharged from one or other of
the duties and privileges of a member of the Order, just as if he had
thrown off the robes.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[246:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_698) Pasûta*m*. By a
misprint the text has pasuta*m*. Compare the end of § 16 below.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[246:2](sbe20076.htm#fr_699)
Ânantarika-kamma*m*. That is, that will work out its effect, (not in the
next birth, as is the case of all other Karma,) but immediately, in the
present life. There are five such deeds (see Childers, sub voce pa*ñk*°,
and Milinda Pa*ñ*ha, p. 25). The Bodisats, according to *G*âtaka I, 45
(verse 256), are free from such sins.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[247:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_700) Hatthi-bha*nd*e.
See the note on Mahâvagga VI, 37, 2.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[247:2](sbe20076.htm#fr_701) Ra*kkh*a*m*; that
is, rathyâm. Compare *G*âtaka I, 346, and the Old Commentary on the
Bhikkhunî-vibhaṅga, Pâ*k*ittiya VII.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[248:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_702) The setting of
this paragraph is parallel to § 3 above in this chapter; the speech of
the unbelievers is the same as that of the *G*a*t*ilas at Mahâvagga I,
15, 4.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[249:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_703) Mettena *k*ittena
phari; literally, 'he suffused him with loving heart.' Compare Rh. D.'s
'Buddhist Birth Stories,' i. p.112.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[249:2](sbe20076.htm#fr_704) In nâgamâsado the
m is inserted for euphony. See the instances given by Kuhn, 'Beiträge
zur Pâli-grammatik,' p. 63. Many others might be added; siva-m-a*ñg*ase,
*G*âtaka. vol. i, verse 27; sama*n*a-m-a*k*ala, Childers sub voce, &c.
Compare the curious use of âsâdeti at *K*ullavagga I, 27.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[249:3](sbe20076.htm#fr_705) A play on the
words is here lost in English (mâ mado mâ *k*a pamâdo).

<span id="fn_692"></span>[250:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_706) Alakkhiko ti ettha
na lakkhetîti alakkhiko na *g*ânâtîti attho. Apâkata-kamma*m* karomîti
na *g*ânâtîti na lakkhitabbo ti alakkha*n*o passitabbo ti attho (B.). We
venture to differ from both of these explanations, and to follow rather
the derivation of the word, and the meaning of the corresponding
Sanskrit term alakshmîka.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[250:2](sbe20076.htm#fr_707) From here down to
the 'decision' is identical with the introductory story in the
Sutta-vibhaṅga to the 32nd Pâ*k*ittiya,--a rule the previous existence
of which is implied in the decision given here.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[250:3](sbe20076.htm#fr_708) Vi*ññ*âpeti is
continually used in the Sutta-vibhaṅga in this sense, and even occurs
already in the Pâtimokkha, Pâ*k*ittiya 39.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[251:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_709) This whole phrase
recurs in Sutta-vibhaṅga, Pârâ*g*ika I, 5, 11, and in the Aṅguttara
Nikâya II, 17, 2. In the latter passage Dr. Morris reads
dumma*ññ*ûna*m*; see his note at pp. 127, 128. But the Sanskrit Buddhist
vocabulary Vyutpatti (teste Böhtlingk-Roth, s.v. maṅku) authorises the
use of dummaṅku.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[251:2](sbe20076.htm#fr_710) So the Aṅguttara,
loc. cit., has, in the same connection, gihîna*m* anukampâya
pâpi*kkh*âna*m* pakkhupa*kkh*edâya.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[251:3](sbe20076.htm#fr_711) See last note. The
idea is here, of course, lest any particular layman should be burdened
by providing for many Bhikkhus.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[251:4](sbe20076.htm#fr_712) That is, under the
32nd Pâ*k*ittiya, on which rule the Sutta-vibhaṅga explains the phrase
ga*n*a-bho*g*ana.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[251:5](sbe20076.htm#fr_713) Sections 14, 15,
and the greater part of 16 recur, word for word, as the introductory
story to the 10th Sa*m*ghâdisesa.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[251:6](sbe20076.htm#fr_714) In
*k*akka-bheda*m* the first word no doubt connotes 'kingdom, lordship,'
as in dhamma-*k*akka, *k*akkavatti, &c.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[252:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_715) This is part of
the standing 'religious discourse' so often ascribed to the Buddha in
the Vinaya texts, and given at full in the *K*ullavagga I, 1-3.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[252:2](sbe20076.htm#fr_716) It was on
precisely the same reasoning that a certain Bhikkhu in Mahâvagga VIII,
28, 1, endeavoured to get the Buddha to convert to the rejection of all
clothing.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[252:3](sbe20076.htm#fr_717) At Mahâvagga VIII,
1, 35, it is laid down that a Bhikkhu may either dress in cast-off rags,
or accept robes from a layman, according as he likes.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[252:4](sbe20076.htm#fr_718) This dwelling
under trees is expressly forbidden, as regards the season of the rains,
in Mahâvagga III, 12, 5.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[252:5](sbe20076.htm#fr_719) The rule of the
Order is merely that no one may knowingly eat fish which he has seen or
heard or suspected to have been caught for that purpose. See Mahâvagga
VI, 31, 14.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[254:1](sbe20076.htm#fr_720) Bâhulliko
bâhullâya *k*eteti. Both these expressions occur above in Mahâvagga VI,
15, 9, 10, and elsewhere (see, for instance, the introductory stories to
*G*âtaka, Nos. 6 and 32) as the standing expression for the opposite of
the state of mind in which a good Bhikkhu ought to live.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[254:2](sbe20076.htm#fr_721) Mâ te ru*kk*i
sa*m*ghabhedo. For the connotation of this phrase, compare below, VII,
4, 4.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[254:3](sbe20076.htm#fr_722) Kappa*tth*ika*m*
kibbisa*m*. At *G*âtaka I, 172, 213, 215, Prof. Fausböll reads kappa
kappa*tth*iya. In saying that the fault itself (kibbisa*m*) is to endure
for a kalpa, the meaning of course is that its effects on the Karma will
endure so long.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[254:4](sbe20076.htm#fr_723) Either the text
has here preserved (as in other cases elsewhere) <span id="page_255">p.
255</span> the fragments of earlier verses, or the poetical forms of the
verses below at VII, 5, 4, have crept into the prose here, where we
should otherwise expect sagge and niraye.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](sbe20077)
