[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20118)  [Next](sbe20120) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

# ELEVENTH KHANDHAKA.

#### ON THE COUNCIL OF RÂ*G*AGAHA.

### 1 <span id="fr_964"></span>[1](#fn_947)

1\. Now the venerable Mahâ Kassapa addressed the Bhikkhus, and said:
'Once I was travelling along the road from Pâvâ to Kusinârâ with a great
company of the Bhikkhus, with about five hundred Bhikkhus. And I left
the high road and sat myself down at the foot of a certain tree.

'Just at that time a certain naked ascetic (â*g*îvaka), who had picked
up a Mandârava <span id="fr_965"></span>[2](#fn_948) flower in Kusinârâ,
was coming along the road towards Pâvâ. And I saw him coming in the
distance, and on seeing I said to him:

'"O, friend! surely thou knowest our Master?"

'"Yea, friend, I know him. This day the Sama*n*a Gotama has been dead a
week. That is how I obtained this Mandârava flower."'

'Then, Sirs, of those of the Bhikkhus who were not yet free from their
passions, some stretched out

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

their arms and wept; and some fell headlong on the ground; and some
reeled to and fro in anguish at the thought: "Too soon has the Blessed
One died! Too soon has the Happy One passed away! Too soon has the Light
gone out in the world!"'

'But those of the Bhikkhus who were free from the passions (the Arahats)
bore their grief, collected and composed at the thought: "Impermanent
are all component things. How is it possible \[that they should not be
dissolved\]?"

'Then I, Sirs, spake thus to the Bhikkhus: "Enough, Sirs! Weep not,
neither lament! Has not the Blessed One already declared to us that it
is the very nature of all things near and dear unto us that we must
divide ourselves from them, leave them, sever ourselves from them? How
then, Sirs, can this be possible--that whereas anything whatever born,
brought into being and organised, contains within itself the inherent
necessity of dissolution--how then can this be possible that such a
being should not be dissolved? No such condition can exist!"

'Then at that time <span id="fr_966"></span>[1](#fn_949), Sirs, one
Subhadda, who had gone out from the world in his old age, was seated
there in the company of Bhikkhus. And Subhadda, the late-received one,
said to the Bhikkhus: "Enough, Sirs! Weep not, neither lament! We are
well rid of the great Sama*n*a. We used to be annoyed by being told,
'This beseems you, this beseems you not.' But now we shall be able to do
whatever we like; and what we do not like, that we shall not have to
do <span id="fr_967"></span>[1](#fn_949)."

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

'Come, Sirs, let us chant together the Dhamma and the Vinaya before what
is not Dhamma is spread abroad, and what is Dhamma is put aside; before
what is not Vinaya is spread abroad, and what is Vinaya is put aside;
before those who argue against the Dhamma become powerful, and those who
hold to the Dhamma become weak; before those who argue against the
Vinaya become powerful, and those who hold to the Vinaya become weak!'

2\. 'Let then the venerable Thera choose out Bhikkhus.'

Then the venerable Mahâ Kassapa chose out five hundred Arahats less one.
And the Bhikkhus said to the venerable Mahâ Kassapa: 'Lord, this
venerable one, Ânanda, although he have not yet attained \[to
Nirvâ*n*a\], yet is he incapable of falling into error through
partiality, or malice, or stupidity, or fear, and thoroughly have the
Dhamma and the Vinaya been learnt by him from the Blessed One himself.
Therefore let our Lord choose the venerable Ânanda. And the venerable
Mahâ Kassapa chose also the venerable Ânanda.'

3\. Then it occurred to the Thera Bhikkhus: 'In what place shall we now
chant over together the Dhamma and the Vinaya?' And it occurred to the
Thera Bhikkhus: 'In Râ*g*agaha is alms plentiful, and there is abundance
of lodging-places. What, now, if we were to spend the rainy season at
Râ*g*agaha, and chant the Dhamma and the Vinaya together there: and if
no other Bhikkhus were to go up to Râ*g*agaha for the rainy season <span
id="fr_968"></span>[1](#fn_950)?'

4\. Then the venerable Mahâ Kassapa laid the

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

resolution before the Sa*m*gha: 'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. If
the time seems meet to the Sa*m*gha, let the Sa*m*gha appoint that these
five hundred Bhikkhus take up their residence during the rainy season at
Râ*g*agaha, to chant over together the Dhamma and the Vinaya, and that
no other Bhikkhus go up to Râ*g*agaha for the rainy season. This is the
resolution. Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear. The Sa*m*gha appoints
accordingly. Whosoever of the venerable ones approves thereof, let him
keep silence. Whosoever approves not thereof, let him speak. The
Sa*m*gha has appointed accordingly. Therefore is it silent. Thus do I
understand.'

5\. So the Thera Bhikkhus went up to Râ*g*agaha to chant over together
the Dhamma and the Vinaya. And the Thera Bhikkhus thought: 'The Blessed
One has spoken in praise of the repair of dilapidations. Let us, then,
during the first month of the rainy season repair such dilapidations,
and during the middle month let us chant over the Dhamma and the Vinaya
together.' And during the first month they repaired dilapidation.

6\. And the venerable Ânanda--thinking, 'To-morrow is the assembly, now
it beseems me not to go into the assembly while I am still only on the
way (towards Arahatship)'--spent the whole night with mind alert. And at
the close of the night, intending to lie dawn, he inclined his body, but
before his head reached the pillow, and while his feet were still far
from the ground, in the interval he became

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

free from attachment to the world, and his heart was emancipated from
the Âsavas (that is to say, from sensuality, individuality, delusion,
and ignorance) <span id="fr_969"></span>[1](#fn_951).

7\. And the venerable Mahâ Kassapa laid the resolution before the
Sa*m*gha: 'If the time seem meet to the Sa*m*gha, I will question Upâli
concerning the Vinaya.' And the venerable Upâli laid a resolution before
the Sa*m*gha: 'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. If the time seems
meet to the Sa*m*gha, I, when questioned by the venerable Mahâ Kassapa,
will give reply.'

Then the venerable Mahâ Kassapa said to the venerable Upâli: 'Venerable
Upâli, where was the first Pârâ*g*ika promulgated?'

'In Vesâlî, Sir.'

'Concerning whom was it spoken?'

'Concerning Sudinna, the son of Kalanda.'

'In regard to what matter?'

'Sexual intercourse.'

Thus did the venerable Mahâ Kassapa question the venerable Upâli as to
the matter, as to the occasion, as to the individual concerned, as to
the (principal) rule, as to the sub-rule <span
id="fr_970"></span>[2](#fn_952), as to who would be guilty, and as to
who would be innocent <span id="fr_971"></span>[3](#fn_953), of the
first Pârâ*g*ika.

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

'Again, venerable Upâli, where was the second Pârâ*g*ika promulgated?'

'At Râ*g*agaha, Sir.'

'Concerning whom was it spoken?'

'Dhaniya, the potter's son.'

'In regard to what matter?'

'The taking of that which had not been given <span
id="fr_972"></span>[1](#fn_954).'

Thus did the venerable Mahâ Kassapa question the venerable Upâli as to
the matter, and as to the occasion, and as to the individual concerned,
and as to the (principal) rule, and as to the sub-rule, and as to who
would be guilty, and as to who would be innocent of the second
Pârâ*g*ika.

'Again, venerable Upâli, where was the third Pârâ*g*ika promulgated?'

'At Vesâlî, Sir.'

'Concerning whom was it spoken?'

'A number of Bhikkhus.'

'In regard to what matter?'

'Human beings <span id="fr_973"></span>[2](#fn_955).'

Thus did the venerable Mahâ Kassapa question the venerable Upâli as to
\[all the particulars, as before\] of the third Pârâ*g*ika.

'Again, venerable Upâli, where was the fourth Pârâ*g*ika promulgated?'

'At Vesâlî, Sir.'

'Concerning whom was it spoken?'

'The Bhikkhus dwelling on the banks of the Vaggumudâ river.'

'In regard to what matter?'

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

'Superhuman conditions.'

Thus did the venerable Mahâ Kassapa question the venerable Upâli as to
\[all the particulars, as before\] of the fourth Pârâ*g*ika. And in like
manner did he question him through both the Vinayas <span
id="fr_974"></span>[1](#fn_956); and as he was successively asked, so
did Upâli make reply.

8\. Then the venerable Mahâ Kassapa laid a resolution before the
Sa*m*gha: 'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. If the time seems meet to
the Sa*m*gha, I would question Ânanda concerning the Dhamma.'

And the venerable Ânanda laid a resolution before the Sa*m*gha: 'Let the
venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. If the time seems meet to the Sa*m*gha, I,
as questioned by the venerable Mahâ Kassapa, will give reply.'

And the venerable Mahâ Kassapa said to the venerable Ânanda: 'Where,
venerable Ânanda, was the Brahma*g*âla spoken?'

'On the way, Sir, between Râ*g*agaha and Nalanda, at the royal
rest-house at Ambala*tth*ikâ <span id="fr_975"></span>[2](#fn_957).'

'Concerning whom was it spoken?'

'Suppiya, the wandering ascetic, and Brahmadatta, the young Brâhman.'

Thus did the venerable Mahâ Kassapa question

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

the venerable Ânanda as to the occasion of the Brahma*g*âla, and as to
the individuals concerning whom it was spoken.

'And again, venerable Ânanda, where was the Sâma*ññ*a-phala spoken?'

'At Râ*g*agaha, Sir; in *G*îvaka's Mango Grove.'

'And with whom was it spoken?'

'With A*g*âtasattu, the son of the Vedehî.'

Thus did the venerable Mahâ Kassapa question the venerable Ânanda as to
the occasion of the Sâma*ññ*a-phala, and as to the individual concerned.
And in like manner did he question him through the five Nikâyas, and as
he was successively asked, so did Ânanda make reply.

9\. Then the venerable Ânanda spake thus to the Thera Bhikkhus: 'The
Blessed One, Sirs, at the time of his passing away, spake thus to me
"When I am gone, Ânanda, let the Sa*m*gha, if it should so wish, revoke
all the lesser and minor precepts <span
id="fr_976"></span>[1](#fn_958)."'

'Did you then, venerable Ânanda, ask the Blessed One which were the
lesser and minor precepts?'

'No, Sirs.'

Some Theras then said that all the rules save the four Pârâ*g*ikas;
others that all save those and the thirteen Sa*m*ghâdisesas; others that
all save those and the two Aniyatas; others that all save those and the
thirty Nissaggiyas; others that all save those and the ninety-two
Pâ*k*ittiyas; others that all save those and the four Pâ*t*idesaniyas
were lesser and minor precepts.

Then the venerable Mahâ Kassapa laid a resolution before the Sa*m*gha:
'Let the venerable

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sa*m*gha hear me.
There are certain of our precepts which relate to matters in which the
laity are concerned. Now the laity know of us that "such and such things
are proper for you Sama*n*as who are Sakyaputtiyas, and such and such
things are not." If we were to revoke the lesser and minor precepts, it
will be said to us: "A set of precepts was laid down for his disciples
by the Sama*n*a Gotama to endure until the smoke should rise from his
funeral pyre <span id="fr_977"></span>[1](#fn_959). So long as their
teacher remained with these men, so long did they train themselves in
the precepts. Since their teacher has passed away from them, no longer
do they now train themselves in the precepts.'

'If the time seems meet to the Sa*m*gha, not ordaining what has not been
ordained, and not revoking what has been ordained, let it take upon
itself and ever direct itself in the precepts according as they have
been laid down. This is the resolution.

'Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. \[These things being so <span
id="fr_978"></span>[2](#fn_960)\] the Sa*m*gha takes upon itself the
precepts according as they have been laid down. Whosoever of the
venerable ones approves thereof, let him keep silence. Whosoever
approves not thereof, let him speak. The Sa*m*gha has taken upon itself
the precepts according as they were laid down. Therefore does it keep
silence. Thus do I understand.'

10\. Now the Thera Bhikkhus said to the venerable

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ânanda: 'That was
ill done by thee, friend Ânanda, in that thou didst not ask the Blessed
One which were the lesser and minor precepts. Confess thy fault.'

'Through forgetfulness was it, Sirs, that I did not ask that of the
Blessed One. I see no fault therein. Nevertheless, out of my faith in
you, I confess that as a fault <span id="fr_979"></span>[1](#fn_961).'

'This also, friend Ânanda, was ill done by thee, in that thou steppedst
upon the Blessed One's rainy-season garment to sew it. Confess thy
fault.'

'It was not, Sirs, through any want of respect to the Blessed One that I
did so. I see no fault therein. Nevertheless, out of my faith in you, I
confess that as a fault.'

'This also, friend Ânanda, was ill done by thee, in that thou causedst
the body of the Blessed One to be saluted by women first <span
id="fr_980"></span>[2](#fn_962), so that by their weeping the body of
the Blessed One was defiled by tears. Confess that fault.'

'I did so, Sirs, with the intention that they should not be kept beyond
due time. I see no fault therein. Nevertheless, out of my faith in you,
I confess that as a fault.'

'This too, friend Ânanda, was ill done by thee, in that even when a
suggestion so evident and a hint so clear were given thee by the Blessed
One, thou didst not beseech him, saying, "Let the Blessed One remain on
for a kalpa! Let the Happy One remain on for a kalpa for the good and
happiness of the

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

great multitudes, out of pity for the world, for the good and the gain
and the weal of gods and men <span id="fr_981"></span>[1](#fn_963)!"
Confess that fault.'

'I was possessed (by the Evil One) <span
id="fr_982"></span>[2](#fn_964), friends, when I refrained from so
beseeching him. I see no fault therein. Nevertheless, out of my faith in
you, I confess that as a fault.'

'This also, friend Ânanda, was ill done by thee, in that thou exertedst
thyself to procure admission for women into the Dhamma and Vinaya
proclaimed by the Tathâgata <span id="fr_983"></span>[3](#fn_965).
Confess that fault.'

'That did I do, friends, thinking of Mahâ Pa*g*âpatî the Gotamî, the
sister of the Blessed One's mother; his nurse and comforter, who gave
him milk; how she, when she who had borne him was dead, herself suckled
him as with mother's milk. I see no fault therein. Nevertheless, out of
my faith in you, I confess that as a fault.'

11\. Now at that time the venerable Purâ*n*a was wandering through the
Southern Hills with a great company of Bhikkhus, with five hundred
Bhikkhus. And when the Thera Bhikkhus had completed the chanting over
together of the Dhamma and the Vinaya, he, having stayed in the Southern
Hills as long as he thought fit, went on to Râ*g*agaha to the
Ve*l*uvana, to the Kalandaka Nivâpa, where the Thera Bhikkhus were, and
having greeted the Thera Bhikkhus, he took his seat on one side.

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When he was so
seated, the Thera Bhikkhus said to him:

'The Dhamma and the Vinaya, friend Purâ*n*a, have been chanted over
together by the Thera Bhikkhus. Do thou, then, submit thyself to and
learn the text so rehearsed by them <span
id="fr_984"></span>[1](#fn_966).'

'The Dhamma and the Vinaya, Sirs, have been well sung by the Theras.
Nevertheless, even in such manner as it has been heard by me, and
received by me from the very mouth of the Blessed One, in that manner
will I bear it in my memory.'

12\. Now the venerable Ânanda said to the Thera Bhikkhus: 'The Blessed
One, Sirs, said to me at the time of his death: "Let then the Sa*m*gha,
Ânanda, when I am dead, impose the higher penalty on *Kh*anna the
Bhikkhu <span id="fr_985"></span>[2](#fn_967)."

'Didst thou then, friend Ânanda, ask the Blessed One what the higher
penalty was?'

'I did, Sirs, (and the reply was): 'Let *Kh*anna the Bhikkhu, Ânanda,
say whatever he may wish; but the Bhikkhus should neither speak to him,
nor exhort him, nor admonish him."'

'Do thou, then, friend Ânanda, let *Kh*anna the Bhikkhu know that the
higher penalty has been imposed upon him.'

'How can I, Sirs, do so? Passionate is that Bhikkhu, and rough.'

'Go then, friend Ânanda, in company with a number of other Bhikkhus.'

'Even so, Sirs,' said Ânanda, in assent to the Thera Bhikkhus. And he
took with him a number

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

of Bhikkhus, to wit, five hundred Bhikkhus, and embarked on a boat going
up stream, and disembarked at Kosambî, and not far from king Udena's
park he took his seat at the foot of a certain tree.

13\. Now at that time king Udena was enjoying himself in the park
together with the ladies of his palace. And the ladies heard that their
teacher, the venerable Ânanda, was seated at the foot of a tree not far
from the park. And they said to king Udena:

'They say that our teacher, the venerable Ânanda, is seated at the foot
of a tree not far from the park. We desire, Lord, to go and see him.'

'Go, then, and see the Sama*n*a Ânanda.' And they went and saluted the
venerable Ânanda, and took their seats on one side. And he. instructed,
and aroused, and incited, and gladdened them with religious discourse.
And when that discourse was concluded, they presented the venerable
Ânanda with five hundred robes, and exalted and thanked him for his
discourse, and arose from their seats, and saluted him, and keeping him
on their right sides as they passed him, they departed thence.

14\. And king Udena saw the ladies coming from the distance. And on
seeing them he said to them:

'Well, did you succeed in seeing the Sama*n*a Ânanda?'

'We saw him, Sire.'

'Did you present the Sama*n*a Ânanda with any gift?'

'We gave, Sire, to the venerable Ânanda five hundred robes.'

Then king Udena was indignant and annoyed, and became angry, saying:

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

'How can the Sama*n*a Ânanda accept so many robes? Would he set up as a
hawker in cloths, or would he open a shop <span
id="fr_986"></span>[1](#fn_968)?'

And king Udena went to where the venerable Ânanda was, and after
exchanging with him the greetings and compliments of friendship and
civility, sat down by his side. And when he was so seated, he said to
him:

'Did our ladies come hither, Ânanda?'

'Yes, great king.'

'Did they give anything to your reverence?'

'They gave me, great king, five hundred robes.'

'And what does your reverence intend to do with those five hundred
robes?'

I shall divide them, great king, among those of the Bhikkhus whose robes
are worn out.'

'And what do you intend, Ânanda, to do with the worn-out robes?'

'Of those, great king, we shall make counterpanes.'

'And what do you intend to do, Ânanda, with the old counterpanes?'

'Of those, great king, we shall make bolster cases.'

'And what do you intend to do, Ânanda, with the old bolster cases?'

'Of those, great king, we shall make carpets.'

'And what do you intend to do, Ânanda, with the old carpets?'

'Of those, great king, we shall make towels for the washing of the
feet.'

'And what do you intend to do, Ânanda, with the old towels?'

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

'Of those, great king, we shall make dusters.'

'And what do you intend to do, Ânanda, with the old dusters?'

'Those, great king, we shall tear in shreds, and beat up with mud, and
use them for making flooring of clay.'

Then king Udena thought: 'These Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as make general use
of everything in a conscientious way, and take nothing as one man's
peculiar property <span id="fr_987"></span>[1](#fn_969).' And he
presented other five hundred pieces of cloth to the venerable Ânanda.

15\. But Ânanda went on to the Ghosita Ârâma, and sat down then on the
seat spread out for him. And the venerable *Kh*anna went to the place
where he was and saluted him, and took his seat beside him. And when he
was so seated, Ânanda said to him

'The Sa*m*gha, friend *Kh*anna, has imposed upon you the higher
penalty.'

'What then, friend Ânanda, is the higher penalty?'

'You, friend *Kh*anna, may say to the Bhikkhus whatever you wish; but
the Bhikkhus are neither to speak to you, nor exhort you, nor admonish
you.'

'Shall I not be even a slain man, friend Ânanda, so long as I am neither
spoken to, nor exhorted, nor admonished by the Bhikkhus?' said *Kh*anna,
and he fainted and fell.

Then the venerable *Kh*anna, pained, grieved, and seized with, remorse
through the higher penalty, remained alone and separate, earnest,
zealous, and resolved. And ere long he attained to that supreme

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

goal <span id="fr_988"></span>[1](#fn_970) of the higher life for the
sake of which men even of good family go out from all and every
household gain and comfort to become houseless wanderers--yea, that
supreme goal did he, by himself, and while yet in this visible world,
bring himself to the knowledge of, and continue to realise, and to see
face to face! And he became conscious that rebirth was at an end for
him, that the higher life had been fulfilled, that all that should be
done had been accomplished, and that, after this present life, there
would be no beyond <span id="fr_989"></span>[2](#fn_971)!

So the venerable *Kh*anna became yet another among the Arahats. And
after he had attained to Arahatship, the venerable *Kh*anna went to the
venerable Ânanda, and said:

'Remove from me now, friend Ânanda, the higher penalty.'

'From the moment, friend *Kh*anna, that you had realised Arahatship,
from that moment was the higher penalty removed from you.'

16\. Now whereas five hundred Bhikkhus, without one failing, without one
more, took part in this rehearsal of the Vinaya, therefore is that
rehearsal of the Vinaya called 'that of the five hundred <span
id="fr_990"></span>[3](#fn_972).'

=====================

Here ends the Eleventh Khandhaka, on the Rehearsal by the Five Hundred.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_947"></span>[370:1](sbe20119.htm#fr_964) The following
section differs from the corresponding passage in the 'Book of the Great
Decease' (VI, 36-41) in the very curious and instructive way pointed out
by H.O. in the Introduction to his edition of the text, p. xxvi, on
which see the remarks of Rh. D. at p. xiii of the General Introduction
to his 'Buddhist Suttas.'

<span id="fn_948"></span>[370:2](sbe20119.htm#fr_965) This was a flower
which was supposed to grow only in heaven, and its appearance on earth
showed that the devas, on some special occasion, had been casting down
heavenly flowers upon the earth.

<span id="fn_949"></span>[371:1](sbe20119.htm#fr_967) In the 'Book of
the Great Decease' the following speech comes before the preceding one.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[372:1](sbe20119.htm#fr_968) This last was
necessary, for if other Bhikkhus spent the Was at Râ*g*agaha, either
they must take part in the council, or its <span id="page_373">p.
373</span> decisions would have been invalid through its being
incompletely constituted (want of vaggatta).

<span id="fn_951"></span>[374:1](sbe20119.htm#fr_969) In other words, he
became an Arahat. Some MSS. omit the clause about the feet.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[374:2](sbe20119.htm#fr_970) Anupa*ññ*atti.
Turnour (Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1837, p. 19)
translates this word,: which is not in Childers, by 'the sequel or
application of the exhortation.' We think the pa*ññ*atti refers to the
principal rule (as laid down in the Sutta Vibhaṅga at the close of I, 5,
11), and the anupa*ññ*atti to the additions made to it in the following
sections.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[374:3](sbe20119.htm#fr_971) This last clause
doubtless refers to the closing words in the account given in the Sutta
Vibhaṅga of each rule.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[375:1](sbe20119.htm#fr_972) That is, 'theft.'

<span id="fn_955"></span>[375:2](sbe20119.htm#fr_973) That is, murder or
manslaughter. 'The slaying of is to be understood.

<span id="fn_956"></span>[376:1](sbe20119.htm#fr_974) Ubhato-vinaye.
That is, relating on the one hand to Bhikkhus, and on the other to
Bhikkhunîs (not Sutta Vibhaṅga and Khandhakas). The Burmese MS. at
Berlin reads ubhato-vibhaṅge, suggested possibly by Buddhaghosa's
expression in the corresponding part of his accounts of this Council at
the commencement of the Sumaṅgala Vilâsinî and the Samanta Pâsâdikâ (see
Turnour, loc. cit., and H.O., Vinaya III, 290.)

<span id="fn_957"></span>[376:2](sbe20119.htm#fr_975) In the text read
râ*g*âgârake, as suggested in the notes at p. 329, and confirmed by the
Sutta itself (ed. Grimblot).

<span id="fn_958"></span>[377:1](sbe20119.htm#fr_976) 'Book of the Great
Decease,' VI, 3.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[378:1](sbe20119.htm#fr_977) Dhûmakâlika*m*.
See our note above on VI, 17, I. Buddhaghosa says here, Dhûmakâlikan ti
yâva samanassa Gotamassa parinibbâna-*k*itika-dhûmo pa*ññ*âyati tâvakâlo
ti attho.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[378:2](sbe20119.htm#fr_978) The whole
repeated.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[379:1](sbe20119.htm#fr_979) Compare Mahâvagga
X, 1, 8, at the end.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[379:2](sbe20119.htm#fr_980) It is worthy of
notice that this episode is not referred to in the 'Book of the Great
Decease' (VI, 23-26. Compare V, 46-51).

<span id="fn_963"></span>[380:1](sbe20119.htm#fr_981) This refers to the
conversations in the 'Book of the Great Decease,' III, 1-4, and 43-60
(especially 56).

<span id="fn_964"></span>[380:2](sbe20119.htm#fr_982)
Pariyu*tth*ita-*k*itto. The words in parentheses are supplied from the
'Book of the Great Decease,' III, 4, where see Rh. D.'s note on the
spelling of the word.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[380:3](sbe20119.htm#fr_983) Pabba*gg*a*m*,
admission into the Order.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[381:1](sbe20119.htm#fr_984) Saṅgîti*m* upehi.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[381:2](sbe20119.htm#fr_985) See 'Book of the
Great Decease,' VI, 4.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[383:1](sbe20119.htm#fr_986) Paggâhika-sâlâ, on
which Buddhaghosa says nothing.

<span id="fn_969"></span>[384:1](sbe20119.htm#fr_987) Na kulâva*m*
gâmenti, on which Buddhaghosa says nothing.

<span id="fn_970"></span>[385:1](sbe20119.htm#fr_988) That is,
Arahatship, Nirvâ*n*a.

<span id="fn_971"></span>[385:2](sbe20119.htm#fr_989) This Nirvâ*n*a
paragraph is constantly recurring (e. g. 'Book of the Great Decease,' V,
68; Mahâvagga V, 1, 18; Sa*m*yutta VII, 1).

<span id="fn_972"></span>[385:3](sbe20119.htm#fr_990) Compare XII, 2, 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](sbe20120)
