[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20057)  [Next](sbe20059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6 <span id="fr_559"></span>[2](#fn_549).

1\. Now when the Blessed One had stayed as long as he thought fit at
Vesâlî he set out towards Sâvatthi.

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

Now at that time the pupils of the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus went on in
front of the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha which had the Buddha at its head, and
occupied the rooms, and occupied the sleeping-places, saying, 'This will
do for our superiors (upa*ggh*âyas), this for our teachers (â*k*ariyas),
this for ourselves.' And the venerable Sâriputta who had followed after
the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha which had the Buddha at its head, since all the
rooms and all the sleeping-places had been occupied, found no place to
sleep in, and took his seat at the foot of a certain tree.

Now the Blessed One, at early dawn, after he had risen, coughed. The
venerable Sâriputta coughed also.

'Who is this?' (said the Blessed One.)

'It is I, Lord; Sâriputta.'

'How do you come to be sitting here, Sâriputta?'

Then the venerable Sâriputta told the matter to the Blessed One.

2\. Then the Blessed One on that occasion and in that connection
convened a meeting of the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha, and asked, 'Is it true, as I
have been told, O Bhikkhus, that the pupils of the *Kh*abbaggiya
Bhikkhus have (acted in this way)?'

'It is true, Lord.'

Then the Blessed One rebuked them, saying (as usual, see *K*ullavagga I,
1, 2, 3), and he said to the Bhikkhus, 'Who is it, O Bhikkhus, who is
worthy of the best seat, and the best water, and the best food?'

Some of the Bhikkhus said, 'One who belonged to a Kshatriya family
before he entered the Order.' Others of the Bhikkhus said, One who
belonged to a Brahman family before he entered the Order.' Others again
said, 'One who belonged to a

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gahapati <span
id="fr_560"></span>[1](#fn_550) family before he entered the Order--one
versed in the Suttas--one versed in the Rules of the Order--an expounder
of the Dhamma <span id="fr_561"></span>[2](#fn_551)--one who has
attained the first, second, third, fourth *Gh*âna--one who has entered
the first, second, third Path--an Arahat--one who has the threefold
wisdom <span id="fr_562"></span>[3](#fn_552)--one who has the six
powers <span id="fr_563"></span>[4](#fn_553).'

3\. Then the Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus, and said, 'Long ago, O
Bhikkhus, there was a great banyan tree on the lower slopes of the
Himâlaya range; and near it there dwelt three friends--a partridge, a
monkey, and an elephant. And they dwelt together without mutual
reverence, confidence, and courtesy <span
id="fr_564"></span>[5](#fn_554). Then, O Bhikkhus, it occurred to those
friends, "Come now, let us find out which of us is the elder by birth;
and let us agree to honour and reverence and esteem and support him, and
by his counsels let us abide." So, Bhikkhus, the partridge and the
monkey asked the elephant,

'"How far back can you, friend, remember?"

'"Friends! when I was little I used to walk over

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

this banyan tree, keeping it between my thighs, and its topmost twig
brushed against my stomach. So far back, friends, can I remember."

'Then, O Bhikkhus, the partridge and the elephant asked the monkey \[the
same question\],

'"Friends! when I was little, sitting once on the ground, I gnawed at
the then topmost twig of this banyan. So far back can I remember."

'Then, O Bhikkhus, the monkey and the elephant asked the partridge \[the
same question\],

'"Friends! there was formerly a lofty banyan tree in yonder open space.
One day after eating one of its fruits, I voided the seed here; and from
that this banyan tree grew up. So I must be older than either of you."

'Thereupon, O Bhikkhus, the elephant and the monkey said to the
partridge, "You, friend, are the oldest of us all. Henceforth we will
honour and reverence and esteem and support you, and by your counsels
will we abide."

'Thenceforth, O Bhikkhus, the partridge kept the monkey and the elephant
in obedience to the Five Precepts, and observed them also himself. And
dwelling together in mutual reverence, confidence, and courtesy, at the
dissolution of the body after death they were reborn unto a happy state
in heaven. And this (perfect life of theirs) became known as "the good
life of the partridge <span id="fr_565"></span>[1](#fn_555)."

’Tis those who reverence the old  
That are the men who Dhamma know, <span id="page_195">p. 195</span>  
Worthy of praise while in this life  
And happy in the life to come.

4\. 'So that, O Bhikkhus, since even animals can live together in mutual
reverence, confidence, and courtesy, so much more, O Bhikkhus, should
you so let your light shine forth <span id="fr_566"></span>[1](#fn_556)
that you, who have left the world to follow so well taught a doctrine
and discipline, may be seen to dwell in like manner together.' And when
he had delivered a religious discourse (as in I, 1, 3), he said to the
Bhikkhus:

'I enjoin upon you, O Bhikkhus, that paying of reverence, rising up in
reverence, salutation, proper respect, and apportionment of the best
seat and water and food, shall be according to seniority. But property
belonging to the Sa*m*gha shall not be exclusively appropriated
according to seniority <span id="fr_567"></span>[2](#fn_557). Whosoever
does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a.

5\. 'These ten, O Bhikkhus, are not to be saluted--a Bhikkhu afterwards
admitted unto the higher grade of the Order by one previously
admitted--a person not admitted--a senior Bhikkhu when he belongs to a
different community, and does not speak according to the Dhamma--a
woman <span id="fr_568"></span>[3](#fn_558)--a eunuch <span
id="fr_569"></span>[4](#fn_559)--a Bhikkhu who has been placed under
probation <span id="fr_570"></span>[5](#fn_560)--one who, having been so
placed, is

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

liable to be thrown back to the beginning of his probationary term <span
id="fr_571"></span>[1](#fn_561)--one who is liable to have a penance
(Mânatta) imposed upon him--one who is undergoing a penance--one who, so
undergoing a penance, is fit to be rehabilitated.

'And these three, O Bhikkhus, ought to be saluted--one previously
admitted into the higher grade of the Order by one afterwards
admitted--the senior in a different community when he speaks according
to the Dhamma--and, O Bhikkhus, throughout the worlds of men and gods,
of Mâras and of Brahmas, by all creatures Sama*n*as and Brahmans, gods
and men, the Arahat Sammâsambuddha.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_549"></span>[191:2](sbe20058.htm#fr_559) The incident
related in the following chapter is identical with the 37th *G*âtaka
(including the Introductory Story there given) already translated by Rh.
D. in the 'Buddhist Birth Stories,' pp. 310-314.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[193:1](sbe20058.htm#fr_560) On this mention of
gahapati as the name of a caste or rank, compare the passage in the
Tevi*gg*a Sutta I, 47 = Sâma*ññ*aphala Sutta, p. 133 (translated by Rh.
D. in 'Buddhist Suttas from the Pâli,' S.B.E. vol. xi, p. 187), where
the word is opposed to a*ññ*atarasmi*m* kule pa*kk*â*g*âto.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[193:2](sbe20058.htm#fr_561) Dhamma is here
possibly already used in the special sense to which the term Abhidhamma
was afterwards applied. So Pu*nn*a, who in the Aṅguttara Nikâya I, 14,
is called the chief of the expounders of the Dhamma (compare Dîpava*m*sa
IV, 4), says of himself in the Apadâna abhidhammanaya*ññ*o ’ha*m*.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[193:3](sbe20058.htm#fr_562) Tevi*gg*o. See Rh.
D.'s remarks in 'Buddhist Suttas,' pp. 161, 162.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[193:4](sbe20058.htm#fr_563) This list contains
one or two terms which are omitted in the *G*âtaka introduction.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[193:5](sbe20058.htm#fr_564) These terms recur
at Mahâvagga I, 25, 6.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[194:1](sbe20058.htm#fr_565) Tittiriya*m*
brahma*k*ariya*m*. It is quite possible that a covert sarcasm is here
intended to be understood against the Taittirîya Brahmans.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[195:1](sbe20058.htm#fr_566) Ta*m* sobhetha yam
(one illegible word--JBH). On this idiom compare Mahâvagga X, 2, 20.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[195:2](sbe20058.htm#fr_567) Compare chapter
and also chapter 12. It would seem from these passages that the
prohibition to reserve exclusively according to seniority the use of
property belonging to the whole Sa*m*gha was held to imply that the
temporary use of it was to go according to seniority. Compare X, 18.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[195:3](sbe20058.htm#fr_568) See *K*ullavagga
X, 3.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[195:4](sbe20058.htm#fr_569) Compare Mahâvagga
I, 61, 2.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[195:5](sbe20058.htm#fr_570) See *K*ullavagga
II, 1, 2.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[196:1](sbe20058.htm#fr_571) See *K*ullavagga
III, 14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](sbe20059)
