[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20019)  [Next](sbe20021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 5.

1\. Now at that time the mangoes were ripe in the park of Seniya
Bimbisâra, the king of Magadha. And Seniya Bimbisâra, the king of
Magadha, had given command, saying,' Let the venerable ones have as much
fruit as they like.' Then the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus plucked even the
young fruits and ate them.

Now Seniya Bimbisâra, the king of Magadha, wanted a mango; and he gave
orders, saying, 'Go,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

my good men, to the park, and bring me hither a mango.'

'Even so, Lord,' said the men in assent to Seniya Bimbisâra, the king of
Magadha and they went to the park, and said to the park-keepers, 'Our
lord, good friends, has need of a mango. Give us one!'

'There are no mangoes, Sirs. The Bhikkhus have plucked even the young
ones, and eaten them.'

Then those men told the matter to Seniya Bimbisâra, the king of Magadha,
and he said: 'The mangoes have been well used, my good men, by the
venerable ones. Notwithstanding it is moderation that has been exalted
by the Blessed One.'

The people murmured, were shocked, and were indignant, &c., saying, 'How
can the Sakyaputtiya Sama*n*as, knowing no moderation, use up the king's
mangoes?' The Bhikkhus heard those men murmuring, shocked, and
indignant. Then those Bhikkhus told this matter to the Blessed One.

'You are not, O Bhikkhus, to eat mangoes. Whosoever does so, shall be
guilty of a dukka*t*a.'

2\. Now at that time it was the turn of a certain multitude to provide
the Sa*m*gha with a meal. Mango-peal was put into the curry. The
Bhikkhus, fearing to offend, would not partake of it.

'Take it, O Bhikkhus, and eat. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to eat the peal
of the mango.'

Now at that time it was the turn of a certain multitude to provide the
Sa*m*gha with a meal. They did not get so far as to make (curry with)
the peal, but went about in the dining-hall with whole mangoes. The
Bhikkhus, fearing to offend, would not accept them.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

'Take them, O Bhikkhus, and eat. I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to eat fruit
which has become allowable to Sama*n*as in any one of these five
ways--when it has been injured by fire <span
id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_147)--or by sword <span
id="fr_153"></span>[2](#fn_148)--or by nails--when it has not yet had
any seed in it--and fifthly, when it has no more seed in it <span
id="fr_154"></span>[3](#fn_149). I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to eat fruit
which has become allowable to Sama*n*as in any one of these five ways.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_147"></span>[75:1](sbe20020.htm#fr_152) Buddhaghosa gives
in the Samanta Pâsâdikâ on the 11th Pâ*k*ittiya the following
explanations of these terms. Aggi-parigitan ti agginâ pari*g*ita*m*
abhibhûta*m* da*ddh*a*m* phu*tth*an ti attho. The reading pari*g*ita*m*
is correct and should be inserted in the text for pari*k*ita*m*.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[75:2](sbe20020.htm#fr_153) Sattha-pari*g*itan
ti satthena pari*g*ita*m* abhibhûta*m* *kh*inna*m* viddha*m* vâ ti
attho. Esa nayo nakha-pari*g*ite (B., loc. cit.).

<span id="fn_149"></span>[75:3](sbe20020.htm#fr_154) These last two
clauses have already occurred at Mahâvagga VI, 21. The principle of the
injunction throughout its five divisions is one and the same--the seed,
or the capacity of fructification, must either have never existed, or
have passed away, or have been destroyed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](sbe20021)
