[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20011)  [Next](sbe20013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 11.

1\. Now at that time the Bhikkhu Uvâ*l*a <span
id="fr_54"></span>[5](#fn_53), being examined in the midst of the
Sa*m*gha with an offence, when he had denied then confessed it, when he
had confessed it then denied it, made

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

counter-charges <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_54), and spoke lies
which he knew to be such <span id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_55).

Those Bhikkhus who were moderate were annoyed, murmured, and became
indignant, saying, 'How can the Bhikkhu Uvâ*l*a do so?' And they told
the matter to the Blessed One.

'Is it true, O Bhikkhus, as they say that the Bhikkhu \[&c., as
before\].'

'It is true, Lord.'

Then he rebuked him, and when he had delivered a religious discourse he
addressed the Bhikkhus, and said:

'Then, O Bhikkhus, let the Sa*m*gha carry out the
Tassa-pâpiyyasikâ-kamma (the Proceeding in the case of the obstinately
wrong) <span id="fr_57"></span>[3](#fn_56).'

2\. 'And thus, O Bhikkhus, is it to be carried out. In the first place
the Bhikkhu Uvâ*l*a must have been warned; when he had been warned, he
must have been called upon to remember (whether he has, or has not,
consciously committed the offence); when he had been called upon to
remember, he must have been caused (by being put on his trial with
respect to the offence) to bring upon himself a new

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

offence (namely, of obstinacy or prevarication); when he has brought
upon himself this new offence, some discreet and able Bhikkhu ought to
lay the matter before the Sa*m*gha, saying,

'"Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear the. This Bhikkhu Uvâ*l*a, being
examined in the midst of the Sa*m*gha with an offence, when he has
denied it then confesses it, when he has confessed it then denies it,
makes counter-charges, and speaks lies which he knows to be such. If the
time seems meet to the Sa*m*gha, let the Sa*m*gha carry out the
Tassapâpiyyasikâ-kamma against the Bhikkhu Uvâ*l*a.

'"This is the motion.

'"Let the venerable Sa*m*gha hear me. This Bhikkhu Uvâ*l*a (&c., as
before). The Sa*m*gha carries out the Tassa-pâpiyyasikâ-kamma against
Uvâ*l*a the Bhikkhu. Whosoever of the venerable ones approves of the
Tassa-pâpiyyasikâ-kamma being carried out against Uvâ*l*a the Bhikkhu,
let him keep silence. Whosoever approves not thereof, let him speak.

'"A second time I say the same thing. This Bhikkhu Uvâ*l*a (&c., as
before, down to) let him speak. A third time I say the same thing (&c.,
as before, down to) let him speak.

'"The Tassa-pâpiyyasikâ-kamma has been carried out by the . Sa*m*gha
against Uvâ*l*a the Bhikkhu. Therefore is it silent. Thus do I
understand <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_57)."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[27:5](sbe20012.htm#fr_54) In the Burmese MSS.
the name of this monk is written Upavâla.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[28:1](sbe20012.htm#fr_55) A*ññ*ena a*ññ*a*m*
pa*t*i*k*arati. We follow Wijesi*m*ha Mudaliyar's interpretation of this
phrase as given by Childers (s.v. tassapâpiyyasikâ).

<span id="fn_55"></span>[28:2](sbe20012.htm#fr_56) Chapter 14, section
29 below, is in fact an elaboration of this paragraph, giving instances
of the kind of prevarication here intended to be referred to.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[28:3](sbe20012.htm#fr_57) The exact meaning of
the phrase is somewhat doubtful, owing to the ambiguity of the tassa. It
should probably be analysed 'the proceeding against one who is more
sinful (pâpiyo) than that (tassa);' that is, who adds sin to sin.
Childers gives a long note on the Proceeding drawn by Wijesi*m*ha
Mudaliyar from this chapter, but does not analyse the word.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[29:1](sbe20012.htm#fr_58) This Kammavâ*k*â is
precisely the same as is laid down in *K*ullavagga I, 1, 4, &c. in the
case of all the other penal Kammas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](sbe20013)
