[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20074)  [Next](sbe20076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2.

1\. Now when the Blessed One had stayed at Anupiyâ as long as he thought
fit, he set out on his journey towards Kosambî. And journeying straight
on he arrived in due course at Kosambî, and there, at Kosambî, he stayed
at the Ghosita Ârâma. Now the following thought occurred to Devadatta
when he had retired into solitude, and was plunged in meditation: 'Whom
now <span id="fr_667"></span>[1](#fn_653) can I so gain over that, he
being well pleased with me, much gain and honour may result to me? And
it occurred to him, 'Now this prince A*g*âtasattu is young, and has a
lucky future before him. Let me then gain him over; and he being well
pleased with me, much gain and honour will result.'

Then Devadatta folded up his sleeping-mat, and set out, fully bowled and
robed, for Râ*g*agaha; and in due course he arrived at Râ*g*agaha. Then
he laid aside his own form, and took upon himself the form of a child
clad in a girdle of snakes, and appeared on the lap of prince
A*g*âtasattu <span id="fr_668"></span>[2](#fn_654). Then was

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

prince A*g*âtasattu terrified, and startled, and anxious, and alarmed.

And Devadatta said to prince A*g*âtasattu, 'Are you afraid of me, O
prince?'

'Yes, I am. Who are you?'

'I am Devadatta.'

'If you, Sir, are really the worthy Devadatta, be good enough to appear
in your own shape.'

Then Devadatta, laying aside the form of the child, appeared there
before prince A*g*âtasattu with his inner and outer robes on, and with
his bowl in his hand. And prince A*g*âtasattu was well pleased with
Devadatta by reason of this marvel of Iddhi, and morning and evening he
used to go in five hundred chariots to wait upon him, and food was
brought and laid before him in five hundred dishes.

Then there arose in Devadatta's mind, possessed and vanquished by gain
and hospitality and fame <span id="fr_669"></span>[1](#fn_655), some
such thought as this: 'It is I who ought to lead the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha.'
And as the idea rose up within him, (that moment) was Devadatta deprived
of that his power of Iddhi.

2\. Nov at that time a Koliyan, by name Kakudha, who had been (as
Bhikkhu) the attendant on Moggallâna, had just died, and had appeared
again in a certain spiritual body <span id="fr_670"></span>[2](#fn_656),
possessed of a personality as large as two or three of the common
rice-fields of a Mâgadha village, and yet so constituted <span
id="fr_671"></span>[3](#fn_657) that he was

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

not in the way either of himself or of others <span
id="fr_672"></span>[1](#fn_658). And this celestial being, Kakudha, went
to the venerable Moggallâna, and bowed down before him, and took his
stand on one side. And so standing, he told the venerable Moggallâna
\[of the thought that had arisen in Devadatta's mind, and of the result
thereof\]. And when he had told him, he bowed down before the venerable
Moggallâna, and keeping him on his right side as he passed him, he
vanished away.

And the venerable Moggallâna went to the place where the Blessed One
was, and told him \[the whole matter\] <span
id="fr_673"></span>[2](#fn_659).

'What then, Moggallâna, have you so penetrated the mind of that
celestial being Kakudha, that you know that whatsoever he speaks, that
will be accordingly, and not otherwise <span
id="fr_674"></span>[3](#fn_660)?'

'I have, Lord.'

'Keep that saying, Moggallâna, secret; keep that saying secret. Even now
that foolish man will himself make himself known.

3 <span id="fr_675"></span>[4](#fn_661). 'There are, Moggallâna, these
five kinds of teachers now existing in the world. What are the five?

'In the first place, Moggallâna, there is one kind of teacher whose
conduct not being pure, he yet

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

gives out that he is a person of pure conduct, one whose conduct is
pure, and innocent, and without stain. His disciples know that that is
so, but they think, "If we announce the fact to the laity, he will not
like it. And how can we conduct ourselves towards him in a way that is
displeasing to him? And besides he is honoured with gifts of the
requisite clothing, food, lodging, and medicine for the sick. He will
sooner or later become known by that which he himself will do." Such a
teacher, Moggallâna, do his disciples protect in respect of his own
conduct. And being as he is, he expects <span
id="fr_676"></span>[1](#fn_662) to be protected by his disciples in
respect of his own conduct.

4\. 'Again, Moggallâna,' &c. \[as before, putting successively 'mode of
livelihood,' 'preaching of the Dhamma,' 'system of exposition,' &c.,
'insight arising from knowledge,' 'for 'conduct'\]. 'These, Moggallâna,
are the five kinds of teachers now existing in the world. But I being
pure in conduct, mode of livelihood, preaching of the Dhamma, system of
exposition, and insight arising from knowledge, give out that I am so,
that I am pure, innocent, and without stain in all these things. And
neither do my disciples protect me in respect of my own conduct, nor do
I expect them to do so.'

5\. Now when the Blessed One had remained at Kosambî as long as he
thought fit, he set out on his journey towards Râ*g*agaha. And
journeying straight on, he arrived in due course at Râ*g*agaha; and
there, at Râ*g*agaha, he stayed at the Ve*l*uvana in the Kalandaka
Nivâpa.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

And a number of Bhikkhus went to the Blessed One, and bowed down before
him, and took their seats on one side., And when so seated, they said to
the Blessed One: 'Prince A*g*âtasattu is in the habit of going morning
and evening with five hundred carts to wait upon Devadatta, and food is
brought and laid before him in five hundred dishes.'

'Envy not, O Bhikkhus, the gain and hospitality and fame of Devadatta.
So long, O Bhikkhus, as A*g*âtasattu \[so waits upon him and gives him
alms\] so long may we expect Devadatta not to prosper, but to decline in
virtuous qualities <span id="fr_677"></span>[1](#fn_663). Just, O
Bhikkhus, as if you were to burst a gall (bladder) <span
id="fr_678"></span>[2](#fn_664) before the nose of a fierce dog, the dog
would thereby become so much the fiercer, just so long, O Bhikkhus (&c.,
as before). To his own hurt, O Bhikkhus, has this gain, hospitality, and
fame come to Devadatta, to his own destruction. Just, O Bhikkhus, as a
plantain, or a bamboo, or a reed gives fruit to its own hurt and its own
destruction <span id="fr_679"></span>[3](#fn_665), just so to his own
hurt (&c., as before). Just as a young she-mule conceives to her own
hurt and her own destruction <span id="fr_680"></span>[4](#fn_666), just
so, O Bhikkhus, to his own hurt has this gain, &c., come to Devadatta.

'Its fruit destroys the plantain-tree; its fruit the bamboo and the
reed.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

'Honour destroys the evil man, just as its foal destroys the young
she-mule.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here endeth the First Portion for Recitation.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_653"></span>[233:1](sbe20075.htm#fr_667) In the text, for
kin nu read ka*m* nu.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[233:2](sbe20075.htm#fr_668) This taking upon
oneself another shape is not one of the powers of Iddhi included in the
first list referred to at note 5, [p. 230](sbe20074.htm#page_230).

<span id="fn_655"></span>[234:1](sbe20075.htm#fr_669) Compare Mahâvagga
V, 1, 22, on this expression. Also below, § 5.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[234:2](sbe20075.htm#fr_670) A*ññ*atara*m*
manomaya*m* kâya*m* upapanno. Perhaps 'in a mode of existence in which
his body was changeable at will.' (See Childers, sub voce manomayo.)

<span id="fn_657"></span>[234:3](sbe20075.htm#fr_671) Attabhâvo. See IX,
1, 3.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[235:1](sbe20075.htm#fr_672) Vyâbâdheti. He
could occupy the same space as other beings without incommoding them.
The word occurs in the same sense in the passage quoted from Buddhaghosa
in Rh. D.'s note 1 on the Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta V, 10, but originally
occurring in the Aṅguttara Nikâya.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[235:2](sbe20075.htm#fr_673) The last paragraph
is here repeated in the text.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[235:3](sbe20075.htm#fr_674) On the use here of
*k*etasâ *k*eto pari*kk*a, compare Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta I, 16, 17.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[235:4](sbe20075.htm#fr_675) The following two
sections are repeated below, VII, 3, 10, to all the Bhikkhus.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[236:1](sbe20075.htm#fr_676) Pa*kk*âsi*m*sati.
Perhaps this word here means 'he requires, needs.'

<span id="fn_663"></span>[237:1](sbe20075.htm#fr_677) This phrase runs
in the same mould as the one so constantly repeated at the commencement
of the Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta (I, §§ 4-11).

<span id="fn_664"></span>[237:2](sbe20075.htm#fr_678) Pitta*m*
bhindeyyu*m*. Literally, 'should break a gall.'

<span id="fn_665"></span>[237:3](sbe20075.htm#fr_679) These three plants
die after producing fruit.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[237:4](sbe20075.htm#fr_680) Because she would
die if she did. On assatarî, compare above, VI, 4, 3, and our note
there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](sbe20076)
