[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20064)  [Next](sbe20066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 13.

1\. Now at that time the Blessed One spake in many a figure concerning
the Vinaya, speaking in praise of the Vinaya, in praise of learning the
Vinaya, and again and again in reference thereto in praise of the
venerable Upâli. Then said the Bhikkhus: 'The Blessed One speaks (&c.,
down to) Upâli. Come, let us learn the Vinaya under the venerable
Upâli.' And many Bhikkhus, senior and junior, and of medium standing,
went to learn the Vinaya under the venerable Upâli. The venerable Upâli
taught them standing, out of reverence for the senior Bhikkhus, and the
senior Bhikkhus heard him standing, out of reverence for the law; and
thereby both the senior Bhikkhus grew weary, and the venerable Upâli.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, a junior Bhikkhu, when giving instruction, to sit
on a seat of equal height, or higher, out of reverence for the law; and
a senior Bhikkhu, when receiving instruction, to sit on a seat

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

of equal height, or lower, out of reverence for the law <span
id="fr_594"></span>[1](#fn_584).'

2\. Now at that time a. number of Bhikkhus stood around Upâli, waiting
for seats <span id="fr_595"></span>[2](#fn_585); and they grew weary.

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to sit down together with brethren entitled to
sit on seats of equal height.'

Then the Bhikkhus thought, 'How many of us are entitled to sit on seats
of equal height?'

They told this matter to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to sit on the same seat with those who are
within three years of one another in seniority.'

Now at that time a number of Bhikkhus, entitled to sit on the same seat,
sat down on a couch, and broke the couch down; or sat down on a chair,
and broke the chair down.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, the use of a couch, or a chair, for three
persons.'

Even when three sat on the couch, or chair, it broke.

'I allow, O Bhikkhus, two to sit on a couch or a chair.'

Now at that time Bhikkhus who were not entitled to seats of equal
height, were afraid they would offend if they sat together on a long
seat. They told this matter to the Blessed One.

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to sit together on a long seat with others not
entitled to sit on seats of equal height, unless they are women, or
eunuchs, or hermaphrodites.'

Then the Bhikkhus thought, 'What is the limit of length which is
included under the term "long seat?"'

'I allow the term "long seat" to be used, O Bhikkhus, of any seat long
enough to accommodate three persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_584"></span>[207:1](sbe20065.htm#fr_594) Compare the
fifteen rules of a similar character, Sekhiyas 57-72, and especially No.
69.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[207:2](sbe20065.htm#fr_595) Onlookers
apparently, not strictly learners. On the force of pa*t*imâneti, compare
the Bhikkhunî-vibhaṅga, Pârâ*g*ika I, 1, and *G*âtaka II, 423.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](sbe20066)
