[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe20085)  [Next](sbe20087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 8.

1\. Now at that time the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus, on being hindered by
the senior Bhikkhus in (their use of) the hot bath-room, out of spite
piled up a quantity of sticks (in the fireplace), set fire to them,
closed up the doorway, and sat down in the door-way. The Bhikkhus,
scorched by the heat, and not being allowed a way out, fell down in a
faint.

The sober Bhikkhus murmured, &c. . . . . told the Blessed One, &c. . . .
. He said to the Bhikkhus,

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'No one, O
Bhikkhus, is to \[do so\]. Whosoever does, shall be guilty of a
dukka*t*a.

2\. 'Therefore, O Bhikkhus, do I establish a rule of conduct for the
Bhikkhus, in respect of the hot bath-room <span
id="fr_833"></span>[1](#fn_819), according to which they ought to behave
themselves therein.

'Whosoever first enters the bath-room, if ashes have accumulated (in the
fireplace) should throw the ashes out. If the hot bath-room, or its
prepared flooring, or the cell, or the ante-chamber of the bath, or the
cooling-room, or the hall are dirty, they should be swept. The chunam
should be pounded, the clay moistened with water, and water poured into
the water jar.

'When entering the hot bath-room, the face should be smeared over with
clay, and the person well covered up in front and behind before
entering. A seat is not to be taken so as to hustle the senior Bhikkhus,
and junior Bhikkhus are not to be ousted from their seats. If possible,
shampooing is to be performed for the senior Bhikkhus in the hot
bath-room.

'When leaving the hot bath-room, the chair (that has been used to sit on
before the fire) should be carried off, and the person well covered up
before and behind before leaving. If possible, shampooing is to be
performed for the senior Bhikkhus in the water also.

'A bath is not to be taken in front of the senior Bhikkhus, nor above
them. One who has bathed

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

and is getting up out (of the water) is to make ay for one who is
getting down into the water.

'Whoso comes last out of the hot bath-room is to wash it, if it be
dirty; to wash the vessel in which the clay is kept, to put the chairs
used in the hot bath-room in order, to extinguish the fire, to close up
the doorway, and then come out.

'This, O Bhikkhus, is the rule of conduct which I lay down for the
Bhikkhus, in respect of the hot bath-room, according to which they are
to behave themselves therein.'

=====================

### 9 and 10.

\[These chapters deal with the manner of using the privies, and other
sanitary arrangements described in V, 35, where see our note.\]

=====================

### 11, 12, 13, and 14.

\[These chapters simply repeat, word for word, Mahâvagga I, 25, 14-24;
I, 26, 1-11; I, 32, 3; and I, 33 respectively.\]

=====================

Here ends the Eighth Khandhaka, containing the Rules for Conduct.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_819"></span>[297:1](sbe20086.htm#fr_833) *G*antâghara, not
simply bath-room, but room in which hot or steam baths were taken. Most
of the following expressions occur in Mahâvagga I, 25, 12, or above at
V, 14, 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](sbe20087)
