[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](stc00)  [Next](stc02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GHBV94/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Seven Tablets of Creation*, by Leonard William King, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_XI">p. XI</span>

# Preface

PERHAPS no section of Babylonian literature has been more generally
studied than the legends which record the Creation of the world. On the
publication of the late Mr. George Smith's work, "The Chaldean Account
of Genesis," which appeared some twenty-seven years ago, it was
recognized that there was in the Babylonian account of the Creation, as
it existed in the seventh century before Christ, much which invited
comparison with the corresponding narrative in the Book of Genesis. It
is true that the Babylonian legends which had been recovered and were
first published by him were very fragmentary, and that the exact number
and order of the Tablets, or sections, of which they were composed were
quite uncertain; and that, although they recorded the creation of the
heavens and of the heavenly bodies, they contained no direct account of
the creation of man. In spite of this, however, their resemblance to the
Hebrew narrative was unmistakable, and in consequence they at once
appealed to a far larger circle of students than would otherwise have
been the case.

After the appearance of Mr. Smith's work, other scholars produced
translations of the fragments which

<span id="page_XII">p. XII</span>

he had published, and the names of Oppert, Schrader, and Sayce will
always be associated with those who were the first to devote themselves
to the interpretation of the Creation Legends. Moreover, new fragments
of the legends have from time to time been acquired by the Trustees of
the British Museum, and of these the most important is the fine text of
the Fourth Tablet of the Creation Series, containing the account of the
fight between the god Marduk and the dragon Tiamat, which was published
in 1887 by Dr. Wallis Budge, and translated by Professor Sayce in the
same year. Professor Sayce's translation of the Creation Legends marked
a distinct advance upon those of his predecessors, and it was the most
complete, inasmuch as he was enabled to make use of the new tablet which
restored so much of the central portion of the story. In the year 1890,
in his important work *Die Kosmologie der Babylonier*, Professor Jensen
of Marburg gave a translation of the legends together with a
transliteration and commentary; in 1895 Professor Zimmern of Leipzig
translated all the fragments then known, and a year later Professor
Delitzsch of Berlin also published a rendering. Finally, two years ago,
Professor Jensen issued a new and revised translation of the Creation
Legends in the opening pages of the first part of his work *Mythen and
Epen*, the second part of which, containing his notes and commentary,
appeared some months ago.

<span id="page_XIII">p. XIII</span>

In the course of the year 1900, the writer was entrusted with the task
of copying the texts of a number of Babylonian and Assyrian legends for
publication in the series of *Cuneiform Texts from Babylonian Tablets,
etc., in the British Museum*, and, among the documents selected for
issue, were those relating to the Creation of the world. Several of the
texts of the Creation Legends, which had been used by previous
translators, had never been published, and one tablet, which Mr. George
Smith had consulted in 1876, had not been identified by subsequent
workers. During my work I was so fortunate as to recognize this tablet,
and was enabled to make copies of all the texts, not only of those which
were previously known, but also of a number of new duplicates and
fragments which I had meanwhile identified. These copies appeared in
*Cuneiform Texts*, Part XIII (1901), Plates 1-41. The most interesting
of the new fragments there published was a tablet which restored a
missing portion of the text of the Second Tablet of the Creation Series,
and of this, on account of its interest, I gave a translation in a note
to the plate on which the text appeared. It was not my intention at that
time to publish anything further upon the subject of the Creation
Legends.

While I was engaged, however, in searching for fragments of other
Babylonian legends for publication officially, it was my good fortune to
come across a fine duplicate of the Second Tablet of the Creation.

<span id="page_XIV">p. XIV</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Series. A further
prolonged search was rewarded by the finding of other fragments of the
poem, and a study of these showed me that the earlier portions of the
text of the Creation Story, as already known, could be considerably
augmented. Among them, moreover, was a fragment of the poem which refers
to the Creation of Man; this fragment is extremely important, for in
addition to its valuable contents it also settles the disputed question
as to the number of Tablets, or sections, of which the Creation Series
was composed. In view of the additional information as to the form and
contents of the poem which this new material afforded, it was clearly
necessary that a new translation of the Creation Legends should be made,
and this I undertook forthwith.

The new fragments of the poem which I had identified up to the summer of
last year are inscribed upon tablets of the Neo-Babylonian period. At
the conclusion of the examination of tablets of this class, I
lithographed the newly identified texts in a series of plates which are
published in the second volume of the present work. These plates were
already printed off, when, at the beginning of the present year, after
my return from Assyria, I identified a fresh group of fragments of the
poem inscribed, not upon Neo-Babylonian, but upon Assyrian tablets. At
that time I was engaged on making a detailed catalogue, or hand-list, of
the smaller fragments in the various collections of Assyrian tablets
from

<span id="page_XV">p. XV</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kuyunjik, and, as
a result of previous study of the legends themselves and of the Assyrian
commentaries to the Seventh Tablet of the series, I was enabled to
identify ten new fragments of the poem which are inscribed upon tablets
from the library of Ashur-bani-pal at Nineveh. In order to avoid
upsetting the arrangement of the plates in Vol. II, the texts of the new
Assyrian fragments are published by means of outline blocks in
Appendices I and II to the present volume.

Those who have studied the published texts of the Creation Series will
remember that the material used by previous translators of the legends
has consisted of some twenty-one tablets and fragments inscribed with
portions of the poem. The number of new tablets and fragments belonging
to the Creation Series which are here used and translated for the first
time reaches the total of thirty-four, but, as I have joined up six of
these to other similar fragments, this total has been reduced to
twenty-eight. Thus, in place of the twenty-one tablets previously known,
forty-nine separate tablets and fragments have now been identified as
containing portions of the text of the Creation Series.

The new information, furnished by the recently discovered material
regarding the Story of Creation, may here be briefly summarized.
Hitherto our knowledge of the contents of Tablets I and II of the series
has been very fragmentary. After the

<span id="page_XVI">p. XVI</span>

narrative of the creation of the great gods in the opening lines of the
poem, and a fragmentary reference to the first symptoms of revolt
exhibited by the primeval monsters, Apsû and Tiamat, and Mummu, the
minister of Apsû, there occurred a great gap in the text, and the story
began again with the account of how Tiamat prepared to wage war against
the gods. Apsû and Mummu have at this point entirely disappeared from
the narrative, and the ally of Tiamat is the god Kingu, whom she
appoints to command her forces. What followed the creation of the great
gods, what was the cause of the revolt, what was the fate of Apsû and
Mummu, and what were the events which led up to Tiamat's preparations
for battle, are questions that have hitherto remained unanswered. We now
know that the account of the creation of the gods was no fuller than
that which has come down to us from Damascius. After the birth of Lakhmu
and Lakhamu, Anshar and Kishar, Anu, Bêl (i.e., Enlil, or Illil), and Ea
(Nudimmud), the text does not proceed to narrate in detail the coming
forth of the lesser deities, but plunges at once into the story of the
revolt of the primeval forces of chaos. We now know also that it was
Apsû, and not Tiamat, who began the revolt against the gods; and that,
according to the poem, his enmity was aroused, not by the creation of
light as has been previously suggested, but by the disturbance of his
rest in consequence of the new "way" of the gods, which tended to
produce order in place of chaos.

<span id="page_XVII">p. XVII</span>

One of the most striking facts which the new fragments furnish with
regard to the contents of the legends is the prominent part played by
the god Ea in the earlier episodes of the story. After Apsû and Mummu
had repaired to Tiamat and had hatched with her their plot against the
gods, it was the god Ea, who, abounding in all wisdom, detected their
plan and frustrated it. The details of Ea's action are still a matter of
uncertainty, but, as I have shown in the Introduction, it is clear that
Apsû and Mummu were overthrown, and that their conqueror was Ea.
Moreover, it was only after their downfall, and in order to avenge them,
that Tiamat began her preparations for battle. She was encouraged in her
determination by the god Kingu, and it was in consequence of the
assistance he then gave her that she afterwards appointed him leader of
her host.

Another point which is explained by the new fragments concerns the
repetitions in Tablets I, II, and III of the lines containing the
account of Tiamat's preparations for battle. The lines describing this
episode are given no less than four times: in Tablet I, in Tablet II,
and twice in Tablet III. We now know that the first description of
Tiamat's preparations occurs after the account of her determination to
avenge her former allies; and in the Second Tablet the lines are put
into the mouth of Ea, who continues to play a prominent part in the
narrative, and carries the tidings to Anshar. How Anshar repeated the
lines

<span id="page_XVIII">p. XVIII</span>

to Gaga, his messenger, and how Gaga delivered the message to Lakhmu and
Lakhamu, is already well known.

Perhaps the most striking of all the new fragments of the poem here
published is that which contains the opening and closing lines of the
Sixth Tablet, and, at last, furnishes us with a portion of the text
describing the Creation of Man. We now know that, as in the Hebrew
narrative, the culminating act of Creation was the making of man. Marduk
is here represented as declaring to Ea that he will create man from his
own blood, and from bone which he will form; it is important to note
that the Assyrian word here used for "bone," *i<u>ss</u>imtu*, which has
not hitherto been known, corresponds to the Hebrew word *'e<u>s</u>em*,
"bone," which occurs in Gen. ii, 2 3, in connection with the account of
the creation of woman. The text thus furnishes another point of
resemblance between the Babylonian and the Hebrew stories of Creation.
The new fragment also corroborates in a remarkable degree the account
given by Berossus of the Babylonian version of the creation of man.
According to the writer's rendering of the passage, Marduk declares that
he will use his own blood in creating mankind, and this agrees with the
statement of Berossus, that Bêl directed one of the gods to cut off his
(i.e. Bêl's) head, and to form mankind from his blood mixed with earth.
This subject is discussed at length and in detail in the Introduction,
as well as a number of new points.

<span id="page_XIX">p. XIX</span>

of resemblance between the Babylonian and the Hebrew accounts of the
Creation which are furnished by other recently identified fragments of
the poem.

With regard to the extent and contents of the Creation Series, we now
know that the Tablets of which the series was composed are seven in
number; and we also possess the missing context or frame-work of the
Seventh Tablet, which contains addresses to Marduk under his fifty
titles of honour. From this we learn that, when the work of Creation was
ended, the gods gathered together once more in Upshukkinakku, their
council-chamber; here they seated themselves in solemn assembly and
proceeded to do honour to Marduk, the Creator, by reciting before him
the remarkable series of addresses which form the contents of the last
Tablet of the poem. Many of the missing portions of the Seventh Tablet,
including the opening lines, it has been found possible to restore from
the new fragments and duplicates here published.

In the following pages a transliteration of the text of the Creation
Series is given, which has been constructed from all the tablets and
fragments now known to be inscribed with portions of the poem, together
with a translation and notes. For comparison with the legends contained
in the Creation Series, translations have been added of the other
Babylonian accounts of the history of Creation, and of some texts
closely connected therewith. Among

<span id="page_XX">p. XX</span>

these mention may be made of the extracts from a Sumerian text, and from
a somewhat similar one in Babylonian, referring to the Creation of the
Moon and the Sun; these are here published from a so-called
"practice-tablet," or student's exercise. A remarkable address to a
mythical river, to which the creation of the world is ascribed, is also
given.

In the first Appendix the Assyrian commentaries to the Seventh Tablet
are examined in detail, and some fragments of texts are described which
bear a striking resemblance to the Seventh Tablet, and are of
considerable interest for the light they throw on the literary history
of the poem. Among the texts dealt with in the second Appendix one of
the most interesting is a Babylonian duplicate of the tablet which has
been supposed to contain the instructions given by Marduk to man after
his creation, but is now shown by the duplicate to be part of a long
didactic composition containing moral precepts, and to have nothing to
do with the Creation Series. Similarly, in the fourth Appendix I have
printed a copy of the text which has been commonly, but erroneously,
supposed to refer to the Tower of Babel. The third Appendix includes
some hitherto unpublished astrological texts of the period of the
Arsacidae, which contain astrological interpretations and explanations
of episodes of the Creation story; they indicate that Tiamat, in her
astrological character, was regarded as a star or constellation in the
neighbourhood of the ecliptic,

<span id="page_XXI">p. XXI</span>

and they moreover furnish an additional proof of the identification of
her monster brood with at any rate some of the Zodiacal constellations.

During the preparation of this work I have, of course, consulted the
translations and renderings of the Creation Legends which have been made
by other workers on the subject, and especially those of Professors
Jensen, Zimmern, and Delitzsch. I have much pleasure in expressing here
my indebtedness to their published works for suggestions which I have
adopted from them.

To Mr. R. Campbell Thompson I am indebted for the ready assistance he
has afforded me during my search for new fragments and duplicates of the
legends.

In conclusion, my thanks are due to Dr. Wallis Budge for his friendly
suggestions which I have adopted throughout the progress of the work.

L. W. KING.

LONDON, July 31st, 1902.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](stc02.md)
