[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Ancient Near
East](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](stc02)  [Next](stc04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002GHBV94/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Seven Tablets of Creation*, by Leonard William King, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_XXV">p. XXV</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

THE great Assyrian poem, or series of legends, which narrates the story
of the Creation of the world and man, was termed by the Assyrians and
Babylonians *Enuma eli<u>sh</u>*, "When in the height," from the two
opening words of the text. The poem consisted of some nine hundred and
ninety-four lines, and was divided into seven sections, each of which
was inscribed upon a separate Tablet. The Tablets were numbered by the
Assyrian scribes, and the separate sections of the poem written upon
them do not vary very much in length. The shortest Tablet contains one
hundred and thirty-eight lines, and the longest one hundred and
forty-six, the average length of a Tablet being about one hundred and
forty-two lines. The poem embodies the beliefs of the Babylonians and
Assyrians concerning the origin of the universe; it describes the coming
forth of the gods from chaos, and tells the story of how the forces of
disorder, represented by the primeval water-gods Apsû and Tiamat, were
overthrown by Ea and Marduk respectively, and how Marduk, after
completing the triumph of the gods over chaos, proceeded to create the
world and man. The poem is known to us from portions of several Assyrian
and late-Babylonian copies of the work, and from

<span id="page_XXVI">p. XXVI</span>

extracts from it written out upon the so-called "practice-tablets," or
students' exercises, by pupils of the Babylonian scribes. The Assyrian
copies of the work are from the great library which was founded at
Nineveh by Ashur-bani-pal, king of Assyria from B.C. 668 to about B.C.
626; the Babylonian copies and extracts were inscribed during the period
of the kings of the Neo-Babylonian and Persian periods; and one copy of
the Seventh Tablet may probably be assigned to as late a date as the
period of the Arsacidae. All the tablets and fragments, which have
hitherto been identified as inscribed with portions of the text of the
poem, are preserved in the British Museum.

From the time of the first discovery of fragments of the poem
considerable attention has been directed towards them, for not only are
the legends themselves the principal source of our knowledge of the
Babylonian cosmogony, but passages in them bear a striking resemblance
to the cognate narratives in the Book of Genesis concerning the creation
of the world. The late Mr. George Smith, who was the first to publish an
account of the poem, recognized this resemblance and emphasized it in
his papers on the subject in 1875. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) In
the following year in

<span id="page_XXVII">p. XXVII</span>

his work "The Chaldean Account of Genesis" <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) he gave translations of the fragments of the
poem which had been identified, and the copies which he had made of the
principal fragments were published. <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md)
After Smith's death the interest in the texts which he had published did
not cease, and scholars continued to produce renderings and studies of
the legends. <span id="fr_3"></span>[3](#fn_3.md)

<span id="page_XXVIII">p. XXVIII</span>

In 1883 Dr. Wallis Budge gave an account of a fine Babylonian duplicate
of what proved to be the Fourth Tablet of the Creation Series; this
document restored considerable portions of the narrative of the fight
between Marduk and the dragon Tiamat, and added considerably to our
knowledge of the story of Creation and of the order in which the events
related in the story took place. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) In
the Hibbert Lectures for 1887 Professor Sayce translated the new
fragment of the text, <span id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5.md) and in the
following year published a complete translation <span
id="fr_6"></span>[3](#fn_6.md) of all fragments of the Creation Legends
which had up to that time been identified. In 1890 Professor Jensen, in
his studies on the Babylonian cosmogony, included a translation of the
legends together with a transliteration and a number of valuable
philological notes and discussion. <span id="fr_7"></span>[4](#fn_7.md) In
1895

<span id="page_XXIX">p. XXIX</span>

Professor Zimmern published a translation of the legends, similar in
plan to Sayce's earlier edition; in it he took advantage of some
recently identified fragments and duplicates, and put forward a number
of new renderings of difficult passages. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) In 1896 a third German translation of the
legends made its appearance; it was published by Professor Delitzsch and
included transliterations and descriptions of the various tablets and
fragments inscribed with portions of the text. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9.md) Finally, in 1900 Professor Jensen published
a second edition of his rendering of the legends in his *Mythen und
Epen*; <span id="fr_10"></span>[3](#fn_10.md) this work was the best which
could be prepared with the material then available. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[4](#fn_11.md)

<span id="page_XXX">p. XXX</span>

In the most recent translations of the Creation Series, those of
Delitzsch and Jensen, use was made in all of twenty-one separate tablets
and fragments which had been identified as inscribed with portions of
the text of the poem. <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md) In the present
work thirty-four

<span id="page_XXXI">p. XXXI</span>

additional tablets and fragments, inscribed with portions of the text of
the Creation Series, have been employed; but, as six of these join other
similar fragments, the number of separate tablets and fragments here
used for the first time is reduced to twenty-eight. The total number of
separate fragments of the text of the Creation Series is thus brought up
to forty-nine. <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) The new material is
distributed among the Seven Tablets of the Creation Series as
follows:—To the four known fragments of the First Tablet may now be
added eight others, <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14.md) consisting of
two fragments of an Assyrian tablet and four Babylonian fragments and
two extracts inscribed upon Babylonian "practice-tablets." To the three
known fragments of the Second Tablet may be added four others, <span
id="fr_15"></span>[3](#fn_15.md) consisting of parts of one Assyrian and of
three Babylonian tablets. To the four known fragments of the Third
Tablet may be added five other, <span id="fr_16"></span>[4](#fn_16.md)

<span id="page_XXXII">p. XXXII</span>

consisting of fragments of one Assyrian and one Babylonian tablet and
extracts inscribed upon three Babylonian "practice-tablets." To the five
known fragments of the Fourth Tablet only one new duplicate can be
added, <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) which is inscribed upon a
Babylonian "practice-tablet." To the three known fragments of the Fifth
Tablet may be added two others, <span id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18.md)
consisting of parts of two Assyrian tablets. Of the Sixth Tablet no
fragment has previously been known, and its existence was only inferred
from a fragment of the catch-line preserved on copies of the Fifth
Tablet; fragments of the text of the Sixth Tablet are published for the
first time in the present work from part of a Babylonian tablet. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[3](#fn_19.md) Finally, to the two known fragments of the
Seventh Tablet may now be added seven other <span
id="fr_20"></span>[4](#fn_20.md) inscribed upon five Assyrian fragments and
portions of two Babylonian tablets.

The new fragments of the text of the First and Second Tablets of the
Creation Series throw light on the earlier episodes in the story of
Creation, and enable us to fill up some of the gaps in the narrative. By
the identification of the Tablet K. 5,419 *c*, <span
id="fr_21"></span>[5](#fn_21.md) George Smith recovered the opening lines
of the First Tablet, which describes the condition of things before
Creation

<span id="page_XXXIII">p. XXXIII</span>

when the primeval water-gods, Apsû and Tiamat, personifying chaos,
mingled their waters in confusion. The text then briefly relates how to
Apsû and Tiamat were born the oldest of the gods, the first pair,
La<u>h</u>mu and La<u>h</u>amu, being followed after a long interval by
Anshar and Kishar, and after a second interval by other deities, of
whose names the text of K. 5,419 *c* only preserves that of Anu. George
Smith perceived that this theogony had been reproduced by Damascius in
his summary of the beliefs of the Babylonians concerning the creation of
the world. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md) Now, since Damascius
mentions Ἴλλινος and Ἀός along with Ἀνός, it was clear that the text of
the poem included a description of the birth of the elder Bel (i.e.
Enlil or Illil) and of Ea in the passage in which Anu's name occurs. But
as the text inscribed upon the obverse of K. 5,419 *c*,

<span id="page_XXXIV">p. XXXIV</span>

and of its Neo-Babylonian duplicate 82-7-14, 402, <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md) breaks off at l. 15, the course of the
story after this point has hitherto been purely a matter for conjecture.
It appeared probable that the lines which followed contained a full
account of the origin of the younger gods, and from the fact that
Damascius states that Βῆλος, the Creator of the world, was the son of
(i.e. Ea) and Δαύκη (i.e. Damkina), it has Seen concluded that at any
rate special prominence was given to the birth of Bel, i.e. Marduk, who
figures so prominently in the story from the close of the Second Tablet
onwards.

The new fragments of the First Tablet show that the account of the birth
of the gods in the Creation Series is even shorter than that given by
Damascius, for the poem contains no mention of the birth and parentage
of Marduk. After mentioning the birth of Nudimmud (i.e. Ea), <span
id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_24.md) the text proceeds to describe his
marvellous wisdom and strength, and states that he had no rival among
the gods; the birth of no other god is recorded after that of Ea, and,
when Marduk is introduced later on, his existence, like that of Mummu
and of Gaga, appears to be tacitly assumed. It would seem, therefore,
that the reference made by

<span id="page_XXXVII">p. XXXVII</span>

Damascius to Marduk's parentage was not derived from the text of the
Creation Series, but was added by him to complete his summary of the
Babylonian beliefs concerning the origin of the gods.

This omission of Marduk's name from the earlier lines of the First
Tablet and the prominence given to that of Ea may at first sight seem
strange, but it is in accordance with the other newly recovered portions
of the text of the First and Second Tablets, which indirectly throw an
interesting light on the composite character and literary history of the
great poem. <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md) It will be seen that of
the deities mentioned in these earlier lines Nudimmud (Ea) is the only
god whose characteristics are described in detail; his birth, moreover,
forms the climax to which the previous lines lead up, and, after the
description of his character, the story proceeds at once to relate the
rebellion of the primeval gods and the part which Ea played in detecting
and frustrating their plans. In fact, Ea and not Marduk is the hero of
the earlier episodes of the Creation story.

The new fragments of the text show, moreover, that it was Apsû and not
Tiamat who began the rebellion against the gods. While the newly created
gods represented the birth of order and system in the universe, Apsû and
Tiamat still remained in confusion and undiminished in might. Apsû,
however, finding the earlier part

<span id="page_XXXVIII">p. XXXVIII</span>

that his slothful rest was disturbed by the new order of beings whom he
had begotten, summoned Mummu, <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md) his
minister, and the two went together to Tiamat, and lying down before
her, took counsel with her

<span id="page_XXXIX">p. XXXIX</span>

regarding the means to be adopted to restore the old order of things. It
may be noted that the text contains no direct statement that it was the
creation of light which caused the rebellion of the primeval gods. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md) Apsû merely states his hatred of the
alkatu or "way" of the gods, in consequence of which he can get no rest
by day or night; and, from the fact that he makes use of the expressions
"by day" and "by night," it may be inferred that day and night were
vaguely conceived as already in existence. It was therefore the
substitution of order in place of chaos which, according to the text of
the poem, roused Apsû's resentment and led to his rebellion and
downfall <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28.md)

<span id="page_XL">p. XL</span>

Our knowledge of the part played by Ea in the overthrow of Apsû and
Mummu is still fragmentary, but we know from l. 60 of the First Tablet
that it was he who detected the plot against the gods; it is also
certain that the following twenty lines recorded the fate of Apsû and
his minister, and there are clear indications that it was Ea to whom
their overthrow was due. In Tablet II, ll. 53 E, Anshar, on learning
from Ea the news of Tiamat's preparations for battle, contrasts the
conquest of Mummu and Apsû with the task of opposing Tiamat, and the
former achievement he implies has been accomplished by Ea. It is clear,
therefore, that Ea caused the overthrow of Apsû <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29.md) and the capture of Mummu <span
id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30.md) but in what way he brought it about,
whether by actual fighting or by "his pure incantation," <span
id="fr_31"></span>[3](#fn_31.md) is still a matter for conjecture. In view
of the fact that Anshar at first tried peaceful means for overcoming
Tiamat <span id="fr_32"></span>[4](#fn_32.md) before exhorting Marduk to
wage battle against her, the latter supposition is the more probable of
the two. The subjugation of Apsû by Ea explains his subsequent
disappearance from the Creation story. When Apsû is next mentioned, it
is as "the Deep," <span id="fr_33"></span>[5](#fn_33.md) and not as an
active and Tiamat's malevolent deity.

After the overthrow of Apsû, Tiamat remained unconquered, and she
continued to represent in her

<span id="page_XLI">p. XLI</span>

own person the unsubdued forces of chaos. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md) But, as at first she had not herself begun
the rebellion, so now her continuation of the war against the gods was
due to the prompting of another deity. The speech in which this deity
urges Tiamat to avenge Apsû and Mummu occurs in Tablet I, ll. 93-104,
and, inasmuch as she subsequently promoted Kingu to be the leader of her
forces ''because he had given her support," it may be concluded that it
was Kingu who now prompted her to avenge her former spouse. <span
id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35.md) Ea, however, did not cease his active
opposition to the forces of disorder, but continued to play the chief
rôle on the side of the gods. He heard of Tiamat's preparations for
battle, he carried the news to Anshar, his father, and he was sent by
him against the monster. It was only after both he and Anu had failed in
their attempts to approach and appease Tiamat <span
id="fr_36"></span>[3](#fn_36.md) that Anshar appealed to Marduk to become
the champion of the gods.

Another point completely explained by the new fragments of the text is
the reason for the repetitions which occur in the first three tablets of
the series. It will be seen that Tablet I, ll. 109-142, are repeated in
Tablet II, ll. 15-48; that Tablet II, ll. 1. 1-48, are

<span id="page_XLII">p. XLII</span>

repeated in Tablet III, ll. 15-52; and that Tablet III, ll. 15-66, are
repeated in the same Tablet, II. 73-124. The lines which are repeated
have reference to Tiamat's preparations for battle against the gods, and
to Anshar's summons of the gods in order that they may confer power on
Marduk as their champion. From the new fragments of the text we now know
that the lines relating to Tiamat's preparations occur on the First
Tablet in the form of narrative, immediately after she had adopted
Kingu's suggestion that she should avenge the overthrow of Apsû and
Mummu; and that in the Second Tablet they are repeated by Ea in his
speech to Anshar, to whom he carried the news. The context of the
repetitions in the Third Tablet is already known; Anshar first repeats
the lines to his minister Gaga, when telling him to go and summon the
gods to an assembly, and later on in the Tablet Gaga repeats the message
word for word to La<u>h</u>mu and La<u>h</u>amu.

The constant repetition of these lines was doubtless intended to
emphasize the terrible nature of the opposition which Marduk
successfully overcame; and the fact that Berossus omits all mention of
the part played by Ea in the earlier portions of the story is also due
to the tendency of the Babylonian priests to exalt their local god at
the expense of other deities. The account which we have received from
Berossus of the Babylonian beliefs concerning the origin of the universe
is largely taken up with a description of

<span id="page_XLV">p. XLV</span>

the mythical monsters which dwelt in the deep at a time when the world
had not come into being and when darkness and water alone existed. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37.md) Over these monsters, according to
Berossus, reigned a woman named Ὀμόρκα, who is to be identified with
Tiamat, <span id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38.md)

<span id="page_XLVI">p. XLVI</span>

while the creatures themselves represent the monster-brood which Tiamat
formed to aid her in her fight against the gods. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md) Compared with the description of the
monsters, the summary from Berossus of the incidents related on the
Fourth Tablet is not very full; the text states that Βῆλος (i.e. Bel)
slew Ὀμόρκα,

<span id="page_XLIX">p. XLIX</span>

and having cleft her in twain, <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40.md) from
one half of her he made the earth, and from the other the heavens, while
he overcame the creatures that were within her, i.e. the monsters of the
deep.

The actual account of the creation of the world by Marduk, as related in
the Creation Series, begins towards the end of the Fourth Tablet, <span
id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41.md) where the narrative closely agrees with
the summary from Berossus. Marduk is there related to have split Tiamat
into halves, and to have used one half of her as a covering for heaven.
The text then goes on to state that he founded heaven, which is termed
E-shara, a mansion like unto the Deep in structure, and that he caused
Anu, Bêl, and Ea to inhabit their respective districts therein. The
Fifth Tablet does not begin with the account of the creation of the
earth, but records the fixing of the constellations of the Zodiac, the
founding of the year, and Marduk's charge to the Moon-god and the
Sun-god, to the former of whom he entrusted the night, his instructions
relating to the phases of the Moon, and the relative positions of the
Moon and the Sun during the month. The new fragments of the Fifth Tablet
contain some interesting variants to this portion of the text, <span
id="fr_42"></span>[3](#fn_42.md) but,

<span id="page_L">p. L</span>

with the exception of the last few lines of the text, they throw no
light on what the missing portions of the Tablet contained. In view,
however, of the statement of Berossus that from one half of Tiamat Bêl
formed the earth, we may conjecture that an account of the creation of
the earth occurred upon some part of the Fifth Tablet. It is also
probable that the Fifth Tablet recorded the creation of vegetation.
That. this formed the subject of some portion of the poem is certain
from the opening lines of the Seventh Tablet, where Marduk is hailed as
"Asari, 'Bestower of planting,' '\[Founder of sowing\],' 'Creator of
grain and plants,' 'who caused \[the green herb to spring up\]!'"; and
the creation of plants and herbs would naturally follow that of the
earth.

From the new fragment of the Sixth Tablet, No. 92,629, we know that this
portion of the poem related the story of the creation of man. As at the

<span id="page_LIII">p. LIII</span>

beginning of his work of creation Marduk is said to have "devised a
cunning plan" <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md) while gazing upon the
dead body of Tiamat, so now, before proceeding to man's creation, it is
said that "his heart prompted him and he devised \[a cunning
plan\]." <span id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44.md) In the repetition of this
phrase we may see an indication of the importance which was ascribed to
this portion of the story, and it is probable that the creation of man
was regarded as the culmination of Marduk's creative work. It is
interesting to note, however, that the creation of man is not related as
a natural sequel to the formation of the rest of the universe, but forms
the solution of a difficulty with which Marduk has been met in the
course of his work as Creator. To overcome this difficulty Marduk
devised the "cunning plan" already referred to; the context of this
passage is not very clear, but the reason for man's creation may be
gathered from certain indications in the text.

We learn from the beginning of the Sixth Tablet that Marduk devised his
cunning plan after he had "heard the word of the gods," and from this it
is clear that the Fifth Tablet ends with a speech of the gods. Now in
Tablet VI, l. 8, Marduk states that he will create man "that the service
of the gods may be established"; in l. 9. f., however, he adds that

<span id="page_LIV">p. LIV</span>

he will change the ways of the gods, and he appears to threaten them
with punishment. It may be conjectured, therefore, that after Marduk had
completed the creation of the world, the gods came to him and complained
that there were no shrines built in their honour, nor was there anyone
to worship them. To supply this need Marduk formed the device of
creating man, but at the same time he appears to have decided to vent
his wrath upon the gods because of their discontent. It is possible,
however, that Ea dissuaded Marduk from punishing the gods, though he no
doubt assisted him in carrying out the first part of his proposal. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md)

In ll. 5 ff. of the Sixth Tablet Marduk indicates the means he will
employ for forming man, and this portion of the text corroborates in a
remarkable manner the account given by Berossus of the method employed
by Bêl for man's creation. The text of the summary from Berossus, in the
form in which it has come down to us, <span
id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46.md) is not quite satisfactory, as the

<span id="page_LV">p. LV</span>

course of the narrative is confused. The confusion is apparent in the
repetition of the description of man's creation and in the interruption
of the naturalistic explanation of the slaying of Omorka. An ingenious
but simple emendation of the text, however, was suggested by von
Gutschmidt which removes both these difficulties. The passage which
interrupts the naturalistic explanation, and apparently describes a
first creation of man, he regarded as having been transposed; but if it
is placed at the end of the extract it falls naturally into place as a
summary by Eusebius of the preceding account of man's creation which is
said by Alexander Polyhistor to have been given by Berossus in the First
Book of his History. <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47.md) By adopting
this emendation we obtain the text.

<span id="page_LVI">p. LVI</span>

a clear and consecutive account of how Bêl, after the creation of heaven
and earth, perceived that the land was desolate; and how he ordered one
of the gods to cut off his (i.e. Bêl's) head, and, by mixing the blood
which flowed forth with earth, to create men and animals.

This passage from Berossus has given rise to considerable discussion,
and more than one scholar has attempted to explain away the beheading of
Bêl, the Creator, that man might be formed from his blood. Gunkel has
suggested that in the original legend the blood of Tiamat was used for
this purpose; <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md) Stucken, <span
id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49.md) followed by Cheyne, <span
id="fr_50"></span>[3](#fn_50.md) has emended the text so that it may
suggest that the head of Tiamat, and not that of Bel, was cut off; while
Zimmern would take the original meaning of the passage to be that the
god

<span id="page_LVII">p. LVII</span>

beheaded was not Bel, but the other deity whom he addressed. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md) In l. 5 of the Sixth Tablet, however,
Marduk states that he will use his own blood for creating man; <span
id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_52.md) the text of this passage from Berossus is
thus shown to be correct, and it follows that the account which he gave
of the Babylonian beliefs concerning man's creation does not require to
be emended or explained away.

<span id="page_LVIII">p. LVIII</span>

Jensen has already suggested <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53.md) that
the god whom Bel addressed was Ea, and the new fragment of. the Sixth
Tablet proves that this suggestion is correct. In the Sixth Tablet
Marduk recounts to Ea his intention of forming man, and tells him the
means he will employ. We may therefore conclude that it was Ea who
beheaded Marduk at his request, and, according to his instructions,
formed mankind from his blood. Ea may thus have performed the actual
work of making man, but he acted under Marduk's directions, and it is
clear from Tablet VII, ll. 29 and 32, that Marduk, and not Ea, was
regarded as man's Creator.

According to Berossus, man was formed from the blood of Bêl mixed with
earth. The new fragment of the Sixth Tablet does not mention the mixing
of the blood with earth, but it is quite possible that this detail was
recounted in the subsequent narrative. On the other hand, in the
Babylonian poem Marduk declares that, in addition to using his own
blood, he will create bone for forming man. Berossus makes no mention of
bone, but it is interesting to note that *i<u>ss</u>imtu*, the Assyrian
word here used for "bone," <span id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_54.md) is
doubtless the equivalent of the Hebrew word *'e<u>s</u>em*,

<span id="page_LIX">p. LIX</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "bone," which
occurs at the end of the narrative of the creation of woman in Gen. ii,
23.

The blood of Bêl, according to Berossus, was employed not only in man's
creation but in that of animals also, and it is possible that this
represents the form of the legend as it was preserved upon the Sixth
Tablet. Though, in that case, the creation of animals would follow that
of man, the opening lines of the Sixth Tablet prove that man's creation
was regarded as the culmination of Marduk's creative work. The "cunning
plan," which Marduk devised in order to furnish worshippers for the
gods, concerned the creation of man, and if that of animals followed it
must have been recorded as a subsidiary and less important act. <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md) In this connection it may be noted that
the expression τὰ δυμάμενα τὸν ἀέρα φέρειν, which Berossus applies to
the men and animals created from the blood of Bel, was probably not
based on any description or episode in the Creation story as

<span id="page_LX">p. LX</span>

recorded on the Seven Tablets, but was suggested by the naturalistic
interpretation of the legend furnished by Berossus himself.

With reference to the creation of man, it was suggested by George Smith
that the tablet K. 3,364 was a fragment of the Creation Series, and
contained the instructions given to man after his creation by Marduk.
This view has been provisionally adopted by other translators of the
poem, but in Appendix II <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56.md) I have
shown by means of a duplicate, No. 33,851, that the suggestion must be
given up. Apart from other reasons there enumerated, it may be stated
that there would be no room upon the Sixth Tablet of the Creation Series
for such a long series of moral precepts as is inscribed upon the
tablets K. 3,364 and No. 33,851. It may be that Marduk, after creating
man, gave him some instructions with regard to the worship of the gods
and the building of shrines in their honour, but the greater part of the
text must have been taken up with other matter.

The concluding lines of the Sixth Tablet are partly preserved, and they
afford us a glimpse of the filial scene in the Creation story. As the
gods had previously been summoned to a solemn assembly that they might
confer power upon Marduk before he set out to do battle on their behalf,
so now, when he had vanquished Tiamat and had finished his work of
instructions to

<span id="page_LXIII">p. LXIII</span>

creation, they again gathered together in Upshukki-naku, their
council-chamber, and proceeded to magnify him by every title of honour.
We thus obtain the context or setting of the Seventh, and last, Tablet
of the Creation Series, the greater part of which consists of the hymn
of praise addressed by the gods to Marduk as the conqueror of Tiamat and
the Creator of the world.

The hymn of the gods takes up lines 1-124 of the Seventh Tablet, and
consists of a series of addresses in Creation which Marduk is hailed by
them under fifty titles of honour. The titles are Sumerian, not Semitic,
and each is followed by one or more Assyrian phrases descriptive of
Marduk, which either explain the title or are suggested by it. Of the
fifty titles which the hymn contained, the following list of eleven
occur in the first forty-seven lines of the text:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Asari: *<sup>ilu</sup> Asar-ri*, Tabl. VII, l. 1; p. 92 f.

Asaru-alim: *<sup>ilu</sup> Asaru-alim*, Tabl. VII, l. 3; p. 92 f.

Asaru-alim-nuna: *<sup>ilu</sup> Asaru-alim-nun-na*, Tabl. VII, l. 5; p.
92 f.

Tutu: *<sup>ilu</sup> Tu-tu*, Tabl. VII, l. 9; p. 92 f.

Zi-ukkina: *<sup>ilu</sup> Zi-ukkin-na*, var. *<sup>ilu</sup> Zi-ukkin*,
Tabl. VII, l. 15; p. 94f.

Zi-azag: *<sup>ilu</sup> Zi-azag*, Tabl. VII, l. 19; p. 36 f.; var.
*<sup>ilu</sup> Na-zi-azag-g*\[*a*\], p. 161.

Aga-azag: *<sup>ilu</sup> Aga-azag*, Tabl. VII, l. 25; p. 96 f.

Mu-azag: *<sup>ilu</sup> Mu*(i.e. KA + LI)-*azag*, Tabl. VII, l. 33;
var. *<sup>ilu</sup> Mu*(i.e. <u>SH</u>AR)-*azag*, p. 173.

</div>

<span id="page_LXIV">p. LXIV</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Shag-zu: *<sup>ilu</sup> <u>Sh</u>ag-zu*, Tabl. VII, l. 35; p. 98 f.

Zi-si: *<sup>ilu</sup> Zi-si*, Tabl. VII, l. 41; p. 100 f.

Sub-kur: *<sup>ilu</sup> Su<u>h</u>-kur*, Tabl. VII, l. 43; p. 100 f.

</div>

In the gap in the text of the Seventh Tablet, between ll. 47 and 105,
occur the following ten titles of Marduk, which are taken from the
fragments K. 13,761 and K. 8,519 (and its duplicate K. 13,337), and from
the commentary K. 4,406:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Agi\[l . . . . \]; *<sup>ilu</sup> A-gi*\[*l*- . . . . \], Tabl. VII (K.
13,761); p. 102 f.; var. *ilu Gil*\[ \], p. 163.

Zulummu: *<sup>ilu</sup> Zu-lum-mu*, Tabl. VII (K. 13,761); p. 102 f.

Mummu: *<sup>ilu</sup> Mu-um-mu*, Tabl. VII (K. 13,761); p. 102 f.

Mulil: *<sup>ilu</sup> Mu-lil*, Tabl. VII (K. 13,761); p. 102 f.

Gishkul: *<sup>ilu</sup> Gi<u>sh</u>-kul*, Tabl. VII (K. 13,761); p. 102
f.

Lugal-ab\[ . . . . \]: *<sup>ilu</sup> Lugad-ab-*\[ . . . . \], Tabl.
VII (K. 13,761); p. 102 f.

Pap-\[ . . . . \]: *<sup>ilu</sup> Pap*-\[ . . . . \], Tabl. VII (K.
13,761); p. 102 f.

Lugal-durma<u>h</u>: *<sup>ilu</sup> Lugal-dur-ma<u>h</u>*, Tabl. VII
(K. 8,519), and K. 4,406, Rev., col. ii, l. 8; pp. 104f., 165.

Adu-nuna: *<sup>ilu</sup> A-du-nun-na*, Tabl. VII (K. 8,519) and K.
4,406, Rev., col. ii, l. 23; pp. 104f., 166.

Lugal-dul(*or* du)-azaga: *<sup>ilu</sup> Lugal-dul-azag-ga*, Tabl. VII
(K. 8,519); p. 106 f.

</div>

<span id="page_LXV">p. LXV</span>

Four other titles, occurring in the concluding portion of the text of
the Seventh Tablet, are:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Nibiru: *<sup>ilu</sup> Ni-bi-ru*, var. \[*ilu*\] *Ne-bi-ri*, Tabl. VII,
l. 109; p. 108 f.

Bêl-mâtâti: *be-el mâtâti*, var. *<sup>ilu</sup> Bêl mâtâti*, Tabl. VII,
l. 116, p. 110 f.; cf. also EN KUR-KUR (i.e. *bêl mâtâti*), p. 168.

Ea: *<sup>ilu</sup> E-a*, Tabl. VII, l. 120; p. 100 f.

<u>H</u>ansha: <u>H</u>an<u>sh</u>â <sup>A-AN</sup>, var.
*<u>H</u>a-an-<u>sh</u>a-a*, Tabl. VII, l. 123, p. 110 f.; cf. also
*<sup>ilu</sup> <u>H</u>an<u>sh</u>â*, p. 178.

</div>

From the above lists it will be seen that the recovered portions of the
text of the Seventh Tablet furnish twenty-five out of the fifty names of
Marduk. From the list of the titles of Marduk preserved on K. 2,107 + K.
6,086, <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57.md) and from No. 54,228, a
parallel text to the Seventh Tablet, <span id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_58.md)
seven other names may be obtained, which were probably among those
occurring in the missing portion of the text; these are:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Lugal-en-ankia: *<sup>ilu</sup> Lugal-en-an-ki-a*, K. 210, col. ii, l.
19; p. 173.

Gugu: *<sup>ilu</sup> Gu-gu*, K. 2,107, col. ii, l. 22; p. 173.

Mumu: *<sup>ilu</sup> Mu-mu*, K. 2,107, col. ii, l. 23; p. 173.

Du<u>t</u>u: *<sup>ilu</sup> Du-<u>t</u>u*, K. 2,107, col. ii, l. 24; p.
173.

</div>

 

<span id="page_LXVI">p. LXVI</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Dudu: *<sup>ilu</sup> Du-du*, K. 2,107, col. ii, l. 25; p. 173.

Shag-gar(?): *<u>Sh</u>ag-gar*, No. 54,228, Obv., l. 13; p. 177.

En-bilulu: *<sup>ilu</sup> En-bi-lu-lu*, No. 54,228, Obv., l. 14; p.
178. <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59.md)

</div>

By these titles of honour the gods are represented as conferring supreme
power upon Marduk, and the climax is reached in ll. 116 ff. of the
Seventh Tablet, when the elder Bêl and Ea, Marduk's father, confer their
own names and power upon him. Marduk's name of <u>H</u>anshâ, "Fifty,"
by which he is finally addressed, in itself sums up and symbolizes his
fifty titles. At the conclusion of these addresses there follows an
epilogue <span id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_60.md) of eighteen lines, in which
the study of the poem is commended to mankind, and prosperity is
promised to those that rejoice in Marduk and keep his works in
remembrance.

The story of the Creation, in the form in which it has come down to us
upon tablets of the seventh and later centuries before Christ, is of a
distinctly

<span id="page_LXVII">p. LXVII</span>

composite character, and bears traces of a long process of editing and
modification at the hands of the Babylonian priests. Five principal
strands may be traced which have been combined to form the poem; these
may be described as (1) The Birth of the gods; parts (2 ) The Legend of
Ea and Apsû; (3) The Dragon-Myth; (4) The actual account of Creation;
and (5) The Hymn to Marduk under his fifty titles. Since the poem in its
present form is a glorification, of Marduk as the champion of the gods
and the Creator of the world, it is natural that more prominence should
be given to episodes in which Marduk is the hero than is assigned to
other portions of the narrative in which he plays no part. Thus the
description of Tiamat and her monster-brood, whom Marduk conquered, is
repeated no less than four times, <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61.md)
and the preparations of Marduk for battle and his actual fight with the
dragon take up the greater part of the Fourth Tablet. On the other hand,
the birth of the older gods, among whom Marduk does not figure, is
confined to the first twenty-one lines of the First Tablet; and not more
than twenty lines are given to the account of the subjugation of Apsû by
Ea. That these elements should have been incorporated at all in the
Babylonian version of the Creation story may be explained by the fact
that they serve to enhance the position of prominence subsequently
attained by

<span id="page_LXVIII">p. LXVIII</span>

Marduk. Thus the description of the birth of the older gods and of the
opposition they excited among the forces of disorder, was necessarily
included in order to make it clear how Marduk was appointed their
champion; and the account of Ea's success against Apsû served to
accentuate the terrible nature of Tiamat, whom he was unable to
withstand. From the latter half of the Second Tablet onwards, Marduk
alone is the hero of the poem.

The central episode of the poem is the fight between Marduk and Tiamat,
and there is evidence to prove that this legend existed in other forms
than that under which it occurs in the Creation Series. The conquest of
the dragon was ascribed by the Babylonian priests to their local god,
and in the poem the death of Tiamat is made a necessary preliminary to
the creation of the world. On a fragment of a tablet from
Ashur-bani-pal's library we possess, however, part of a copy of a
legend <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md) which describes the conquest
of a dragon by some deity other than Marduk. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63.md) Moreover, the fight is there described as
taking place, not before creation, but at a time when men existed and
cities had been built. In this version

<span id="page_LXIX">p. LXIX</span>

men and gods are described as equally terrified at the dragon's
appearance, and it was to deliver the land from the monster that one of
the gods went out and slew him. This fragmentary tablet serves to prove
that the Dragon-Myth existed in more than one form in Babylonian
mythology, and it is not improbable that, many of the great cities of
Babylonia possessed local versions of the legend in each of which the
city-god figured as the hero. <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64.md)

In the Creation Series the creation of the world is narrated as the
result of Marduk's conquest of the dragon, and there is no doubt that
this version of the story represents the belief most generally held
during the reigns of the later Assyrian and Babylonian kings. We
possess, however, fragments of other legends in which the creation of
the world is not connected with the death of a dragon. In one of these,
which is written both in Sumerian and Babylonian, <span
id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65.md) the great Babylonian cities and temples
are described as coming into existence in consequence of a movement in
the waters which alone existed before the creation of the world. Marduk
in this

<span id="page_LXX">p. LXX</span>

version also figures as the Creator, for, together with the goddess
Aruru, <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66.md) he created man by laying a
reed upon the face of the waters and forming dust which he poured out
beside it; according to this version also he is described as creating
animals and vegetation. In other legends which have come down to us, not
only is the story of Creation unconnected with the Dragon-Myth, but
Marduk does not figure as the Creator. In one of these "the gods"
generally are referred to as having created the heavens and the earth
and the cattle and beasts of the field; <span
id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67.md) while in another the creation of the Moon
and the Sun is ascribed to Anu, Bel, and Ea. <span
id="fr_68"></span>[3](#fn_68.md)

From the variant accounts of the story of Creation and of the
Dragon-Myth, which are referred to in the preceding paragraphs, it will
be clear that the priests of Babylon made use of independent legends in
the composition of their great poem of Creation <span
id="fr_69"></span>[4](#fn_69.md); by

<span id="page_LXXI">p. LXXI</span>

assigning to Marduk the conquest of the Dragon <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70.md) and the creation of the world they
justified his claim to the chief place among the gods. As a fit ending
to the great poem they incorporated the hymn to Marduk, consisting of
addresses to him under his fifty titles. This portion of the poem <span
id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71.md) is proved by the Assyrian commentary, R.
366, etc., <span id="fr_72"></span>[3](#fn_72.md) as well as by fragments
of parallel, but not duplicate, texts <span
id="fr_73"></span>[4](#fn_73.md) to have been an independent composition
which had at one time no connection with the series *Enuma
eli<u>sh</u>*. In the poem the hymn is placed in the mouth of the gods,
who at the end of the Creation have assembled together in Upshukkinaku;
and to it is added the epilogue of eighteen lines, which completes the
Seventh Tablet of the series.

<span id="page_LXXII">p. LXXII</span>

In discussing the question as to the date of the Creation legends, it is
necessary to distinguish clearly between the date at which the legends
assumed the form in which they have come down to us upon the Seven
Tablets of the series *Enuma eli<u>sh</u>*, and the date which may be
assigned to the legends themselves before they were incorporated in the
poem. Of the actual tablets inscribed with portions of the text of the
Creation Series we possess none which dates from an earlier period than
the seventh century B.C. The tablets of this date were made for the
library of Ashur-bani-pal at Nineveh, but it is obvious that the poem
was not composed in Assyria at this time. The legends in the form in
which we possess them are not intended to glorify Ashur, the national
god of Assyria, but Marduk, the god of Babylon, and it is clear that the
scribes of Ashur-bani-pal merely made copies for their master of older
tablets of Babylonian origin. T o what earlier date we may assign the
actual composition of the poem and its arrangement upon the Seven
Tablets, is still a matter for conjecture; but it is possible to offer a
conjecture, with some degree of probability, after an examination of the
various indirect sources of evidence we possess with regard to the age
of Babylonian legends in general, and of the Creation legends in
particular.

With regard to the internal evidence of date furnished by the Creation
legends themselves, we may

<span id="page_LXXIII">p. LXXIII</span>

note that the variant forms of the Dragon-Myth and of the account of the
Creation, to which reference has already been made, presuppose many
centuries of tradition during which the legends, though derived probably
from common originals, were handed down independently of one another.
During this period we may suppose that the same story was related in
different cities in different ways, and that in course of time
variations crept in, with the result that two or more forms of the same
story were developed along different lines. The process must have been
gradual, and the considerable differences which can be traced in the
resultant forms of the same legend may be cited as evidence in favour of
assigning an early date to the original tradition from which they were
derived.

Evidence as to the existence of the Creation legends at least as early
as the ninth century B.C. may be deduced from the representations of the
fight between Marduk and the dragon Tiamat, which was found sculptured
upon two limestone slabs in the temple of Ninib at Nimrûd. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md) The temple was built by Ashur-nasir-pal,
who reigned from B.C. 884 to B.C. 860, and across the actual sculpture
was inscribed the text of a dedication to Ninib by this king. The slab
therefore furnishes direct proof of the existence of the legend more
than two hundred years before the

<span id="page_LXXIV">p. LXXIV</span>

formation of Ashur-bani-pal's library. Moreover, the fight between
Marduk and Tiamat is frequently found engraved upon cylinder-seals, and,
although the majority of such seals probably date from the later
Assyrian and Persian periods, the varied treatment of the scene which
they present points to the existence of variant forms of the legend, and
so indirectly furnishes evidence of the early origin of the legend
itself.

From an examination of the Babylonian historical inscriptions which
record the setting up of statues and the making of temple furniture, we
are enabled to trace back the existence of the Creation legends to still
earlier periods. For instance, in a text of Agum, <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75.md) a Babylonian king who reigned not later
than the seventeenth century B.C., we find descriptions of the figures
of a dragon <span id="fr_76"></span>[2](#fn_76.md) and of other
monsters <span id="fr_77"></span>[3](#fn_77.md) which he set up in the
temple E-sagil at Babylon; and in this passage we may trace an
unmistakable reference to the legend of Tiamat and her monster-brood.
Agum also set up in the temple beside the dragon a great basin, or
laver, termed in the inscription a *tâmtu*, or "sea." <span
id="fr_78"></span>[4](#fn_78.md) From the name of the laver, and from its
position beside the figure of the dragon,

<span id="page_LXXV">p. LXXV</span>

we may conclude that it was symbolical of the abyss of water personified
in the Creation legends by Tiamat and Apsû. Moreover, in historical
inscriptions of still earlier periods we find allusions to similar
vessels termed *apsê*, i.e. "deeps" or "oceans," <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md) the presence of which in the temples is
probably to be traced to the existence of the same traditions.

The three classes of evidence briefly summarized above tend to show that
the most important elements in the Creation legends were not of late
origin, but must be traced back in some form or other to remote periods,
and may well date from the first half of the third millennium B.C., or
even earlier. It remains to consider to what date we may assign the
actual weaving together of these legends into the poem termed by the
Babylonians and Assyrians *Enuma eli<u>sh</u>*. Although, as has already
been remarked, we do not possess any early copies of the text of the
Creation Series, this is not the case with other Babylonian legends.
Among the tablets found at Tell el-Amarna, which date from the fifteenth
century B.C., were fragments of copies of two Babylonian legends, the
one containing the story of Nergal and Ereshkigal, <span
id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_80.md) and

<span id="page_LXXVI">p. LXXVI</span>

the other inscribed with a part of the legend of Adapa and the South
Wind. <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81.md) Both these compositions, in
style and general arrangement, closely resemble the legends known from
late Assyrian copies, while of the legend of Adapa an actual fragment,
though not a duplicate, exists in the library of Ashur-bani-pal. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82.md) Fragments of legends have also been
recently found in Babylonia which date from the end of the period of the
First Dynasty of Babylon, about B.C. 2100, and the resemblance which
these documents bear to certain legends previously known from Assyrian
copies only is not only of a general nature, but extends even to
identity of language. Thus one of the recovered fragments is in part a
duplicate of the so-called "Cuthaean Legend of Creation"; <span
id="fr_83"></span>[3](#fn_83.md) two others contain phrases found upon the
legend of Ea and Atar-<u>h</u>asis, while upon one of them are traces of
a new version

<span id="page_LXXVII">p. LXXVII</span>

of the Deluge-story. <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84.md) Still more
recently the Trustees of the British Museum have acquired three
fragments of Babylonian legends inscribed upon tablets which date from a
still earlier period, i.e. from the period of the kings of the Second
Dynasty of Ur, before B.C. 2200; <span id="fr_85"></span>[2](#fn_85.md)

<span id="page_LXXVIII">p. LXXVIII</span>

and to the same period is to be assigned the fragment of a legend which
was published a few weeks ago by Dr. Meissner, <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86.md) and probably also the new fragment of the
Etana-myth, published last year by Father Scheil. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87.md) These five fragments are of peculiar
interest, for they show that early Semitic, as opposed to Sumerian,
legends were in existence, and were carefully preserved and studied in
other cities of Mesopotamia

<span id="page_LXXIX">p. LXXIX</span>

than Babylon, and at a period before the rise of that city to a position
of importance under the kings of the First Dynasty.

The evidence furnished by these recently discovered tablets with regard
to the date of Babylonian legends in general may be applied to the date
of the Creation legends. While the origin of much of the Creation
legends may be traced to Sumerian sources, <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88.md) it is clear that the Semitic inhabitants
of Mesopotamia at a very early period produced their own versions of the
compositions which they borrowed, modifying and augmenting them to suit
their own legends and beliefs. The connection of Marduk with the
Dragon-Myth, and with the stories of the creation of the world and

<span id="page_LXXX">p. LXXX</span>

man, may with considerable probability be assigned to the subsequent
period during which Babylon gradually attained to the position of the
principal city in Mesopotamia. On tablets inscribed during the reigns of
kings of the First Dynasty we may therefore expect to find copies of the
Creation legends corresponding closely with the text of the series
*Enuma eli<u>sh</u>*. It is possible that the division of the poem into
seven sections, inscribed upon separate tablets, took place at a later
period; but, be this as it may, we may conclude with a considerable
degree of confidence that the bulk of the poem, as we know it from late
Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian copies, was composed at a period not later
than B.C. 2000.

The political influence which the Babylonians exerted over neighbouring
nations during long periods of their history was considerable, and it is
not surprising that their beliefs concerning the origin of the universe
should have been partially adopted by the races with whom they came in
contact. That Babylonian elements may be traced in the Phoenician
cosmogony has long been admitted, but the imperfect, and probably
distorted, form in which the latter has come down to us renders
uncertain any comparison of details. <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89.md)
Some of the beliefs concerning the

<span id="page_LXXXI">p. LXXXI</span>

creation of the world which were current among the Egyptians bear a more
striking resemblance to the corresponding legends of Babylonia. Whether
this resemblance was due to the proto-Semitic strain which probably
existed in the ancient Egyptian race, <span
id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90.md) or is to be explained as the result of
later Babylonian influence from without, is yet uncertain. But, whatever
explanation be adopted, it is clear that the conception of chaos as a
watery mass out of which came forth successive generations of primeval
gods is common to both races. <span id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_91.md) It is
in Hebrew literature, however, that the most striking examples of the
influence of the Babylonian Creation legends are to be found.

The close relation existing between the Babylonian account of the
Creation and the narrative in Genesis i, 1-11, 4*a* has been recognized
from the time of the

<span id="page_LXXXII">p. LXXXII</span>

first discovery of the former, <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92.md) and
the old and new points of resemblance between them may here be briefly
discussed. According to each account the existence of a watery chaos
preceded the creation of the universe; and the Hebrew word *tehôm*,
translated "the deep" in Gen. i, 2, is the equivalent of the Babylonian
*Tiamat*, the monster of the deep personifying chaos and confusion. In
the details of the Creation there is also a close resemblance between
the two accounts. In the Hebrew narrative the first act of creation is
that of light (Gen. i, 3-5), and it has been suggested that a parallel
possibly existed in the Babylonian account, in that the creation of
light may have been the cause of the revolt of Tiamat. From the new
fragments of the poem we now know that the rebellion of the forces of
disorder, which was incited by Apsû and not Tiamat, was due, not to the
creation of light, but to his hatred of the way of the gods which
produced order in place of chaos <span id="fr_93"></span>[2](#fn_93.md) A
parallelism may still be found, however; in the original form of the
Babylonian myth, according to which the conqueror of the dragon was
undoubtedly a solar deity. <span id="fr_94"></span>[3](#fn_94.md) Moreover,
as has been pointed out above, <span id="fr_95"></span>[4](#fn_95.md) day
and night are vaguely conceived in the poem as already in existence at
the

<span id="page_LXXXIII">p. LXXXIII</span>

time of Apsû's revolt, so that the belief in the existence of light
before the creation of the heavenly bodies is a common feature of the
Hebrew and the Babylonian account.

The second act of creation in the Hebrew narrative is that of a
firmament which divided the waters that were under the firmament from
the waters that were above the firmament (Gen. i, 6-8). In the
Babylonian poem the body of Tiamat is divided by Marduk, and from
one-half of her he formed a covering or dome for heaven, i.e. a
firmament, which kept her upper waters in place. Moreover, on the
fragment S. 2,013 <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96.md) we find mention of
a *Ti-amat e-Zi-ti* and a *Ti-amat <u>sh</u>ap-li-ti*, that is, an Upper
Tiamat (or Ocean) and a Lower Tiamat (or Ocean), which are the exact
equivalents of the waters above and under the firmament. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_97.md)

<span id="page_LXXXIV">p. LXXXIV</span>

The third and fourth acts of creation, as narrated in Gen. i, 9-13, are
those of the earth and of vegetation. Although no portion of the
Babylonian poem has yet been recovered which contains the corresponding
account, it is probable that these acts of creation were related on the
Fifth Tablet of the series. <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98.md) Berossus
expressly states that Bel formed the earth out of one half of Omorka's
body, and as his summary of the Babylonian Creation story is proved to
be correct wherever it can be controlled, it is legitimate to assume
that he is correct in this detail also. More- over, in three passages in
the Seventh Tablet the creation of the earth by Marduk is referred to:
l. 115 reads, "Since he created the heaven and fashioned the firm
earth"; <span id="fr_99"></span>[2](#fn_99.md) the new fragment K. 12,830
(restored from the commentary K. 8,299) states, "He named the four
quarters (of the world)"; <span id="fr_100"></span>[3](#fn_100.md) and
another new fragment, K. 13,761 (restored from the commentary K. 4,4061,
definitely ascribes to Marduk the title "Creator of the earth." <span
id="fr_101"></span>[4](#fn_101.md) That the creation of vegetation by
Marduk was also recorded in the poem may be concluded from the opening
lines of the Seventh Tablet, which are inscribed on the new fragment K.
2,854, and (with restorations from the commentary S. II, etc.) ascribe
to him the titles "Bestower of

<span id="page_LXXXV">p. LXXXV</span>

planting," "Founder of sowing," " Creator of grain and plants," and add
that he "caused the green herb to spring up." <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102.md)

To the fifth act of creation, that of the heavenly bodies (Gen. i,
14-15), we find an exceedingly close parallel in the opening lines of
the Fifth Tablet of the series. <span id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_103.md) In
the Hebrew account, lights were created in the firmament of heaven to
divide the day from the night, and to be for signs, and for seasons, and
for days, and years. In the Babylonian poem also the stars were created
and the year was ordained at the same time; the twelve months were to be
regulated by the stars; and the Moon-god was appointed "to determine the
days." As according to the Hebrew account two great lights were created
in the firmament of heaven, the greater light to rule the day and the
lesser to rule the night, so according to the Babylonian poem the night
was entrusted to the Moon-god, and the Moon-god's relations to the
Sun-god are described in detail. On the Seventh Tablet, also, the
creation of heaven and the heavenly bodies is referred t o; in l. 16
Marduk is stated "to have established for the gods the bright
heavens," <span id="fr_104"></span>[3](#fn_104.md) and l. 111 f. read, "For
the stars of heaven he upheld the paths, he shepherded all the gods like
sheep!" <span id="fr_105"></span>[4](#fn_105.md)

<span id="page_LXXXVI">p. LXXXVI</span>

To the sixth and seventh acts of creation, i.e., the creation of
creatures of the sea and winged fowl, and of beasts and cattle and
creeping things (Gen. i, 20-25), the Babylonian poem as yet offers no
parallel, for the portion of the text which refers to the creation of
animals is still wanting. But since Berossus states that animals were
created at the same time as man, it is probable that their creation was
recorded in a missing portion either of the Fifth or of the Sixth
Tablet. If the account was on the lines suggested by Berossus, and
animals shared in the blood of Bel, it is clear that their creation was
narrated, as a subsidiary and less important episode, after that of
man. <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106.md) But, although this episode is
still wanting in the poem, we find references on other Assyrian Creation
fragments to the creation of beasts. Thus, for the creation of the
creatures of the sea in Genesis, we may compare the fragmentary text K.
3445+R. 396, which records the creation of *na<u>h</u>irê*; "dolphins
(?)." <span id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_107.md) And for the creation of
beasts of the earth and cattle, we may compare the tablet D.T. 41, <span
id="fr_108"></span>[3](#fn_108.md) which, after referring generally to the
creation of "living creatures" by "the gods," proceeds to classify them
as the cattle and beasts of the field, and the creatures of the city,
the two of animals.

<span id="page_LXXXVII">p. LXXXVII</span>

classes referring respectively to wild and domesticated animals. <span
id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109.md)

The account of the creation of man, which is recorded as the eighth and
last act of creation in the Hebrew account (Gen. i, 26-31), at length
finds its parallel in the Babylonian poem upon the new fragment of the
Sixth Tablet, No. 92,629. <span id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110.md) It has
already been pointed out that the Babylonian account closely follows the
version of the story handed down to us from Berossus, <span
id="fr_111"></span>[3](#fn_111.md) and it may here be added that the
employment by Marduk, the Creator, of his own blood in the creation of
man may perhaps be compared to the Hebrew account of the creation of man
in the image and after the likeness of Elohim. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[4](#fn_112.md) Moreover, the use of the plural in the
phrase "Let us make man" in Gen. i, 26, may be compared with the
Babylonian narrative which relates that Marduk imparted his purpose of
forming man to his father Ea,

<span id="page_LXXXVIII">p. LXXXVIII</span>

whom he probably afterwards instructed to carry out the actual work of
man's creation. <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113.md)

A parallel to the charge which, according to the Hebrew account, Elohim
gave to man and woman after their creation, has hitherto been believed
to exist on the tablet K. 3,364, which was supposed to contain a list of
the duties of man as delivered to him after his creation by Marduk. The
new Babylonian duplicate of this text, No. 33,851, proves that K. 3,364
is not part of the Creation Series, but is merely a tablet of moral
precepts, so that its suggested resemblance to the Hebrew narrative must
be given up. It is not improbable, however, that a missing portion of
the Sixth Tablet did contain a short series of instructions by Marduk to
man, since man was created with the special object of supplying the gods
with worshippers and building shrines in their honour. That to these
instructions to worship the gods was added the gift of dominion over
beasts, birds, and vegetation is possible, but it must be pointed out
that the Babylonian version of man's creation is related from the point
of view of the gods, not from that of man. Although his creation forms
the culmination of Marduk's work, it was conceived, not as an end and
aim in itself, but merely as an expedient to satisfy the discontented
gods. <span id="fr_114"></span>[2](#fn_114.md) This expedient is referred
to in the Seventh

<span id="page_LXXXIX">p. LXXXIX</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tablet, l. 29, in
the phrase "For their forgiveness (i.e., the forgiveness of the gods)
did he create mankind," and other passages in the Seventh Tablet tend to
show that Marduk's mercy and goodness are extolled in his relations, not
to mankind, but to the gods. <span id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_115.md) In
one passage marl's creation is referred to, but it is in connection with
the charge that he forget not the deeds of his Creator. <span
id="fr_116"></span>[2](#fn_116.md)

The above considerations render it unlikely that the Babylonian poem
contained an exact parallel to the exalted charge of Elohim in which He
placed the rest of creation under man's dominion. It is possible,
however, that upon the new fragment of the Seventh Tablet, K. 12,830
(restored from the commentary K. 8,299) <span
id="fr_117"></span>[3](#fn_117.md) we have a reference to the superiority
of man over animals, in the phrase "mankind \[he created\], \[and upon\]
him understanding \[he bestowed (?) . . .\]"; and if this be so, we may
compare it to Gen. i, 286. Moreover, if my suggested restoration of the
last word in l. 7 of the Sixth Tablet be correct, so that it may read "I
will create man who shall inhabit \[the earth\], <span
id="fr_118"></span>[4](#fn_118.md)" we may

<span id="page_XC">p. XC</span>

compare it to Gen. i, 28*a* in which man is commanded to be fruitful,
and multiply, and replenish the earth. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119.md)

A suggestion has been made that the prominence given to the word of the
Creator in the Hebrew account may have found its parallel in the
creation by a word in the Babylonian poem. It is true that the word of
Marduk had magical power and could destroy and create alike; but Marduk
did not employ his word in any of his acts of creation which are at
present known to us. He first conceived a cunning device, and then
proceeded to carry it out by hand. The only occasion on which he did
employ his word to destroy and to create is in the Fourth Tablet, ll.
19-26, <span id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_120.md) when, at the invitation of
the gods, he tested his power by making a garment disappear and then
appear again at the word of his mouth. The parallelism between the two
accounts under this heading is not very close.

The order of the separate acts of creation is also not quite the same in
the two accounts, for, while in the Babylonian poem the heavenly bodies
are created immediately after the formation of the firmament, in the
Hebrew account their creation is postponed until after the earth and
vegetation have been made. It is possible that the creation of the earth
and plants has been displaced by the writer to whom the present form of
the Hebrew account is due, and that the

<span id="page_XCI">p. XCI</span>

order of creation was precisely the same in the original forms of the
two narratives. But even according to the present arrangement of the
Hebrew account, there are several striking points of resemblance to the
Babylonian poem. These may be seen in the existence of light before the
creation of the heavenly bodies; in the dividing of the waters of the
primeval flood by means of a firmament also before the creation of the
heavenly bodies; and in the culminating act of creation being that of
man.

It would be tempting to trace the framework of the Seven Days of
Creation, upon which the narrative in Genesis is stretched, to the
influence of the Seven Tablets of Creation, of which we now know that
the great Creation Series was composed. The reasons for the employment
of the Seven Days in the Hebrew account are, however, not the same which
led to the arrangement of the Babylonian poem upon Seven Tablets. In the
one the writer's intention is to give the original authority for the
observance of the Sabbath; in the other there appears to have been no
special reason for this arrangement of the poem beyond the mystical
nature of the number "seven." Moreover, acts of creation are recorded on
all of the first six Days in the Hebrew narrative, while in the
Babylonian poem the creation only begins at the end of the Fourth
Tablet. <span id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121.md) The resemblance,
therefore, is somewhat superficial, but

<span id="page_XCII">p. XCII</span>

it is possible that the employment of the number "seven" in the two
accounts was not fortuitous. Whether the Sabbath was of Babylonian
origin (as seems probable) or not, it is clear that the writer of the
narrative in Genesis was keenly interested in its propagation and its
due observance. Now in Exilic and post-Exilic times the account of the
Creation most prevalent in Babylonia was that in the poem *Enuma
eli<u>sh</u>*, the text of which was at this time absolutely fixed and
its arrangement upon Seven Tablets invariable. That the late revival of
mythology among the Jews was partly due to their actual study of the
Babylonian legends at this period is sufficiently proved by the minute
points of resemblance between the accounts of the Deluge in Genesis and
in the poem of Gilgamesh. <span id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122.md) It is
probable, therefore, that the writer who was responsible for the final
form of Gen. i-ii, 4*a*, was familiar with the Babylonian legend of
Creation in the form in which it has come down to us. The supposition,
then, is perhaps not too

<span id="page_XCIII">p. XCIII</span>

fanciful, that the connection of the Sabbath with the story of Creation
was suggested by the mystical number of the Tablets upon which the
Babylonian poem was inscribed.

Further resemblances to the Babylonian Creation legends may be traced in
the second Hebrew account of the Creation which follows the first in
Gen. ii, 4*b*-7. According to this version man was formed from the dust
of the ground, which may be compared to the mixing of Bel's blood with
earth according to the account of Berossus, the use of the Creator's
blood in the one account being paralleled by the employment of His
breath in the other for the purpose of giving life to the dust or earth.
Earth is not mentioned in the recovered portion of the Sixth Tablet, but
its use in the creation of men is fully in accordance with Babylonian
beliefs. Thus, according to the second Babylonian account of the
Creation, <span id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123.md) Marduk formed man by
pouring out dust beside a reed which he had set upon the face of the
waters. Clay is also related to have been employed in the creation of
special men and heroes; thus it was used in Ea-bani's creation by
Arum, <span id="fr_124"></span>[2](#fn_124.md) and it is related to have
been mixed with divine blood for a similar purpose in the fragmentary
legend Bu. 91-5-9, 269. <span id="fr_125"></span>[3](#fn_125.md) To the
account of the creation of woman in Gen. ii, 18 ff. we find a new
parallel in l. 5 of the

<span id="page_XCIV">p. XCIV</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sixth Tablet of
the Creation Series, in the use of the word *i<u>ss</u>imtu*, " bone,"
corresponding to the Hebrew *'e<u>s</u>em* which occurs in the phrase
"bone of my bones " in Gen. ii, 23.

In addition to the Babylonian colouring of much of the story of Paradise
we may now add a new parallel from the Babylonian address to a mythical
River of Creation, inscribed on S. 1704 and the Neo-Babylonian Tablet
82-9-18, 5311. <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126.md) This short
composition is addressed to a River to whom the creation of all things
is ascribed, <span id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_127.md) and with this river
we may compare the mythical river of Paradise which watered the garden,
and on leaving it was divided into four branches. That the Hebrew River
of Paradise is Babylonian in character is clear; and the origin of the
Babylonian River of Creation is also to be found in the Euphrates, from
whose waters southern Babylonia derived its great fertility. <span
id="fr_128"></span>[3](#fn_128.md) The

<span id="page_XCV">p. XCV</span>

life-giving stream of Paradise is met with elsewhere in the Old
Testament, as, for instance, in Ezekiel xlvii, and it is probable that
we may trace its influence in the Apocalypse. <span
id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129.md)

It is unnecessary here to discuss in detail the evidence to prove that
the Hebrew narratives of the influence on Creation were ultimately
derived from Babylonia, and mythology. were not inherited independently
by the Babylonians and Hebrews from a common Semitic ancestor. <span
id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_130.md) For the local Babylonian colouring of
the stories, and the great age to which their existence can be traced,
extending back to the time of the Sumerian inhabitants of
Mesopotamia, <span id="fr_131"></span>[3](#fn_131.md) are conclusive
evidence against the second alternative. On the other hand, it is
equally unnecessary to cite the well-known arguments to prove

<span id="page_XCVI">p. XCVI</span>

the existence among the Hebrews of Creation legends similar to those of
Babylonia for centuries before the Exile. The allusions to variant
Hebrew forms of the Babylonian Dragon-Myth in Amos ix, 3, Isaiah li, 9,
Psalm lxxiv, 13 f., and lxxxix, 9 f., and Job xxvi, 12 f., and ix, 13,
may be cited as sufficient proof of the early period at which the
borrowing from Babylonian sources must have taken place; and the
striking differences between the Biblical and the known Babylonian
versions of the legends prove that the Exilic and post-Exilic Jews must
have found ready to their hand ancient Hebrew versions of the stories,
and that the changes they introduced must in the main have been confined
to details of arrangement and to omissions necessitated by their own
more spiritual conceptions and beliefs. The discovery of the Tell
el-Amarna tablets proved conclusively that Babylonian influence extended
throughout Egypt and Western Asia in the fifteenth century B.C., and the
existence of legends among the letters demonstrated the fact that
Babylonian mythology exerted an influence coextensive with the range of
her political ties and interests. We may therefore conjecture that
Babylonian myths had become naturalized in Palestine before the conquest
of that country by the Israelites. Many such Palestinian versions of
Babylonian myths the Israelites no doubt absorbed; while during the
subsequent period of the Hebrew kings Assyria and Babylonia exerted a
direct influence upon them. It is clear, therefore, that at the time of
their of Babylonian

<span id="page_XCVII">p. XCVII</span>

exile the captive Jews did not find in Babylonian mythology an entirely
new and unfamiliar subject, but recognized in it a series of kindred
beliefs, differing much from their own in spiritual conceptions, but
presenting a startling resemblance on many material points.

Now that the principal problems with regard to the contents, date, and
influence of the Creation Series, *Enuma eli<u>sh</u>*, have been dealt
with, it remains to describe in some detail the forty-nine fragments and
tablets from which the text, transliterated and translated in the
following pages, has been made up. After each registration-number is
given a reference to the published copy of the text in *Cuneiform Texts
from Babylonian Tablets*, etc., *in the British Museum*, pt. xiii, or in
Vol. II of this work, or in Appendices I and II of this volume; a brief
description of each tablet is added, together with references to any
previous publication of the text. After the enumeration of the known
copies of each tablet, a list is given of the authorities for the
separate lines of the tablet, in order to enable the reader to verify
any passage in the text with as little delay as possible.

The following twelve tablets and fragments are inscribed with portions
of the text of the First Tablet of the series:—

1\. K. 5,419*c*: *Cuneiform Texts*, pt. xiii (*illegible*), pl. I.
Obverse: ll. 1-16; Reverse: catch-line and colophon.

<span id="page_XCVIII">p. XCVIII</span>

Upper part of an Assyrian tablet, 34 in. by 1 7/8 in. For earlier
publications of the text, see George Smith, *T.S.B.A.*, vol. iv, the
Creation Series, p. 363 f., pl. i; Fox Talbot, *T.S.B.A.*, vol. v, pp.
428 ff.; Menant, *Manuel de la langue Asyrienne*, p. 378 f.; Delitzsch,
*Asyrische Lesestücke*, 1st ed., p. 40, 2nd ed., p. 78, 3rd ed., p. 93;
Lyon, *Assyrian Manual*, p. 62; and my *First Steps in Assyrian*, p. 122
f.

2\. No. 93,015 (82-7-14, 402): *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pls. 1 and 3.
Obverse: ll. 1-16; Reverse: ll. 124-142 and colophon.

Upper part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 2 1/8 in. by 2 1/4 in. For an
earlier publication of the text, see Pinches, *Bab. Or. Rec.*, vol. iv,
p. 26f. The fragment is probably part of the same tablet as that to
which No. 10 belonged.

3\. No. 45,528 + 46,614: Vol. II, pls. i-vi. Obverse: ll. 1-48; Reverse:
ll. 111-142, catch-line, and colophon.

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, formed from two fragments, which I have
joined; 2 1/4 in. by 5 ½ in. This text has not been previously
published.

4\. No. 35,134: Vol. II, pl. vii. Obverse: ll. 11-21; no reverse.

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 1 3/8 in. by 2 in. This text has not
been previously published.

5\. No. 36,726: Vol. II, pl. viii. Obverse: ll. 28-33.

Neo-Babylonian "practice-tablet"; the text, which forms an extract,
measures 2 7/8. by 1 1/4 in. This text has not been previously
published.

6\. 81-7-27, 80: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 2. Obverse: ll. 31-56;
Reverse: ll. 118-142.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 25/8 in. by 3 in. This text, which was
referred to by Pinches in the *Bab. Or. Rec.*, vol. iv, p. 33, was used
by Zimmern for his translation in Gunkel's *Schöpfung*

 

<span id="page_XCIX">p. XCIX</span>

*und Chaos*, p. 402 f.; it was given in transliteration by Delitzsch,
*Weltschöpfungsepos*, p. 25 f., and by Jensen, *Mythen una Epen*, pp. 2
ff.

7\. K. 3,938: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 3. Obverse: ll. 33-42;
Reverse: ll. 128-142.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 1 1/6 in. by 1 3/4 in. This fragment was
used by George Smith, *Chaldean Account of Genesis*, p. 93 f., and by
subsequent translators; the text was given in transliteration by
Delitzsch, *Weltschöpfungsepos*, p. 27.

8\. K. 7,871: Vol. I, Appendix II, pp. 183 ff. Obverse: ll. 33-47; no
reverse.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 1 1/6 in. by 1 3/4 in. The fragment may
belong to the same tablet as No. II. This text has not been previously
published.

9\. No. 36,688: Vol. II, pl. vii. Obverse: ll. 38-44.

Part of a Neo-Babylonian "practice-tablet"; the text, which forms an
abstract, measures 1½ in. by 1 1/8 in. This text has not been previously
published.

10\. No. 46,803: Vol. II, pls. ix-xi. Obverse ll. 46-67; Reverse: ll.
83-103.

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 2 in. by 2 in. The fragment is probably
part of the same tablet as that to which No. 2 belonged. This text has
not been previously published.

11\. K. 4,488: Vol. I, Appendix II, pp. 185 ff. Obverse: ll. 50-63; no
reverse.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 1 3/4 in. by 1½ in.; see above, No. 8. This
text has not been previously published.

12\. 82-9-18, 6,879: Vol. II, pls. xii and xiii. No obverse; Reverse:
ll. 93-1 18.

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 1 7/8 in. by 2 5/8 in. This text has
not been previously published.

 

<span id="page_C">p. C</span>

The authorities for the lines of the First Tablet are as follows:—

TABLET I.

ll. 1-10: Nos. 1, 2, and 3.

ll. 11-16: Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4.

ll. 17-21: Nos. 3 and 4.

ll. 22-27: No. 3.

ll. 28-30: Nos. 3 and 5.

ll. 31-32: Nos. 3, 5, and 6.

l\. 33: Nos. 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8.

ll. 34-37: Nos. 3, 6, 7, and 8.

ll. 38-42: Nos. 3, 6, 7, 8, and 9.

l\. 43: Nos. 3, 6, and 8.

1\. 44: Nos. 3, 6, 8, and 9.

l\. 45: Nos. 3, 6, and 8.

ll. 46-47: Nos. 3, 6, 8, and 10.

l\. 43: Nos. 3, 6, and 10.

l\. 49: Nos. 6 and 10.

ll. 53-56: Nos. 6, 10, and 11.

ll. 57-63: Nos. 10 and 11.

ll. 64-67: No. 10.

ll. 68-82: Wanting.

ll. 83-92: No. 10.

ll. 93-103: Nos. 10 and 12.

ll. 104-110: No. 12.

ll. 111-117: Nos. 3 and 12.

l\. 118: Nos. 3, 6, and 12.

ll. 119-123: Nos. 3 and 6.

ll. 124-127: Nos. 2, 3, and 6.

ll. 128-142: Nos. 2, 3, 6, and 7.

<span id="page_CI">p. CI</span>

The following seven tablets and fragments are inscribed with portions of
the text of the Second Tablet of the series:—

13\. No. 40,559: Vol. II, pls. xiv-xxi. Obverse: ll. 1-40; Reverse: ll.
(111)-(140), catch-line, and colophon.

Upper part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 2 5/8 in. by 4 1/6 in. This text
has not been previously published.

14\. No. 38,396: Cun. Texts, pt. xiii, pl. 4. Obverse: ll. 11-29;
Reverse: ll. (105)-(132).

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 3 1/4 in. by 2 in. This text has not
been previously published.

15\. No. 92,632 + 93,048: Vol. II, pls. xxii-xxiv. Obverse: ll. 14-29;
Reverse: ll. (104)-(138).

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, formed from two fragments which I have
joined; 1 7/8 in. by 1 6/8 in. This text has not been previously
published.

16\. K. 4,832: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 5. Obverse: ll. 32-58;
Reverse: ll. (104)-(138).

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 1½ in. by 3 1/4 in. This tablet was known to
George Smith, see *Chald. Acc. of Gen.*, p. 92; its text was published
by S. A. Smith, *Miscellaneous Texts*, pl. 8 f.

17\. 79-7-8, 178: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 6. Obverse: ll. (69)-(75);
Reverse: ll. (76)-(85).

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 3 1/8 in. by 1 3/4 in. This text, which was
identified by Pinches, was given in transliteration by Delitzsch,
*Weltschöpfungsepos*, p. 30, and by Jensen, *Mythen und Epen*, p. 10 f.

18\. K. 10,008: Vol. I, App. II, pp. 187 ff. No obverse; Reverse:
probably between 11.85 and 104.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 1 5/8 in. by 2 1/4 in This text has not been
previously published.

 

<span id="page_CII">p. CII</span>

19\. K. 292: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 6. No obverse; Reverse: ll.
(131)-( 140).

Lower part of an Assyrian tablet, 2½ in. by 2 1/4 in. The text of this
tablet, which was known to George Smith, was given in transliteration by
Delitzsch, *Weltschöpfungsepos*, p. 31, and by Jensen, *Mythen and
Epen*, p. 10.

The authorities for the lines of the Second Tablet are as follows:—

TABLET II.

ll. 1-10: No. 13.

ll. 11-13: Nos. 13 and 14.

ll. 14-29: Nos. 13, 14, and 15.

ll. 30-31: No. 13.

ll. 32-40: Nos. 13 and 16.

ll. 41-58: No. 16.

ll. 59-(68): Wanting.

ll. (69)-(85): No. 17.

between ll. (86) and (103): No. 18.

l\. (104): No. 16.

ll. (105)-(110): Nos. 14 and 16.

ll. (111)-(113): Nos. 13, 14, and 16.

ll. (114)-(126): Nos. 13, 14, 15, and 16.

l\. (127): Nos. 13, 15, and 16.

ll. (128)-(129): Nos. 13, 14, 15, and 16.

l\. (130): Nos. 13, 15, and 16.

l\. (131): Nos. 13, 15, 16, and 19.

l\. (13-2): Nos. 13, 14, 16, and 19.

ll. (133)-(138): Nos. 13, 16, and 19.

ll. (139)-(140): Nos. 13 and 19.

<span id="page_CIII">p. CIII</span>

The following nine tablets and fragments are inscribed with portions of
the text of the Third Tablet:—

20\. K. 3,473 + 79-7-8, 296 + R. 615: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pls. 7-9.
Obverse: ll. 1-85; Reverse: ll. 86-138.

Parts of an Assyrian tablet, 2½ in. by 8 3/8 in. The three fragments of
this tablet, which have been recovered, join, but, as they are much
warped by fire, they have not been stuck together. For earlier
publications of the text, see S. A. Smith, *Miscellaneous Texts*, pls.
1-5, and my *First Steps in Assyrian*, pp. 124 ff. The text of K. 3,473
had been already recognized by George Smith, see *Chald. Acc. Gen.*, p.
92 f.

21\. No. 93,017 \[88-4-19, 13\]: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pls. 10 and 11.
Obverse: ll. 47-77; Reverse: ll. 78-105.

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 2½ in. by 3 5/8 in. This text, which
was identified by Pinches, was given in transliteration by Delitzsch,
*Weltschöpfungsepos*, p. 35 f., and by Jensen, Mythen und Epen, pp. 14
ff.

22\. 82-9-18, 1,403+6,316 \[No. 61,429\]: Vol. II, pls. xxv-xxviii.
Obverse: ll. 5-15, 52-61; Reverse: ll. 62-76, 124-128.

Part of a Neo-Babylonian "practice-tablet," inscribed with a series of
five-line extracts from the text; 2 in. by 3 in. A copy of the text of
82-9-18, 1,403, is given in *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 13: since then I
have joined to it the fragment 82-9-18, 6,316, and the text is therefore
repeated in Vol. II. This text has not been previously published.

23\. K. 8,524: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 12. Fragment from the end of
Obv. or beginning of Rev.: ll. 75-86.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 1 7/8 n . by 1 3/8 in. The text was

 

<span id="page_CIV">p. CIV</span>

referred to by Pinches in the *Bab. Or. Rec.*, vol. iv, p. 30, and was
given in transliteration by Delitzsch, *Weltschöpfungsepos*, p. 31.

24\. 82-9-18, 6,950+83-1-18, 1,868: Vol. II, pl. xxix. Duplicate of ll.
19-26 and 77-84; variants are noted in the text under ll. 19-26.

Neo-Babylonian "practice-tablet"; the text forms an extract measuring 2
5/8 in. by 1 1/4 in. A copy of the text of 83-1-18, 1,868, is given in
*Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 12; since then I have joined to it the
fragment 82-9-18, 6,950, and the text is therefore repeated in Vol. II.
This text has not been previously published.

25\. K. 6,650: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 9. Duplicate of ll. 38-55 and
96-113; variants are noted in the text under ll. 38-55.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 3 in. by 3 3/8 in. This text has not been
previously published.

26\. No. 42,285: Vol. II, pls. xxx-xxxiii. Obverse: ll. 46-68; Reverse:
ll. 69-87.

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 2½ in. by 2 5/8 in. This text has not
been previously published.

27\. 82-9-18, 5,448+83-1-18, 2,116: Vol. II, pl. xxxiv. Obverse: ll.
64-72.

Part of a Neo-Babylonian "practice-tablet"; the text, which forms an
extract, measures 2 3/4 in. by 1½ in. A copy of the text of 83-1-18,
2,116, is given in *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 12; since then I have
joined to it the fragment 82-9-18, 5,448, and the text is therefore
repeated in Vol. II. This text has not been previously published.

28\. K. 8,575: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 12. Obverse: ll. 69-76;
Reverse: ll. 77-85.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 2 5/8 in. by 2 1/6 in. This text, which was
identified by Bezold, Catalogue, p. 941, was given in transliteration by
Delitzsch, *Weltschöpfungsepos*, p. 38.

 

<span id="page_CV">p. CV</span>

The authorities for the lines of the Third Tablet are as follows:—

TABLET III.

ll. 1-4: No. 20.

ll. 5-15: Nos. 20 and 22.

ll. 16-18: No. 20.

ll. 29-26: Nos. 20 and 24.

ll. 38-45: Nos. 20 and 25.

l\. 46: Nos. 20, 25, and 26.

ll. 47-51: Nos. 20, 21, 25, and 26.

ll. 52-55: Nos. 20, 21, 22, 25, and 26.

ll. 56-63: Nos. 20, 21, 22, and 26.

ll. 64-68: Nos. 20, 21, 22, 26, and 27.

ll. 69-72: Nos. 20, 21, 22, 26, 27, and 28.

ll. 73-74: Nos. 20, 21, 22, 26, and 28.

ll. 75-76: Nos. 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, and 28.

ll. 77-84: Nos. 20, 21, 23, 24, 26, and 28.

l\. 85: Nos. 20, 21, 23, 26, and 28.

l\. 86: Nos. 20, 21, 23, and 26.

l\. 87: Nos. 20, 21, and 26.

ll. 88-95: Nos. 20 and 21.

ll. 96-105: Nos. 20, 21, and 25.

ll. 106-113: Nos. 20 and 25.

ll. 124-128: Nos. 20 and 22.

ll. 27-37: No. 20.

ll. 114-123: No. 20.

ll. 129-138: No. 20.

<span id="page_CVI">p. CVI</span>

The following six tablets and fragments are inscribed with portions of
the text of the Fourth Tablet:—

29\. No. 93,016 \[82-9-18, 3,737\]: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pls. 14-15.
Obverse: ll. 1-44; Reverse: ll. 116-146.

Upper part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 3 3/8 in. by 4 7/8 in. For an
earlier publication of the text, see Budge, *P.S.B.A.*, vol. x, p. 86,
pls. 1-6.

30\. K. 3,437 + R. 641: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pls. 16-19. Obverse: ll.
36-83; Reverse: ll. 84-119.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 3 in. by 5½ in. For an earlier publication
of' the text of K. 3,437, see George Smith, *T.S.B.A.*, vol. iv, p. 363
f., pls. 5 and 6; and of K. 3,437+R. 641, see Delitzsch, *Asyrische
Lesestücke*, pp. 97 ff., and my *First Steps in Assyrian*, pp. 137 ff.

31\. 79-7-8, 25 I: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 20. Obverse: ll. 35-49;
Reverse: ll. 103-107.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 1 in. by 2 1/8 in. The text, which was
identified by Pinches, was used in transliteration by Delitzsch,
*Weltschöpfungsepos*, pp. 41 ff., and by Jensen, *Mythen und Epen*, pp.
22 ff. This fragment probably belongs to the same tablet as No. 34.

32\. No. 93,051: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 20. Obverse: ll. 42-54;
Reverse: ll. 85-94.

Part of a Neo-Babylonian "practice-tablet," inscribed with the text
divided into sections of five lines; 2 1/4 in. by 1 3/4 in. This text
has not been previously published.

33\. K. 5,420*c*: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 21. Obverse: ll. 74-92;
Reverse: ll. 93-119.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 3 3/8 in. by 3 1/8 in. Restorations and
variants were taken from this tablet by George Smith for his edition of
K. 3,437; see above, No. 30.

34\. R. 2, 83: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 19. No obverse; Reverse: ll.
117-129.

<span id="page_CVII">p. CVII</span>

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 2 1/4 in, by 1 5/8 in. The text, which was
identified by Pinches, was given in transliteration by Delitzsch,
*Weltschöpfungsepos*, p. 45. This fragment probably belongs to the same
tablet as No. 31.

The authorities for the lines of the Fourth Tablet are as follows:—

TABLET IV.

l\. 35: Nos. 29 and 31.

ll. 36-41: Nos. 29, 30, and 31.

ll. 42-44: Nos. 29, 30, 31, and 32.

ll. 45-49: Nos. 30, 31, and 32.

ll. 50-54: Nos. 30 and 32.

ll. 55-73: No. 30.

ll. 74-84: Nos. 30 and 33.

ll. 85-94: Nos. 30, 32, and 33.

ll. 95-102: Nos. 30 and 33.

ll. 103-107: Nos. 30, 31, and 33.

ll. 108-115: Nos. 30 and 33.

l\. 116: Nos. 29, 30, and 33.

ll. 117-119: Nos. 29, 30, 33, and 34.

ll. 120-129: Nos. 29 and 34.

ll. 130-146: No. 29.

ll. 1-34: No. 29.

The following five tablets and fragments are inscribed with portions of
the text of the Fifth Tablet:—

35\. K. 3,567 + K. 8,588: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 22. Obverse: ll.
1-26; Reverse: catch-line.

Upper part of an Assyrian tablet, 3 1/8 in. by 2 7/8 in. For earlier
publications of the text, see George Smith, *T.S.B.A.*, vol. iv, p. 363
f., pl. 2; Delitzsch, *Assyrische Lesestücke*, 3rd ed., p. 94; and my
*First Steps in Assyrian*, pp. 158 ff.

 

<span id="page_CVIII">p. CVIII</span>

36\. K. 8,526: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 23. Obverse: ll. 1-18;
Reverse: ll. (138)-( 140).

Upper part of an Assyrian tablet, 1 ½ in. by 2 1/4 in. The text was used
by George Smith for his edition of No. 35, and in the other copies of
that tablet mentioned above; it was given in transliteration by
Delitzsch, *Weltschöpfungsepos*, p. 48 f.

37\. K. 13,774: Vol. I, Appendix II, pp. 190 ff. Obverse: ll. 6-19; no
reverse.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 1 1/4 in. by 1½ in. This text has not been
previously published.

38\. K. 11,641: Vol. I, Appendix II, pp. 192 ff. Obverse: ll. 14-22;
Reverse: ll. (128)-(140), catch-line, and colophon.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 2 3/4 in. by 3 3/8 in. This text has not
been previously published.

39\. K. 3,449a: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 23. Obverse: ll. (66)-( 74);
Reverse: ll. (75)-(87).

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 2½ in. by 1½ in. This text, which was first
identified and translated by George Smith, *Chald. Acc. of Gen.*, p. 94
f., was given in transliteration by Delitzsch, *Weltschöpfungsepos*, p,
50, and the reverse by Jensen, *Mythen and Epen*, p. 32.

The authorities for the lines of the Fifth Tablet are as follows:—

TABLET V.

ll. 1-5: Nos. 35 and 36.

ll. 6-13: Nos. 35, 36, and 37.

ll. 14-18: Nos. 35, 36, 37, and 38.

1\. 19: Nos. 35, 37, and 38.

ll. 20-22: Nos. 35 and 38.

ll. 23-26: No. 35.

<span id="page_CIX">p. CIX</span>

ll. 27-(65): Wanting.

ll. (66)-(87): No. 39.

ll. (88)-( I 27): Wanting.

ll. (138)-(140): Nos. 36 and 38.

ll. (128)-( 137): No. 38.

The following fragment is inscribed with a portion of the text of the
Sixth Tablet:—

40\. No. 92,629: Vol. II, pls. xxxv and xxxvi. Obverse: ll. 1-21;
Reverse: ll. 138-146, catch-line, and colophon,

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 2 1/8 in. by 2 1/4 in. This text has
not been previously published.

The following nine tablets and fragments are inscribed with portions of
the text of the Seventh Tablet:—

41\. K. 2,854: Vol. I, Appendix I, p. 159. Obverse: ll. 1-18; Reverse
uninscribed.

Upper part of an Assyrian tablet, 2½ in. by 1 3/4 in. This text has not
been previously published.

42\. No. 91, 139 + 93,073: Vol. II. pls. xxxviii-xlv. Obverse: ll. 3-40;
Reverse: ll. 106-141.

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 2 3/4 in. by 4 7/8 in. This text is
made up of two fragments which I have joined; it has not previously been
published.

43\. K. 8,522: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pls. 26 and 27. Obverse: ll.
15-45; Reverse: ll. 105-137.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 2½ in. by 3 1/4 in. For earlier publications
of the text, see George Smith, *T.S.B.A.*, vol. iv, p. 363 f., pls. 3
and 4, and Delitzsch, *Assyrische Lesestücke*, 3rd ed., p. 95 f.

<span id="page_CX">p. CX</span>

44\. No. 35,506: Vol. II, pls. xlvi-xlviii. Obverse: ll. 14-36; Reverse:
ll. 105-142.

Part of a Neo-Babylonian tablet, 2 1/4 in. by 4 1/4 in. This text, which
probably dates from the period of the Arsacidae, has not been previously
published.

45\. K. 9,267: *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 28. Obverse: ll. 40-47;
Reverse: ll. 109-138.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 3 5/8 in. by 2 in. Restorations and variants
were taken from this tablet by George Smith for his edition of K. 8,522;
see above, No. 43.

46\. K. 12,830: Vol. I, Appendix I, p. 163. Obverse or Reverse: between
ll. 47 and 105.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 7/8 in. by 7/8 in. This text has not been
previously published.

47\. K. 13,761: Vol. I, Appendix I, p. 164. End of Obverse and beginning
of Reverse: between ll. 47 and 105.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 1 1/8 in. by 1 5/8 in. This text has not
been previously published.

48\. K. 8,519: Vol. I, Appendix I, p. 165. End of Obverse and beginning
of Reverse: between ll. 47 and 105.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 1 3/4 in. by 1 3/8 in. This text has not
been previously published. <span id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_132.md)

49\. K. 13,337: Vol. I, Appendix I, p. 166. Duplicate of No. 48; between
ll. 47 and 105.

Part of an Assyrian tablet, 7/8 in. by 1 in. This text, which is a
duplicate of K. 8,519, has not been previously published.

 

<span id="page_CXI">p. CXI</span>

The authorities for the lines of the Seventh Tablet are as follows:—

TABLET VII.

ll. 1-2: No. 41.

ll. 3-13: Nos. 41 and 42.

l\. 14: Nos. 41, 42, and 44.

ll. 15-18: Nos. 41, 42, 43, and 44.

ll. 19-36: Nos. 42, 43, and 44.

ll. 37-39: Nos. 42 and 43.

l\. 40: Nos. 42, 43, and 45.

ll. 41-45: Nos. 43 and 45.

between ll. 47 and 105: Nos. 46, 47, 48, and 49.

l\. 105: Nos. 43 and 44.

ll. 46-47: No. 45.

ll. 106-108: Nos. 42, 43, and 44.

ll. 109-137: Nos. 42, 43, 44, and 45.

l\. 138: Nos. 42, 44, and 45.

ll. 139-141: Nos. 42 and 44.

l\. 142: No. 44.

The above forty-nine tablets and fragments, inscribed with portions of
the text of the Creation Series, belong to two distinct periods. The
older class of tablets were made for the library of Ashur-bani-pal at
Nineveh, and they are beautifully written in the Assyrian character upon
tablets of fine clay. <span id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133.md) The

<span id="page_CXII">p. CXII</span>

Neo-Babylonian tablets, on the other hand, are, as a rule, less
carefully written; they vary considerably in size and shape, and were
made at different periods for private individuals, either for their own
use, <span id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_134.md) or that they might be
deposited in the temples as votive offerings. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_135.md) Some of these Babylonian copies

<span id="page_CXIII">p. CXIII</span>

are fine specimens of their class, e.g. Nos. 3, 13, 21, 29, and
42, <span id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136.md)and the characters and words
upon them are carefully written and spaced; others, however, consist of
small, carelessly made tablets, on to which the poem is crowded. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_137.md)On all the tablets, whether Assyrian or
Babylonian, which possess colophons, the number of the Tablet in the
Series is carefully given. <span id="fr_138"></span>[3](#fn_138.md) The
extracts from the text, which were written out by students upon
"practice-tablets," no doubt in order to give them practice in writing
and at the same time to enable them to learn the text by heart, are
naturally rather rough productions. <span
id="fr_139"></span>[4](#fn_139.md) One characteristic which applies to all
the tablets,

<span id="page_CXIV">p. CXIV</span>

whether Assyrian or Neo-Babylonian, is that the text is never written in
columns, but each line of the poem is written across the tablet from
edge to edge. <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140.md) As a result, the
tablets are long and narrow in shape, and are handled far more
conveniently than broader tablets inscribed with two or more columns of
writing on each side.

The forms of the text of the poem, which were in use in the Assyrian and
Neo-Babylonian periods, are identical, and it is incorrect to speak of
an Assyrian and a Babylonian "recension." At the time of Ashur-bani-pal
the text had already been definitely fixed, and, with the exception of
one or two phrases, the words of each line remained unchanged from that
time forward. It is true that on the Babylonian tablets the words are,
as a rule, written more syllabically, but this is a general
characteristic of Babylonian copies of historical and literary texts.
Moreover, upon several of the more carefully written tablets, the metre
is indicated by the division of the

<span id="page_CXV">p. CXV</span>

halves of each verse, <span id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_141.md) an
arrangement which is not met with on any of the Assyrian tablets. But
both the Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian copies represent the same
"recension" of the text, and, as has already been indicated, <span
id="fr_142"></span>[2](#fn_142.md) are probably the descendants of a common
Babylonian original. The following table will serve to show the number
of Assyrian and Neo- Babylonian copies of each of the Seven Tablets
under which the forty-nine separate fragments of the text may be
arranged:—

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>TABLET.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>ASSYRIAN TEXT.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>NEO-BAB. TEXT.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>NEO-BAB. EXTRACTS.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>I</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>Four copies (Nos. 1, 6, 7, 8, 11).<br />
Nos. 8 and 11 are probably parts of the same tablet.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>Four copies (Nos. 2, 3, 4, 10, 12).<br />
Nos. 2 and 10 are probably parts of the same tablet.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>Two "practice-tablets"(Nos. 5, 9).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>II</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>Four copies (Nos. 16, 17, 18, 19)<br />
Nos. 18 and 19 are probably not parts of the same tablet.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>Three copies (Nos. 13, 14, 15).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>III.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>Four copies (Nos. 20, 23, 25, 28).<br />
Nos. 23 and 25 are probably not parts of the same tablet; it is possible, however, that No. 23 is part of a copy of Tabl. II, its text corresponding to ll. 13-24.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>Two copies (Nos. 21, 26).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>Three "practice-tablets" (Nos. 22,24, 27).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p><span id="page_CXVI">p. CXVI</span></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>IV</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>Three copies (Nos. 30, 31, 33, 34).<br />
Nos. 31 and 34 are probably parts of the same tablet.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>One copy (No. 29).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>One "practice-tablet" (No. 32).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>V</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>Four, or five, copies (Nos. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39).<br />
Nos. 35 and 39 are possibly parts of the same tablet.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>VI</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>One copy (No. 40).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>VII</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>Four, or five, copies (Nos. 41, 43, 451 46, 47, 48, 49).<br />
Nos. 41 and 46 are probably parts of the same tablet, and Nos. 47 and 49 are probably parts of another tablet; it is possible that No. 45 is a part of the same tablet as Nos. 41 and 46.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p>Two copies (Nos. 42, 44).</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="25%"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

In the arrangement and interpretation of the text of the Seventh Tablet
we receive considerable assistance from some fragments of Assyrian
commentaries which have come down to us. These were compiled by the
Assyrian scribes in order to explain that composition, and they are of
the greatest value for the study of the text. The contents of these
documents, and their relation to the text of the Seventh

<span id="page_CXVII">p. CXVII</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tablet, are
described in detail in Appendix I, <span id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_143.md)
but the following facts with regard to the size of the tablets inscribed
with the commentaries, and to previous publications of portions of them,
may here be conveniently given.

The most important class of commentary takes the form of a bilingual
list, and, as has been pointed out elsewhere, <span
id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_144.md) presupposes the existence of a Sumerian
version of part of the text of the Seventh Tablet of the Creation
Series. The text of the commentary is inscribed in a series of double
columns; in the left half of each column it gives a list of the Sumerian
words, or ideograms, and, in the right half, opposite each word is added
its Assyrian equivalent. It is noteworthy that the list is generally
arranged in the order in which the words occur in the Assyrian text of
the Seventh Tablet. The columns of the commentary are divided into a
number of compartments, or sections, by horizontal lines impressed upon
the clay, and the words within each compartment refer either to separate
couplets, or to separate lines, of the Seventh Tablet. Of this class of
commentary we possess six fragments of two large tablets which were
inscribed with five or six double columns of writing on each side; the
two tablets are duplicates of one another, having been inscribed with
the same

<span id="page_.CXVIII">p. .CXVIII</span>

version of the commentary. The following is a description of the six
separate fragments, the two large tablets, to which they belong, being
headed respectively A and B:—

A. (1) S. II + S. 980+ S. 1,416. For the text, see Vol. II, pls. li-liii
and lv; cf. also App. I, pp. 158 ff., 167f.

The fragment is the top left hand portion of the tablet; it measures 4
in. by 7 in. The text of S. II + S. 980 was published in V R., pl. 21,
No. 4. The fragment S. 1,416, which I have joined to the other two, has
not been previously published.

\(2\) K. 4,406. For the text, see Vol. II, pls. liv-lv; cf. also App. I,
pp. 163 ff.

The fragment is the top right hand portion of the tablet; it measures 4
1/4 in. by 4 7/8 in. The text has been previously published in II R.,
pl. 31, No. 2.

\(3\) 82-3-23, 151. For the text, see Vol. II, pl. liv; cf. also App. I,
p. 162.

The fragment measures 1 3/8 in. by 2 1/8 in.; it has not been previously
published.

B. (1) R. 366+80-7-19, 288t-293. For the text, see Vol. II, pls.
lvi-lviii; cf. also App. I, pp. 160, 168 f.

The fragment is from the left side of the tablet; it measures 2 1/8 in.
by 5 1/8 in. The fragment R. 366 was published in V R., pl. 21, No. 3;
80-7-19, 293, was joined to it by Bezold, *Catalogue*, p. 1,608. The
third fragment, 80-7-19, 288, was identified by Zimmern and published in
the *Zeits. für Assyr*., xii, p. 401 f.

 

<span id="page_CXIX">p. CXIX</span>

\(2\) K. 2,053. For the text, see Vol. II, pls. lix-lx; cf. also App. I,
pp. 161, 167 f.

This fragment measures 2 3/8 in. by 2½ in.; it has long been known to be
a duplicate of S. I I + S. 980 (see Bezold, *Catalogue*, p. 396), but
its text has not been previously published.

\(3\) E(. 8,299. For the text, see Vol. II, pl. lx; cf. also App. I, p.
162 f.

This fragment measures 3 in. by 1½ in.; it has not been previously
published.

In addition to the above commentary in the form of a bilingual list, we
possess single specimens of a second and a third class of explanatory
text. The second class contains a running commentary to passages
selected from other Tablets of the Creation Series in addition to the
Seventh, and is represented by the tablet S. 747. <span
id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_145.md) The third class, represented by the
obverse of the tablet K. 2,1.07 + K. 6,086, <span
id="fr_146"></span>[2](#fn_146.md) gives explanations of a number of titles
of Marduk, several of which occur in the recovered portions of the text
of the Seventh Tablet. Each of these two commentaries furnishes
information on various points with regard to

<span id="page_CXX">p. CXX</span>

the interpretation of the Seventh Tablet, but, as may be supposed, they
do not approach in interest the six fragments of the commentary of the
first class.

The transliteration of the text of the Creation Series, which is given
in the following pages, has been made up from the tablets, fragments,
and extracts enumerated on pp. xcvii ff.; while several passages in the
Seventh Tablet have been conjecturally restored from the Assyrian
Commentaries just described. In the reconstruction of the text
preference has usually been given to the readings found upon the
Assyrian tablets, and the variant readings of all duplicates, both
Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian, are given in the notes at the foot of the
page. The lines upon each tablet of the Series have been numbered, and,
where the numbering of a line is conjectural, it is placed within
parentheses. Great assistance in the numbering of the lines of detached
fragments of the text has been afforded by the fact that upon many of
the, Neo-Babylonian copies every tenth line is marked with a figure "10"
in the left-hand margin; in but few instances can the position of a
detached fragment be accurately ascertained by its shape. The lines upon
the Second and Fifth Tablets have been conjecturally numbered up to one
hundred and forty. Upon the Sixth Tablet the total number of lines was
one hundred and thirty-six or one hundred and forty-six; and, in view of
the fact that the scribe of No. 92,629 has continued the text to the
bottom of

<span id="page_CXXI">p. CXXI</span>

the reverse of the tablet, the larger number is the more probable of the
two. The following is a list of the total number of lines inscribed upon
each of the Seven Tablets of the Series:—

|        |           |        |
|--------|-----------|--------|
| Tablet | I, 142    | lines. |
| "      | II, (140) | "      |
| "      | III, 138  | "      |
| "      | IV, 146   | "      |
| "      | V, (140)  | "      |
| "      | VI, 146   | "      |
| "      | VII, 142  | "      |

 

Although it is now possible to accurately estimate the number of lines
contained by the Creation Series, there are still considerable gaps in
the text of several of the Tablets. The only Tablets in which the whole
or portions of every line are preserved are the Third and Fourth of the
Series. Gaps, where the text is completely wanting, occur in Tablet I,
ll. 68-82, and in Tablet II, ll. 59-(68). <span
id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_147.md) The greater part of the text of Tablet V
is wanting, but by roughly estimating the position of the fragment K.
3,449*a*, which occurs about in the centre of the text, we obtain two
gaps, between ll. 26 and (66) and between ll. (87) and (128). Of Tablet
VI we possess only the opening and closing lines, the rest of the text,
from l. 22 to l. 137, being wanting. Finally, the gap in the text of

<span id="page_CXXII">p. CXXII</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tablet VII,
between ll. 47 and 105, is partly filled up by the fragments KK. 12,830,
13,761, 8,519, 13,337, which together give portions of thirty-nine
lines.

Upon some of the Babylonian copies the metre is indicated in writing by
the division of the halves of each verse, <span
id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_148.md) and, wherever this occurs upon any
tablet or duplicate, the division has, as far as possible, been retained
in the transliteration of the text. In accordance with the rules of
Babylonian poetry, the text generally falls into couplets, the second
verse frequently echoing or supplementing the first; each of the two
verses of a couplet is divided into halves, and each half-verse may be
further subdivided by an accented syllable. <span
id="fr_149"></span>[2](#fn_149.md) This four-fold division of each

<span id="page_CXXIII">p. CXXIII</span>

verse will be apparent from the following connected The metre of
transliteration of the first half-dozen lines of the poem, in which the
subdivisions of the verses are marked in accordance with the system of
the Babylonian scribes as found upon the tablet Sp. ii, 265*a*  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150.md):—

<div align="center">

|                               |                        |                                |                            |
|-------------------------------|------------------------|--------------------------------|----------------------------|
| 1\. f. *enuma*                | \| *eli<u>sh</u>*      | \|\| *lâ nabû*                 | \| *<u>sh</u>amamu*        |
|      *<u>sh</u>apli<u>sh</u>* | \| *ammatum*           | \|\| *<u>sh</u>uma*            | \| *lâ zakrat*             |
| 3\. f. *Apsûma*               | \| *rî<u>sh</u>tû*     | \|\| *zaru*-                   |   *<u>sh</u>un*            |
|      *mummu*                  | \| *Tiamat*            | \|\| *muallidat*               | \| *gimri<u>sh</u>un*      |
| 5\. f. *mê*-                  |   *<u>sh</u>unu*       | \|\| *i<u>sh</u>teni<u>sh</u>* | \| *i<u>h</u>î<u>k</u>ûma* |
|        *gipâra*               | \| *lâ ki<u>ss</u>ura* | \|\| *<u>s</u>u<u>s</u>â*      | \| *lâ <u>sh</u>e'i*       |

</div>

 

It will be seen that the second verse of each couplet balances the
first, and the caesura, or division, in the centre of each verse is well
marked. The second half of verse 3 and the first half of verse 5, each
of which contains only one word, may appear rather short for scansion,
but the rhythm is retained by dwelling on the first part of the word and
treating the suffix almost as an independent word. It is unnecessary to
transliterate more of the text of the poem in this manner, as the simple
metre, or rather rhythm, can be detected without difficulty from the
syllabic transliteration which is given in the following pages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[XXVI:1](stc03.htm#fr_0.md) Mr. Smith described the
legends in a letter to the *Daily Telegraph*, published on March 4th,
1875, No. 6,158, p. 5, col. 4. He there gave a summary of the contents
of the fragments, and on November and in the same year he read a paper
on them before the <span id="page_XXVII">p. XXVII</span> Society of
Biblical Archæology. In noting the resemblance between the Babylonian
and the Hebrew legends it was not unnatural that he should have seen a
closer resemblance between them than was really the case. For instance,
he traced allusions to "the Fall of Man" in what is the Seventh Tablet
of the Creation Series; one tablet he interpreted as containing the
instructions given by "the Deity" to man after his creation, and another
he believed to represent a version of the story of the Tower of Babel.
Although these identifications were not justified, the outline which he
gave of the contents of the legends was remarkably accurate. It is
declared by some scholars that the general character of the larger of
the Creation fragments was correctly identified by Sir H. C. Rawlinson
several years before.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[XXVII:1](stc03.htm#fr_1.md) *The Chaldean Account
of Genesis*, London, 1876; German edition, edited by Delitzsch, Leipzig,
I 876. New English edition, edited by Sayce, London, 1880.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[XXVII:2](stc03.htm#fr_2.md) By November, 1875,
Smith had prepared a series of six plates containing copies of portions
of the First and Fifth Tablets, and also of the Fourth Tablet which he
entitled "War between the Gods and Chaos)" and of the Seventh Tablet
which he styled "Tablet describing the Fall." These plates were
published in the *Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archæology*,
vol. iv (1876), and appeared after his death.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[XXVII:3](stc03.htm#fr_3.md) See the papers by H.
Fox Talbot in T.S.B.A., vol. iv, pp. 349 ff., and vol. v, pp. I ff., 426
ff., and Records of the Past, vol. ix (1877), pp. 115 ff., 135 ff.; and
the translations made by Oppert in an appendix to Ledrain's *Histoire
d'Israel, première partie* (1879), pp. 411 ff., and by Lenormant in *Les
origines de* <span id="page_XXVIII">p. XXVIII</span> *l'histoire*
(1880), app. i, pp. 494ff. The best discussion of the relations of the
legends to the early chapters of Genesis was given by Schrader in the
second edition (1883) of his *Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament*,
English translation, 1885-1888; I hear from Professor Zimmern that the
new edition of this work, a portion of which he is editing, will shortly
make its appearance.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[XXVIII:1](stc03.htm#fr_4.md) The tablet was
numbered 82-9-18, 3,737; see below, p. cvi, No. 29. Budge gave a
description of the tablet in the *Proceedings of the Society of Biblical
Archæology* for Nov. 6th, 1883, and published the text in *P.S.B.A.*,
vol. x (1887 ), p. 86, pls. 1-6.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[XXVIII:2](stc03.htm#fr_5.md) See *Lectures on the
Origin and Growth of Religion as illustrated by the Religion of the
Ancient Babylonians* (Hibbert Lectures for 1887), pp. 379. ff.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[XXVIII:3](stc03.htm#fr_6.md) *In Records of the
Past*, new series, vol. i (1888), pp. 122 ff.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[XXVIII:4](stc03.htm#fr_7.md) See *Die Kosmologie
der Babylonier* (Strassburg, 1890), pp. 263 ff.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[XXIX:1](stc03.htm#fr_8.md) Zimmern published his
translation as an appendix to Gunkel's *Schöpfung und Chaos* in *Urzeit
und Endzeit* (Gottingen, 1895), pp. 401 ff.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[XXIX:2](stc03.htm#fr_9.md) *Bas Babylonische
Weltschöpfungsepos*, published in the *Abhandlungen der
philologisch-historischen Classe der Königl. Süchsischen Gesellschaft
der Wissenschaffen*, xvii, No. ii.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[XXIX:3](stc03.htm#fr_10.md)
*Assyrisch-Babylonische Mythen und Epen*, published as the sixth volume
of Schrader's *Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek*; part I, containing
transliterations and translations (1900); part 2, containing commentary
(1901).

<span id="fn_11"></span>[XXIX:4](stc03.htm#fr_11.md) In addition to the
translations of the legends mentioned in the text, a number of papers
and works containing descriptions and discussions of the Creation
legends have from time to time been published. Among those which have
appeared during the last few years may be mentioned the translations of
portions of the legends by Winckler in his *Keilinschriftliches Textbuch
zum Alten Testament*, ii (1892), pp. 88 ff.; Barton's article on
*Tiamat*, published in the *Journal of the American Oriental Society*,
vol. xv (1893), pp. 1 ff.; and the translations and discussions of the
<span id="page_XXX">p. XXX</span> legends given in Jastrow's *Religion
of Babylonia and Assyria* (1898), pp. 407 ff., in my own Babylonian
*Religion and Mythology* (1899), pp. 5 3 ff., by Muss-Arnolt in
*Assyrian and Babylonian Literature*, edited by R. F. Harper (1901), pp.
282 ff., and by Loisy, *Les mythes babyloniens et les premiers chapitres
de la Genèse* (1901). Discussions of the Babylonian Creation legends and
their connection with the similar narratives in Genesis have been given
by Lukas in *Die Grundbegriffe in den Kosmogonien der alten Völker*
(1893), pp. 1-46, by Gunkel in *Schöpfung und Chaos* in *Urzeit und
Endzeit* (1895), pp. 16 ff., by Driver in *Authority and Archeology*,
edited by Hogarth (1899), pp. 9 ff., and by Zimmern in *Biblische und
babylonische Urgeschichte* (*Der alte Orient*, 1901); an exhaustive
article on "Creation" has also been contributed by Zimmern and Cheyne to
the *Encyclopedia Biblica*, vol. i (1899), cols. 938 ff.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[XXX:1](stc03.htm#fr_12.md) Delitzsch's list of
fragments, enumerated on pp. 7 ff. of his work, gave the total number as
twenty-two. As No. 21 he included the tablet K. 3,364, but in Appendix
II (pp. 201 ff.) I have proved, by means of the Neo-Babylonian duplicate
No. 33,851, that this tablet is part of a long composition containing
moral precepts, and has no connection with the Creation Series. H e also
included K. 3,445 + R. 396 (as No. 20) but there are strong reasons for
believing that this tablet does not belong to the series *Enuma elish*,
but is part of a variant account of the story of Creation; see further,
Appendix II, pp. 197 ff. On the other hand he necessarily omitted from
his list an unnumbered fragment of the Seventh Tablet, which had been
used by George Smith, but had been lost sight of after his death; this
fragment I identified two years ago as K. 9,267. It may be added that
the total number of fragments correctly identified up to that time was
twenty-five, but, as four of these had been joined to others, the number
of separate tablets and fragments was reduced to twenty-one.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[XXXI:1](stc03.htm#fr_13.md) On pp. xcvii ff. brief
descriptions are given of these forty- nine separate fragments of the
Creation Series, together with references to previous publications in
which the text of any of them have appeared. The whole of the old
material, together with part of the new, was published in *Cuneiform
Texts from Babylonian Tablets, etc., in the British Museum*, part xiii.
The texts of the new tablets and fragments which I have since identified
are published in the lithographed plates of Vol. II, and by means of
outline blocks in Appendices I and II (see pp. 159 ff.). For the
circumstances under which the new fragments were identified, see the
Preface to this volume.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[XXXI:2](stc03.htm#fr_14.md) See below, p. xcviii
f., Nos. 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[XXXI:3](stc03.htm#fr_15.md) See below, p. ci, Nos.
13, 14, 15, and 18.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[XXXI:4](stc03.htm#fr_16.md) See below, p. ciii f.,
Nos. 22, 24, 25, 26, and 27.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[XXXII:1](stc03.htm#fr_17.md) See below, p. cvi,
No. 32.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[XXXII:2](stc03.htm#fr_18.md) See below, p. cviii,
Nos. 37 and 38.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[XXXII:3](stc03.htm#fr_19.md) See below, p. cix,
No. 40.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[XXXII:4](stc03.htm#fr_20.md) See below, p. cix f.,
Nos. 41, 42, 44, 46, 47, 48, and 49.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[XXXII:5](stc03.htm#fr_21.md) See below, p. xcvii
f., No. 1.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[XXXIII:1](stc03.htm#fr_22.md) The following is the
text of the passage in which Damascius summarizes the Babylonian
beliefs:— \#\#\# —Quaestiones de primis principiis, cap 125 (ed. Kopp,
p. 384). The Δαχην and Δαχον of the text should be emended to Λαχην and
Λαχον, which correspond to La<u>h</u>amu and La<u>h</u>mu. Of the other
deities, Ταυθέ corresponds to Tiamat, Ἀπασών to Apsû, Κισσαρή to Kishar,
Ἀσσωρός to Anshar, and Ἀνός to Anu; Μωϋμῖς corresponds to Mummu (see
below, p. xxxviii, note 1).

<span id="fn_23"></span>[XXXIV:1](stc03.htm#fr_23.md) See below, p. xcviii,
No. 2.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[XXXIV:2](stc03.htm#fr_24.md) It is interesting to
note that Ea is referred to under his own name and not by his title
Nudimmud upon new fragments of the poem in Tabl. I, l.60 (p. 12 f.),
Tabl. II, l. 5 (p. 22 f.), and Tabl. VI, l. 3 (p. 86 f.) and l. 11 (p.
88 f.).

<span id="fn_25"></span>[XXXVII:1](stc03.htm#fr_25.md) See further, pp.
lxvi ff.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[XXXVIII:1](stc03.htm#fr_26.md) The Μωϋμῖσ of
Damascius; see above, p. xxxiii, n. I. The title Mummu was not only
borne by Apsû's minister, who, according to Damascius, was the son of
Apsû and Tiamat, but in Tabl. I, 1.4, it is employed as a prefix to the
name of Tiamat herself. In this passage I have conjecturally rendered it
as "chaos" (see p. 2 f.), since the explanatory text S. 747, Rev., l. 10
(see below, pp. 162, 170), gives the equation *Mu-um-mu* = *rig-mu*.
There is, however, much to be said for Jensen's suggestion of the
existence of a word *mummu* meaning "form," or ''mould," or "pattern"
(cf. *Mythen und Epen*, p. 302 f.). Jensen points out that Ea is termed
*mu-um-mu ba-an ka-la*, "the *mummu* (possibly, pattern) who created
all" (cf. *Beiträge zur Assyriologie*, ii, p. 261), and he adds that the
title might have been applied in this sense to Tiamat, since in Tabl. I,
l. 113, and the parallel passages, she is described as
*pa-ti-<u>sh</u>a-ad ka-la-ma*, and from her body heaven and earth were
created; the explanation, given by Damascius, of Mummu, the son of Apsû
and Tiamat, as νοητὸς κόσμος is also in favour of this suggestion.
Moreover, from one of the new fragments of the Seventh Tablet, K. 13,761
(see p. 102 f.), we now know that one of Marduk's fifty titles was
Mummu, which is there explained as *ba-a*\[*n* . . . . \], i.e.,
probably, *ba-a*\[*n ha-la*\], "Creator \[of all\]" (cf. Ea's title,
cited above). In view of the equation *Mu-urn-mu* = *rig-mu* (Jensen's
suggested alternatives *<u>sh</u>im-mu* and *bi-i<u>sh</u>-mu* are not
probable), we may perhaps conclude that, in addition to the word
*mummu*, "form, pattern," there existed a word *mummu*, ''chaos,
confusion," and that consequently the title *Mummu* was capable of two
separate interpretations. If such be the case, it is possible that the
application of the title to Tiamat and her son was suggested by its
ambiguity of meaning; while Marduk (and also Ea) might have borne the
name as the "form" or "idea" of order and system, Tiamat and her son
might have been conceived as representing the opposing "form" or ''idea"
of chaos and confusion.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[XXXIX:1](stc03.htm#fr_27.md) Jensen's translation
of what is l. 50 of the First Tablet represents Mummu as urging Apsû to
make the way of the gods "like night," and implies that it was the
creation of light which caused the rebellion. L. 5 0, however, is
parallel to l. 38, and it is certain that the adv.
*mu-<u>sh</u>i<u>sh</u>* is to be rendered "by night," and not "like
night." In l. 38 Apsû complains that "by day" he cannot rest, and "by
night" he cannot lie down in peace; Mummu then counsels him to destroy
the way of the gods, adding in l. 50, "Then by day shalt thou have rest,
by night shalt thou lie down (in peace)"; see pp. 8 ff. Jensen's
suggested rendering of *im-ma a<u>s</u>-ru-nim-ma*, in place of
*im-ma-a<u>s</u>-ru-nim-ma*, in Tabl. I, l. 109 and the parallel
passages, is therefore also improbable.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[XXXIX:2](stc03.htm#fr_28.md) This fact does not
preclude the interpretation of the fight between Marduk and Tiamat as
based upon a nature-myth, representing the disappearance of mist and
darkness before the rays of the sun. For Marduk was originally a solar
deity, and Berossus himself mentions this interpretation of the legend
(see further, p. lxxxii, and the quotation on p. liv f., notes 2 and 1).

<span id="fn_29"></span>[XL:1](stc03.htm#fr_29.md) Cf. Tabl. I, l. 97.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[XL:2](stc03.htm#fr_30.md) Cf. Tabl. I, l. 62.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[XL:3](stc03.htm#fr_31.md) Cf. Tabl. IV, l. 142.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[XL:4](stc03.htm#fr_32.md) Cf. Tabl. I, l. 98.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[XL:5](stc03.htm#fr_33.md) Cf. Tabl. II, ll. 75 ff.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[XLI:1](stc03.htm#fr_34.md) It is possible that the
fragments of l. 88 f. of Tabl. I are not to be taken as part of a
speech, but as a description of Tiamat's state of confusion and
restlessness after learning of Apsû's fate.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[XLI:2](stc03.htm#fr_35.md) See also p. 14, n. 1.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[XLI:3](stc03.htm#fr_36.md) On the probable order
of the attempts made by Ea and Anu respectively to oppose Tiamat, see
Appendix II, p. I 88, n. 1.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[XLV:1](stc03.htm#fr_37.md) The account of the
Creation given by Berossus in his history of Babylonia was summarized by
Alexander Polyhistor, from whom Eusebius quotes in the first book of his
Chronicon; the following is his description of the mythical monsters
which existed before the creation of the world:— \#\#\# Eusebi
chronicorum liber prior, ed. Schoene, col. 14 f.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[XLV:2](stc03.htm#fr_38.md) The reading Ὀμόρκα is
an emendation for ομορωκα, cf. op. cit., col. 16, n. 6; while for Θαλατθ
we should probably read Θαμτέ, i.e., the Babylonian Tâmtu, "sea, ocean"
= Tiamat, cf. Robertson-Smith, *Zeits. für Assyr.*, vi, p. 339. The name
Ὀμόρκα may probably be identified with Ummu-<u>H</u>ubur, ''the
Mother-<u>H</u>ubur," a title of Tiamat which occurs in Tabl. I, l. 113
and the parallel passages. The first part of the name gives the equation
Ομ =*Ummu*, but how Hubur has given rise to the transcription ορκα is
not clear. Jensen has attempted to explain the difficulty <span
id="page_XLVI">p. XLVI</span> by suggesting that Ὀμόρκα = *Ummu-urki*,
and urki he takes as an Assyrian translation of <u>H</u>ubur. For
*<u>H</u>ubur* he suggests the meaning "that which is above, the North"
(mainly from the occurrence of *<u>H</u>u-bu-ur <sup>KI</sup>* =
*Su-bar-tum*, the Upper or Northern part of Mesopotamia, in II R, pl.
50, l. 51, cf. also V R, pl. 16, l. 19); and, since what is in the North
would have been regarded by the Babylonians as "behind," the title
*<u>H</u>ubur* might have been rendered in Babylonian as *urku*. This
explanation is ingenious, but that the title *<u>H</u>ubur*, as applied
to Tiamat, had the meaning "that which is above, the North," cannot be
regarded as proved (cf. also *Mythen*, p. 564). Gunkel and Zimmern, on
the other hand, see in Ὀμόρκα the equivalent of the Aramaic words *'Om
'orqa*, "Mother of the Deep," the existence of which they trace to the
prevalence of the Aramaic dialect in Babylonia at the time of Berossus
(see *Schöpfung und Chaos*, p. 18 f., n. 1); according to this
explanation the title Ὀμόρκα would be the Aramaic equivalent of
**Ummu-<u>H</u>ubur**, for *<u>H</u>ubur* may well have had the meaning
"deep, depth." Thus, on the fragment S. 2,013 (see below, p. 196 f.) the
meaning "depth," rather than "the North," is suggested by the word; in
l. 9 of this fragment the phrase *<u>H</u>u-bur pal-ka-ti*, "the broad
<u>H</u>ubur," is employed in antithesis to *<u>sh</u>amê*(*e*)
*ru-<u>k</u>u-u-ti*, "the distant heavens," precisely as in the
following couplet *Ti-amat <u>sh</u>ap-li-ti*, "the Lower Ocean
(Tiamat)," is opposed to *Ti-amat e-zi-ti*, "the Upper Ocean (Tiamat)."
For a possible connection between the lower waters of Tiamat and
<u>H</u>ubur, the River of the Underworld, see below, p. lxxxiii, n. 2,
and p. xciv f., n. 3.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[XLVI:1](stc03.htm#fr_39.md) According to the poem,
Tiamat is definitely stated to have created eleven kinds of monsters.
The summary from Berossus bears only a general resemblance to the
description of the monsters in the poem.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[XLIX:1](stc03.htm#fr_40.md) See below, p. liv f.,
note 1.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[XLIX:2](stc03.htm#fr_41.md) cf. ll. 135 ff.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[XLIX:3](stc03.htm#fr_42.md) For instance, the
fragment K. 13,774 (see below, pp. 190 ff.) in l. 8, in place of "He set
the stations of Bel and Ea along with him," reads "He set the stations
of Bel and Anu along with him." According to the text Marduk appoints
Nibir (Jupiter), Bêl (the <span id="page_L">p. L</span> north pole of
the equator), and Ea (probably a star in the extreme south of the
heavens) as guides to the stars, proving that they were already thus
employed in astronomical calculations. In place of Ea, K. 13,774
substitutes Anu, who, as the pole star of the ecliptic, would be of
equal, if not greater, importance in an astronomical sense. Another
variant reading on K. 13,754 is the substitution of
*kakkaba-<u>sh</u>u*, "his star," in place of *<sup>ilu</sup>
Nannar-ru*, the Moon-god, in l. 12; the context is broken, but we cannot
doubt that *<u>sh</u>uk-nat mu-shi*, "a being of the night," in l. 13
refers to the Moon-god, and that Marduk entrusted the night to the
Moon-god according to this version also. Further variants occur in l. 17
f. in the days enumerated in the course of Marduk's address to the
Moon-god; see below, p. 191 f.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[LIII:1](stc03.htm#fr_43.md) See Tabl. IV, l. 136.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[LIII:2](stc03.htm#fr_44.md) See Tabl. VI, l. 2

<span id="fn_45"></span>[LIV:1](stc03.htm#fr_45.md) See below, p. lviii.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[LIV:2](stc03.htm#fr_46.md) After the description
of the monsters of the deep referred to above (see p. xlv), the summary
from Berossus records the creation by Bel of the earth, and the heavens,
and mankind, and animals, as follows:— \#\#\# <span id="page_LV">p.
LV</span>.—*Euseb. chron. lib. pri.*, ed. Schoene, col. 16 f. For the
probable transposition of the passage which occurs in the text after
γεγεννημένων, see the following note.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[LV:1](stc03.htm#fr_47.md) The transposition of the
passage suggested by von Gutschmidt necessitates only one emendation of
the text, viz. the reading of τοιωνδε in place of τον δε before Βῆλον.
The context of this passage would then read \#\#\# and the summary by
Eusebius, at the end of the extract, would read \#\#\# cf. Schoene, op.
cit., col. 16 f., note 9. The emendation has been accepted by Budde,
*Die Biblische Urgeschichte*, p. 477 f.:, by Jensen, *Kosmologie*, p.
292, and by Gunkel and Zimmern, *Schöpfung und Chaos*, p. 19 f.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[LVI:1](stc03.htm#fr_48.md) Cf. *Schöpfung und
Chaos*, p. 20 f.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[LVI:2](stc03.htm#fr_49.md) For ἑαυτοῦ in both
passages Stucken would read αὐτῆς; cf. *Astralmythen der Hebaeer,
Babylonier und Aegypter*, i, p. 55.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[LVI:3](stc03.htm#fr_50.md) Cheyne, who adopts
Stucken's suggestion, remarks: "It stands to reason that the severed
head spoken of in connection with the creation of man must be Tiâmat's,
not that of the Creator"; cf. *Encyclopædia Biblica*, i, col. 947, note.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[LVII:1](stc03.htm#fr_51.md) In the *Zeits. für
Assyr*., xiv, p. 282, Zimmern remarks: "Somit darf man wol doch nicht .
. . . annehmen, dass ursprünglich das Blut der Tiâmat gemeint sei,
allerdings auch nicht das Blut des Schöpfergottes selbst, sondern das
irgend eines Gottes . . ., der zu diesem Zwecke geschlachtet wird." In
making this suggestion Zimmern was influenced by the episode related in
col. iii of the fragmentary and badly preserved legend Bu. 91-5-9, 269
(cf. *Cuneiform Texts*, pt. vi, and *Mythen*, p. 275, note), which he
pointed out contained a speech by a deity in which he gives orders for
another god to be slain that apparently a man may be formed from his
blood mixed with clay (cf. *Z.A.*, xiv, p. 281). The episode, however,
has no connection with the first creation of man, but probably relates
to the creation of a man or hero to perform some special exploit, in the
same way as Uddushu-namir was created by Ea for the rescue of Ishtar
from the Underworld, and as Ea-bani was created by the goddess Aruru in
the First Tablet of the Gilgamesh-epic (cf. also Jensen's remarks in his
*Mythen und Epen*, p. 275 f.). I learn from Professor Zimmern and
Professor Bezold that it was the tablet Bu. 91-5-9, 269, and not an
actual fragment of the Creation Series, to which Professor Zimmern
refers on p. 14 of his *Biblische una' babylonische Urgeschichte*.
Although, as already stated, this fragment is not, strictly speaking,
part of a creation-legend, it illustrates the fact that the use of the
blood of a god for the creation of man was fully in accordance with
Babylonian beliefs.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[LVII:2](stc03.htm#fr_52.md) See below, p. 86 f.,
n. 7.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[LVIII:1](stc03.htm#fr_53.md) See *Kosmologie*, p.
293.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[LVIII:2](stc03.htm#fr_54.md) The word is here met
with for the first time, the reading of GIR-PAD-DU (var. DA), the
ideogram for "bone," not having been known previously.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[LIX:1](stc03.htm#fr_55.md) On p. 200 it is
remarked that, until more of the text of the Fifth and Sixth Tablets is
recovered, it would be rash to assert that the fragment K. 3,445 + R.
396 (cf. *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 24 f.) cannot belong to the
Creation Series. The phrase *is-'Run<u>k</u>a<u>kk</u>ada* (Obv., l. 35
) might perhaps refer to the head of Tiamat (cf. *ru-pu-u<u>sh</u>-tu
<u>sh</u>a Ti-a*\[*mat*\], in l. 19), which would not be inconsistent
with the fragment forming part of the Fifth Tablet as suggested on p.
198. If the fragment were part of the Sixth Tablet, the *ka<u>kk</u>adu*
in l. 35 might possibly be Marduk's head (compare also
*ik-<u>s</u>ur-ma* in l. 31 with *lu-uk-<u>s</u>ur* in Tabl. VI, l. 5 ).
In view, however, of the inconsistencies noted on p. 199 f., it is
preferable to exclude the fragment at present from the Creation Series.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[LX:1](stc03.htm#fr_56.md) See pp. 201 ff.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[LXV:1](stc03.htm#fr_57.md) See pp. 171 ff.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[LXV:2](stc03.htm#fr_58.md) See pp. 175 ff.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[LXVI:1](stc03.htm#fr_59.md) In view of the fact
that the Semitic name *Bêl-mâtâti* occurs as one of Marduk's titles, it
is not impossible that the title *Bêl-ilâni*, which is applied to him in
the Epilogue to the Seventh Tablet (l. 129, see p. 112), also occurred
as one of his fifty titles in the body of the text. It is unlikely that
the name Marduk itself was included as one of the fifty titles, and in
support of this view it may be noted that the colophon to the commentary
R. 366, etc. (see p. 169), makes mention of "fifty-one names" of Marduk,
which may be most easily explained by supposing that the scribe reckoned
in the name Marduk as an additional title.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[LXVI:2](stc03.htm#fr_60.md) See below, p. 169.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[LXVII:1](stc03.htm#fr_61.md) See above, p. xli f.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[LXVIII:1](stc03.htm#fr_62.md) See below, pp. 1-16
ff.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[LXVIII:2](stc03.htm#fr_63.md) Jensen makes Bel the
slayer of the dragon in this legend (cf. *Mythen und Epen*, p. 46), from
which it might be argued that Marduk is the hero in both versions of the
story. But Jensen's identification of the deity as Bêl was due to a
mistake of Delitzsch, who published an inaccurate copy of the traces of
the deity's name upon the tablet; see below, p. 120, n. 1.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[LXIX:1](stc03.htm#fr_64.md) The so-called
"Cuthaean Legend of the Creation" (cf. pp. 140 ff.) was at one time
believed to represent another local version of the Creation story, in
which Nergal, the god of Cuthah, was supposed to take the place of
Marduk. But it has been pointed out by Zimmern that the legend concerns
the deeds of an Old-Babylonian king of Cuthah, and is not a Creation
legend; see below, p. 140 f., note 1.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[LXIX:2](stc03.htm#fr_65.md) See below, pp. 130 ff.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[LXX:1](stc03.htm#fr_66.md) Elsewhere this goddess
figures in the rôle of creatress, for from the First Tablet of the
Gilgamesh-epic, col. ii, ll. 30 ff., we learn that she was credited with
the creation of both Gilgamesh and Ea-bani. Her method of creating
Ea-bani bears some resemblance to that employed in the creation of man
according to the Sumerian and Babylonian version above referred to; she
first washed her hands, and then, breaking off a piece of clay, she cast
it upon the ground and thus created Ea-bani (cf. Jensen, *Mythen und
Epen*, p. 120 f.).

<span id="fn_67"></span>[LXX:2](stc03.htm#fr_67.md) See below, p. 122 f.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[LXX:3](stc03.htm#fr_68.md) See below, pp. 124 ff.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[LXX:4](stc03.htm#fr_69.md) In addition to the five
principal strands which have been described above as forming the
framework of the Creation Series, <span id="page_LXXI">p. LXXI</span> it
is possible to find traces of other less important traditions which have
been woven into the structure of the poem. Thus the association of the
god Kingu with Tiamat is probably due to the incorporation of a separate
legend with the Dragon-Myth.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[LXXI:1](stc03.htm#fr_70.md) It may be here noted
that the poem contains no direct description of Tiamat, and it has been
suggested that in it she was conceived, not as a dragon, but as a woman.
The evidence from sculpture and from cylinder-seals, however, may be
cited against this suggestion, as well as several phrases in the poem
itself (cf. e.g., Tabl. IV, ll. 97 ff.). It is true that in one of the
new fragments of the poem Tiamat is referred to as *sinni<u>sh</u>atu*,
i.e. "woman" or "female" (cf. Tabl. II, l. 122), but the context of this
passage proves that the phrase is employed with reference to her sex and
not to her form.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[LXXI:2](stc03.htm#fr_71.md) Tabl. VII, ll. 1-124.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[LXXI:3](stc03.htm#fr_72.md) See below, p. 169.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[LXXI:4](stc03.htm#fr_73.md) See below, pp. 175 ff.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[LXXIII:1](stc03.htm#fr_74.md) The slabs are
preserved in the British Museum, Nimroud Gallery, Nos. 28 and 29.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[LXXIV:1](stc03.htm#fr_75.md) An Assyrian copy of
this inscription, which was made for the library of Ashur-bani-pal, is
preserved in the British Museum, and is numbered K. 4,149; the text is
published in V R, pl. 33.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[LXXIV:2](stc03.htm#fr_76.md) Cf. col. iii, l. 13.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[LXXIV:3](stc03.htm#fr_77.md) Cf. col. iv, ll. 50
ff.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[LXXIV:4](stc03.htm#fr_78.md) Cf. col. iii, l. 33.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[LXXV:1](stc03.htm#fr_79.md) Such "deeps" were set
up by Bur-Sin, King of Ur about B.C. 2500 (cf. I R, pl. 3, No. xii, 1),
and by Ur-Ninâ, a still earlier king of Shirpurla (cf. De Sarzec,
*Découveries en Chaldée*, pl. ii, No. I, col. iii, l. 5 f.).

<span id="fn_80"></span>[LXXV:2](stc03.htm#fr_80.md) Two separate fragments
of this legend were found, of which one is in the British Museum and the
other, made up of four <span id="page_LXXVI">p. LXXVI</span> smaller
fragments, is in Berlin. Their texts are published by Budge and Bezold,
The Tell el-Amarna Tablets, p. 140 f. and pl. 17 (Bu. 88-10-13, 69), and
by Winckler and Abel, *Beer Thonfafelfund von El-Amarna*, p. 164f. (Nos.
2 3 4, 236, 237, and 239); cf. also Knudtzon, *Beiträge Zur Assyr.*, iv,
pp. 130 ff. For a translation of the fragments, see Jensen, *Mythen und
Epen*, pp. 74 ff.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[LXXVI:1](stc03.htm#fr_81.md) For the text, see
Winckler and Abel, *op. cit.*, p. 166 *a* and *b*, and cf. Knudtzon,
*B.A.*, iv, pp. 128 ff. For translations, see E. T. Harper, *B.A.*, ii,
pp. 420 ff., Zimmern in Gunkel's *Schöpfung und Chaos*, pp. 420 ff., and
Jensen, *Mythen und Epen*, pp. 94 ff.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[LXXVI:2](stc03.htm#fr_82.md) K. 8,214, published
by Strong, *P.S.B.A.*, xvi, p. 274f.; see Jensen, *Mythen und Epen*, pp.
98 ff.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[LXXVI:3](stc03.htm#fr_83.md) See below, p. 146 f.,
n. 4.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[LXXVII:1](stc03.htm#fr_84.md) The old Babylonian
fragment Bu. 91-5-9,269 (cf. *Cun. Texts*, vi, and see above, p. lvii;
n. 1), and the Deluge-fragment of the reign of Ammizaduga (published by
Scheil, *Receueil de travaux*, xx, pp. 55 ff.) both contain phrases
found upon the legend of Atar-basis, K. 3,399; cf. Zimmern, *Zeits. fur
Assyr.*, xiv, p. 278 f. The text of K. 3,399, which has not hitherto
been published, is included as plate 49 in part xv of *Cuneiform Texts*;
for translations, see Zimmern, *op. cit.*, pp. 287 ff., and Jensen,
Mythen, pp. 274 ff.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[LXXVII:2](stc03.htm#fr_85.md) The tablets are
numbered 87,535, 93,828, and 87,521, and they are published in
*Cuneiform Texts*, pt. xv (1092), plates 1-6. The opening addresses,
especially that upon No. 87,535, are of considerable interest; in this
tablet the poet states that he will sing the song of Mama, the Lady of
the gods, which he declares to be better than honey and wine, etc. (col.
i, (I ) \[*z*\]*a-ma-ar <sup>ilu</sup> Bi-li-it-ili a-za-ma-ar* (2)
*ib-ru u<u>s</u>-<u>s</u>i-ra ku-ra-du 5-me-a* (3 ) *<sup>Ilu</sup>
Ma-ma za-ma-ra-la-ma e-li di-i<u>sh</u>-pi-i-im u ka-ra-nim
<u>t</u>a-bu* (4) \[*a-du-u e-Zi di-i<u>sh</u>-pi u ka-ra-ni-i-im*,
etc.). The goddess Mama is clearly to be identified with Mami, who also
bore the title *Bêlit-ili* (cf. Jensen, Mythen, p. 286 f., n. 11); and
with the description of her offspring in col. i, ll. 8 ff.
(*<sup>ilu</sup> Ma-ma i<u>sh</u>-ti-na-am u-li-id-ma . . . .
<sup>ilu</sup> Ma-ma <u>sh</u>i-e-na u-Zi-id-ma . . . . <sup>ilu</sup>
Ma-ma <u>sh</u>a-la-ti u-l*\[*i*\]-*i*\[*d-ma*\]) we may compare Mami's
creation of seven men and seven women in the legend of Atar-<u>h</u>asis
(cf. Jensen, op. cit., p. 286 f.). The legend No. 93,828 also concerns a
goddess referred to as *Bêlit-ili*, whom Bel summons into his presence
(cf. col. i, ll. 10 ff.). The texts are written syllabically almost
throughout, and simple syllables preponderate; and it is interesting to
note that the ending *i<u>sh</u>* with the force of a preposition, which
occurs in the Creation legends, is here also employed, cf. No. 87,521,
col. iii, l. 4, *mu-ut-ti-is' um-mi-<u>sh</u>u* and possibly col. vi, l.
3, *gi-ir-di-i<u>sh</u>* The texts are <span id="page_LXXVIII">p.
LXXVIII</span> carefully written (it may be noted that a *na* has been
omitted by the scribe in No. 93,828, col. i, l. 7), the lines vary
considerably in length, and the metre is not indicated by the
arrangement of the text. Though fragmentary the episodes described or
referred to in the texts are of considerable interest, perhaps the most
striking being the reference to the birth of Ishum in col. viii of No.
87,521, and the damming of the Tigris with which the text of No. 87,535
concludes. I intend elsewhere to publish translations of the fragments.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[LXXVIII:1](stc03.htm#fr_86.md) *Ein
altbabylonisches Fragment des Gilgamosepos*, in the *Mitteilungen der
Voderasiatischen Gesellschaft*, 1902, I. The fragment here published
refers to episodes in the Gilgamesh-epic, the name of Gilgamesh being
written *<sup>ilu</sup>* GI<u>SH</u>, i.e. *<sup>ilu</sup>*
GI<u>SH</u>-<u>T</u>U-BAR. From the photographic reproductions published
by Dr. Meissner, it is clear that the Gilgamesh fragment, in the nature
of the clay employed, and in the archaic forms of the characters,
resembles the three fragments in the British Museum. Unlike them,
however, the lines of its text do not appear to be separated by
horizontal lines ruled upon the clay.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[LXXVIII:2](stc03.htm#fr_87.md) Father Scheil has
published the text in late Assyrian characters in the *Recueil de
travaux*, xxiii, pp. 18 ff., and he does not give a photograph of the
tablet. From his description ("C'était une belle grande tablette de
terre cuite, avec, par face, trois ou quatre colonnes . . . L'écriture
en est archaïque et, sans aucun doute possible, antérieure à
<u>H</u>ammurabi"), we may conclude that it dates from the same period
as the three tablets in the British Museum described above.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[LXXIX:1](stc03.htm#fr_88.md) See above, p. lxxv.
Cf. also the Sumerian influence exhibited by the names of the older
pairs of deities La<u>h</u>mu and La<u>h</u>amu, Anshar and Kishar, as
well as in the names of Kingu, Gaga, etc.; while the ending
*i<u>sh</u>*, employed as it constantly is in the Creation Series with
the force of a preposition, may probably be traced to the Sumerian *ku*,
later *<u>sh</u>u*, *<u>sh</u>i* (cf. Jensen, *Kosmologie*, p. 266). The
Assyrian commentaries to the Seventh Tablet, moreover, prove the
existence of a Sumerian version of this composition, and as the hymn
refers to incidents in the Creation legends, the Sumerian origin of
these, too, is implied. The Sumerian version of the story of the
Creation by Marduk and Aruru (see below, pp. 130 ff.) cannot with
certainty be cited as evidence of its Sumerian origin, as from internal
evidence it may well be a later and artificial composition on Sumerian
lines. That we may expect, however, one day to find the original
Sumerian versions of the Creation legends is not unreasonable; with
respect to the recovery of the ancient religious literature of the
Sumerians, the remarkable series of early Sumerian religious texts
published in *Cun. Texts*, pt. xv, plates 7-30, may be regarded as an
earnest of what we may look for in the future.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[LXXX:1](stc03.htm#fr_89.md) For the account of the
Phoenician cosmogony according to Sanchuniathon, see Eusebius, *Praep.
ev.*, i, 9 f., who quotes from the Greek translation of Philo Byblius;
the accounts of Eudemus and Mochus are described by Damascius, cap. 125
(ed. Kopp, <span id="page_LXXXI">p. LXXXI</span> p. 385). For summaries
and comparisons of these cosmogonies, see Lukas, *Die Grundbegriffe in
den Kosmogonien der alten Völker*, pp. 139 ff.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[LXXXI:1](stc03.htm#fr_90.md) Cf. Budge, *History
of Egypt*, vol. i, pp. 39 ff.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[LXXXI:2](stc03.htm#fr_91.md) Other Egyptian
beliefs, according to which the god Shû separated heaven and earth and
upheld the one above the other, may be compared to the Babylonian
conception of the malting of heaven and earth by the separation of the
two halves of Tiamat's body. For detailed descriptions of the Egyptian
cosmogonies, see Brugsch, *Religion und Mythologie der alten Aegypter*,
pp. 100 ff.; and for a convenient summary of the principal systems, see
Lukas, *op. cit*., pp. 47 ff. Though the Babylonian and Egyptian
cosmogonies, in some of their general features, resemble one another,
the detailed comparisons of the names of deities, etc., which Hommel
attempts in his Babylonische Ursprung der ägyptischen Kultur, are rather
fanciful.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[LXXXII:1](stc03.htm#fr_92.md) See above, p. xxvi
f.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[LXXXII:2](stc03.htm#fr_93.md) See above, p. xxxix,
and below, p, 10, n. 1.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[LXXXII:3](stc03.htm#fr_94.md) See above, p. xxxix,
n. 2.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[LXXXII:4](stc03.htm#fr_95.md) See above, p. xxxix.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[LXXXIII:1](stc03.htm#fr_96.md) See below, p. 196
f.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[LXXXIII:2](stc03.htm#fr_97.md) According to
Babylonian belief the upper waters of Tiamat formed the heavenly ocean
above the covering of heaven; but it is not clear what became of her
lower waters. It is possible that they were vaguely identified with
those of Apsû, and were believed to mingle with his around and beneath
the earth. It may be suggested, however, that perhaps all or part of
them were identified with Hubur, the River of the Underworld which was
believed to exist in the depths of the earth (cf. Jensen, *Mythen*, p.
307). The fact that Tiamat bore the title Ummu-<u>H</u>ubur, "the Mother
Hubur," may be cited in support of this suggestion, as well as the
occurrence upon S. 2,013 (cf. p. 197) of the phrases *<u>sh</u>amê*(*e*)
*ru-<u>k</u>u-u-ti* and *<u>H</u>u-bur pal-ka-ti*, corresponding to
*Ti-amat e-Zi-ti* and *Ti-amat <u>sh</u>ap-li-ti* respectively; see also
p. xlvi, note.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[LXXXIV:1](stc03.htm#fr_98.md) See above, p. 1.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[LXXXIV:2](stc03.htm#fr_99.md) See below, p. 109.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[LXXXIV:3](stc03.htm#fr_100.md) See below, p. 101.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[LXXXIV:4](stc03.htm#fr_101.md) See below, p. 103.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[LXXXV:1](stc03.htm#fr_102.md) See above, p. 1,
and below, p. 93.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[LXXXV:2](stc03.htm#fr_103.md) See below, pp. 78
ff.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[LXXXV:3](stc03.htm#fr_104.md) See below, p. 95.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[LXXXV:4](stc03.htm#fr_105.md) See below, p. 109.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[LXXXVI:1](stc03.htm#fr_106.md) See above, p. lix.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[LXXXVI:2](stc03.htm#fr_107.md) See above, p. lix,
n. 1, and below, p. 198.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[LXXXVI:3](stc03.htm#fr_108.md) See below, p. 122
f.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[LXXXVII:1](stc03.htm#fr_109.md) The portion of
the text on which this reference to the creation of beasts is inscribed
forms an introduction to what is probably an incantation, and may be
compared to the Creation legend of Marduk and Aruru which is employed as
an introduction to an incantation to be recited in honour of the temple
E-zida (see below, p. 130 f., n. 1). The account given of the creation
of the beasts is merely incidental, and is introduced to indicate the
period of the creation by Nin-igi-azag of two small creatures, one white
and one black, which were probably again referred to in the following
section of the text.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[LXXXVII:2](stc03.htm#fr_110.md) See below, pp. 86
ff.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[LXXXVII:3](stc03.htm#fr_111.md) See above, pp.
liv ff.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[LXXXVII:4](stc03.htm#fr_112.md) See also below,
p. xciii. It may be also noted that, according to Babylonian belief, the
great gods (cf. the plural of Elohim) were always pictured in human
form.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[LXXXVIII:1](stc03.htm#fr_113.md) See above, p.
lviii.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[LXXXVIII:2](stc03.htm#fr_114.md) See above, p.
liii f., and below, p. 85, note 3, and p. 88 f., notes 1 and 3.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[LXXXIX:1](stc03.htm#fr_115.md) See especially,
ll. 7 f., 9 ff., 15 ff., 23, and 27 f.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[LXXXIX:2](stc03.htm#fr_116.md) L. 31 f., which
read, "May his (*i.e.* Marduk's) deeds endure, may they never be
forgotten in the mouth of mankind whom his hands have made!"

<span id="fn_117"></span>[LXXXIX:3](stc03.htm#fr_117.md) See below, p. 100
f.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[LXXXIX:4](stc03.htm#fr_118.md) See below, p. 87;
the account of Berossus is in favour of this restoration.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[XC:1](stc03.htm#fr_119.md) The new parallel to
Gen. ii, 23, furnished by l. 5 of the Sixth Tablet, is referred to
below, p. xciv.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[XC:2](stc03.htm#fr_120.md) See below, p. 60 f.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[XCI:1](stc03.htm#fr_121.md) There is, however, a
parallel between the Seventh Day on <span id="page_XCII">p. XCII</span>
which Elohim rested from all His work, and the Seventh Tablet which
records the hymns of praise sung by the gods to Marduk after his work of
creation was ended.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[XCII:1](stc03.htm#fr_122.md) See my *Babylonian
Religion and Mythology*, pp. 138 ff. The fact that the Jews of the Exile
were probably familiar with the later forms of Babylonian legends
explains some of the close resemblances in detail between the Babylonian
and Hebrew versions of the same story. But this is in perfect accordance
with the borrowing of that very story by the Hebrews many centuries
before; indeed, to the previous existence of ancient Hebrew versions of
Babylonian legends may be traced much of the impetus given to the
revival of mythology among the exiled Jews.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[XCIII:1](stc03.htm#fr_123.md) See below, pp. 130
ff.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[XCIII:2](stc03.htm#fr_124.md) See above, p. lxx,
n. 1.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[XCIII:3](stc03.htm#fr_125.md) See above, p. lvii,
n. 1.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[XCIV:1](stc03.htm#fr_126.md) See below, p. 128 f.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[XCIV:2](stc03.htm#fr_127.md) With the Babylonian
River of Creation, suggested by the Euphrates, we may compare the
Egyptian beliefs concerning <u>H</u>âp or <u>H</u>âpi, the god of the
Nile, who became identified with most of the great primeval Creation
gods and was declared to be the Creator of all things. Considering the
importance of the Nile for Egypt, it is easy to understand how he came
to attain this position. Brugsch sums up his account of this deity in
the words: "So ist der Nilgott im letzten Grunde der geheimnissvolle
Urheber aller Wohlthaten, welche die von ihm befruchtete ägyptische Erde
den Göttern und Menschen zu bieten vermag, er ist 'der starke Schopfer
von allem'"; see *Religion und Mythologie der alten Aegypter*, p. 641.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[XCIV:3](stc03.htm#fr_128.md) It is possible that
this River, though suggested by the <span id="page_XCV">p. XCV</span>
Euphrates, is to be identified with *<u>H</u>ubur*, the River of the
Underworld, to whom an incantation in the terms of the one under
discussion might well have been addressed. A connection between Tiamat
and the river *<u>H</u>ubur* has been suggested above (cf. p. lxxxiii,
n. 2), and, should this prove to be correct, we might see in the phrase
*banat*(*at*) *ka-la-ma*, applied to the River, a parallel to
*pa-ti-ka-at ka-la-ma*, the description of *Ummu-<u>H</u>ubur* (Tiamat)
in Tablet I, l. 113 and the parallel passages.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[XCV:1](stc03.htm#fr_129.md) The connection which
Gunkel and Zimmern would trace between the River of Paradise and the
River of Water of Life in the Apocalypse on the one side and the "water
of life," mentioned in the legend of Adapa, on the other, cannot be
regarded as proved. The resemblance in the expressions may well be
fortuitous, since there are few other points of resemblance between the
narratives in which the expressions occur.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[XCV:2](stc03.htm#fr_130.md) On these subjects,
see my *Bab. Rel. and Myth.*, pp. 108 ff.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[XCV:3](stc03.htm#fr_131.md) See above, pp. lxxv
and lxxix.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[CX:1](stc03.htm#fr_132.md) I learn from Professor
Zimmern that he also has identified this fragment as part of the Seventh
Tablet by its correspondence with the commentary K. 4,406, published in
II R, pl. 31 (see below, p. cxviii).

<span id="fn_133"></span>[CXI:1](stc03.htm#fr_133.md) That the copies were
not always made from Babylonian tablets is proved by the colophon of K.
292 (cf. *Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 6), which states that this copy of
the Second Tablet was made from <span id="page_CXII">p. CXII</span> an
Assyrian archetype (*gab-ri <sup>mâtu</sup> A<u>shsh</u>ur
<sup>KI</sup>*). Upon some tablets Ashur-bani-pal's label was scratched
after the tablet had been baked, e.g., K. 3,567 + K. 8,588 (Cun. Texts,
pt. xiii, pl. 22). Other Assyrian copies, though giving the catch-line
to the next tablet, are without colophons, e.g., K. 3,473, etc. (cf.
*Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 9), and K. 8,526 (cf. *Cun. Texts*, pt.
xiii, pl. 23); the copy of the last tablet, K. 2,854 (see below, p.
159), the reverse of which is blank, was probably also without a
colophon.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[CXII:1](stc03.htm#fr_134.md) Cf. No. 40,559 (vol.
ii, pl. xxi), a copy of the Second Tablet which was made for a certain
Nabû-a<u>h</u>ê-iddina; and No. 45,528f 46,614 (vol. ii, pl. vi), a copy
of the First Tablet, which is described as the property of
Nabû-meshêti<u>k</u>-urri, a worshipper of Marduk and Sarpanitu, and is
said to have been copied from an original at Babylon on the ninth day of
Iyyar, in the twenty-seventh year of Darius. A certain
Nabû-balâ<u>t</u>su-i<u>k</u>bi, the son of Na'id-Marduk, appears to
have owned a complete set of the Seven Creation Tablets, for we possess
fragments of the First and of the Sixth Tablet in the series which
belonged to him (cf. No. 93,015, *Cun. Texts*, pl. 3, where the first
word of the second line of the colophon, which puzzled Delitzsch, is
clearly *bu<u>sh</u>û*; No. 46,803, vol. ii, pls. ix ff.; and No.
92,629, vol. ii, pl. xxxvii).

<span id="fn_135"></span>[CXII:2](stc03.htm#fr_135.md) Thus the fine copy
of the Fourth Tablet, No. 93,016, which was written by the scribe
Nabû-bêlishu, was, according to its colophon (cf. *Cun. Texts*, pt.
xiii, pl. 15), deposited by the smith Na'id-Marduk as a votive offering
in the temple E-zida. In his transliteration of this colophon Delitzsch
has made an odd blunder; he has not recognized the common phrase *ana
balâ<u>t</u> nap<u>sh</u>âti <sup>pl</sup> -<u>sh</u>u*, "for the
preservation of his life," which occurs at the end of line 3 of the
colophon, and has taken it as a proper name <span id="page_CXIII">p.
CXIII</span> *<sup>m</sup>* TIN-ZI *<sup>pl</sup> -<u>sh</u>u* (see
*Weltschöpfungsepos*, p. 41), a transliteration which turns the sentence
into nonsense.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[CXIII:1](stc03.htm#fr_136.md) See pls. ii, iii,
iv, and vi, and the frontispiece to Vol. II. Photographic reproductions
of the reverse of No. 21 and the obverse of No. 29 are given in the
*Guide to the Babylonian and Assyrian Antiquities in the British
Museum*, pls. vi and vii.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[CXIII:2](stc03.htm#fr_137.md) Cf. e.g., Nos.
93,015 (No. 2), 46,803 (No. 10), and 92,629 (No. 40), all of which were
probably written by the same scribe.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[CXIII:3](stc03.htm#fr_138.md) Cf. the notes
*duppu I <sup>KAN</sup> E-nu-ma e-li<u>sh</u>* on No. 45,528, etc. (vol.
ii, pl. vi); *duppu E-nu-ma e-li<u>sh</u> ri-e<u>sh</u>* on No. 93,015
(*Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 3); \[*dupp*\]*u II <sup>KAN</sup> E-nu-ma
e-li<u>sh</u>*; on K. 292 (*Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 6); *duppu IV
<sup>KAN-MA</sup> E-nu-ma e-li<u>sh</u>*, which follows a note as to the
number of lines in the text upon No. 93,016 (*Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl.
15); and *dup-pi V <sup>KAM-ME</sup> E-nu-ma e-li<u>sh</u>* on K. 3,567
*(Cun. Texts*, pt. xiii, pl. 22).

<span id="fn_139"></span>[CXIII:4](stc03.htm#fr_139.md) The
"practice-tablets" fall into two classes. In one class the tablets are
wholly taken up with portions of the text of the Creation Series, which
is written out upon them in sections of five verses separated by
horizontal lines; cf. Nos. 82-9-18, <span id="page_CXIV">p. CXIV</span>
1,403 + 6,361 (No. 22) and 93,051 (No. 32). In the other class short
extracts from the text are inscribed upon tablets containing other
matter, all of which the pupil has written out for practice; cf. Nos.
36,726 (No. s), 36,688 (No. 9), 82-9-18, 6,950 + 83-1-18, 1,868 (No.
241, and 82-9-18, 5,448 + 83-1-18, 2,116 (No. 27). The second class are
the more carelessly written of the two.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[CXIV:1](stc03.htm#fr_140.md) The only apparent
exceptions to this rule occur on some of the Neo-Babylonian tablets, in
which two lines of the text are occasionally written on one line of the
tablet when they are separated from each other by a division-mark. This
is simply due to want of space, which necessitated the crowding of the
text.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[CXV:1](stc03.htm#fr_141.md) See below, p. cxxii.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[CXV:2](stc03.htm#fr_142.md) See above, pp. lxxii
ff.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[CXVII:1](stc03.htm#fr_143.md) See below, pp. 157
ff.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[CXVII:2](stc03.htm#fr_144.md) See above, p.
lxxix, n. 1, and below, p. 158.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[CXIX:1](stc03.htm#fr_145.md) The tablet S. 747,
which measures 49 in. by 3 1/8 in., is published in *Cun. Texts*, pt.
xiii, p1. 32, and its connection with the text of the Creation Series is
described in Appendix I, p. 170 f. The text was given in transliteration
by Delitzsch, *Weltschöpfungsepos*, p. 58f.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[CXIX:2](stc03.htm#fr_146.md) The tablet K.
2,107+K. 6,086, which measures 4 in. by 5½ in., is published in Vol. II,
plate lxi f., and a transliteration and a translation of the text are
given in Appendix I, pp. 171 ff. Col. ii of the single fragment K. 2,
107 was given in transliteration by Delitzsch, *Weltschöpfungsepos*, p.
155.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[CXXI:1](stc03.htm#fr_147.md) In the gap in Tablet
II, ll. 86-103, may probably be inserted the new fragment K. 10,008; see
Appendix II, pp. I 87 ff.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[CXXII:1](stc03.htm#fr_148.md) On Nos. 45,528 +
46,614 (No. 3), 82-9-18, 6,879 (No. 12), 38,396 (No. 14), 42,285 (No.
26), and 93,016 (No. 29); cf. also the "practice-tablets," Nos. 82-9-18,
1,403 + 6,316 (No. 22) and 82-9-18, 5,448 + 83-1-18, 2,116 (No. 27).

<span id="fn_149"></span>[CXXII:2](stc03.htm#fr_149.md) For the first
description of the metre of the poem, see Budge, *P.S.B.A.*, vol. vi, p.
7; and for later discussions of the metre of Babylonian poetry in
general, see Zimmern's papers in the *Zeits. für Assyr.*, viii, pp. 121
ff., x, pp. 1 ff., xi, pp. 86 ff., and xii, pp. 382 ff.; cf. also D. M.
Mueller, *Die Propheten in ihrer ursprünglichen Form*, i, pp. 5 ff. It
may be noted that in addition to the division of the text into couplets,
the poem often falls naturally into stanzas of four lines each. That the
metre was not very carefully studied by the Neo-Babylonian scribes is
proved by the somewhat faulty division of the verses upon some of the
tablets on which the metre is indicated, and also by the fact that the
pupils of the scribes were allowed, and perhaps told, to write out
portions of the poem in sections, not of four, but of five lines each
(see above, p. cxiii f., n. 4).

<span id="fn_150"></span>[CXXIII:1](stc03.htm#fr_150.md) Published by
Zimmern, *Z.A.*, x, p. 17 f.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Tablet](stc04.md)
