[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shamanism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sis06)  [Next](sis08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FL4VJ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shamanism in Siberia*, by M.A. Czaplicka, \[1914\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XI

### THE SHAMAN IN ACTION

SINCE the performances of shamans as professionals called in to treat
diseases, to answer inquiries, for soothsaying and other similar
purposes, are very much the same among the different tribes of
Palaeo-Siberians, we shall confine ourselves to giving a few typical
examples of these performances. The same procedure will be followed with
regard to the Neo-Siberians.

#### Palaeo-Siberians.

The Koryak. Professional shamanism among the Koryak is at a most
primitive stage of development, yet at the same time, thanks to the
influence of European culture, it is also decadent.

Jochelson speaks\[1\] of the shamanistic performances which he saw as
follows: 'During the entire period of my sojourn among the Koryak I had
opportunity to see only two shamans. Both were young men, and neither
enjoyed special respect on the part of his relatives. Both were poor men
who worked as labourers for the rich members of their tribe. One of them
was a Maritime Koryak from Alutor. He used to come to the village of
Kamenskoye in company with a Koryak trader. He was a bashful youth, his
features, though somewhat wild, were flexible and pleasant, and his eyes
were bright. I asked him to show me proof of his shamanistic art. Unlike
other shamans, he consented without waiting to be coaxed. The people put
out the oil-lamps in the underground house in which he stopped with his
master. Only a few coals were glowing on the hearth, and it was almost
dark in the house. On the large platform which is put up in the front
part of the house as the seat and sleeping-place for visitors, and not
far from where my wife and I were sitting, we could discern the shaman
in an ordinary shaggy shirt of reindeer skin, squatting on the reindeer
skins that covered the platform. His face was covered with a large oval
drum.

\[1. Jochelson, *The Koryak* p. 49.\]

'Suddenly he commenced to beat the drum softly and to sing in a
plaintive voice; then the beating of the drum grow stronger and
stronger; and his song-in which could be heard sounds imitating the
howling of the wolf, the groaning of the cargoose, and the voices of
other animals, his guardian spirits-appeared to come, sometimes from the
corner nearest to my seat, then from the opposite end, then again from
the middle of the house, and then it seemed to proceed from the ceiling.
He was a ventriloquist. Shamans versed in this art are believed to
possess particular power. His drum also seemed to sound, now over my
head, now at my feet, now behind, now in front of me. I could see
nothing; but it seemed to me that the shaman was moving around,
noiselessly stepping upon the platform with his fur shoes, then retiring
to some distance, then coming nearer, lightly jumping, and then
squatting down on his heels.

'All of a sudden the sound of the drum and the singing ceased. When the
women had relighted their lamps, he was lying, completely exhausted, on
a white reindeer skin on which he had been sitting before the
shamanistic performance. The concluding words of the shaman, which he
pronounced in a recitative, were uttered as though spoken by the spirit
whom he had summoned lip, and who declared that the "disease" had left
the village, and would not return.'

The other shamanistic ceremony was performed by a shaman at Jochelson's
request for the purpose of divining whether he would reach home safely.

During this ceremony\[1\] the shaman suddenly asked Jochelson for his
knife, saying, 'The spirits say that I should cut myself with a knife.
You will not be afraid?\[2\]

Jochelson gave him, not without some scruples, his travelling knife,
which was sharp and looked like a dagger. 'The light in the tent was put
out; but the dim light of the Arctic spring night  
(it was in April), which penetrated the canvas of the tent, was
sufficient to allow me to follow the movements of the shaman. He took
the knife, beat the drum, and sang, telling the spirits  
that he was ready to carry out their wishes. After a little -while he
put away the drum, and, emitting a rattling sound from his threat, he
thrust the knife into his breast up to the hilt. I noticed, however,
that after having cut his jacket, he turned the

\[1. Op. cit., p. 51.

2, Ibid.\]

knife downwards. He drew out the knife with the same rattling in his
throat, and resumed beating the drum.'\[1\]

Then he said to Jochelson that he would have a good journey, and,
returning the knife to him, showed through the hole in his coat the
blood on his body. 'Of course, these spots had been made before', says
Jochelson.\[2\] 'However, this cannot be looked upon as mere deception.
Things visible and imaginary are confounded to such an extent in
primitive consciousness that the shaman himself may have thought that
there was, invisible to others, a real gash in his body, as bad been
demanded by the spirits. The common Koryak, however, are sure that the
shaman actually cuts himself, and that the wound heals up immediately.'

The Chukchee. Among the Chukchee, says Bogors,\[3\] a typical
shamanistic performance is carried on in the inner room of the house,
when it is closed for the night. This room, especially among the
Reindeer Chukchee, is very small. Sometimes the performance here
described is preceded by another, held in the outer room, in daylight,
and usually connected with a communal ceremonial.

When the drum is tightened and moistened, and the light is put out, the
shaman, who is often quite naked down to the waist, begins to operate.

In modern times Chukchee shamans imitate the Tungus shamans in smoking a
pipe filled with strong narcotic tobacco.

The shaman beats the drum and sings tunes; at first slowly, then more
rapidly. His songs have no words, and there is no order in their
succession. Though the audience take no actual part in the ceremony,
they are in fact of some assistance, as forming a very primitive
'chorus'. Their frequent exclamations encourage the shaman's actions.

Without an *ocitkolin* ('to give answering calls,' participle) a
Chukchee shaman considers himself unable to perform his office
fittingly; novices, therefore, while trying to learn the shamanistic
practices, usually induce a brother or a sister to respond, thus
encouraging the zeal of the performer.\[4\]

'Among the Asiatic Eskimo, the wife and other members of the family form
a kind of chorus, which from time to time catches up the tune and sings
with the shaman. Among the Russianized Yukaghir of the lower Kolyma, the
wife is also the assistant of

\[1. Op. cit., p. 52.

2\. Ibid.

3\. *The Chukchee*, p. 433.

4\. Op. cit., p. 434.\]

her shaman husband, and during the performance she gives him encouraging
answers, and he addresses her as his "supporting staff".'\[1\]

When the *kelet* come to the shaman, he acts in a different way,
according to whether he has or has not a ventriloquistic gift.

If the shaman is only 'single-bodied', the *kelet* will sing and beat
the drum through his body, the sound only of the shaman's voice being
changed. When he is a ventriloquist, the *kelet* appear  
as separate voices'.

Bogoras says that shamans could, with credit to themselves, carry on a
contest with the best practitioners of similar arts in civilized
countries. The voices are successful imitations of different sounds:
human, superhuman, animal, even of tempests and winds, or of an echo,
and come from all sides of the room; from without, from above, and from
underground. The whole of Nature may sometimes be represented in the
small inner room of the Chukchee.

Then the spirit either begins to talk or departs with a sound like the
buzzing of a fly. While it stays, it beats the drum violently, speaking
in its own language, if it happens to be any animal except the wolf,
fox, and raven, which can speak in the language of men; but there is a
peculiar timbre in their voices.

Usually it is not only one spirit which appears, and this part of the
performance might be called a dialogue. Sometimes the shaman does not
himself understand the language he is using, and an interpreter is
necessary. There are cases when spirit-language, comprising a mixture of
Koryak, Yakut, and Yukaghir, has to be translated into Russian for the
Russianized shamans and natives, especially those of the Kolyma
district.

Jochelson tells of a Tungus shaman nicknamed Mashka, whose 'spirits',
being of Koryak origin, spoke through him in that language: 'I asked him
several times to dictate to me what his spirits were saying, and he
would invaribly reply that he did not remember, that he forgot
everything after the seance was over, and that, besides, he did not
understand the language of his spirits. At first I thought that be was
deceiving me; but I had several opportunities of convincing myself that
he really did not understand any Koryak. Evidently he had learned by
heart Koryak incantations which he could pronounce only in a state of
excitement., \[2\]

\[1. Op. cit., p. 435.

2\. Jochelson, *The Koryak*, p. 52.\]

There is no regular shamanist language among the Chukchee, merely a few
special expressions.  
'Among the north-western branch of the Koryak, the " spirits are said to
use a special mode of pronunciation, similar to that used by the
south-eastern Koryak and the Chukchee. A few words are also said to be
peculiar to them. Among the Asiatic Eskimo the " spirits " are said to
have a special language. Many words of it were given me by the shamans,
and most of them are analogous to the "spirit" language known to various
Eskimo tribes of America, both in Alaska and on the Atlantic side.'\[1\]

Sometimes the spirits are very mischievous. In the movable tents of the
Reindeer people an invisible hand will sometimes turn everything upside
down, and throw different objects about, such as snow, pieces of ice,
&c.

'I must mention', says Bogoras,\[2\] 'that the audience is strictly
forbidden to make any attempts whatever to touch the "spirits". These
latter highly resent any intrusion of this kind, and retaliate either on
the shaman, whom they may kill on the spot, or on the trespassing
listener, who runs the risk of having his head broken, or even a knife
thrust through his ribs in the dark. I received warnings of this kind at
almost every shamanistic performance.'

After the preliminary intercourse with the 'spirits', the shaman, still
in the dark, gives advice and utters prophecies. For example, at one
ceremony, where Bogoras was present, the shaman Galmuurgin prophesied to
his host that many wild reindeer would be at his gate the following
autumn. 'One buck', he said, 'will stop on the right side of the
entrance, and pluck at the grass, attracted by a certain doe of
dark-grey hair. This attraction must be strengthened with a special
incantation. The reindeer-buck, while standing there, must be killed
with the bow, and the arrow to be used must have a flat rhomboid point.
This will secure the successful killing of all the other wild reindeer.'
\[3\]

After his introductory interview with the spirits, the shaman sometimes
'sinks'; he falls to the ground unconscious, while his soul is wandering
in the other worlds, talking with the 'spirits' and asking them for
advice. The modern shamans actually 'sink' very seldom, but they know
that it was done in the old days.

When shamanistic performances are connected with ceremonials, they are
carried on in the outer room. Ventriloquism is not

\[1. Bogoras, *The Chukchee*, p. 438.

2\. Op. cit., p. 439.

3\. Op. cit., p. 440.\]

practised on these occasions, and the *kele* 'is bent on mischief, and
among other things, seeks to destroy the life which is under his
temporary power." Many tricks are performed by shamans even in daylight.

Upune, the wife of a dead Chukchee shaman, possessed wonderful
shamanistic power; she herself declared that she had only a small part
of her husband's ability. In a shamanistic performance 'she took a large
round pebble of the size of a man's fist, set it upon the drum, and,
blowing upon it from all sides, began to mumble and snort in the same
*kele*-like manner. She called our attention by signs-being in the
possession of the *kele*, she had lost the faculty of human speech-and
then began to wring the pebble with both hands. Then a continuous row of
very small pebbles began to fall from her hands. This lasted for fully
five minutes, till quite a heap of small pebbles had collected below, on
the skin. The larger pebble, however, remained smooth and intact."

At the request of Bogoras the female shaman repeated this feat with the
same success, and all the upper part of the body being naked, it was
easy to observe her movements. The practice of stabbing oneself through
the abdomen with a knife is universal in shamanistic performances;
Kamchadal and Eskimo, Chukchee and Yukaghir, even the Neo-Siberian
shamans of northern Asia, are familiar with this trick.

It would be difficult to describe all the tricks performed by the
shamans: some of the commonest are the swallowing of burning coals,\[3\]
setting oneself free from a cord by which one is bound, &c.

#### Neo-Siberians.

The Yakut. For comparison with the Palaeo-Siberian methods of
shamanizing, we shall take a Yakut shaman in action, as described by
Sieroszwski.\[4\] 'Outwardly, shamanistic ceremonies are very uniform,'
says Sieroszewski. The ceremony now described 'is the part of the
shamanistic ceremony which remains always and everywhere unchanged, and,
sanctioned by custom, forms, so to speak, the basis of the rite.'

When the shaman who has been called to a sick person enters the *yurta*,
he at once takes the place destined for him on the

\[1.Op. cit., p. 442.

2\. Op. cit., p. 444.

3\. *Satrytcheff, The Voyage of Capt. Sarytcheff's Fleet along the N.E.
Coast of Siberia, through The Polar Sea and the Pacific*, p. 30.

4\. Sieroszewski, *12 Lat w Kraju Yakutów*, 1902, p. 639.\]

billiryk agon. He lies on his white mare's skin and waits for the night,
the time when it is possible to shamanize. Meanwhile he is entertained
with food and drink.

'When the sun sets and the dusk of evening approaches, all preparations
for the ceremony in the *yurta* are hurriedly completed: the ground is
swept, the wood is cut, and food is provided in larger quantity and of
better quality than usual. One by one the neighbours arrive and seat
themselves along the wall, the men on the right, and the women on the
left; the conversation is peculiarly serious and reserved,, the
movements gentle.

'In the northern part of the Yakut district the host chooses the best
latchets and forms them into a loop, which is placed round the shaman's
shoulders and bold by one of those present during the dance, in order to
prevent the spirits from carrying him off. At length every one has
supper, and the household takes some rest. The shaman, sitting on the
edge of the *billiryk*, slowly untwists his tresses, muttering and
giving orders. He sometimes has a nervous and artificial hiccough which
makes his whole body shake; his gaze does not wander, his eyes being
fixed on one point, usually on the fire.

'The fire is allowed to die out. More and more deeply the dusk descends
on the room; voices are hushed, and the company talks in whispers;
notice is given that anybody -wishing to go out must do so at once,
because soon the door will be closed, after which nobody can either go
out or come in.

'The shaman slowly takes off his shirt and puts on his wizard's coat,
or, failing that, he takes the woman's coat called *sangyniah*.\[1\]
Then he is given a pipe, which he smokes for a long time, swallowing the
smoke; his hiccough becomes louder, he shivers more violently. When he -
has finished smoking, his face is pale, his head falls on his breast,
his eyes are half-closed.

'At this point the white mare's skin is placed in the middle of the
room. The shaman asks for cold water, and when he has drunk it he slowly
holds out his hand for the drum prepared for him; he then walks to the
middle of the room, and, kneeling for a time on his right knee, bows
solemnly to all the four corners of the world, at the same time
sprinkling the ground about him with the water from his mouth.

\[1. Gmelin speaks of special embroidered stockings which the shaman,
dons in the *yurta*. (*Reise durch Sibirien*, pp. 351-6.)\]

'Now everything is silent. A handful of white horsehair is thrown on the
fire, putting it quite out; in the faint gleam of the red coals the
black motionless figure of the shaman is still to be seen for a while,
with drooping bead, big drum on breast, and face turned towards the
south, as is also the head of the mare's skin upon which he is sitting.

Complete darkness follows the dusk; the audience scarcely breathes, and
only the unintelligible mutterings and hiccoughs of the shaman can be
heard; gradually even this sinks into a profound silence. Eventually a
single great yawn like the clang of iron breaks the stillness, followed
by the loud piercing cry of a falcon, or the plaintive weeping of a
seamew-then silence again.

'Only the gentle sound of the voice of the drum, like the humming of a
gnat, announces that the shaman has begun to play.

'This music is at first soft. delicate, tender, then rough and
irrepressible like the roar of an oncoming storm. It grows louder and
louder and, like peals of thunder, wild shouts rend the air; the crow
calls, the grebe laughs, the seamews complain, snipes whistle, eagles
and hawks scream.'

'The \[1\] music swells and rises to the highest pitch, the beating of
the drum becomes more and more vigorous, until the two sounds combine in
one long-drawn crescendo. The numberless small bells ring and clang; it
is not a storm-it is a whole cascade of sounds, enough to overwhelm all
the listeners.... All at once it breaks off-there are one or two strong
beats on the drum, which, hitherto held aloft, now falls to the shaman's
knees. Suddenly the sound of the drum and the small bells ceases. Then
silence for a long moment, while the gentle gnat-like murmur of the drum
begins again.'

\[1. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 641.\]

This may be repeated several times, according to the degree of the
shaman's inspiration; at last, when the music takes on a certain new
rhythm and melody, sombrely the voice of the shaman chants the following
obscure fragments:

1\. 'Mighty bull of the earth . . . Horse of the steppes!'  
2. 'I, the mighty bull . . . bellow!'  
3. 'I, the horse of the steppes . . . neigh!'  
4. 'I, the man set above all other beings!'  
5. 'I, the man most gifted of all!'  
6. 'I, the man created by the master all-powerful!  
7. 'Horse of the steppes, appear! teach me!'  
8. 'Enchanted bull of the earth, appear! speak to me!'  
9. 'Powerful master, command me!'  
10. 'All of you, who will go with me, give heed with your ears! Those
whom I command not. follow me not!'  
11. 'Approach not nearer than is permitted! Look intently! Give heed !
Have a care!'  
12. 'Look heedfully! Do this, all of you . all together . . . all,
however many you may be!'  
13. 'Thou of the left side, O lady with thy staff, if anything be done
amiss, if I take not the right way, I entreat you - correct me! Command!
. . .'  
14. 'My errors and my path show to me! O mother of mine! Wing thy free
flight! Pave my wide roadway!'  
15. 'Souls of the sun, mothers of the sun, living in the south, in the
nine wooded hills, ye who shall be jealous . . . I adjure you all . . .
let them stay . . . let your three shadows stand high!'  
16. 'In the East, on your mountain, lord, grandsire of mine. great of
power and thick of neck-be thou with me!'  
17. 'And thou, grey-bearded wizard (fire), I ask thee: with all my
dreams, 'with all comply! To all my desires consent . . . Heed all!
Fulfil all! . . . All heed . . . All fulfil!'\[1\]

At this point the sounds of the drum are heard once more, once more wild
shouts and meaningless words-then all is silent.

Adjurations similar to the above are used in all the Yakut districts and
all ceremonies begin with them. There is, however, another formula still
longer and more complicated, which Sieroszewski says he could not
procure. The ritual which follows this formula consists of an
improvisation appropriate to each person and occasion.

In the ensuing prayers the shaman addresses his *ämägyat* and other
protective 'spirits'; be talks with the *kaliany*, asks them questions,
and gives answers in their names. Sometimes the shaman must pray and
beat the drum a long time before the spirits come; often their
appearance is so sudden and so impetuous that the shaman is overcome and
falls down. It is a good sign if he falls on his face, and a bad sign if
he falls on his back.

'When the *ämägyat* comes down to a shaman, he arises and

\[1. Sieroszewski, op. cit., pp. 641-2.\]

begins to leap and dance, at first on the skin, and then, his movements
becoming more rapid, he glides into the middle of the room. Wood is
quickly piled on the fire, and the light spreads through the *yurta*,
which is now full of noise and movement. The shaman dances, sings, and
beats the drum uninterruptedly, jumps about furiously, turning his face
to the south, then to the -west, then to the east. Those who hold him by
the leather thongs sometimes have great difficulty in controlling his
movements. In the south Yakut district, however, the shaman dances
unfettered. Indeed, he often gives up his drum so as to be able to dance
more unrestrainedly.

'The head of the shaman is bowed, his eyes are half-closed his hair is
tumbled and in wild disorder lies on his sweating face, his mouth is
twisted strangely, saliva streams down his chin, often he foamgs at the
mouth.

'He moves round the room, advancing and retreating, beating the drum,
which resounds no less wildly than the roaring of the shaman himself; he
shakes his jingling coat, and seems to become more and more maniacal,
intoxicated with the noise and movement.

'His fury ebbs and rises like a wave; sometimes it leaves him for a
while, and then, holding his drum high above his head, solemnly and
calmly he chants a prayer and summons the "spirit".

'At last he knows all he desires; be is acquainted with the cause of the
misfortune or disease with which be has been striving; he is sure of the
help of the beings whose aid he needs. Circling about in his dance,
singing and playing, be approaches the patient.

'With new objurgations be drives away the cause of the illness by
frightening it, or by sucking it out with his mouth from the painful
place: then, returning to the middle of the room, he drives it away by
spitting and blowing. Then he learns what sacrifice is to be made to the
"powerful spirits", for this harsh treatment of the spirit's servant,
who was sent to the patient.

'Then the shaman, shading his eyes from the light with his hands, looks
attentively into each corner of the room; and if he notices anything
suspicious, he again beats the drum, dances, wakes terrifying gestures,
and entreats the " spirits ".

'At length all is made clean, the suspicious "cloud" is no more to be
seen, which signifies that the cause of the trouble has been driven out;
the sacrifice is accepted, the prayers have been heard-the ceremony is
over.

'The shaman still retains for some time after this the gift of prophecy;
he foretells various happenings, answers the questions of the curious,
or relates what he saw on his journey away from the earth.

'Finally he is carried with his mare's skin back to his place of honour
on the *billiryk*'.\[1\]

The sacrifice offered to the 'spirits' varies according to the
importance of the occasion. Sometimes the disease is transferred to the
cattle, and the stricken cattle are then sacrificed, i. e. ascend to the
sky.\[2\] It is this journey to the sky, together with the spirits and
the sacrificed animal, which the dance symbolizes. In the old days
(according to the native accounts) there were, in fact, shamans who
really did ascend into the sky while the spectators saw how 'on the
clouds there floated the sacrificed animal, after it sped the drum of
the shaman, and this was followed by the shaman himself in his wizard's
coat'.\[3\]

There were also wicked and powerful shamans who, instead of a real
animal, carried up into the sky a mare formed of cloud, but the evidence
for the existence of these shamans is indefinite.  
During this difficult and dangerous journey every shaman has his places
of rest, called *ouokh* (*olokh*); when he takes a seat during the
dance, this signifies that he has come to an *ouokh*;\[4\] when he
rises, he is ascending further tip into the sky; if he falls down, he is
descending under the earth.

Every shaman, however far be may have proceeded on his journey, knows
where he is, on which *ouoloh*, and also the route taken by every other
shaman who is shamanizing at that moment.  
Sometimes the leading of the ' spirit' and the sacrificed cattle into
the sky forms a separate ceremony performed a few months after the
first, in which they had promised this sacrifice. The sacrifices are
either bloody, when the shaman tears to pieces the

\[1. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 644.

2\. Troshchanski says (p. 105): 'Instead of the human *kut* which the
*abassy* had captured, he receives an animal *kut*. Usually, between the
spirit who took away the *kut* of the man and the representative of the
latter, there takes place (through the shaman) a keen bargaining, in
which the spirit gives up some of its demands.'

3\. Sieroszewski, op. cit., p. 645.

4\. These *ouokh* occur in a series of nine, in conformity with the
usual arrangement of objects in nines which characterizes the whole
religious and social system of the Yakut. (Sieroszewski, op. cit., p.
472.)\]

body of the animal with rage and fury, or bloodless; e. g. when some
grease or meat, or other material, such as hair, &c., is offered up.

The Samoyed. The shamanistic ceremonial among the Samoyed of the Tomsk
Government has been described by Castren,\[1\] from whose account we
take the following picture.

On arriving at the *yurta* the shaman takes his seat on a bench, or on a
chest which must contain no implement capable of inflicting a wound.
Near him, but not in front, the occupants of the *yurta* group
themselves. The shaman faces the door, and pretends to be unconscious of
all sights and sounds. In his right band he holds a short staff which is
inscribed on one side with mystic symbols; and in his left, two arrows
with the points held upwards. To each point is affixed a small bell. His
dress has nothing distinctive of a shaman; he usually wears the coat
either of the inquirer or of the sick person. The performance begins
with a song summoning the spirits. Then the shaman strikes the arrows
with his staff, so that the bells chime in a regular rhythm, while all
the spectators sit in awed silence. When the spirits appear, the shaman
rises and commences to dance. The dance is followed by a series of
complicated and difficult body-movements. While all this is going on the
rhythmical chiming of the bells never ceases. His song consists of a
sort of dialogue with the spirits, and is sung with changes of
intonation denoting different degrees of excitement or enthusiasm. When
his enthusiasm rises to a high pitch, those present join in the singing.
After the shaman has learnt all he wishes from the spirits, the latter
communicate the will of the god to the people. If he is to foretell the
future, he employs his staff. He throws it on the ground, and if it
falls with the side inscribed with mystical signs turned upward, this is
a good omen; if the blank side shows, ill-fortune may be looked for.

To prove his trustworthiness to those present, the shaman uses the
following means. He sits on a reindeer skin, and his hands and feet are
bound, The room is completely darkened. Then, as if in answer to his
call to the spirits, various noises are heard both Within and without
the *yurta*: the beating of a drum, the grunting of a bear, the hissing
of a serpent, the squeak of a squirrel, and mysterious scratchings on
the reindeer-skin where he sits. Then

\[1. Castren, *Reiseberichte und Briefe, 1845-9*. pp. 172-4.\]

the shaman's bonds are untied, he is set free, and every one is
convinced that what they heard was the work of the spirits.

The Altaians. The *kams* (shamans) of the Turkic tribes of the Altai
have preserved with great strictness the ancient shamanistic ceremonial
forms. Potanin\[1\] gives a curious description of the performance of a
young shaman, Enchu, who lived by the River Talda, about six versts from
Anguday. Four stages, each marked by a different posture of the shaman,
characterized his performance: in the first, he was sitting and facing
the fire; second, standing, with his back to the fire; third, a sort of
interlude, during which the shaman rested from his labour, supporting
himself with his elbow on the drum, which he balanced on its rim, while
he related what he had learned in his intercourse with the spirits; and
fourth, a final shamanizing, with his back to the fire, and facing the
place where the drum usually hangs. Enchu declared afterwards that he
had no recollection of what happened while he was shamanizing with his
back turned to the fire. While he was in that position he had been
whirling about madly in circles on one spot, and without any
considerable movement of his feet; crouching down on his haunches, and
rising again to a standing posture, without interrupting the rotating
movement. As he alternately bent and straightened his body from the
hips, backwards and forwards and from side to side, with lively
movements or jerks, the *manyak* (metal pendants) fastened to his coat
danced and dangled furiously in ill directions, describing shining
circles in the air. At the same time the shaman kept beating his drum,
holding it in various positions so that it gave out different sounds.
From time to time Enchu held the drum high above his head in a
horizontal position and beat upon it from below. The natives of Anguday
explained to Potanin that when the shaman held the drum in that way, he
was collecting spirits in it. At times he would talk and laugh with some
one apparently near by, but invisible to others, showing in this manner
that he was in the company of spirits. At one time Enchu fell to singing
more, quietly and evenly, simultaneously imitating on his drum the
hoof-beats of a horse. This was to indicate that the shaman, with his
accompanying spirits, was departing to the underworld of Erlik, the god
of darkness.

Mr. Potanin gives a description of this voyage which he heard from a
Russian missionary, Mr. Chivalkoff.

\[1. Potanin, Sketches of N. W. Mongolia, vol. iv, pp. 60-2.\]

The *kam* directs his way towards the south. The has to cross the Altai
Mountains and the red sands of the Chinese deserts. Then he crosses a
yellow steppe, such as no magpie can traverse. ''Singing, we shall cross
it', says the *kam* in his Song. After the yellow steppe there is a
'pale' one, such as no crow can pass over, and the *kam* in his
imaginary passage once more sings a song full of hopeful courage. Then
comes the iron mountain of Tamir Shayha, which 'leans against the sky'.
Now the *kam* exhorts his train to be all of one mind, that they may
pass this barrier by the united force of their will. He describes the
difficulty of surmounting the passes and, in doing so, breathes heavily.
On the top he finds the bones of many *kams* who have fallen here and
died through failure of power. Again he sings songs of hope, declares he
will leap over the mountain, and suits the action to the word. At last
he comes towards the opening which leads to the underworld. Here he
finds a sea, bridged only by a hair. To show the difficulty of crossing
this bridge, the *kam* totters, almost falls, and with difficulty
recovers himself. In the depths of the sea he beholds the bodies of many
sinful *kams* who have perished there, for only those who are blameless
can cross this bridge. On the other side he meets sinners who are
receiving punishment suited to their faults; e.g. an eavesdropper is
pinned by his ear to a stake. On reaching the dwelling-place of Erlik,
he is confronted by dogs, who will not let him pass, but at last, being
appeased by gifts, they grow milder. Before the beginning of the
shamanistic ceremony gifts have been prepared for this emergency. Having
successfully passed these warders, the *kam*, as if approaching the
Yarta of Erlik and coming into his presence, bows, brings his drum up to
his forehead, and says, '*Mergu! mergu!*' Then he declares whence and
why he comes. Suddenly he shouts; this is meant to indicate that Erlik
is angry that a mortal should dare to enter his yurta. The frightened
*kam* leaps backward towards the door, but gathers fresh courage and
again approaches Erlik's throne. After this performance has been gone
through three times, Erlik speaks: 'Winged creatures cannot fly hither,
beings with bones cannot come: how have you, ill-smelling blackbeetle,
made your way to my abode?'

Then the kam stoops and with his drum makes certain movements if dipping
up wine. He presents the wine to Erlik; and makes a shuddering movement
like that of one who drinks strong wine, to indicate, that Erlik has
drunk. When he perceives that Erlik's humour is somewhat milder tinder
the influence of his draught he makes him offerings of gifts. The great
spirit (Erlik) is moved by the offerings of the *kam*, and promises
increase of cattle, declares which mare will foal, and even specifies
what marking the young one will have. The *kam* returns in high spirits,
not on his horse as he went, but on a goose--a change of steeds which he
indicates by moving about the *yurta* on tiptoe, to represent flying.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Shamanism and Sex](sis08)
