[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tnw05)  [Next](tnw07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The New Word*, by Allen Upward, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

### FIFTH HEAD

### THE HOUSE OF CARDS

*Metaphysics*.—1. *Direction to the Binder*.—2. *Hoax of Andronicus
Rhodius*.—3. *The Magic Song*.—4. *Pure Reason and Practical Reason*.—5.
*The Annex of the Universe*.

IDEALISM, as defined by the dictionary, the Idealism of the schools, the
Idealism that is spelt with a capital I, is a system of metaphysical
philosophy. Those are the words with which Latham begins his
explanation. And the issue that they raise is one that cannot be
escaped. Did the Testator use the word idealist in the technical sense
of the professors? Did he intend this Prize for systems of metaphysical
philosophy?

Berkeleyism did not end with Berkeley. His doctrine, or his language,
was taken up by greater men. It was the greatest of them, Kant, who
really stamped the word Idealism with this sense, and gave it currency.
Since his time the term has almost replaced the term metaphysical. Among
modern metaphysicians, Idealism is your only wear.

I have already said that Nobel's bequest seems to me a challenge to this
sort of idealism, that is to say, a challenge to the science or mystery
of Metaphysics. Brought face to face with this word in

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Doctor Latham's
explanation of idealism, I felt I had no choice but to examine it.

I

I approached this famous word with not a little dread, arising partly
from my want of skill in Mediterranean languages, and partly from a
well-known incident in its recent history.

In the last century there was formed in London a private debating club
under the name of the Metaphysical Society. Its members were some of the
ablest men of their generation, Tennyson the poet, Gladstone the
statesman, Spencer the philosopher, Manning the churchman, Huxley the
scientist. These distinguished men met and talked together for ten
years, and at the end of that time they broke up the society, because,
as one of them said, they had not yet agreed on the meaning of the word
metaphysics.

I was not rash enough to hope I could succeed where such distinguished
men had failed, but I was happy in the knowledge that I had not so hard
a task as theirs. They had sought for a definition of metaphysics; I
wanted merely a working sense, a sense that would enable me to judge if
a metaphysical work came within the meaning of the Testator.

The word was Greek, to all appearance, but, like

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

idealist, it turned out to be one of those Greek words which the Greeks
themselves were never fortunate enough to know. In the lexicon I could
find only its two pieces, *meta* and *phusikos*.

*Phusikos* did not seem a word hard to translate. Natural, native,
begotten, born—such were the meanings offered me by the Greek lexicon.
But *meta*, on the other hand, proved to have the most variable meanings
of any word I have ever met. It meant almost everything from inside to
outside. With nothing but the Greek words to help me I might have groped
for ever for the meaning of metaphysics among words like supernatural
and unnatural, afterbirth and unborn.

I do not know how far it is the case in other languages, but in English,
words like physical, material, real, natural and sensible all ring well;
they suggest the true and useful. Whereas words like immaterial, unreal,
unnatural and senseless all ring badly; they suggest the false and
foolish. The prejudice against the study of metaphysics in
English-speaking countries attaches to the very name of the science,
which is, as nearly as I could make out, in the vulgar
tongue—*nonsense*.

I was obliged to go once more to Doctor Latham, this time with the most
encouraging result. For after explaining the word as "ontology, or the
science of the affections of being in general," and adding that the
science in question was generally branded as an impossible one, he
showed me that

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

metaphysics is one of the few words whose beginning is known.

I shall have written most of the foregoing pages in vain if there is any
need for me to insist on the difference this made to me. That the word
was a Babu formation would matter no more than it had mattered in the
case of dynamite, as soon as I could come to the mixture.

I quote Doctor Latham's authority, a distinguished writer on
metaphysics, named Mansel.

"The term metaphysics, though originally employed to designate a
treatise of Aristotle, was probably unknown to the philosopher himself.
On the whole the weight of evidence appears to be in favour of the
supposition which attributes the inscription *ta meta ta phusika* to
Andronicus Rhodius, the first editor of Aristotle's collected works."

Andronicus Rhodius, it appears, like Columbus, added a new continent to
the realms of knowledge by accident.

"The title, as given to the writings on the first philosophy, probably
indicates only their place in the collection as coming after the
physical treatises of the author."

And thus we see the word came into being as a direction to the
binder.—The question is whether it has ever become anything more?

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

II

Among the wonderful beliefs of those old heathen men who, guessing where
we count and measure, prophesied of all the lore to come, is none more
wonderful than that which shines through the magic song of the Finns,
the belief in the creative power of the uttered word. What else is the
story of Andrónikos of Rhodes? He uttered, all unwittingly, his wizard
spell; and lo! Professors of Metaphysics in all the Roman universities
of Europe and America.

What, then, is the mixture of which Aristotle's editor furnished only
the name? What is it that the professors have been professing for two
thousand years?

If I turn for an answer to this question to a popular work of reference,
like the Encyclopaedia Britannica, I find that the official teachers of
the science of Andronicus Rhodius have been no more able to agree among
themselves than the members of the Metaphysical Society. The history of
metaphysics is the history of the attempt to supply a mixture to fit the
name. The enchanted squirrels have toiled in the sorcerer's cage. They
have written whole learned libraries; the Mediterranean words have gone
round and round in imposing procession; but the writers have not gained
an inch.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

III

Wherein lies the mesmeric power of these Babu words? It is sheer
repetition. By dint of saying them over and over again we make ourselves
believe in them. Repetition is the secret of all enchantment. We find it
in the magic spells buried beneath the dust of Akkad. We meet it in the
lullaby that puts the child to sleep.

The learned Latham can suggest no parent for the word lull. No doubt the
monks forgot to latinise it;—it does not happen to be found in any
Anglo-Saxon manuscript. Meanwhile it is a word whose roots go down into
the deepest soil of speech. It is, of course, the Swedish
*lulla*,—*laulu*, the Finland word for song. It is of kin to the word
lay, also a song. It looks at us out of the Roman *legend*. The Greek
word *lego* meant to lull to sleep. It hides in words like logic and
religion,—nay, in lexicography! It is the core of the word language.
Perhaps it is the oldest and most widespread word that men have ever
framed their lips to say.

There is only one way to break the spell, and that is to stop the magic
song. We must interrupt the Mediterranean sorcerer, and ask him what he
is saying. We must translate the Babu words.

One thing is clear already about the word metaphysics. The prime
enchanter, Andronicus Rhodius, used *meta* in the sense of after, and
not among. If

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

physics be the science of nature, then metaphysics should be the science
of whatever is outside nature.

And so, indeed, the long toil of the metaphysicians has been a struggle
to get out of the natural world, by getting inside themselves. And
inside themselves they have found what they call The Mind, and in this
very mind they have found the objects of the external world, the stones
and trees, in short, nature all over again.

IV

Now there may be a real science of mind. The study of how men think and
reason ought to be the crowning study, the last word in any education
worth the name, the last chapter of any but a parrot's grammar-book. But
just because it is the crowning study it must rest on all the others. It
is as natural as they are. And like them it must follow Bacon's
rule—Learn from the things, and not from the words about the things.

I have likened the mind to a tree whose roots are feelings and whose
leaves are words. The followers of Andronicus Rhodius have tried to
learn about it only from the leaves. They have considered the mind (much
as the philologists have considered words) as a cut flower, picked from
somewhere outside the universe, and stuck inside us. They have studied
only the leaves, and so they have not thoroughly understood even the
leaves. They have used

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

shorthand by mistake for longhand. They have dealt in names to which
there was no mixture.

The last great name among the slaves of this enchantment, the last great
fore-Darwinian thinker, is Kant. His admirers tell us—(I am copying
Carlyle)—that the grand characteristic of his philosophy is his
distinction between the Understanding and the Reason—*Verstand* and
*Vernunft*. Reason discerns truth itself, Absolute Truth, while
Understanding discerns only relations, Relative Truth. Understanding is
confined to material knowledge, and the practical issues of daily life;
and it breaks down in the attempt to prove there is a God. That is a
task reserved for Reason, which alone is able to deal with spiritual
things.

Here, then, we have the Andronican science at its best; this is the
grand result of studying the mind upside down. Let us see what the words
mean.

I will not be too curious about the German, though I have my own doubts
as to whether *Vernunft* has anything to do with Reason. With the Dutch,
who spell it *vernuft*, it stands for wit, skill, genius; while one of
my Swedish word-books translates Reason by both of Kant's
words—*förnuft* and *förstand*.

The English words are fortunately as plain as words can be. We have seen
already that understanding is simply a closer kind of watching; it is to
learn by following what is going on, and so keeping it in mind. Reason
is a book word, it is the French *raison*, the Latin *ratio*. But it is
only a

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

glorified counting. The folk word for it is reckoning, the Swedish
*räkning*.

What Andronican science has achieved has been to exchange the meanings
of these plain words. It is Understanding that discerns things by
themselves, the Absolute, and Reason that discerns relations, or, in
homelier words, puts two and two together. Shall I confess that I think
both words are better used by a forgotten poet writing on the
immortality of the soul:—

"When she rates things, and moves from ground to ground,  
  The name of reason she obtains by this:  
But when by reason she the truth hath found,  
  And standeth fast, she understanding is."

Here is a writer who has stopped to ask himself the meaning of the words
he used. He does not talk as though reason were one thing, and
understanding another independent thing. He sees that both are only
names for the same inner power, called reason while she does her sum,
and understanding while she sets down the amount.

And after all, it was Kant who called in Practical Reason to do the very
thing that the poor practical Understanding was forbidden to do, and the
Pure Reason had failed to do, namely to prove there is a God. The fool
who said in his heart, There is no God, would have felt proud if he had
lived to read the *Kritik der reinen Vernunft*.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

V

In our time it has become plain that all that kind of thing must go to
the scrap-heap whither Descartes and Bacon swept the rubbish of the
medieval schoolmen. To-day, if we wish to learn anything about the mind,
we begin by looking at the brain; we interpret words by feelings, and
feelings by words; we watch the savage and the child as they begin to
think and talk; we follow what is going on in nature, instead of trying
to turn our backs on it; and so we make some little headway.

But we no longer call that study metaphysics. We call it Mind-lore, or,
in Babu, Psychology.

For my part I have never been constrained to enter the revolving cage. I
have a shield that shivers the enchanted weapons. It is my ignorance of
the Babu tongue. As soon as I look at the Andronican hieroglyphs they
change their shapes, and shrink down into the poor common words of daily
life. That sublime pair of twins, *subjective* and *objective*, dwindle
down to inside and outside; that mysterious *consciousness* shrivels
into mere wakefulness; that pompous *Ego* is nothing better than
myself,—and so the glittering Aladdin's palace melts before my eyes—

"And like an unsubstantial pageant faded,  
 Leaves not a rack behind."

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

In a French town I once saw a hotel called *L’Univers*, and over against
it a building with the sign—*Annexe de l’Univers*. I know the architect
of that building. His name is Andrónikos of Rhodes.

And it is a house of cards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. Altruism: The Face in the Looking-Glass](tnw07)
