[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tnw04)  [Next](tnw06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The New Word*, by Allen Upward, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

### FOURTH HEAD

### THE PLAY UPON WORDS

*Johnson's Dictionary*.—1. *The Missing Word*.—2. *Recurring
Decimals*.—3. *A Puzzle for Atheists*.—4. *Plato Refuted by Plato*.—5.
*Books in Chains*.

ON reading this Will for the first time, and wondering what the word
Idealistic meant to others than myself, I turned to an English
dictionary.

I

The dictionary which I found to my hand happened to be the famous work
of Doctor Johnson, or, to speak carefully, one founded on that work by
Doctor Latham, who was an esteemed philologist, and professor of the
English language. It is in four vast volumes, published just fourteen
years before the date of the Testator's death, by nineteen publishers,
and it should be fairly representative of the science and art of
lexicography in England.

The words are taken in the order of their spelling; each one is given a
Latin label such as substantive or adjective; if in its sounds or
spelling it shows the mark of the Roman mint a Mediterranean word is
quoted as its original; then follows the explanation

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (the thing I was
in search of)—and Johnson's Dictionary is renowned for its explanations;
and lastly there come extracts from books in which the word is used.

These extracts were styled by Johnson his authorities. His whole habit
of mind withheld him from seeing that the speech of the English folk is
a higher authority than any book. "Of the laborious and mercantile part
of the people (he writes), the diction is in a great measure casual and
mutable." That is not so. The folk keep their native words much longer
and much better than the bookmen. Hundreds of English words long buried
under the dust of Dryasdust are coming to light, and are returning into
English literature from the ends of the earth, to-day. Johnson, it is
plain, could not rid himself of the old monkish way of looking at it. To
him the right English was a barbarous provincial dialect; the language
worthy of a scholar's attention was that which came closest to the Roman
pattern. He has told us this, by calling his work a dictionary and not a
word-book.

The same wrongheadedness makes itself manifest in his treatment, and in
Latham's treatment, of some words admitted to these volumes.

There are many words common to both the Baltic and the Mediterranean;
some of them common to every Aryan dialect; some of them older than the
Aryan invasion, if there was an Aryan invasion, relics of the old
stone-cutting race that crossed from

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Africa in the wake
of the retreating ice. The Roman missionaries latinised some of these
words, much as they christianised the pagan folklore. And so to-day the
Johnsons and the Lathams mark as Roman importations words that are only
Roman in the spelling, words that were rooted in the northern speech
before one stone of Rome was laid upon another.

Many of the words thus treated dropped out of spoken English, and their
place was taken by others whose outline was too stubborn to be effaced
by foreign spelling. Thus the English folk, robbed of verihood by the
monks, instinctively refused the Roman verity, and took refuge in truth.

If a man does not know these things by heart, if he has never caught a
true glimpse into the history of words, what can he tell us about their
meanings? If he cannot see that even the spellings, the outer shells of
words, are often palimpsests in which the writing on the surface hides
another and yet another writing underneath—if he cannot see this, how
can we hope that his glance will be keener when he comes to consider the
meaning which is the life of the word; and that his explanation of it
will be anything better than the gabble of the Latin school?

I turned to Doctor Latham's volumes with misgiving, and the first
discovery I made was an ominous one. The word used by Nobel was not
there.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

II

Instead I found this entry:—

 

"IDEALIST *substantive*. Supporter of the doctrine of idealism."

 

The only inference was that a work of an idealist tendency must be one
supporting the same doctrine. I asked Doctor Latham what the doctrine
was, and I got this answer:

 

"IDEALISM.—System of metaphysical philosophy founded upon the doctrine
that the objects of the external world are what they are, less on the
strength of any material properties of their own, than through the
action of the mind, in which they exist as ideas."

 

At the first blush my plight seemed to be worse than Herakles’, when he
cut off the hydra's head; I had a dozen Babu words to deal with instead
of one. I made shift to turn some of them into English.

"The stones and trees of the outside world are what they are, less on
the strength of any stuff of their own, than through the working of the
mind, in which they stand forth as—*ideas*."

Before examining the doctrine further it seemed desirable to know Doctor
Latham's meaning for the word *idea*. Here surely was the key-word.
Without

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

understanding it, it must be hard to understand Idealist.

I looked again, and found an explanation as short as the other had been
long.

 

"IDEA--mental image."

 

Good. But the word image is sometimes used in a loose sense by poets. To
make more sure I turned it up.

 

"IMAGE—Any corporeal representation: generally used of statues."

 

This time there could be no doubt. The image was not a metaphor, it was
a thing of stone and marble. Yet I was struck by the curious result of
adding this explanation to the last one.

Ideal = mental image.  
Image = corporeal representation.  
Idea = mental corporeal representation.

Mental-corporeal? The words seemed to unsay each other. It was like what
the logicians call a contradiction in terms. In order to be fair to
Doctor Latham I went to the word representation.

 

"REPRESENTATION.—Image, likeness."

 

The reappearance of the image so soon was disconcerting. It seemed to
dog the lexicographer as

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

the Commander's statue dogged Don Juan. His last two explanations worked
out thus:—

Image = any corporeal representation.  
Representation = image.  
Image = any corporeal image.

This time it was not an unsaying, but a saying over again, like what the
logicians call an identical proposition.

Meanwhile, instead of getting nearer to the meaning of idea, Doctor
Latham seemed to be going round and round it. He seemed like a squirrel
trying to climb up in a revolving cage: the cage goes round, but the
squirrel gets no higher. I began to see there might be books in which
the words went round and round, but the author got no further,—books not
altogether outside the scope of this enquiry.

It was all very well to say that the stones and trees were only
representations in the mind, but if there were no stones and trees, what
did the representations represent? In order to give Doctor Latham every
chance, I followed him to the word mind.

Here was a word which he confessed to be of English growth, no doubt
because it happens to be found in some old English book, where it is
spelt *gemynd*. It is indeed a folk word, and almost a cry. "Mind what
you do!"—"I have a great mind to!"—"He is out of his mind!"—all these
are utterances heard every day. Such a word should be a fair test for a
professor of the English language.

Doctor Latham explained it in this manner:—

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

"MIND. 1. Intelligent power. 2. Intellectual capacity. 3. Liking;
choice; inclination; propension; affection. 4. Quality; disposition. 5.
Thoughts; sentiments. 6. Opinion. 7. Memory; remembrance;
recollections."

 

I sought further light from two more entries.

 

"INTELLECTUAL.—Relating to the understanding."

"UNDERSTANDING.—Intellectual powers."

 

It was another recurring decimal in words. Intellectual meant relating
to the intellectual powers.

And yet understanding is one of those words that explain themselves.
Like the Swedish *forsta*, which is still found in some parts of England
as forestand, it tells its own story. A picture of Leighton's shows it
to the eye. A man is teaching a boy the use of the bow. He leans over
the boy from behind, grasping the boy's hands in his, and guiding them
while the bow is drawn. That boy is *understanding* how to draw a bow.

When we have got as far as that we need go no further. We have got to
the mixture. Words of this kind are on the same footing as the names of
things outside us. They are the names of actions,—I will call them play
words. When we have seen the play, the word has served its office.

One more example of lexicography and I must

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

leave Doctor Latham swimming round and round for ever in his
Mediterranean maelstrom.

One of his explanations of mind was thoughts. And this was his
explanation of thought.

 

"THOUGHT.—Operation of the mind; idea; image formed in the mind."

 

And so at the end of my effort to learn from him the meaning of the word
idea, he had brought me back to the starting point.

I put the two last explanations together, and they gave me an equation,
the like of which perhaps is not in human language.

Mind = thoughts.  
Thought = image formed in the mind.  
Mind = images formed in the images formed in the images formed in the

III

It is time to return to the doctrine of Idealism.

 

"The stones and trees of the outside world are themselves, less on the
strength of any stuff of their own than through the play of the mind, in
which they stand forth as"—(recurring decimal) .

That is to say, the stones and trees outside us are really not outside
us, but inside us. They are not things, but thoughts. A wit has put it
still more

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

wittily,—"The universe is a thought, and I am thinking it."

 

This doctrine, or this play upon words, was invented by Bishop Berkeley
in order to confound the atheists, a class of men who, it may be
suspected, are what they are, less on the strength of any materialism of
their own than through the working of the reverent mind, in which they
exist as bogeys.

It is impossible to refuse to Berkeley the admiration due to the man who
has said the last word in his own department. His doctrine is the
perfection of metaphysics, if it be not a parody on metaphysics. Nobody
has ever refuted it; and nobody has ever believed it.

Berkeley himself of course did not believe it, because it is evidently
an inverted pantheism, with oneself as the creator; and Berkeley was a
deeply religious man. There is no record of any atheist who was ever
confounded by it. And that is the only point which we have to consider.

We are freed, by the words of the Will, from inquiring whether this
language, or other language like it, is true or false. We have to ask
the easier, but much more searching, question, does it materially
benefit mankind?

Every work that runs counter to our settled habits of thought and
speech, driving us to weigh the meanings of our words, and question the
soundness of our views, is of benefit to mankind, in so far as it

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

tends to break up those lumps and knots in the mind which are called
prejudices, and which hinder us from thinking and speaking truly. In so
far as Berkeley's book did that, or does that, it is a good book. But
apart from that it seems to have no tendency whatever. It is like the
famous English Act of Parliament the only effect of which was to add
three words to every conveyance. An idealist, in Doctor Latham's sense
of the word, instead of saying to his gardener,—"Gardener, plant that
rose-tree in this bed," would have to say,—"Perception of a gardener,
plant that perception of a rose-tree in this perception of a bed." The
doctrine leaves us where it found us. If some of our thoughts pretend to
be stones and trees, and are called stones and trees in consequence, how
can it benefit mankind to call them anything else?

The question is whether this doctrine has borne fruits. Who has believed
it, and been the better for believing it? Berkeley himself refused to be
translated from a poor bishoprick to a rich one. If he had been asked if
this was because he did not believe in the existence of Matter, he would
have answered no, but because he believed in the Gospel.

There is an older doctrine of which this idealism seems to be the
insubstantial ghost. A greater than Berkeley once taught that all the
material world was illusion—*Maya*. But in the mouth of the Buddha that
teaching was not a clever paradox; it was a living truth by seizing on
which men might win their

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

way out of sorrow. It was not a metaphysical doctrine, but a practical
rule of behaviour;—Set not thy heart on the things of this world, for
they are vain.

And yet I am not sure that even the teaching of the Buddha was of an
idealist tendency, within the meaning of this Will.

IV

Latham, one sees, has faithfully explained the word Idealism, as a
technical term in use among metaphysicians and moral philosophers. That
the word stood for anything besides the mock scepticism of Berkeley;
that it had passed into common use with a meaning almost the opposite of
scepticism; he evidently did not know. Indeed, as we have seen, he had
never met with it as an adjective at all.

What is more strange is that he should have overlooked an older sort of
Idealism, familiar in metaphysical and moral-philosophical writing long
before Berkeley's day; the Idealism of Plato, father of all such as work
in metaphysics, and patentee of the metaphysical *Idea*.

There are two Platos; one the companion of Socrates, walking in the
market-place with his master, and showing us as in a stage play how the
great truth-seeker pierced his way through cunning webs of words; the
other the teacher in the Academy, weaving his own webs, and decorating
them with

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

his master's name. It is to the second Plato that we owe the doctrine of
Ideas.

Let me see if I can state it in words as homely as those of Socrates.

The doctrine of the first Plato, or rather of his master Socrates, the
verihood underlying the early dialogues, which they lead towards, even
if they do not openly declare it, comes to this. We give expression to
our likes and dislikes by such words as nice, nasty, good and evil. When
we write such words a little differently, as Niceness, Nastiness, The
Good and The Evil, we do not change their nature because we have changed
their spelling. They have not ceased to be the names of our own
feelings, and become something else, merely because we want to use them
as nouns instead of adjectives. We have not created a mixture by
creating a name. The words in their new shape are shorthand words, by
whose use we can say what we want to say more quickly. By The Good we
mean that which all men deem good, or rather that which we think all men
ought to deem good,—for all men do not worship the same God.

The doctrine of the second Plato is the first doctrine read backwards,
as the Devil-worshippers used to read the Lord's Prayer. It is that the
adjectives come from the nouns, and not the nouns from the adjectives.
Niceness and Nastiness, The Good and The Evil, are not the names of
thoughts inside us, but of thoughts outside us; perhaps the Thoughts of

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

an eternal Thinker, of which our thoughts are copies.

Here is at least an Idealism of a more idealist tendency than
Berkeley's. Perhaps were Plato writing now, he could not fairly be
refused the Nobel Prize. Tried by the test of ontology, however, his
teaching is imperfect. For the electric current induced by a Current
outside, goes the other way. And so we find the real Thoughts outside us
stir up thoughts within us not in sympathy, but in antagonism, The
cruelty of Nature teaches us, not to be cruel, but to be kind. Her
carelessness makes us careful. Her hardship leads us toward luxury. Her
riddles give birth to our science. And so throughout life necessity
answers to necessity. The Picts draw their conversion on themselves. The
king is man's reply to anarchy; Christianity is his reply to Caesar;
peace is his reply to war; the Idealist is his reply to Materialism. He
turns leaf after leaf of the great Lesson-Book, and the word *Finis* is
not on any one.

V

There is another test, and a very practical and memorable test, under
which Plato breaks down.

In the year 1474 a remarkable sight was to be seen in all the public
libraries of France; the sight of books in chains. A controversy had
been carried on between two parties, calling themselves Nominalists

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

and Realists, and now the writings of the Nominalists had been placed in
iron chains by order of King Louis XI, at the bidding of Pope John
XXIII, to keep them out of the hands of the young student.

It seems to me that there can be no much better test than that, of
whether a work is of an idealist tendency. When I see a book in chains,
and when I know that the chains have been placed on it by a king at the
bidding of a pope, that is enough for me. I do not need to open it to be
sure that it is worthy of the Nobel Prize.

And what was it that these fettered books taught? What was the heresy of
the Nominalists? It was that of Socrates over again in another form. It
was that names are not things; that shorthand does not say more than
longhand, that when, instead of thinking of men one by one, you think of
all of them at once, and call your thought humanity, you have merely
added a new word to the dictionary, and not a new thing to the contents
of the universe.

Such was the doctrine that alarmed a Roman Pope, and not without good
reason; for the Nominalists of that generation became the Reformers of
the next. Nor is Pope John XXIII yet dead, neither have all the chains
yet been taken off. I have myself found the very harmless essays of the
late Professor Huxley under lock and key in a so-called Free Library.

Judged by this test a work of an idealist tendency must be a work that
some one will want to put in iron chains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Metaphysics: The House of Cards](tnw06)
