[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tet07)  [Next](tet09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VI

### OUR WITCH WOMAN

OUR witch woman was rather a remarkable old person. When she was, I
suppose, considerably over sixty, her favourite granddaughter died.

Old Bootha was in a terrible state of grief, and chopped herself in a
most merciless manner at the burial, especially about the head. She
would speak to no one, used to spend her time about the grave, round
which she fixed upright posts which she painted white, red, and black.
All round the grave she used to sweep continually.

More and more she isolated herself, and at last discarded all her
clothes and roamed the bush *à la* Eve before the Fall, as she had
probably done as a young girl.

She dug herself an underground camp, roofed it over, and painted
enormous posts which she erected in front of her 'Muddy wine,' as she
called her camp. She never came near the house, though we had been great
friends before.

She used to prowl round the outhouses and pick up all sorts of things,
rubbish for the most part, but often good utensils too; all used to be
secreted in the underground camp. She never talked to any one, but used
to mutter continually to herself and her dogs in an unknown tongue which
only her dogs seemed to understand.

We thought she was quite mad.

One day, while we were playing tennis, she suddenly, muttering her
strange language and dancing new corroboree steps, clad only in her
black skin, came up. Matah told her to go away, but she only corroboreed
round him and said she wanted to see me. I have the most morbid horror
of lunacy in any form. I was once induced to go over a lunatic
asylum--the horror of it haunts me still. However, I thought it would
never do to show the coward I was, so though I felt as if I had been
scooped out and filled up with ice, I went to her. She danced round me
for a little time, then sidled up to me and said:

'Wahl you frightened, wahl me hurt you. I only womba--mad--all
yowee--spirits--in me tell me gubbah--good-I lib 'long a youee; bimeby I
come back big feller wirreenun; wahl you frightened? I not hurt you.'

And after crooning an accompaniment to her steps off she went, a strange
enough figure, dancing and crooning as she went towards her camp; and
not until the spirits gave up possession of her did she come near the
house again.

One day she gave us a start. We were schooling a new team of four
horses. The off-side leader had only been in once before, and was a
brumby (horse run in from a wild mob). We had to pass Bootha's camp. I
looked about as we neared it but saw nothing of her. Suddenly from the
ground, as it seemed, out dashed the weird old figure, arms full of
things, jabbering away at a great rate. Whiz came a tin plate past the
leaders' heads; the offside horse reared and plunged and took some
holding. Whiz came an old bill; then, one after another, a regular
fusilade of various utensils.

It did not take us long to get past, but for as long as we could see the
attack was kept up. Coming back we saw nothing of Bootha, and all the
utensils had been picked up.

I used to tell the other blacks to see that Bootha had plenty of food.
They said she was all right, the spirits were looking after her.
Lunatics, from their point of view, are only persons spirit-possessed.

Gradually old Bootha, clothed as usual, came back about the place.

Strange stories came through the house blacks to me of old Bootha. She
was very ill for a long time, then suddenly she recovered; not only
recovered but seemed rejuvenated. We heard of wonderful cures she made;
how she always consulted the spirits about any illness; how there were
said to be spirits in some of her dogs; how she was now a rainmaker and,
in fact, a fully fledged witch.

I was curious to see some of these wonders, so used to get the old woman
to come up when any one was ill, consult her, and generally make much of
her. There is no doubt she could diagnose a case well enough. Matah
suffered a good deal with a constant pain in one knee, he was quite lame
from it. He showed it to Bootha one day. She sang a song to her spirits,
then said:

'Too muchee water there; you steam him, put him on hot rag; you drink
plenty cold water, all lite dat go.'

As it happened a medical man was passing a few days afterwards with an
insurance agent. Matah consulted him.

'Hum! Yes, yes. Hot fomentations to the place affected, poultices, a
cooling draught. There's a stoppage of fluid at the knee-joint which
must be dispersed.'

I thought Bootha ought to have been called in consultation.

A girl I had staying with me was taken suddenly and, to us,
unaccountably ill. She was just able to get out of her room into the
drawing-room, where she would lie back on the cushions of a lounge
looking dreadfully limp and utterly washed out. Hearing of her illness
old Bootha came up. I thought it might amuse Adelaide to see an old
witch; she agreed, so I brought her in.

Bootha went straight up to the sick girl, expressed a few sympathetic
sentences, then she said she would ask the spirits what had made
Adelaide ill and what would cure her.

She moved my furniture until she left the centre of the room clear; she
squatted down, and hanging her head began muttering in an unintelligible
dialect. Presently her voice ceased and we heard from beside her a most
peculiar whistling sort of voice, to which she responded, evidently
interrogating. Again the whistling voice from further away. Bootha then
told me she had asked a dead black fellow, Big Joe, to tell her what she
wanted to know; but he could not, so now she was going to ask her dead
granddaughter. Again she said a sort of incantation, and again, after a
while, came the whistling voice reply-this time from another direction,
not quite so loud. The same sort of thing was gone through with the same
result.

Then Bootha said she would ask Guadgee, a black girl who had been one of
my first favourites in the camp, and who had died a few years
previously.

The whistling voice came from a third direction, though all the time I
could see Bootha's lips moving.

Guadgee answered all she was asked. She said Adelaide was made ill
because she had offended the spirits by bathing in the creek under the
shade of a Minggah, or spirit-tree, a place tabooed to all but
wirreenuns, or such as hold communion with spirits.

Of course, according to the blacks, to disturb a shadow is to hurt the
original.

In this Minggah, Guadgee. said, were swarms of bees invisible to all but
wirreenuns, and they are ready always to resent any insult to the
Minggah or its shadow. These spirit-bees had entered Adelaide and
secreted some wax on her liver; their bites, Guadgee said, were on her
back.

Well, that can't be it, I said, I for you never did bathe in the shade
of a Minggah; for, going as you always do with the house-girls, you are
bound to be kept from such sacrilege; they would never dare such
desecration.'

'Which is their Minggah? Is it a big Coolabah between the Bend and the
garden?'

'Yes.'

'Then I did bathe there the last time I went down. I was up too late to
go with the Black-but-Comelys, and as the sun was hot I went further
round the point and bathed in the shade. And the bee-bites must be those
horribly irritating pimples I have across my back.'

The cause of illness settled to her satisfaction, Bootha asked how to
cure it. The patient was to drink nothing hot nor heating but as much
cold water as she liked, especially a long drink before going to bed.
Guadgee said she would come in the night when the patient was asleep and
take the wax from her liver; she would sleep well and wake better in the
morning.

Bootha got up then, came over to the patient, took her hand, rubbed it
round the wrist several times, muttering an incantation; then saying she
would see her again next day, off she went, taking, she told us, all the
spirits away inside her, whence at desire they could be returned to such
Minggah in their own Noorunbah, or hereditary hunting-grounds, as
wirreenuns had placed them in, or to roam at their pleasure when not
required by those in authority over spirits. Our old spiritualist denies
us freedom even in the after-life she promises us.

Adelaide slept that night, looked a better colour the next morning, and
rapidly recovered.

We think old Bootha must be a good physician and a ventriloquist, only I
believe it is said ventriloquists cannot live long, and Bootha is now
over eighty.

Others besides wirreenuns see spirits sometimes, but rarely, though
wirreenuns are said to have the power to conjure them up in a form
visible to ordinary eyes.

Babies are said to see spirits when they are smiling or crowing as if to
themselves; it's to some spirit visible to them but to no one else.

When a baby opens his hands and shuts them again quickly, smiling all
the while, that baby is with the spirits catching crabs!

Dogs see spirits; when they bark and howl suddenly and you see nothing
about, it is because they have seen a spirit.

One person may embody many spirits, but such an one must be careful not
to drink anything hot or heating, such would drive out the spirits at
once. The spirits would never enter a person defiled by the white man's
'grog.'

Old Bootha had an interview with a very powerful spirit after she was
ill, who told her that the spirit of her father was now in Bahloo, the
moon; and that it was this spirit which had cured her, and if she kept
his commands she would live for ever. The commands were never to drink
'grog,' never to wear red, never to eat fish. This was told her fifteen
years ago, never once has she transgressed; her vigour for an old woman
considerably over eighty is marvellous.

She was going away for a trip. Before going she said, as she would not
be able to know when I wanted rain for my garden, she would put two
posts in it which had in them the spirits of Kurreahs, or crocodiles. As
these spirits required water I might be certain my tanks would never go
dry while they were on guard. She asked one of my Black-but-Comelys, a
very stalwart young woman, to help her lift one of these posts into the
garden where she wanted to erect it. The girl took hold of one end, but
in a little while dropped it, said it was too heavy. Old Bootha got
furious.

'I get the spirits to help me,' she said, and started a little
sing-song, then shouldered the post herself and carried it in. These
posts are painted red, black, and white, with a snaky pattern, the
Kurreah sign, on them. She also planted in my garden two other
witch-poles, one painted red and having a cross-bar about midway down it
from which raddled strings were attached to the top; this was to keep
away the Euloowayi, black fellows possessed of devils, who came from
behind the sunset.

The other was a plain red-painted, tapering pine-pole which she said,
when it fell to the ground, would tell of the death of some one related
to an inmate of the house. Should it lean towards the house it foretold
misfortune; or if she were any time away, when she was returning she
would send her Mullee Mullee to sit on the top and bend it just to let
us know. This pole would also keep away the spirits of the dead from the
house during her absence. While she was away there would be no one to
come and clear the place of evil by smoking the Budtha twigs all round
it, as she always did if I were alone and, she thought, in need of
protection.

Old Bootha has what she calls a wi-mouyan, clever-stick. It is about six
feet long, great lumps of beefwood gum making knobs on it at intervals;
between each knob it is painted. Armed with this stick, a piece of
crystal, some green twigs, and sometimes a stick with a bunch of
feathers on top, and a large flat stone, she goes out to make rain. The
crystal and stone she puts under the water in the creek, the feathered
stick she erects on the edge of the water, then goes in and splashes
about with green twigs, singing all the time.

After a while she gets out and parades the bank with the wi-mouyan,
singing a rain-song which charms some of the water out of the creek into
the clouds, whence it falls where she directs it. Once my garden of
roses looked very wilted. I asked Bootha to make rain, but just then she
was very offended with Matah. One of her dogs had been poisoned, she
would make no rain on his country. However, at last she said she would
make some for me. I bound her down to a certain day. The day came; a
heavy storm fell just over my garden, filling the ground tank, which was
almost empty. About two inches fell. Within half a mile of each side of
the garden the dust was barely laid.

Old Bootha's luck stuck to her that time, and I had to give her a new
dress and some 'bacca.' But during the last drought she failed signally.
Her excuse for failing was that a great wirreenun up the creek was so
angry with the white people who were driving away all emu, kangaroo, and
opossums, the black fellow's food, and yet made a fuss if their dogs
killed a sheep for them sometimes, that he put his rain-stone in a fire,
and while he did that no rain would fall. He said if all the sheep died
the white fellows would go away again, and then, as long ago, the black
fellows' country would have plenty of emu and kangaroo.

We saw a curious coincidence in connection with one of Bootha's
witch-poles in my garden, the pole whose falling foretold death of some
relative of some one in the house.

One afternoon there had been drizzling rain and a grey mist
overshadowing things. Matah went out to look at the chances of a
continuance of rain, the usual drought being on. He called to me to come
and see a curious sky. Looking towards the west I saw a golden ball of a
sun piercing the grey clouds which seemed like a spangled veil over its
face; shooting from the sun was a perfect halo of golden light, from
which three shafts spread into roadways up past the grey clouds into the
vault of heaven. The effect was very striking indeed, against the grey
clouds shaded from silver to almost black.

As we stood waiting for the sun to sink and the afterglow to paint these
clouds, as it did, from shrimp pink and heliotrope to vivid crimson, we
saw Bootha's pole fall. The air was quite still.

'The damp has loosened its setting,' said Matah, 'but we had better
leave it alone and let the old girl fix it up again herself; it may be
taboo to ordinary mortals like us.'

We left it.

That evening a messenger arrived from the sheep station to say my cook's
mother had died just before sunset. The camp were firm believers in
Bootha's witch-stick after that.

It was just as well we did not touch that stick; had we done so, Bootha
says we should have broken out in sores all over our bodies.

They say that long ago the wirreenuns always used to have a sort of
totem wizard-stick guarding the front of their camps.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Birth--Betrothal--An Aboriginal Girl From Infancy To
Womanhood](tet09)
