[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tet09)  [Next](tet11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VIII

### THE TRAINING OF A BOY UP TO BOORAH PRELIMINARIES

AT the boy manufactory, Boomayahmayahmul, the wood lizard, was the
principal worker, though Bahloo from time to time gave him assistance.

The little blacks throw their mythical origin at each other tauntingly.
A little black girl, when offended with a boy friend, says:

'Ooh, a lizard made you.'

'Wah! wah! a crow made you,' he retorts.

Up to a certain age boys are trained as are girls--charms sung over them
to make them generous, honest, good swimmers, and the rest; but after
that they are taken into the Weedegah, or bachelors' camp, and developed
on manly lines.

When he is about seven years old, his mother will paint her son up every
day for about a week with red and white colourings. After that he would
go to the Weedegah Gahreemai, bachelors' camp. He would then be allowed
to go hunting with boys and men. He would see, now when he was out with
the men, how fire was made in the olden time, almost a lost art now when
wax matches are plentiful.

No boy who had not been to a Boorah would dare to try to make fire.

The implements for fire-making are a little log about as thick as a
man's arm, of Nummaybirah wood--a rather soft white wood--and a split
flat piece about a foot long and three inches wide. The little log was
split open at one end, a wedge put in it, and the opening filled up with
dry grass broken up. This log was laid on the ground and firmly held
there; the fire-maker squatted in front, and with the flat piece rubbed
edgeways across the opening in the log. The sawdust fell quickly into
the opening. After about a minute and a half's rubbing a smoke started
out. After rubbing on a little longer the fire-maker took a handful of
dry grass, emptied the smoking sawdust and dry grass into it, waved it
about, and in three and a half minutes from starting the process I have
seen a blaze. Sometimes it has taken longer, but just under five minutes
is the longest time I have ever seen it take.

They use pine too, I believe, but whenever I timed them it was
Nummaybirah they were using.

The boys pick up the woodcraft of the tribes when they begin going out
with the men. As the boys began to grow up, when a good season came
round, and game and grass were plentiful, the old men were seen to draw
apart often and talk earnestly.

At length there came a night when was heard a whizzing, whirling boom
far in the scrub. As the first echo of it reached the camp, the women,
such as were still young enough to bear children, stopped their ears,
for should any such hear the Gurraymi, the women's name for the Gayandi,
or Boorah spirit's voice, that spirit will first make them mad, then
kill them.

The old women began to sing a Boorah song. To deaden the sound of the
dreaded voice, opossum rugs were thrown over the children, none of whom
must hear, unless they are boys old enough to be initiated; the sound
reveals the fact to such that the hour of their initiation is at hand.

The men all gathered together with the boys, except two old wirreenuns,
who earlier in the evening have seemingly quarrelled and gone away into
the scrub.

The men and boys in camp march up and down to some distance from the
camp. The old women keep on singing, and one man with a spear painted
red with a waywah fastened on top, walks up and down in the middle of
the crowd of men, holding the spear, with its emblematic belt of
manhood, aloft; as he does so, calling out the names of the bends of the
creek, beginning with the one nearest to which they are camped. When he
gets to the end of the names along that creek and comes to the name of a
big river, all the men join him in giving a loud crow like

'Wah! wah! wah!'

Then he begins with the names along the next creek across the big river,
and so on; at the mention of each main stream the crowd again join in
the cry of

'Wah! wah! wah!'

All the while, closer and still closer, comes the sound of the Gayandi,
as the men call the Gurraymi, or bull roarer.

At length the two old wirreenuns come back to the camp and the noise
ceases, to recur sometimes during the night, when I expect, did any one
search for them, the old wirreenuns would be found missing from the
camp.

After the first whirling of the bull roarers and calling of the creek
names, the Gooyeanawannah, or messengers, prepare for a journey, and
when ready, the wirreenuns start them off in various directions to
summon neighbouring tribes from hundreds of miles round to attend the
Boorah. The messengers each carry a spear with a waywah (or belt of
manhood) on the top, seeing which no tribe, even at enmity with the
messenger, will molest him. When a messenger arrived at a strange camp,
he was not asked his business but left to choose his own time for
telling. He would squat down a little way from the strangers' camp, food
would probably be brought to him which he would cat.

He would find out who was the chief wirreenun of the tribe, then take
him apart, give to him his Boorah message-stick as guarantee of his good
faith, and tell him where and when the Boorah was to be held. After
having given all necessary information, the Gooyeanawannah would return
to his tribe; the wirreenun to whom he had given the Doolooboorah, or
message-stick, would send it on by the messenger of his tribe, and so
with others, until all were summoned, each tribe letting it be known
that a Boorah summons had been received by sounding the Gayandi, which
would carry its own tale to those in the camp.

Should young boys be chosen as messengers, they were held in high
honour; Woormerh they were called.

While the messengers were away, the old men of the tribe in whose
Noorumbah, or hereditary hunting lands, the Boorah was to be held,
prepared the sacred grounds.

They cleared a big circle, round which they put a bank of earth, and
from the circle was cleared a path leading to a thick scrub; along this
path were low earthen embankments, and the trees on both sides had the
bark stripped off, and carved on them the various totems and multiplex
totems of the tribes. Such carvings were also put on the trees round the
Bunbul, or little Boorah ring, where the branches were also in some
instances lopped, and the trunks carved and painted to represent figures
of men, amongst whom were supposed to be the sons of Byamee's wives. Two
of these sons had been made young men at the first Boorah Byamee
instituted in this district, the ground of which is pointed out to this
day.

In the middle of the Bunbul a large heap of wood was placed ready for
the Yungawee, or sacred fire.

When the preliminary preparations were over, the camps were moved to
just outside the Boorah, or big Boorah ring. By that time the other
tribes began to arrive. First came from each tribe the boys to be
initiated and the Munthdeeguns, or men in charge of them. The men were
painted, and had leafy twigs tied round their wrists and ankles, as had
the boys also, and all carried in their hands small branches of green.
Those especially in charge of boys held, too, a painted spear with a
waywah on top of it.

As they approached the place of gathering the head man, with the painted
spear, began calling out all the names of the places along the creeks
from whence he came; at the name of each big watercourse they all cried
together

'Wah! Wah! wah!'

They were met at some distance from the camp by the men who had summoned
them, and who had made a round brush yard where they were to meet them.
Here the older women were singing Boorah songs. Some held their breasts
as a sign they had sons among the initiates; others put their hands on
their shoulders, which showed they had brothers going to be made young
men. All the women had leafy twigs tied round their wrists and ankles as
the men had. The newcomers and the men who met them walked round the
yard at a measured beat, lifting one leg and throwing up one arm each
time the cry of 'Wah! wah! wah!' was given, for here too the enumeration
of geographical names went on.

When the Boorah song was over, the men marched out of the yard; closely
behind them the two oldest men with the tufted spears; the Boorah boys
closely after them. The women followed, carrying bunches of leafy twigs
with which they pelted the boys until they reached the camp.

Matah and I had been watching the whole performance, and followed in the
wake of the women.

The whole scene impressed us as picturesque-the painted figures of the
men and boys, with the peculiarly native stealthy tread, threading their
way through the grey Coolabah trees; the decorated women throwing their
leafy missiles with accurate aim into the ranks of the boys, who did not
dare to look at their assailants. A Boorah boy must give no evidence of
curiosity; the *nil admirari* attitude then begun clings to a black man
through life. The women of the tribe express voluble surprise, but a
black man never except by the dilation of his eyes.

Every night after this a corroboree was held. The fully initiated of
each tribe, as they arrived, help in the preparation of the inner sacred
ground, while the younger men collected game and other food.

The old men cut out of the ground along the narrow path leading to the
Bunbul, and round it, huge earthen animals, their various totems, such
as crocodiles, kangaroos, emus and others, all of a colossal size. These
they plastered over with mud and painted in different colours and
designs. On the right of the Bunbul they made an earthen figure of
Byamee--this figure was reclining holding in each hand a Boondee. On the
other side was the huge figure of a woman-this represented
Birrahgnooloo, the favourite wife of Byamee; she held two spears. There
was a third figure not so large as the other two but like them, apart
from the figures near the path and the Bunbul; this was Baillahburrah,
according to some, Dillalee according to others, the supernatural son of
Byamee--or as some say, brother--not born of woman, having lived before
the human race existed, before Byamee travelled as Creator and culture
hero through Australia.

Of the Gayandi, the Boorah spirit, sometimes called Wallahgooroonboooan,
there was no figure, because he was always present at Boorahs, though
invisible. His voice only gave evidence of his presence.

The wirreenuns said it was he who had placed in the forks of trees round
the big ring heaps of dry wood, which they said, when the ceremonies
began, he would light, making a dazzling illumination of the scene.

In the middle of the Boorah ring was placed a mudgee, a painted stick
on- spear, with a bunch of hawk's feathers on the top. Every night was
heard at intervals the Gayandi, and immediately the younger women and
children stopped their ears, while the old women shrieked their
*brumboorah*.

As each fresh batch of blacks arrived the volume of sound was increased,
for the old men with their Gayandi would go into the scrub and whirl
them. These bull roarers sound curiously uncanny-1 did not wonder the
uninitiated accepted the spirit theory as to their origin.

The bush of Australia is a good background for superstition; there is
such a non-natural air about its Nature, as if it has been sketched in
roughly by a Beardsley-like artist.

The function of the Gayandi is to inspire awe, and it fulfils it. Byamee
himself made the first. It was some time before he got quite the effect
he wanted. At first he desired to give the Boorah spirit a form as well
as a voice, to inspire awe; he also wished it to knock out the front
tooth of an initiate.

He made a stone figure in the image of man, having a voice. This spirit,
known variously as Gayandi, or Darramulun, went to the Boorah, but when
he was to knock out the front tooth, he began to eat the boys' faces. He
was too strong; he would not do to preside over, Boorahs. Byamee
transformed him into a large piggiebillah-like animal, though instead of
being covered with spines, thick hair grew over him; he has since been
known as Nahgul. He went away into the bush, where he has been a dreaded
devil ever since; for if he touches a man's shadow even, that man will
itch all over and nothing can cure him of it. He haunts Boorah grounds.

Next Byamee made a stone bull roarer sort of thing, but this was too
heavy to make the noise he wanted. One day he was chopping a big
Coolabah tree close to Weetalibah water-hole, which tree, much to the
horror of our blacks, was burnt down a few years ago by travellers.

As Byamee chopped, out flew a big chip. He heard the whizzing sound it
made, gave another chop, out flew another; again the whizzing sound.

'That is what I want,' he said I'll make a Gayandi of wood.'

He cut a piece of mubboo, or beefwood, and shaped it; he tied a piece of
string to a hole in one end; he hung it up in the big Coolabah tree.
Then he went and cut one out of Noongah or Kurrajong, tied a string on
to that and put it beside the other on the tree, and left them swinging
there.

One day he came back and was camping near; his wives, came along to the
big tree. There the Gayandi swung, making a whirring noise.

'What's that?' said the women. 'We'll have a look what it is.' Seeing
Byamee they said, 'We heard voices in that big tree over there.'

Whereabouts?' he said.

In that Coolabah tree. Such strange voices, such as we never heard.'

'You two go" he said, 'to our camp and make a fire. I'll go and see what
it is.'

When the women were out of sight he went to the tree and took the pieces
of wood down. He was satisfied now they would answer his purpose. He
carefully hid them until he made a Boorah. And since then such pieces of
wood have been the medium for the Gayandi's voice, and are kept
carefully hidden away from all but the eyes of wirreenuns.

At length all the expected tribes had arrived, preparations were
finished, and a signal was given for a move to be made that the real
ceremonies might begin.

The fully initiated men went away after their midday meal, and about
sundown came in single file along the banked-in path each carrying a
firestick in one hand, a green switch in the other. When they reached
the mudgee in the middle of the big ring and corroboreed for a little
round it, the old women answered with a Boorah song, and all moved to
the edge of the ring. At this stage men often tried to steal each
other's boys, and great wrestling matches came off. One man would try to
pull up the mudgee, out would rush one of another clan to wrestle with
him. First the boys would wrestle, then the elder men, each determined
his clan should prove victorious at this great Boorah wrestling.

The skill of the eeramooun, or uninitiated boys, would be tried in sham
fights too. They were given bark shields, and their attackers had bark
boomerangs; great was the, applause when the boys ably defended
themselves. Previously they have been tried with boomerang and boodthul
throwing, and other arts of sport and warfare, boys of each tribe trying
to excel those of the others. If a boy comes well out of these trials
the men say he is worthy to be a yelgidyi, or fully initiated young man.

When the wrestling and sham fights are over, corroborees begin. All
night they are kept up, and sometimes there are day performances too.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Boorah and Other Meetings](tet11)
