<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Christianity](../../chr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jlgi00) 
[Next](jlgi02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/156459498X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574J6/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jesus, the Last Great Initiate*, by Edouard Schuré, \[1908\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

### PREFACE

<span class="smallcaps">Criticism</span> on the life of Jesus during the
past century has been greatly to the fore. A complete account of this
criticism will be found in the luminous sketch made by M.
Sabatier, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) in which the entire history
and present state of this investigation are given. Sufficient for the
moment to refer to the two principal phases supplied by Strauss and
Renan, with the object of determining the new point of view I now wish
to offer.

Departing from the philosophical school of Hegel to ally himself with
the critical and historical one of Bauer, Strauss, without denying the
existence of Jesus, endeavored to prove that his life, as related in the
Gospels, is a myth, a legend created by popular imagination, to meet the
necessities of a rising Christianity, and in accordance with Old
Testament prophecy. His position, a purely negative one, but which he
defended with great skill and erudition, has been found true in certain
details, but quite untenable in its entirety and essential elements. It
has, in addition, the grave defect of explaining neither the character
of Jesus nor the origin of Christianity. The life of Jesus, according to
Strauss, is a planetary system without a sun. One merit, however, must
be granted this work, that of having transferred the problem from the
ground of dogmatic theology to that of textual and historical criticism.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

M. Renan's *Vie de Jesus* owes its brilliant success to its lofty,
æsthetic, and literary qualities, as well as to the boldness of the
writer, the first who dared make the life of the Christ a problem of
human psychology. Has he solved the problem? After the dazzling success
of the book, the general opinion of all serious critics has been in the
negative. The Jesus of M. Renan begins his career as a gentle dreamer,
an enthusiastic but simpleminded moralist; he ends it as a violent
thaumaturgist, devoid of all idea of reality. "In spite of all the
precautions of the historian," says M. Sabatier, "it is the march of a
healthy mind in the direction of madness. The Christ of M. Renan hovers
between the calculations of ambition and the dreams of a seer." The fact
is that he becomes the Messiah without wishing—almost without
knowing—it. He permits himself to be given this name merely to please
the apostles and to fulfil the popular wish. It is not with so feeble a
faith that a true prophet creates a new religion and changes the soul of
the earth. The life of Jesus, according to M. Renan, is a planetary
system illumined by a pallid sun devoid of vivifying magnetism or
creative heat.

How did Jesus become the Messiah? That is the primordial question, the
solution of which is essential to the right understanding of the Christ;
it is also that before which M. Renan hesitated and turned aside. M.
Théodore Kein saw that this question must be boldly faced (*Das Leben
Jesu*, Zürich, 1875, 3rd edition). His life of Jesus is the most
remarkable that has appeared since M. Renan's. It throws on the question
all the light given by texts and history esoterically interpreted. But
the problem is not one capable of being solved without the aid of
intuition and esoteric tradition.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

It is by means of this esoteric light, the inner flame of all religions,
the central truth of all fruitful philosophy, that I have attempted to
reconstruct along its main lines, the life of Jesus, taking into account
whatever previous historical criticism has hitherto cleared and prepared
the ground. No need to define what I mean by the esoteric point of view,
the synthesis of Religion and Science. Concerning the historical and
relative value of the Gospels, I have taken the three synoptical Gospels
(those of Matthew, Mark, and Luke) as a basis, and that of John as the
arcanum of the esoteric teaching of the Christ, at the same time
acknowledging the subsequent language and form, and the symbolical
tendency of this Gospel.

All four Gospels, which should be mutually examined and verified, are
equally authentic, though from different claims. Those of Matthew and
Mark are precious gospels of letter and fact; therein are to be found
the public deeds and words of the Christ. The gentle Luke affords a
glimpse of the mystery-meaning beneath the poetical legend-veil; it is
the Gospel of the Soul, of Woman, and of Love. Saint John unfolds these
mysteries; in his Gospel are to be found the inner depths of the
doctrine, the secret teaching, the meaning of the promise, the esoteric
reserve. Clement of Alexandria, one of the few Christian bishops who
held the key to universal esoterism, rightly named it the Gospel of the
Spirit. John has a profound insight of the transcendent truths revealed
by the Master, and a great facility in presenting them. Accordingly, his
symbol is the Eagle, whose wing cleaves the firmament, and whose flaming
eye encompasses the depths of space.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[7:1](jlgi01.htm#fr_0) *Dictionnaire des Sciences
Réligieuses*, par Lichtenberger, tome 7, article "Jesus."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](jlgi02)

</div>
