<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Christianity](../../chr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jlgi02) 
[Next](jlgi04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/156459498X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574J6/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jesus, the Last Great Initiate*, by Edouard Schuré, \[1908\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# JESUS,

# THE LAST GREAT INITIATE

### CHAPTER I

### CONDITION OF THE WORLD AT THE BIRTH OF JESUS

<span class="smallcaps">A solemn</span> period of the world's destiny
was approaching; the sky was overshadowed with darkness and filled with
sinister omens.

In spite of the efforts of the initiates, polytheism, throughout Asia,
Africa, and Europe, had terminated only in the downfall of civilization.
The sublime cosmogony of Orpheus, so gloriously chanted by Homer, had
not been attained, and the only explanation possible is that human
nature found great difficulty in maintaining a certain intellectual
altitude. For the great spirits of antiquity, the gods were never
anything more than a poetical expression of the subordinated forces of
Nature, a speaking image of its inner organism; it is as symbols of
cosmic and animic forces that these gods live indestructible in the
consciousness of humanity. This diversity of gods and forces, the
initiates thought, was dominated and penetrated by the supreme God or
pure Spirit. The principal aim of the sanctuaries of Memphis, Delphi,
and Eleusis had been precisely the teaching of

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

this unity of God with the theosophical ideas and moral discipline
resulting therefrom.

But the disciples of Orpheus, Pythagoras, and Plato failed before the
egoism of the politicians, the sordidness of the sophists, and the
passions of the mob. The social and political decomposition of Greece
was the consequence of its religious, moral, and intellectual
decomposition. Apollo, the Solar Word, the manifestation of the supreme
God and the supra-terrestrial world, is silent. No more oracles, no more
inspired poets are to be heard! Minerva, Wisdom, and Foresight, veils
her countenance in presence of her people converted into Satyrs,
profaning the mysteries, and insulting the gods in Aristophanic farces
on the stage of Bacchus. The very mysteries themselves are corrupted,
for [sycophants](errata.htm#0) and courtesans are admitted to the
[Eleusinian](errata.htm#1) rites. … When soul becomes blunted, religion
falls into idolatry; when thought becomes materialized, philosophy
degenerates into scepticism. Thus we see Lucian, poor microbe born from
the corpse of paganism, turn the myths into ridicule, when once
Carneades had denied their scientific origin.

Superstitious in religion, agnostic in philosophy, egoistical and
divided in politics, reeling under anarchy and fatally abandoned to
despotism. Greece had become sadly changed from the time when she
transmitted the science of Egypt and the mysteries of Asia in immortal
forms of beauty.

If there was one who understood what the world needed, and who
endeavored to restore this need by an effort of heroic genius, that one
was Alexander the Great. This legendary conqueror, initiated, as was
also his father, Philip, into the mysteries of Samothrace,

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

proved himself even more of an intellectual son of Orpheus than a
disciple of Aristotle. Doubtless, the Achilles of Macedonia, who,
accompanied by a mere handful of Greeks, crossed Asia as far as India,
dreamed of universal empire, but not after the fashion of the Cæsars, by
oppression of the people, and the destruction of religion and unfettered
science. His grand idea was to reconcile Asia and Europe by a synthesis
of religions, supported by scientific authority. Impelled by this
thought, he paid homage to the science of Aristotle, as he did to
Minerva of Athens, the Jehovah of Jerusalem, the Egyptian Osiris, and
the Hindu Brahma, recognizing, as would a veritable initiate, an
identical divinity and wisdom beneath these differing symbols. This new
Dionysus possessed a broad sympathy and mighty prophetic insight.
Alexander's sword typified the last flash of the Greece of Orpheus,
illumining both East and West. The son of Philip died in the
intoxication of victory and the glorious accomplishment of his dream,
leaving the shreds of his empire to selfish and rapacious generals. But
his thought did not die with him; he had founded Alexandria, where
Oriental Philosophy, Judaism, and Hellenism were to be fused in the
crucible of Egyptian esoterism, until the time might be ripe for the
resurrection word of the Christ.

In proportion as Apollo and Minerva, the twin constellations of Greece,
paled away on the horizon, the people saw a menacing sign, the Roman
She-Wolf, rise in the troubled sky.

What is the origin of Rome? The conspiracy of a greedy oligarchy, in the
name of brute force; the oppression of the human intellect, of religion,
science, and art, by deified political power: in other words, the
contrary

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

of truth, by which a government receives its justification, according to
the supreme principles of science, justice and economy. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

The whole of Roman history is merely the consequence of the iniquitous
pact by which the Conscript Fathers declared war, first, against Italy,
and afterwards against the whole Roman race. They chose a fitting
symbol; for the brazen She-Wolf, with tawny hair erect, and hyena's head
turned in the direction of the Capitol, is the image of this government,
the demon which will take possession of the Roman soul to the very end.

In Greece, at least, the sanctuaries of Delphi and Eleusis were long
respected; at Rome, from the very outset, science and art were rejected.
The attempt of the sage Numa, the Etruscan initiate, failed before the
suspicious ambition of the Conscript Fathers. He brought with him the
Sibylline books, which contained part of the science of Hermes,
appointed magistrates elected by the people, distributed territory, and
submitted the right of declaring war to the Fecial priests. Accordingly,
King Numa, long cherished in the memory of the people, who regarded him
as inspired by divine genius, seems to be a historical intervention of
sacred science in the government. He does not represent the genius of
Rome, but rather that of the Etruscan initiation, which followed the
same principles as the [school](errata.htm#2) of Memphis and Delphi.

After Numa, the Roman Senate burnt the [Sibylline](errata.htm#3) Books,
ruined the authority of the flamens, destroyed

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

arbitral institutions, and returned to its old systems in which religion
was nothing more than an instrument of public domination. Rome became
the hydra which engulfed the peoples and their gods with them. The
nations of the earth were gradually reduced to subjection and pillage.
The Mamertine prison became filled with kings from North and South.
Rome, bent on having no other kings than slaves and charlatans, destroys
the final possessors of esoteric tradition in Gaul, Egypt, Judea, and
Persia. She pretends to worship the gods, but the only object of her
adoration is the She-Wolf. And now, away on the blood-stained dawn,
there appears the final offspring of this ravenous creature, the
embodiment of the genius of Rome—Cæsar! Rome has conquered all the
nations of the earth, Cæsar, her incarnation, arrogates to himself
universal power. He aspires not merely to become the ruler of mankind,
for, uniting the [tiara](errata.htm#4) with the diadem, he causes
himself to be proclaimed Chief Pontiff. After the Battle of Thapsus,
deification as a hero is voted him, after that of Munda, divine
apotheosis is granted by the Senate; his statue is erected in the temple
of Quirinus, and a college of officiating priests appointed, bearing his
name. To crown all in irony and logic, this very Cæsar who deifies
himself, denies in the presence of the Senate the immortality of the
soul! Would it be possible to proclaim more openly that there is no
longer any other God than Cæsar.

Under the Cæsars, Rome, inheritor of Babylon, extends her power over the
whole world. What has become of the Roman State? It is engaged in
destroying all collective life outside of governors and tax-collectors

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

in the provinces. Conquering Rome feeds like a vampire on the corpse of
a worn-out system.

And now the Roman orgies are freely and publicly paraded with all their
bacchanalia of vice and crime. They begin with the voluptuous meeting of
Mark Antony and Cleopatra, and will be brought to an end with the
debaucheries of Messalina and the mad frenzy of Nero. They signalize
their presence by a lascivious and public parody of the mysteries, and
are destined to close in the Roman Circus, where nude virgins, martyrs
to their faith, are torn to pieces and devoured by savage beasts, amid
the plaudits of thousands of spectators.

And yet, among the nations conquered by Rome, there was one which called
itself the people of God, whose genius was the very opposite to that of
Rome. How conies it that Israel, worn out by intestine strife, crushed
by three centuries of slavery, had preserved its indomitable faith? Why
did this conquered people rise, prophet-like, to oppose Greek decadence
and Roman orgies? Whence did they derive the courage to predict the fall
of the masters who had their feet on the throat of the nation, and speak
of some vague final triumph, when they themselves were drawing to an
irremediable ruin? The reason was, that a great idea, inspired by Moses,
lived in the nation. Under Joshua, the twelve tribes had erected a
commemorative pillar with the inscription, "This is a testimony between
us that Jehovah is God alone."

The law-maker of Israel had made monotheism the corner-stone of his
science and social law, as well as of a universal religious idea. He had
had the genius to understand that on the triumph of this idea the future
of mankind would depend. To preserve it, he had writ-

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

ten a hieroglyphic book, constructed a golden ark, and raised up a
people from the nomad dust of the wilderness. On these witnesses of the
spiritualistic idea Moses brought down the lightning flash and the
thunderbolt from heaven. Against them conspired not only the Moabites,
the Philistines, the Amalekites, and all the tribes of Palestine, but
even the frailties and passions of the Jewish people itself. The Book
ceased to be understood by the priesthood; the ark was captured by
enemies, numerous were the times when the people almost forgot their
mission. Why then, in spite of all, did they remain faithful to this
mission? Why had the idea of Moses remained graven on the brow and heart
of Israel in letters of fire? To whom is due this exclusive
perseverance, this magnificent fidelity amid the vicissitudes of a
troubled history, such a fidelity as gave Israel a unique character
among the nations? It may boldly be attributed to the prophets and the
institution of prophecy; by oral tradition it may be traced back to
Moses. The Hebrew people has had *Nabi* at all periods of its history,
right to its dispersion. But the institution of prophecy appears first
under an organic form at the time of Samuel. He it was who founded the
confraternities of *Nebiim*, those schools of prophets, in the face of a
rising royalty and an already degenerate priesthood. He made them
austere guardians of the esoteric tradition and the universal religious
thought of Moses against the kings, in whom the political idea and
national aim was to predominate. In these confraternities were preserved
the relics of the science of Moses, the sacred music, the occult art of
healing, and finally, the art of divination, exercised by the great
prophets with masterly force and abnegation.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

Divination has existed under the most diverse forms among all the
peoples of the ancient cycle; but prophecy in Israel possesses an
amplitude, a loftiness and authority, belonging to the intellectual and
spiritual nature in which monotheism keeps the human soul. The prophecy
offered by the theologians, literally, as the direct communication of a
personal God, denied by naturalistic philosophy as pure superstition, is
in reality nothing but the superior manifestation of the universal laws
of the Spirit. "The general truths which govern the world," says Ewald,
in his fine work on the prophets, "in other terms, *the thoughts of
God*, are immutable and incapable of attack, quite independent of the
fluctuations of things, or of the will and action of men. Man is
originally intended to participate in them, and translate them freely
into acts. But for the Word of the Spirit to enter into carnal man, he
must be fundamentally influenced by the great commotion of history. Then
the Eternal Truth springs forth like a flash of light. This is why we so
often read in the Old Testament that Jehovah is a living God. When man
listens to the divine call, a new life is created in him; now he no
longer feels himself alone, but in communion with God and all truth,
ready to proceed eternally from one verity to another. In this new life,
his thought becomes one with the universal will. He possesses a clear
grasp of the present, and entire faith in the final success of the
divine idea. The man who experiences this is a prophet, *i. e.*, he
feels himself irresistibly impelled to manifest himself before others as
a representative of God. *His thought becomes vision*, and this superior
might which forces the truth from his soul, at times with heart-breaking
anguish, constitutes the prophetic element.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *The prophetic
manifestations, throughout history, have been the thunderbolts and
lightning flashes of truth*." <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

From this spring, those giants, Elijah, Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Jeremiah,
drew their might. Deep in their caves or in the palaces of the kings,
they were indeed sentinels of Jehovah, and, as Elisha said to his master
Elijah, "the chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof." Often do
they foretell with prophetic vision the death of kings, the fall of
kingdoms, and the punishments to be visited on Israel. At times they are
mistaken. The prophetic torch, though lit by the sun of divine truth,
will vacillate and darken in their hands under the influence of national
passion. But never do they waver concerning moral truths, the real
mission of Israel, the final triumph of justice to mankind. As true
initiates, they preach their scorn of outer worship, the abolition of
sacrifices of blood, the purification of the soul, and the practice of
love. It is with regard to the final triumph of monotheism, its
liberating and peace-bringing rôle to all nations, that their vision is
truly remarkable. The most frightful misfortunes that can strike a
nation, foreign invasion, captivity in Babylon, cannot shake their
faith. Listen to what Isaiah said during the invasion of Sennacherib:

“Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her:
rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her.

“That ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations;
that ye may milk out and be delighted with the abundance of her glory.

“For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will extend peace to her like a
river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

flowing stream: then shall ye suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides,
and be dandled upon her knees.

“As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you; and ye shall
be comforted in Jerusalem.

“And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall
flourish like an herb: and the hand of the Lord shall be known towards
his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies.

“For behold, the Lord will come with fire and with his chariots like a
whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of
fire.

“For by fire and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh: and
the slain of the Lord shall be many.

“They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves in the gardens
behind one tree in the midst, eating swine's flesh, and the abomination
and the mouse shall be consumed together, saith the Lord.

“For I know their works and their thoughts: it shall come that I will
gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come and see my
glory.” <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)

It is only before the tomb of the Christ that this vision begins to find
realization, but who could deny its prophetic truth when thinking of the
part Israel played in the history of mankind?

No less firm than this faith in the future of Jerusalem, in its moral
grandeur and religious universality, is the faith of the prophets in a
Savior or a Messiah. They all speak of him; the incomparable Isaiah is
still the one whose vision is clearest, and who depicts it with greatest
force in bold, lofty language:

“There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch
shall grow out of its roots;

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

“And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of
knowledge and of the fear of the Lord;

“And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, and
he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after
the hearing of his ears;

“But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity
for the meek of the earth; and he shall smite the earth with the rod of
his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

“And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness
the girdle of his reins.” <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

Before this vision, the gloomy soul of the prophet becomes calm and
clear, as does a tempest-troubled sky after a storm. For now it is
indeed the image of the Galilean which is present before his inner
vision:

“For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant and as a root out of
a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him,
there is no beauty that we should desire him.

“He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted
with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised
and we esteemed him not.

“Surely he hath borne our griefs and carried our sorrows: yet we did
esteem him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted.

“But he was wounded for our transgressions; he was bruised for our
iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his
stripes we are healed.

“All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of
us all.

“He was oppressed and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he
is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her
shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth.

“He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his
generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the
transgression of my people was he stricken.” <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)

For eight centuries the thunder-words of the prophets caused the idea
and image of the Messiah to hover above all national dissensions and
misfortunes, at times under the form of a terrible avenger, and again as
an angel of mercy. The Messianic idea, tenderly nurtured under Assyrian
despotism in Babylonian exile, and brought to light under Persian
domination, continued to grow under the reign of the Seleucides and the
Maccabees. When the Roman rule and the reign of Herod came, the Messiah
was alive in the consciousness of all. The great prophets had seen him
as a great man, a martyr, a veritable son of God … the people, faithful
to the Judaic idea, imagined him as a David, a Solomon, or a new
Maccabeus. Whatever he might be, this restorer of Israel's greatness was
believed in and expected by all. Such is the might of prophetic action.

Thus we see that just as Roman history ends in Cæsar, along the
instinctive path and infernal logic of Destiny, so the history of Israel
leads freely to the Christ along the conscious path and divine logic of
Providence, manifested in its visible representatives, the prophets.
Evil

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

is fatally condemned to contradict and destroy itself, for it is the
False; but Good, in spite of all obstacles, engenders light and harmony
after a lapse of time, for it is the fruit of Truth. From her triumph
Rome obtained nothing but Cæsarism, from her downfall Israel gave birth
to the Messiah.

A vague expectancy hung over the nations. In the excess of its evil all
humanity had a presentiment of a savior. For centuries mythology had
dreamt of a divine child. The temples spoke of him in mystery;
astrologists calculated his coming; frenzied sibyls had loudly
proclaimed the downfall of pagan gods. The initiates had announced that
some day the world would be governed by one of their own, a Son of
God. <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) The world was expecting the
spiritual king, such a one as would be understood by the poor and lowly.

The great Æschylus, son of a priest of Eleusis, was almost killed by the
Athenians for daring to say in the crowded theater, by the mouth of his
Prometheus, that the reign of Jupiter-Destiny would come to an end. Four
centuries later, under the shadow of the throne of Augustus, the gentle
Virgil announces a new age, and dreams of a marvelous child—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Ultima Cumaei venit jam carminis aetas;  
 Magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur ordo.  
 Jam redit et Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna:  
 Jam nova progenies coelo demittitur alto.  
 Tu modo nascenti puero, quo ferrea primum  
 Desinet, ac toto surget gens aurea mundo,  
 Casta, fave, Lucina; tuus jam regnat Apollo.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">… Aspice convexo nutantem pondere mundum,  
 Terrasque, tractusque maris, coelumque profundum,  
 Aspice venturo laetantur ut omnia saeclo." <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7)</span>

</div>

When will this child be born? From what divine world will this soul
come? In what brilliant lightning-flash of love will it descend to
earth? By what wonderful purity, what superhuman energy will it remember
the abandoned heaven? By what mightier effort will it return from the
depth of its earthly consciousness, taking with it mankind in its train?

No one could have told, but all were waiting and expecting. … Herod the
Great, the Idumean usurper, the protégé of Augustus Cæsar, was then at
the point of death in his Cyprian château at Jericho, after a sumptuous
and blood-stained reign, which had covered Judea with splendid palaces
and human hectacombs. He was dying from a terrible malady, decomposition
of the blood, hated by all, torn with fury and remorse, haunted by the
spectres of his innumerable victims, amongst

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

whom were numbered his innocent wife, the noble Marian, of Maccabee
blood, and three of his own sons. The seven women of his harem had fled
the presence of the royal phantom. His very bodyguard had abandoned him.
Impassive by the side of the dying wretch sat his sister Salome, his
evil genius, the instigator of his foulest crimes. With diadem on brow,
and breast sparkling with precious stones, she kept watch, waiting for
the king's last breath, when she in her turn would seize the reins of
sovereignty.

Thus died the last king of the Jews. At this very moment had just been
born the future spiritual king of humanity, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) and the few initiates of Israel were
silently preparing for his reign in profound humility and silence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[16:1](jlgi03.htm#fr_1) This point of view, in
diametrical opposition to the empiric school of Aristotle and
Montesquieu, was that of the great initiates, the Egyptian priests, as
of Moses and Pythagoras. It had been previously amplified in the
*Mission des Juifs* of M. Saint-Yves. See his remarkable chapter on the
foundation of Rome.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[21:1](jlgi03.htm#fr_2) Ewald, *Die Propheten:*
Introduction.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[22:1](jlgi03.htm#fr_3) Isaiah lxvi. 10-18.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[23:1](jlgi03.htm#fr_4) Isaiah xi. 1-5.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[24:1](jlgi03.htm#fr_5) Isaiah liii. 2-8.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[25:1](jlgi03.htm#fr_6) Such is the esoteric
significance of the beautiful legend of the magi coming from the far
East to worship the child of Bethlehem.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[26:1](jlgi03.htm#fr_7) Virgil, Eclogue 4:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The last great age, foretold by sacred rhymes,  
 Renews its finished course, Saturian times  
 Roll round again, and mighty years begun  
 From their first orb in radiant circles run,  
 The base degenerate iron offspring ends,  
 A golden progeny from Heaven descends:  
 Oh! Chaste Lucina! Speed the mother's pains,  
 And haste the glorious birth, thy own Apollo reigns.  
      .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .  
 See, laboring Nature calls thee to sustain  
 The nodding frame of Heaven and Earth and main:  
 See to their base restored, earth, seas, and air;  
 And joyful ages from behind in crowding ranks appear;  
 To sing thy praise.…"  
                                               —<span
class="smallcaps">DRYDEN</span>.</span>

</div>

<span id="fn_8"></span>[27:1](jlgi03.htm#fr_8) Herod died in the fourth
year before our era. Calculations of the critics are now generally
unanimous in giving this date also as the birth of Jesus. See Keim, *Das
Leben Jesu*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Mary—First Development of Jesus](jlgi04)

</div>
