[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140321)  [Next](2140323.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.iv-p1.1"></span>Canon IV.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.iv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.iv-p2.1"></span>Let</span> those who truly and sincerely
lead the monastic life be counted worthy of becoming honour; but,
forasmuch as certain persons using the pretext of monasticism bring
confusion both upon the churches and into political affairs by going
about promiscuously in the cities, and at the same time seeking to
establish Monasteries for themselves; it is decreed that no one anywhere
build or found a monastery or oratory contrary to the will of the bishop
of the city; and that the monks in every city and district shall be
subject to the bishop, and embrace a quiet course of life, and give
themselves only to fasting and prayer, remaining permanently in the
places in which they were set apart; and they shall meddle neither in
ecclesiastical nor in secular affairs, nor leave their own monasteries
to take part in such; unless, indeed, they should at any time through
urgent necessity be appointed thereto by the bishop of the city.  And no
slave shall be received into any monastery to become a monk against the
will of his master.  And if any one shall transgress this our judgment,
we have decreed that he shall be excommunicated, that the name of God be
not blasphemed.  But the bishop of the city must make the needful
provision for the monasteries.

<span id="xi.xviii.iv-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.iv-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.iv-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.iv-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.iv-p5"></span>Domestic oratories and monasteries are
not to be erected contrary to the judgment of the bishop.  Every monk
must be subject to his bishop, and must not leave his house except at
his suggestion.  A slave, however, can not enter the monastic life
without the consent of his master.

<span id="xi.xviii.iv-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.iv-p6.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.iv-p7"></span>Like the previous canon, this one was
brought forward by the Emperor Marcian in the sixth session, and then as
number one, and the synod accepted the Emperor’s proposed canon almost
verbally.  Occasion for this canon seems to have been given by monks of
Eutychian tendencies, and especially by the Syrian Barsumas, as appears
from the fourth session.  He and his monks had, as Eutychians, withdrawn
themselves from the jurisdiction of their bishops, whom they suspected
of Nestorianism.

<span id="xi.xviii.iv-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.iv-p8.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.iv-p9"></span>Here observe (1) the definite assertion
of episcopal authority over monks, as it is repeated for greater
clearness in the last words of the canon, which are not found in
Marcian’s draft, “It is the duty of the bishop of the city to make due
provision for the monasteries,” and compare canons 8, 24.  Isidore says
that the bishop must “keep an eye on the negligences of monks”
(*Epist*., i. 149).  The Western Church followed in this track (see
Council of Agde, canon xxvii., that “no new monastery is to be founded
without the bishop’s approval,” and Ist of Orleans, canon xix., “Let
abbots be under the bishop’s <span id="page_271">p. 271</span> <span
id="xi.xviii.iv-Page_271"></span>power,” and also Vth of Paris, canon
xij., Mansi, viii., 329, 354, 542, etc.), until a reaction set in
against the oppressiveness of bishops, was encouraged by Gregory the
Great (*Epist*., i. 12; ii. 41), the <span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.iv-p9.1"></span>IV</span>th Council of Toledo (canon li.),
and the English Council of Hertford (canon iij., Bede, iv. 5, and
Bright’s *Chapters of Early Engl. Ch. Hist*., p. 244), and culminated in
the system of monastic exemptions, of which Monte Cassino, St. Martin’s
of Tours, Fulda, Westminster, Battle (see Freeman, *Norm. Conquest*, iv.
409), and St. Alban’s were eminent instances.

<span id="xi.xviii.iv-p10"></span>This canon, cut up and mutilated, is
found in the *Corpus Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars II.,
Causa XVI., Quæst. L, can. xij., and Causa XVIII., Quæst. II., Canon X.

<span id="xi.xviii.iv-p11"></span>I have followed the reading of the
*Prisca*, and of Dionysius, of Routh, and of Balsamon, “they were set
apart,” i.e. (as Balsamon explains) where they received the monastic
tonsure.  This reading substitutes <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.xviii.iv-p11.1"></span>ἀπετάξαντο</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.xviii.iv-p11.2"></span>ἐπετάξαντο</span> ,
which would mean “over which they had been put in authority,” or
possibly (as Johnson) “where they are appointed,” or as Hammond, “in
which they have been settled.”  Isidore reads “*ordinati sunt*.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon V](2140323.md)
