[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140366)  [Next](2140368) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_326">p. 326</span> <span
id="xiii.ii-Page_326"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>Historical Introduction.</span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>The Sixth Ecumenical Council met on
November 7, 680, for its first session, and ended its meetings, which
are said to have been eighteen in number, on September 16th of the next
year.  The number of bishops present was under three hundred and the
minutes of the last session have only 174 signatures attached to them.

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span>When the Emperor first summoned the council
he had no intention that it should be ecumenical.  From the *Sacras* it
appears that he had summoned all the Metropolitans and bishops of the
jurisdiction of Constantinople, and had also informed the Archbishop of
Antioch that he might send Metropolitans and bishops.  A long time
before he had written to Pope Agatho on the subject.

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span>When the synod assembled however, it
assumed at its first session the title “Ecumenical,” and all the five
patriarchs were represented, Alexandria and Jerusalem having sent
deputies although they were at the time in the hands of the infidel.

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span>In this Council the Emperor presided in
person surrounded by high court officials.  On his right sat the
Patriarchs of Constantinople and Antioch and next to them the
representative of the Patriarch of Alexandria.  On the Emperor’s left
were seated the representatives of the Pope.  In the midst were placed,
as usual, the Holy Gospels.  After the eleventh session however the
Emperor was no longer able to be present, but returned and presided at
the closing meeting.

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span>The sessions of the council were held in
the domed hall (or possibly chapel) in the imperial palace; which, the
Acts tell us, was called Trullo (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii-p6.1"></span>ἐν τῳ σεκρέτω τοῦ θείου παλατίου, τῳ οὕτω
λεγομένῳ Τρόυλλῳ</span>).

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span>It may be interesting to remark that the
*Sacras* sent to the bishops of Rome and Constantinople are addressed,
the one to “The Most holy and Blessed Archbishop of Old Rome and
Ecumenical Pope,” and the other to “The Most holy and Blessed Archbishop
of Constantinople and Ecumenical Patriarch.”  Some of the titles given
themselves by the signers of the “Prosphoneticus” are
interesting—“George, an humble presbyter of the holy Roman Church, and
holding the place of the most blessed Agatho, ecumenical Pope of the
City of Rome…,” “John, an humble deacon of the holy Roman Church and
holding the place of the most blessed Agatho, and ecumenical Pope of the
City of Rome…,” “George, by the mercy of God bishop of Constantinople
which is New Rome,” “Peter a presbyter and holding the place of the
Apostolic See of the great city Alexandria…,” “George, an humble
presbyter of the Holy Resurrection of Christ our God, and holding the
place of Theodore the presbyter, beloved of God, who holds the place of
the Apostolic See of Jerusalem…,” “John, by the mercy of God bishop of
the City of Thessalonica, and legate of the Apostolic See of Rome,”
“John, the unworthy bishop of Portus, legate of the whole Council of the
holy Apostolic See of Rome,” “Stephen, by the mercy of God, bishop of
Corinth, and legate of the Apostolic See of Old Rome.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Extracts from the Acts.  Session I.](2140368)
