[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140009)  [Next](2140011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>A Bibliographical Index of the Printed Editions
of the Canons of the Apostles and of the Councils in the Slavonic and
Russian Languages.</span>

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span>(Prepared by <span class="sc"><span
id="v.iii-p2.1"></span>Nicolas Glubokoffski</span>, Professor of the
Chair of the Holy Scriptures of the New Testament in the Ecclesiastical
Academy of St. Petersburgh.) <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md)

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.iii-p4.1"></span>In</span> the orthodox Russian Church, editions
of the Conciliar Canons and Decrees have only been issued under the
immediate disposition and sanction of the supreme ecclesiastical
authority, and, in fact, are amongst those things which it is not within
the competence of private scholars to undertake.  Such editions
therefore have been published in Russia only in accordance with
practical requirements.

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span>1.  The earliest printed edition of the
afore-mentioned canons appeared in the Slavonic “Kormchaja Kniga” <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) (=Gk. <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p6.1"></span>πηδάλιον</span>), the printing of which was
commenced at Moscow, on October 7th, 1649, under the Patriarch Joseph of
Moscow, and was finished on July 1, 1650; but the Patriarch Nicon caused
it to be submitted to a Council for revision, in consequence of which
certain pages were reprinted and inserted afresh into it. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md)   Thereupon copies of this “Kormchaja”
were distributed for use amongst the <span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>
<span id="v.iii-Page_xxvi"></span>churches, and came into general
circulation not earlier than the year 1653.  The second edition of the
“Kormchaja” appeared in 1787, after a revision under the Metropolitan
Gabriel of Novgorod and St. Petersburgh, <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) and was followed by others (e.g., those
of 1804, 1816, and 1823) without any alterations of importance.  The
latest editions differ from that of Nicon in certain particulars, but
these particulars do not concern the ecclesiastical Canons, which are
placed in the first part of the “Kormchaja” and include the 85 Apostolic
Canons, the decrees of the sixteen councils (of *Nicæa,* Ancyra,
Neocæsarea, Gangra, Antioch, Laodicea, *the 2d, 3d, and 4th*
*Ecumenical*, Sardica, Carthage, Constantinople under Nectarius, in
*Trullo, <span class="sc"><span id="v.iii-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 692,
the 7th Ecumenical*, the First-and-Second \[council of Constantinople\]
and that in the church of St. Sophia) and the Canons of the 13 Holy
Fathers.

<span id="v.iii-p10"></span>2.  In the printed “Kormchaja” the canons
are set forth, not in their full text, but in a shortened form which
sometimes gives but a very insufficient representation of the contents
of the original.  On this account attempts at full translations were
made many years back, but these never appeared in print.  It was not
until 1839 that such an edition as this was put forth by the Holy Synod
at St. Petersburgh, under the title:  “The Book of the Canons of the
Holy Apostles, of the Holy Ecumenical and local Councils, and of the
Holy Fathers,” printed in large folio in “the Imperial city of St.
Peter, the first impression in the 7347th year from the creation of the
world, and the 1839th from the Birth in the flesh of God the Word,
indict. 12.”  In this edition there are 4 unnumbered leaves and 455
numbered pages.  On each page there are two columns, for the original
text and the new translation of the whole text into the Slavonic
respectively, but without the commentaries of the Byzantine Canonists;
occasionally, but rarely, notes based upon Zonaras or Balsamon are
given, which are not always historically accurate (for instance, that to
the 10th Canon of Ancyra, the 3d of Sardica, the 4th of Carthage, and
the one which deals with the First-and-Second Council of <span
class="sc"><span id="v.iii-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 861) while in some
places the text itself is not correct (for instance, in the 13th Canon
of the 1st Ecumenical Council).  This “Book of the Canons” subsequently
went through the following editions:  the 2d, printed in Moscow at the
Synodal Press in 1862, *in folio* 8 leaves + 672 + 74 numbered pages,
with Greek and Slavonic texts; the 3d ibid. in 1866, *in quarto*, 3
leaves + 373 pages + 1 leaf + 59 pages, with the Slavonic text only; the
4th, ibid. in 1874, *in octavo*, 4 leaves 4 + 455 pages + 2 leaves + 104
+ 4 pages, also with the Slavonic text only; the 5th, ibid. in 1886, *in
folio*, 3 leaves + 395 + 42 pages + 1 leaf, again with Slavonic text
only.

<span id="v.iii-p11"></span>3.  The “Book of Canons” by no means
represents an authorized *textus receptus*, and after its publication,
the Holy Synod itself not unfrequently introduced the Canons as given in
the Slavonic edition of the “Kormchaja Kniga” into its edicts, and
moreover recommended the Athenian Edition of the “Syntagma” for all the
ecclesiastico-educational establishments.  This opened the way for a new
work, which, with the permission of the supreme ecclesiastical
authority, was undertaken by the Moscow “Society of Amateurs of
Spiritual Enlightenment.”  The announcement of this was made in No. 3 of
the “Moscow Diocesan Church Gazette” of the year 1875, whilst in the
same year in the January number of the Moscow Journal, “Lectures
delivered in the Society of Amateurs of Spiritual Enlightenment,” the
“programe” of the edition itself was printed (pages 79–90 in the section
devoted to bibliography).  In criticism of it the Professor of Canonical
Law in the University of Novorossiisk, Alexis Stepanovich Pavloff (who
died on August 16, 1898, as Professor of the University of Moscow) wrote
“Notes on the programme of an edition, in a Russian translation of the
Canons of the Church with Commentaries” in the sixteenth volume of
“Memoirs of the Imperial University of Novorossiisk” (Odessa, 1875),
pages 1–17 of the Appendix (and in a separate pamphlet), which was
afterwards reprinted with certain additions in the Moscow Journal,
“Orthodox Review,” of April, 1876 (pages 730–746), under the title:  “A
new translation of the Commentaries upon the canons of the church.”  To
these criticisms the Professor of <span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>
<span id="v.iii-Page_xxvii"></span>Ecclesiastical Law in the Moscow
Ecclesiastical Academy, Alexander Theodorovich Lavroff, wrote a reply in
“Lectures delivered in the Society of Amateurs of Spiritual
Enlightenment” (for the year 1877, part 2, pages 158–194), entitled “A
printed letter to Alexis Stepanovich Pavloff.”  Thus the plan of the
edition gradually took shape.  It was first printed in the Appendices to
the Journal “Lectures in the Society, etc.,” and subsequently was
published separately *in octavo* in the following parts (A) I. “The
Canons of the Holy Apostles with Commentaries” in two editions—Moscow,
1876, (from “Lectures,” 1875, pages 1–163) 4 + 12 + 175 pages, and
ibid., 1887, 5–12 + 163 pages; II. “Canons of the Holy Ecumenical
Councils with Commentaries” (from “Lectures” 1875, pages 165–325; 1876,
pages 329–680; 1877, pages 891–900), in two parts:  1st “The Canons of
the Councils I.–IV.,” Moscow, 1877, 260 pages; 2d. “The Canons of
Councils V.–VII.,” ibid., 736 pages; (B) “The Canons of the Holy Local
Councils with Commentaries,” also in two parts (from “Lectures” 1877,
pages 900–1066; 1878, pages 1067–1306; 1879, pages 1307–1410):  the 1st
(The Canons of the Councils of Ancyra, Neocæsarea, Gangra, Antioch,
Laodicea, and Sardica) Moscow, 1880, 359 pages; the 2d (The Canons of
the Councils of Carthage \[with the letters to Pope Boniface and to Pope
Celestine\], Constantinople, the First-and-Second, and that in the
Temple of the Wisdom of the Word of God) ibid., 1881, 876 pages; (C)
“The Canons of the Holy Fathers with Commentaries,” ibid., 1884, 626
pages.  Together with these is a separate “Index of subjects contained
in the edition of the Canons of the Apostles, Councils and Holy Fathers
with Commentaries,” Moscow, 1888, 58 pages *in octavo.*  The Greek text
of the canons follows the edition <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii-p11.1"></span>Σύνταγμα τῶν θείων καὶ ὶερῶν
κανόνων</span>…<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iii-p11.2"></span>ὑπὸ Γ.
Α. Ράλλη καὶ Μ. Πότλη, Αθήνησιν</span> 1852–1854, and alongside of it is
placed a literal Slavonic translation, after which follows a Russian
translation of the Commentaries of the Byzantine Canonists (Zonaras,
Aristenus, Balsamon), and the text and commentaries of the Slavonic
“Kormchaja;” all this is accompanied by introductions and explanations
of all sorts (historical, philological, etc.).  This edition is rightly
considered by specialists to be of very great value from a scientific
point of view.  Professor A. Th. Lavroff (who became a monk under the
name Alexis, and died Archbishop of Lithuania and Vilna) was its chief
editor and had most to do with it, but many others took part in the
work, and amongst these Professor A. S. Pavloff.

<span id="v.iii-p12"></span>4.  The only *Russian* translation of the
canons which exists is contained in the publications of the
Ecclesiastical Academy of Kazan:  (a) “The Acts of the Ecumenical
Councils translated into Russian,” 7 volumes.  Kazan, 1859–1878 (some of
these volumes have run into a second edition) and (b) “Acts of the nine
local councils translated into Russian,” 1 volume, Kazan, 1878.  This
translation was made under the direction of the Holy Synod, and the
Canons are reproduced in it according to the text of the Acts of the
Councils.

<span id="v.iii-p13"></span>From the outline here presented of the
printed editions of the Canons of the Councils, it will be seen that,
within the limits of their practical applicability, they are reverenced
as the source of the *operative* law in the Russian orthodox church, and
therefore for her it is only the authoritative Byzantine commentaries
which have any particular importance.  There are works upon these by *V.
Demidoff,* “The character and significance of the commentaries upon the
Canonical Codex of the Greek Church—of Aristenus, Zonaras, and
Balsamon,” in the “Orthodox Review,” vol. ii. of 1888, and of Professor
*V. A. Narbekoff,* of Kazan, “The commentaries of Balsamon upon the
Nomocanon of Photius,” Kazan, 1889, and of Professor *M. E. Krasnozhen,*
of Jurieff (Dorpat) “The Commentators of the Canonical Codex of the
Eastern Church: Aristenus, Zonaras, and Balsamon.”  Moscow, 1892.

<span id="v.iii-p14"></span>No separate scientific commentaries upon all
the canons of the councils exist in Russian literature, but they are
described, and explained in courses of Ecclesiastical law (of the
Archimandrite John \[who, when he died, was Bishop of Smolensk\] of
Professors N. S. Suvoroff, T. S. Berdnikoff, N. A. Lashkareff, M. A.
Ostroümoff) <span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_xxviii"></span>in our works upon the history of the
Ecumenical Councils (by Bishop John, and Professor Alexis Petrovich
Lebedeff), and in monographs dealing with Canon Law and Church History. 
As far as a critical edition of the original text of the canons is
concerned, there is a learned and useful article (upon a book by Fr.
Lauchert, Die Kanones usw., Freiberg i. Br. und Leipsig, 1896), by
Vasili Vasilievich Bolotoff, Professor of Ecclesiastical History in the
St. Petersburgh Ecclesiastical Academy in the “Christian Reading,” vol.
iv. for 1896, pp. 178–195.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xxv:21](2140010.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="v.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span> Translated into English by W. J. Birkbeck,
Esq., F.S.A.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xxv:22](2140010.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="v.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span> *Steering-Book*.  W.J.B.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xxv:23](2140010.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="v.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p7"></span> Accordingly some bibliographers correctly
reckon this as two editions, of which that of 1653 *in folio consists*
of 37 + 1 + 60 + 1 + 16 + 679 pages, and was reprinted by the “Old
Ritualists” (*Rascolniki*\*), in 1785 at Warsaw.

<span id="v.iii-p8"></span>\**Rascolniki*, lit. *Schismatics*; i.e., the
Russian Dissenting sects which in the 17th century left the Church
rather than accept the service-books as corrected by the Patriarch
Nicon.—W.J.B.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xxvi:24](2140010.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="v.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p9"></span> This edition was published at Moscow *in
folio* in two parts and volumes, in the 1st there are 2 unnumbered + 38
+ 5 – 60 + 300 + 39 numbered pages; in the 2d 1 + 2 + 235 + 16 + 37
pages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the History of the Roman Law and Its Relation to the
Canon Law.](2140011.md)
