[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140041)  [Next](2140043.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.vi.xxiv"></span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Canon XVI.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxiv-p2.1"></span>Neither</span> presbyters, nor deacons, nor
any others enrolled among the clergy, who, not having the fear of God
before their eyes, nor regarding the ecclesiastical Canon, shall
recklessly remove from their own church, ought by any means to be
received by another church; but every constraint should be applied to
restore them to their own parishes; and, if they will not go, they must
be excommunicated.  And if anyone shall dare surreptitiously to carry
off and in his own Church ordain a man belonging to another, without the
consent of his own proper bishop, from whom although he was enrolled in
the clergy list he has seceded, let the ordination be void.

<span id="vii.vi.xxiv-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.vi.xxiv-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiv-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxiv-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XVI.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiv-p5"></span>Such presbyters or deacons as desert
their own Church are not to be admitted into another, but are to be sent
back to their own diocese.  But if any bishop should ordain one who
belongs to another Church without the consent of his own bishop, the
ordination shall be cancelled.

<span id="vii.vi.xxiv-p6"></span>“Parish” in this canon, as so often
elsewhere, means “diocese.”

<span id="vii.vi.xxiv-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vii.vi.xxiv-p7.1"></span>Balsamon.</span>

<span id="vii.vi.xxiv-p8"></span>It seemed right that the clergy should
have no power to move from city to city and to change their canonical
residence without letters dimissory from the bishop who ordained them. 
But such clerics as are called by the bishops who ordained them and
cannot be persuaded to return, are to be separated from communion, that
is to say, not to be allowed to concelebrate (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.vi.xxiv-p8.1"></span>συνιερουργεῖν</span>) with them, for this
is the meaning of “excommunicated” in this place, and not that they
should not enter the church nor receive the sacraments.  This decree
agrees with canon xv. of the Apostolical canons, which provides that
such shall not celebrate the liturgy.  Canon xvj. of the same
Apostolical canons further provides that if a bishop receive a cleric
coming to him from another diocese without his bishop’s letters
dimissory, and shall ordain him, such a bishop shall be separated.  From
all this it is evident that the Chartophylax of the Great Church for the
time does rightly in refusing to allow priests ordained in other
dioceses to offer the sacrifice unless they bring with them letters
commendatory and dimissory from those who ordained them.

<span id="vii.vi.xxiv-p9"></span>Zonaras had also in his Scholion given
the same explanation of the canon.

<span id="vii.vi.xxiv-p10"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, divided into two.  *Decretum*.  Pars II, Causa VII.
Quæst. I. c. xxiij.; and Pars I. Dist. LXXI., c. iij.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XVII](2140043.md)
