[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140689)  [Next](2140691) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.xiv.iv"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>Canon IV.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.iv-p2"></span>That Bishops are to abstain from all
receiving of gifts.

<span id="xvi.xiv.iv-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.iv-p3.1"></span>The</span> Church’s herald, Paul the divine
Apostle, laying down a rule (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xiv.iv-p3.2"></span>κανόνα</span>) not only for the presbyters
of Ephesus but for the whole company of the priesthood, speaks thus
explicitly, saying, “I have coveted no man’s silver or gold, or
apparel.  I have shewed <span id="page_558">p. 558</span> <span
id="xvi.xiv.iv-Page_558"></span>you all things, how that so labouring ye
ought to support the weak;” for he accounted it more blessed to give. 
Therefore we being taught by him do decree, that under no circumstances,
shall a Bishop for the sake of filthy lucre invent feigned excuses for
sins, and exact gold or silver or other gifts from the bishops, clergy,
or monks who are subject to him.  For says the Apostle, “The unrighteous
shall not possess the kingdom of God,” and, “The children ought not to
lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children.”  If then any
is found, who for the sake of exacting gold or any other gift, or who
from personal feeling, has suspended from the ministry, or even
excommunicated, any of the clergy subject to his jurisdiction, or who
has closed any of the venerable temples, so that the service of God may
not be celebrated in it, pouring out his madness even upon things
insensible, and thus shewing himself to be without understanding, he
shall be subjected to the same punishment he devised for others, and his
trouble shall return on his own head, as a transgressor of God’s
commandment and of the apostolic precepts.  For Peter the supreme head
(<span class="Greek"><span id="xvi.xiv.iv-p3.3"></span>ἡ κερυφαία
ἀκρότης</span>) of the Apostles commands, “Feed the flock of God which
is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but
willingly; not for filthy lucre but of a ready mind; neither as being
lords over the clergy (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.xiv.iv-p3.4"></span>τῶν κλήρων</span> \[A.V. God’s heritage\]);
but being ensamples to the flock.  And when the chief shepherd shall
appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away.”

<span id="xvi.xiv.iv-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.xiv.iv-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.iv-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.iv-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon IV.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.iv-p6"></span>We decree that no bishop shall extort
gold or silver, or anything else from bishops, clerics, or monks subject
to his jurisdiction.  And if anyone through the power of gold or of any
other thing or through his own whims, shall be found to have prevented
any one of the clergy who are subject to him, from the celebration of
the holy offices, or shall have shut up a venerable temple so that the
sacred worship of God could not be performed in it, he shall be subject
to the lex talionis.  For Peter the Apostle says:  Feed the flock of
God, not of necessity but willingly, and according to God; not for
filthy lucre’s sake, but with a prompt mind; not exercising lordship
over the clergy, but being an example to the flock.

<span id="xvi.xiv.iv-p7"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.iv-p7.1"></span>Balsamon.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.iv-p8"></span>Note the present canon, which punishes
those bishops by the *lex talionis*, who for filthy lucre’s sake, or out
of private affection, separate any from themselves, or close temples. 
Wherefore he who cuts off others thus, let him be cut off.  But he who
shuts off a temple shall be punished even more than by cutting off.  But
lest any one should say, by the argument *á contrario*, that a bishop
should not be punished who neither for the sake of filthy lucre nor out
of private spite, but lawfully cuts some off, or closes temples, I
answer that this argument only holds good of the cutting off.  For a
bishop who for any reason, whether just or unjust, shuts up a temple,
should be punished, so it seems to me, as I have said above.

<span id="xvi.xiv.iv-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.iv-p9.1"></span>Van Espen.</span>

<span id="xvi.xiv.iv-p10"></span>It would seem that at that time among
the Greeks the use of local interdict (*interdicti localis*) was not
known.  But very many theologians wish to find a vestige of this
interdict in the <span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.xiv.iv-p10.1"></span>IV</span>th century, in St. Basil’s epistle
cclxx. (otherwise ccxliv.), where the holy doctor teaches that the
person who carries off by force a virgin, and those who are cognizant of
this wickedness ought to be smitten with excommunication, and that the
village or its inhabitants, to which the ravisher shall escape and where
he shall be kept in safety, shall be shut out from the prayers.

<span id="xvi.xiv.iv-p11"></span>This canon, or rather the first part of
it, is found in the *Corpus Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars
II., Causa XVI., Q. I., Canon lxiv.; all the latter part is represented
by the words “et infra.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon V](2140691)
