[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140681)  [Next](2140683) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.x"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p1"></span> <span id="page_543">p. 543</span> <span
id="xvi.x-Page_543"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xvi.x-p1.1"></span>Epitome of the Definition of the Iconoclastic
Conciliabulum held in Constantinople, A.D. 754. <span
id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529) </span>

<span id="xvi.x-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.x-p3.1"></span>The Definition of the Holy, Great, and Ecumenical
Seventh Synod.</span>

<span id="xvi.x-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xvi.x-p4.1"></span>The</span> holy and Ecumenical synod, which by
the grace of God and most pious command of the God-beloved and orthodox
Emperors, Constantine and Leo, <span id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530)
now assembled in the imperial residence city, in the temple of the holy
and inviolate Mother of God and Virgin Mary, surnamed in Blachernæ, have
decreed as follows.

<span id="xvi.x-p6"></span>Satan misguided men, so that they worshipped
the creature instead of the Creator.  The Mosaic law and the prophets
cooperated to undo this ruin; but in order to save mankind thoroughly,
God sent his own Son, who turned us away from error and the worshipping
of idols, and taught us the worshipping of God in spirit and in truth. 
As messengers of his saving doctrine, he left us his Apostles and
disciples, and these adorned the Church, his Bride, with his glorious
doctrines.  This ornament of the Church the holy Fathers and the six
Ecumenical Councils have preserved inviolate.  But the before-mentioned
demi-urgos of wickedness could not endure the sight of this adornment,
and gradually brought back idolatry under the appearance of
Christianity.  As then Christ armed his Apostles against the ancient
idolatry with the power of the Holy Spirit, and sent them out into all
the world, so has he awakened against the new idolatry his servants our
faithful Emperors, and endowed them with the same wisdom of the Holy
Spirit.  Impelled by the Holy Spirit they could no longer be witnesses
of the Church being laid waste by the deception of demons, and summoned
the sanctified assembly of the God-beloved bishops, that they might
institute at a synod a scriptural examination into the deceitful
colouring of the pictures (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.x-p6.1"></span>ὁμοιωμάτων</span>) which draws down the spirit of
man from the lofty adoration (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.x-p6.2"></span>λατρείας</span>) of God to the low and material
adoration (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.x-p6.3"></span>λατρείαν</span>) of the creature, and that they,
under divine guidance, might express their view on the subject.

<span id="xvi.x-p7"></span>Our holy synod therefore assembled, and we,
its 338 members, follow the older synodal decrees, and accept and
proclaim joyfully the dogmas handed down, principally those of the six
holy Ecumenical Synods.  In the first place the holy and ecumenical
great synod assembled at Nice, etc.

<span id="xvi.x-p8"></span>After we had carefully examined their decrees
under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, we found that the unlawful art of
painting living creatures blasphemed the fundamental doctrine of our
salvation—namely, the Incarnation of Christ, and contradicted the six
holy synods.  These condemned Nestorius because he divided the one Son
and Word of God into two sons, and on the other side, Arius, Dioscorus,
Eutyches, and Severus, because they maintained a mingling of the two
natures of the one Christ.

<span id="xvi.x-p9"></span>Wherefore we thought it right, to shew forth
with all accuracy, in our present definition the error of such as make
and venerate these, for it is the unanimous doctrine of all the holy
Fathers and of the six Ecumenical Synods, that no one may imagine any
kind of separation or mingling in opposition to the unsearchable,
unspeakable, and incomprehensible union of the two natures in the one
hypostasis or person.  What avails, then, the folly of the painter, who
from sinful love of gain depicts that which should not be depicted—that
is, with his polluted hands he tries to fashion that which should only
be believed in the heart and confessed with the mouth?  He makes an
image and calls it Christ.  The name Christ signifies God and man. 
Consequently it is an image of God and man, and consequently he has in
his foolish mind, in his representation of the created flesh, depicted
the Godhead which cannot be represented, and thus mingled what should
not be mingled.  Thus he is guilty of a double blasphemy—the one in
making an image of the Godhead, and the other by mingling the Godhead
and manhood.  Those fall into the same blasphemy who venerate <span
id="page_544">p. 544</span> <span id="xvi.x-Page_544"></span>the image,
and the same woe rests upon both, because they err with Arius,
Dioscorus, and Eutyches, and with the heresy of the Acephali.  When,
however, they are blamed for undertaking to depict the divine nature of
Christ, which should not be depicted, they take refuge in the excuse: 
We represent only the flesh of Christ which we have seen and handled. 
But that is a Nestorian error.  For it should be considered that that
flesh was also the flesh of God the Word, without any separation,
perfectly assumed by the divine nature and made wholly divine.  How
could it now be separated and represented apart?  So is it with the
human soul of Christ which mediates between the Godhead of the Son and
the dulness of the flesh.  As the human flesh is at the same time flesh
of God the Word, so is the human soul also soul of God the Word, and
both at the same time, the soul being deified as well as the body, and
the Godhead remained undivided even in the separation of the soul from
the body in his voluntary passion.  For where the soul of Christ is,
there is also his Godhead; and where the body of Christ is, there too is
his Godhead.  If then in his passion the divinity remained inseparable
from these, how do the fools venture to separate the flesh from the
Godhead, and represent it by itself as the image of a mere man?  They
fall into the abyss of impiety, since they separate the flesh from the
Godhead, ascribe to it a subsistence of its own, a personality of its
own, which they depict, and thus introduce a fourth person into the
Trinity.  Moreover, they represent as not being made divine, that which
has been made divine by being assumed by the Godhead.  Whoever, then,
makes an image of Christ, either depicts the Godhead which cannot be
depicted, and mingles it with the manhood (like the Monophysites), or he
represents the body of Christ as not made divine and separate and as a
person apart, like the Nestorians.

<span id="xvi.x-p10"></span>The only admissible figure of the humanity
of Christ, however, is bread and wine in the holy Supper.  This and no
other form, this and no other type, has he chosen to represent his
incarnation.  Bread he ordered to be brought, but not a representation
of the human form, so that idolatry might not arise.  And as the body of
Christ is made divine, so also this figure of the body of Christ, the
bread, is made divine by the descent of the Holy Spirit; it becomes the
divine body of Christ by the mediation of the priest who, separating the
oblation from that which is common, sanctifies it.

<span id="xvi.x-p11"></span>The evil custom of assigning names to the
images does not come down from Christ and the Apostles and the holy
Fathers; nor have these left behind them any prayer by which an image
should be hallowed or made anything else than ordinary matter.

<span id="xvi.x-p12"></span>If, however, some say, we might be right in
regard to the images of Christ, on account of the mysterious union of
the two natures, but it is not right for us to forbid also the images of
the altogether spotless and ever-glorious Mother of God, of the
prophets, apostles, and martyrs, who were mere men and did not consist
of two natures; we may reply, first of all:  If those fall away, there
is no longer need of these.  But we will also consider what may be said
against these in particular.  Christianity has rejected the *whole* of
heathenism, and so not merely heathen sacrifices, but also the heathen
worship of images.  The Saints live on eternally with God, although they
have died.  If anyone thinks to call them back again to life by a dead
art, discovered by the heathen, he makes himself guilty of blasphemy. 
Who dares attempt with heathenish art to paint the Mother of God, who is
exalted above all heavens and the Saints?  It is not permitted to
Christians, who have the hope of the resurrection, to imitate the
customs of demon-worshippers, and to insult the Saints, who shine in so
great glory, by common dead matter.

<span id="xvi.x-p13"></span>Moreover, we can prove our view by Holy
Scripture and the Fathers.  In the former it is said:  “God is a
Spirit:  and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in
truth;” and:  “Thou shalt not make thee any graven image, or any
likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth
beneath;” on which account God spoke to the Israelites on the Mount,
from the midst of the fire, but showed them no image.  Further:  “They
changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to
corruptible man,…and served the creature more than the Creator.” 
\[*Several other passages, even less to the point, are cited*.\] <span
id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531)

<span id="xvi.x-p15"></span><span id="page_545">p. 545</span> <span
id="xvi.x-Page_545"></span>The same is taught also by the holy Fathers. 
\[*The Synod appeals to a spurious passage from Epiphanius and to one
inserted into the writings of Theodotus of Ancyra, a friend of St.
Cyril’s; to utterances—in no way striking—of Gregory of Nazianzum, of
SS. Chrysostom, Basil, Athanasius of Amphilochius and of Eusebius
Pamphili, from his* Letter to the Empress Constantia*, who had asked him
for a picture of Christ*.\] <span id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532)

<span id="xvi.x-p17"></span>Supported by the Holy Scriptures and the
Fathers, we declare unanimously, in the name of the Holy Trinity, that
there shall be rejected and removed and cursed out of the Christian
Church every likeness which is made out of any material and colour
whatever by the evil art of painters.

<span id="xvi.x-p18"></span>Whoever in future dares to make such a
thing, or to venerate it, or set it up in a church, or in a private
house, or possesses it in secret, shall, if bishop, presbyter, or
deacon, be deposed; if monk or layman, be anathematised, and become
liable to be tried by the secular laws as an adversary of God and an
enemy of the doctrines handed down by the Fathers.  At the same time we
ordain that no incumbent of a church shall venture, under pretext of
destroying the error in regard to images, to lay his hands on the holy
vessels in order to have them altered, because they are adorned with
figures.  The same is provided in regard to the vestments of churches,
cloths, and all that is dedicated to divine service.  If, however, the
incumbent of a church wishes to have such church vessels and vestments
altered, he must do this only with the assent of the holy Ecumenical
patriarch and at the bidding of our pious Emperors.  So also no prince
or secular official shall rob the churches, as some have done in former
times, under the pretext of destroying images.  All this we ordain,
believing that we speak as doth the Apostle, for we also believe that we
have the spirit of Christ; and as our predecessors who believed the same
thing spake what they had synodically defined, so we believe and
therefore do we speak, and set forth a definition of what has seemed
good to us following and in accordance with the definitions of our
Fathers.

<span id="xvi.x-p19"></span>(1)  If anyone shall not confess, according
to the tradition of the Apostles and Fathers, in the Father, the Son and
the Holy Ghost one godhead, nature and substance, will and operation,
virtue and dominion, kingdom and power in three subsistences, that is in
their most glorious Persons, let him be anathema.

<span id="xvi.x-p20"></span>(2)  If anyone does not confess that one of
the Trinity was made flesh, let him be anathema.

<span id="xvi.x-p21"></span>(3)  If anyone does not confess that the
holy Virgin is truly the Mother of God, etc.

<span id="xvi.x-p22"></span>(4)  If anyone does not confess one Christ
both God and man, etc.

<span id="xvi.x-p23"></span>(5)  If anyone does not confess that the
flesh of the Lord is life-giving because it is the flesh of the Word of
God, etc.

<span id="xvi.x-p24"></span>(6)  If anyone does not confess two natures
in Christ, etc.

<span id="xvi.x-p25"></span>(7)  If anyone does not confess that Christ
is seated with God the Father in body and soul, and so will come to
judge, and that he will remain God forever without any grossness, etc.

<span id="xvi.x-p26"></span>(8)  If anyone ventures to represent the
divine image (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.x-p26.1"></span>χαρακτήρ</span>) of the Word after the
Incarnation with material colours, let him be anathema!

<span id="xvi.x-p27"></span>(9)  If anyone ventures to represent in
human figures, by means of material colours, by reason of the
incarnation, the substance or person (*ousia* or *hypostasis*) of the
Word, which cannot be depicted, and does not rather confess that even
after the Incarnation he \[i.e., the Word\] cannot be depicted, let him
be anathema!

<span id="xvi.x-p28"></span>(10)  If anyone ventures to represent the
hypostatic union of the two natures in a picture, and calls it Christ,
and thus falsely represents a union of the two natures, etc.!

<span id="xvi.x-p29"></span>(11)  If anyone separates the flesh united
with the person of the Word from it, and endeavours to represent it
separately in a picture, etc.!

<span id="xvi.x-p30"></span>(12)  If anyone separates the one Christ
into two persons, and endeavours to represent Him who was born of the
Virgin separately, and thus accepts only a relative (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xvi.x-p30.1"></span>σχετική</span>) union of the
natures, etc.

<span id="xvi.x-p31"></span>(13)  If anyone represents in a picture the
flesh deified by its union with the Word, and thus separates it from the
Godhead, etc.

<span id="xvi.x-p32"></span>(14)  If anyone endeavours to represent by
material colours, God the Word as a mere man, who, although bearing the
form <span id="page_546">p. 546</span> <span
id="xvi.x-Page_546"></span>of God, yet has assumed the form of a servant
in his own person, and thus endeavours to separate him from his
inseparable Godhead, so that he thereby introduces a quaternity into the
Holy Trinity, etc.

<span id="xvi.x-p33"></span>(15)  If anyone shall not confess the holy
ever-virgin Mary, truly and properly the Mother of God, to be higher
than every creature whether visible or invisible, and does not with
sincere faith seek her intercessions as of one having confidence in her
access to our God, since she bare him, etc.

<span id="xvi.x-p34"></span>(16)  If anyone shall endeavour to represent
the forms of the Saints in lifeless pictures with material colours which
are of no value (for this notion is vain and introduced by the devil),
and does not rather represent their virtues as living images in himself,
etc.

<span id="xvi.x-p35"></span>(17)  If anyone denies the profit of the
invocation of Saints, etc.

<span id="xvi.x-p36"></span>(18)  If anyone denies the resurrection of
the dead, and the judgment, and the condign retribution to everyone,
endless torment and endless bliss, etc.

<span id="xvi.x-p37"></span>(19)  If anyone does not accept this our
Holy and Ecumenical Seventh Synod, let him be anathema from the Father
and the Son and the Holy Ghost, and from the seven holy Ecumenical
Synods!

<span id="xvi.x-p38"></span>\[*Then follows the prohibition of the
making or teaching any other faith, and the penalties for disobedience. 
After this follow the acclamations*.\]

<span id="xvi.x-p39"></span>The divine Kings Constantine and Leo said: 
Let the holy and ecumenical synod say, if with the consent of all the
most holy bishops the definition just read has been set forth.

<span id="xvi.x-p40"></span>The holy synod cried out:  Thus we all
believe, we all are of the same mind.  We have all with one voice and
voluntarily subscribed.  This is the faith of the Apostles.  Many years
to the Emperors!  They are the light of orthodoxy!  Many years to the
orthodox Emperors!  God preserve your Empire!  You have now more firmly
proclaimed the inseparability of the two natures of Christ!  You have
banished all idolatry!  You have destroyed the heresies of Germanus \[of
Constantinople\], George and Mansur \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.x-p40.1"></span>μανσουρ</span>, John Damascene\].  Anathema to
Germanus, the double-minded, and worshipper of wood!  Anathema to
George, his associate, to the falsifier of the doctrine of the Fathers! 
Anathema to Mansur, who has an evil name and Saracen opinions!  To the
betrayer of Christ and the enemy of the Empire, to the teacher of
impiety, the perverter of Scripture, Mansur, anathema!  The Trinity has
deposed these three! <span id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_529"></span>[543:530](2140682.htm#fr_529) <span
id="xvi.x-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p2"></span> In this epitome of the verbose definition of
the council, I have followed for the most part Hefele.  (*Hist. of the
Councils*, Vol. V., p. 309 *et seqq*.)

<span id="fn_530"></span>[543:531](2140682.htm#fr_530) <span
id="xvi.x-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p5"></span> Now four years old.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[544:532](2140682.htm#fr_531) <span
id="xvi.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p14"></span> These are Hefele’s words.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[545:533](2140682.htm#fr_532) <span
id="xvi.x-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p16"></span> These are Hefele’s words.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[546:534](2140682.htm#fr_533) <span
id="xvi.x-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p41"></span> These are not given in full but are
sufficient to give the true gist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus on the Conciliabulum Styling Itself the Seventh
Ecumenical Council, But Commonly Called the Mock Synod of
Constantinople.](2140683)
