[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140465)  [Next](2140467.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxiii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxxiii-p1.1"></span>Canon LXXXII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxxiii-p2.1"></span>In</span> some pictures of the
venerable icons, a lamb is painted to which the Precursor points his
finger, which is received as a type of grace, indicating beforehand
through the Law, our true Lamb, Christ our God.  Embracing therefore the
ancient types and shadows as symbols of the truth, and patterns given to
the Church, we prefer “grace and truth,” receiving it as the fulfilment
of the Law.  In order therefore that “that which is perfect” may be
delineated to the eyes of all, at least in coloured expression, we
decree that the figure in human form of the Lamb who taketh away the sin
of the world, Christ our God, be henceforth exhibited in images, instead
of the ancient lamb, so that all may understand by means of it the
depths of the humiliation of the Word of God, and that we may recall to
our memory his conversation in the flesh, his passion and salutary
death, and his redemption which was wrought for the whole world.

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxiii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxxiii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxiii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxxiii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXXII.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxiii-p5"></span>Thou shalt not paint a lamb for the
type of Christ, but himself.

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxiii-p6"></span>As from this canon, a century
earlier than the iconoclastic controversy, the prevalence of pictures is
evident, so from the canon of the same synod with regard to the
veneration due to the image of the cross (number lxxiii.), we learn that
the teaching of the Church with regard to relative worship was the same
as was subsequently set forth, so that the charge of innovating,
sometimes rashly brought against the Seventh Ecumenical Council, has no
foundation in fact whatever.

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxxiii-p7"></span>This canon is further interesting
as being the one cited by more than one Pope and Western Authority as
belonging to “the Sixth Synod.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LXXXIII](2140467.md)
