[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140316)  [Next](2140318) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xvii"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p1"></span> <span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="xi.xvii-Page_267"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xvii-p1.1"></span>Decree with Regard to Nicomedia.</span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xvii-p2.1"></span>Session XIII.</span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p3"></span>(Labbe and Cossart, *Concilia*, Tom. IV.,
col. 715.)

<span id="xi.xvii-p4"></span>The most glorious judges said \[after the
reading of the imperial letters was finished\]:  These divine letters
say nothing whatever with regard to the episcopate, but both refer to
honour belonging to metropolitan cities.  But the sacred letters of
Valentinian and Valens of divine memory, which then bestowed
metropolitan rights upon the city of Nice, carefully provided that
nothing should be taken away from other cities.  And the canon of the
holy fathers decreed that there should be one metropolis in each
province.  What therefore is the pleasure of the holy synod in this
matter?

<span id="xi.xvii-p5"></span>The holy synod cried out:  Let the canons
be kept.  Let the canons be sufficient.

<span id="xi.xvii-p6"></span>Atticus the most reverend bishop of old
Nicopolis in Epirus said:  The canon thus defines, that a metropolitan
should have jurisdiction in each province, and he should constitute all
the bishops who are in that province.  And this is the meaning of the
canon.  Now the bishop of Nicomedia, since from the beginning this was a
metropolis, ought to ordain all the bishops who are in that province.

<span id="xi.xvii-p7"></span>The holy synod said:  This is what we all
wish, this we all pray for, let this everywhere be observed, this is
pleasing to all of us.

<span id="xi.xvii-p8"></span>John, Constantine, Patrick \[Peter\] and
the rest of the most reverend bishops of the Pontic diocese \[through
John who was one of them\] said:  The canons recognize the one more
ancient as the metropolitan.  And it is manifest that the most religious
bishop of Nicomedia has the right of the ordination, and since the laws
(as your magnificence has seen) have honoured Nice with the name only of
metropolis, and so made its bishop superior to the rest of the bishops
of the province in honour only.

<span id="xi.xvii-p9"></span>The holy synod said:  They have taught in
accordance with the canons, beautifully have they taught.  We all say
the same things.

<span id="xi.xvii-p10"></span>\[*Aëtius, Archdeacon of Constantinople,
then put in a plea to save the rights of the throne of the royal
city*.\]

<span id="xi.xvii-p11"></span>The most glorious judges said:  The most
reverend the bishop of Nicomedia shall have the authority of
metropolitan over the churches of the province of Bithynia, and Nice
shall have the honour only of Metropolitical rank, submitting itself
according to the example of the other bishops of the province of
Nicomedia.  For such is the pleasure of the Holy Synod.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The XXX Canons of the Holy and Fourth Synods, of
Chalcedon.](2140318)
