[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140109)  [Next](2140111.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.v.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.v.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span
id="viii.v.iii-Page_91"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.v.iii-p1.1"></span>Synodical Letter of the Council of
Gangra.</span>

<span id="viii.v.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.v.iii-p2.1"></span>Eusebius</span>, Ælian, Eugenius, Olympius,
Bithynicus, Gregory, Philetus, Pappus, Eulalius, Hypatius, Proæresius,
Basil and Bassus, <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md) assembled in
the holy Synod at Gangra, to our most honoured lords and
fellow-ministers in Armenia wish health in the Lord.

<span id="viii.v.iii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.v.iii-p4.1"></span>Forasmuch</span> as the most Holy Synod of
Bishops, assembled on account of certain necessary matters of
ecclesiastical business in the Church at Gangra, on inquiring also into
the matters which concern Eustathius, found that many things had been
unlawfully done by these very men who are partisans of Eustathius, it
was compelled to make definitions, which it has hastened to make known
to all, for the removal of whatever has by him been done amiss.  For,
from their utter abhorrence of marriage, and from their adoption of the
proposition that no one living in a state of marriage has any hope
towards God, many misguided married women have forsaken their husbands,
and husbands their wives:  then, afterwards, not being able to contain,
they have fallen into adultery; and so, through such a principle as
this, have come to shame.  They were found, moreover, fomenting
separations from the houses of God and of the Church; treating the
Church and its members with disdain, and establishing separate meetings
and assemblies, and different doctrines and other things in opposition
to the Churches and those things which are done in the Church; wearing
strange apparel, to the destruction of the common custom of dress;
making distributions, among themselves and their adherents as saints, of
the first-fruits of the Church, which have, from the first, been given
to the Church; slaves also leaving their masters, and, on account of
their own strange apparel, acting insolently towards their masters;
women, too, disregarding decent custom, and, instead of womanly apparel,
wearing men’s clothes, thinking to be justified because of these; while
many of them, under a pretext of piety, cut off the growth of hair,
which is natural to woman; \[and these persons were found\] fasting on
the Lord’s Day, despising the sacredness of that free day, but
disdaining and eating on the fasts appointed in the Church; and certain
of them abhor the eating of flesh; neither do they tolerate prayers in
the houses of married persons, but, on the contrary, despise such
prayers when they are made, and often refuse to partake when Oblations
are offered in the houses of married persons; contemning married
presbyters, and refusing to touch their ministrations; condemning the
services in honour of the Martyrs <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) and those who gather or minister
therein, and the rich also who do not alienate all their wealth, as
having nothing to hope from God; and many other things that no one could
recount.  For every one of them, when he forsook the canon of the
Church, adopted laws that tended as it were to isolation; for neither
was there any common judgment among all of them; but whatever any one
conceived, that he propounded, to the scandal of the Church, and to his
own destruction.

<span id="viii.v.iii-p6"></span>Wherefore, the Holy Synod present in
Gangra was compelled, on these accounts, to condemn them, and to set
forth definitions declaring them to be cast out of the Church; but that,
if they should repent and anathematize every one of these false
doctrines, then they should be capable of restoration.  And therefore
the Holy Synod has particularly set forth everything which they ought to
anathematize before they are received.  And if any one will not submit
to the said decrees, he shall be anathematized as a heretic, and
excommunicated, and cast out of the Church; and it will behove the
bishops to observe a like rule in respect of all who may be found with
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_147"></span>[91:148](2140110.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="viii.v.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="viii.v.iii-p3"></span> This list of names varies in the
different <span class="sc"><span id="viii.v.iii-p3.1"></span>mss.</span>
and versions.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[91:149](2140110.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="viii.v.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.v.iii-p5"></span> This phrase in the Greek has dropped
out in Labbe, and Mansi; it is found in Zonaras, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Canons of the Holy Fathers Assembled at Gangra, Which Were
Set Forth After the Council of Nice.](2140111.md)
