[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140335)  [Next](2140337.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.xviii.xviii"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Canon XVIII.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xviii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xviii-p2.1"></span>The</span> crime of conspiracy or
banding together is utterly prohibited even by the secular law, and much
more ought it to be forbidden in the Church of God.  Therefore, if any,
whether clergymen or monks, should be detected in conspiring or banding
together, or hatching plots against their bishops or fellow-clergy, they
shall by all means be deposed from their own rank.

<span id="xi.xviii.xviii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.xviii.xviii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xviii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xviii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon XVIII.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xviii-p5"></span>Clerics and Monks, if they shall
have dared to hold conventicles and to conspire against the bishop,
shall be cast out of their rank.

<span id="xi.xviii.xviii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.xviii.xviii-p6.1"></span>Bright.</span>

<span id="xi.xviii.xviii-p7"></span>In order to appreciate this canon,
we must consider the case of Ibas bishop of Edessa.  He had been
attached to the Nestorians, but after the reunion between Cyril and John
of Antioch had re-entered into communion with Cyril on the ground that
Cyril had explained his anathemas (Mansi, vii., 240), or, as he wrote to
Maris (in a letter famous as one of the “Three Chapters”) that God had
“softened the Egyptian’s heart” (*ib.*, 248).  Four of his priests
(Samuel, Cyrus, Maras, and Eulegius), stimulated, says Fleury (xxvij.
19) by Uranius bishop of Himeria, accused Ibas of Nestorianism before
his patriarch Domnus of Antioch, who held a synod, but, as Samuel and
Cyrus failed to appear, pronounced them defaulters and set aside the
case (Mansi, vii. 217).  They went up to Constantinople, and persuaded
Theodosius and archbishop Flavian to appoint a commission for inquiring
into the matter.  Two sessions, so to speak, were held by the three
prelates thus appointed, one at Berytus the other at Tyre.  At Berytus,
according to the extant minutes (Mansi, vii., 212 ff.), five new
accusers joined the original four, and charges were brought which
affected the moral character of Ibas as well as his orthodoxy.  The
charge of having used a “blasphemous” speech implying that Christ was
but a man deified, was rebutted by a statement signed by some sixty
clerics of Edessa, who according to the accusers, had been present when
Ibas uttered it.  At Tyre the episcopal judges succeeded in making
peace, and accusers and accused partook of the communion together
(*ib.*, vii., 209).  The sequence of these proceedings cannot be
thoroughly ascertained, but Hefele (sect. 169) agrees with Tillemont
(xv., 474 *et seqq*.) in dating the trial at Berytus slightly earlier
than that at Tyre, and assigning both to the February of 448 or 449. 
Fleury inverts this order, and thinks that, “notwithstanding the
reconciliation” at Tyre, the four accusers renewed their prosecution of
Ibas (xxvij. 20); but he has to suppose two applications on their part
to Theodosius and Flavian, which seems improbable.  “The Council is
believed,” says Tillemont (xv., 698), “to have had this case in mind
when drawing up the present canon:”  and one can hardly help thinking
that, on a spot within sight of Constantinople, they must have recalled
the protracted sufferings which malignant plotters had inflicted on St.
Chrysostom.

<span id="xi.xviii.xviii-p8"></span>This canon is found in part in the
*Corpus Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars II., Causa XI.,
Quæst. I., canons xxj. and xxiij.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon XIX](2140337.md)
