[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140112)  [Next](2140114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.v.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.v.iv.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="viii.v.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Canon II.</span>

<span id="viii.v.iv.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.v.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>If</span> any one shall condemn him who
eats flesh, which is without blood and has not been offered to idols nor
strangled, and is faithful and devout, as though the man were without
hope \[of salvation\] because of his eating, let him be anathema.

<span id="viii.v.iv.ii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="viii.v.iv.ii-p3.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="viii.v.iv.ii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.v.iv.ii-p4.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon II.</span>

<span id="viii.v.iv.ii-p5"></span>Anathema also to him who condemns the
eating of flesh, except that of a suffocated animal or that offered to
idols.

<span id="viii.v.iv.ii-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="viii.v.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>Hefele.</span>

<span id="viii.v.iv.ii-p7"></span>This canon also, like the preceding
one, is not directed against the Gnostics and Manicheans, but against an
unenlightened hyper-asceticism, which certainly approaches the
Gnostic-Manichean error as to matter being Satanic.  We further see
that, at the time of the Synod of Gangra, the rule of the Apostolic
Synod with regard to blood and things strangled was still in force. 
With the Greeks, <span id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span
id="viii.v.iv.ii-Page_93"></span>indeed, it continued always in force as
their Euchologies still show.  Balsamon also, the well-known commentator
on the canons of the Middle Ages, in his commentary on the sixty-third
Apostolic Canon, expressly blames the Latins because they had ceased to
observe this command.  What the Latin Church, however, thought on this
subject about the year 400, is shown by St. Augustine in his work
*Contra Faustum*, where he states that the Apostles had given this
command in order to unite the heathens and Jews in the one ark of Noah;
but that then, when the barrier between Jewish and heathen converts had
fallen, this command concerning things strangled and blood had lost its
meaning, and was only observed by few.  But still, as late as the eighth
century, Pope Gregory the Third (731) forbade the eating of blood or
things strangled under threat of a penance of forty days.

<span id="viii.v.iv.ii-p8"></span>No one will pretend that the
disciplinary enactments of any council, even though it be one of the
undisputed Ecumenical Synods, can be of greater and more unchanging
force than the decree of that first council, held by the Holy Apostles
at Jerusalem, and the fact that its decree has been obsolete for
centuries in the West is proof that even Ecumenical canons may be of
only temporary utility and may be repealed by disuser, like other laws.

<span id="viii.v.iv.ii-p9"></span>This canon is found in the *Corpus
Juris Canonici*, Gratian’s *Decretum*, Pars I., Dist. XXX., c. xiii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon III](2140114)
