[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2140462)  [Next](2140464.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxx"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p1.1"></span>Canon LXXIX.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p2.1"></span>As</span> we confess the divine birth of
the Virgin to be without any childbed, since it came to pass without
seed, and as we preach this to the entire flock, so we subject to
correction those who through ignorance do anything which is inconsistent
therewith.  Wherefore since some on the day after the holy Nativity of
Christ our God are seen cooking <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p2.2"></span>σεμίδαλῖν</span> , and distributing it to
each other, on pretext of doing honour to the *puerperia* of the
spotless Virgin Maternity, we decree that henceforth nothing of the kind
be done by the faithful.  For this is not honouring the Virgin (who
above thought and speech bare in the flesh the incomprehensible Word)
when we define <span id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383.md) and describe,
from ordinary things and from such as occur with ourselves, her
ineffable parturition.  If therefore anyone henceforth be discovered
doing any such thing, if he be a cleric let him be deposed, but if a
layman let him be cut off.

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p4.1"></span>Notes.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p5.1"></span>Ancient Epitome of Canon LXXIX.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p6"></span>*Whoever after the feast of the Mother
of God shall prepare* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p6.1"></span>σεμίδιλιν</span> *(semilam) or anything
else on account of what is called puerperia, let him be cut off.*

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p7"></span><span id="page_400">p. 400</span>
<span id="xiv.iii.lxxx-Page_400"></span>As the Catholic Church has
always taught the Virgin-birth as well as the Virgin-conception of our
Blessed Lord, and has affirmed that Mary was ever-virgin, even after she
had brought forth the incarnate Son, so it follows necessarily that
there could be no childbed nor puerperal flux.  It need hardly be
remarked here that besides other texts that of the prophet is considered
as teaching thus much, “Behold the Virgin (*ha alma*) shall conceive and
bear a son,” she that “bare” as well as she that “conceived” being a
virgin.  Some commentators have taken <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p7.1"></span>ἐπιλόχεια</span> for the afterbirth, but
Christian Lupus, as Van Espen notes, has pointed out that the early
fathers seem to have recognized that the Virgin did have the
“afterbirth,” and this St. Jerome expressly teaches in his book, *Contra
Helvidium*.

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p8"></span>The Greeks, however, understood it as
I have translated, and the witness of Zonaras will be sufficient.  The
words <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p8.1"></span>λοχος</span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p8.2"></span>λοχαιος</span> and the like all signify
“lying in,” “a place of lying in,” and Liddell and Scott say that the
latter word is used of “bearing down like heavy ears of corn,” which
would well express the labour pains.

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p9"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p9.1"></span>Zonaras.</span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p10"></span>This canon teaches that the
parturition of the holy Virgin was without any childbed.  For childbed
(*puerperium*) is the emission of the fœtus accompanied by pain and a
flux of blood:  but none of us ever believed that the Mother of God was
subjected to sufferings of this sort, for these are the consequents of
natural conception, but her conception was supernatural; and by the Holy
Spirit it was brought to pass that she was not subjected to those evils
which rightly are attached to natural parturition.

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p11"></span>On this canon should be read the
extensive treatment of Asseman (*Bib. Juris Orient*., Tom. v., pp. 193
*et seqq*.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_383"></span>[399:384](2140463.htm#fr_383.md) <span
id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p2.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii.lxxx-p3"></span> The Latin adds “and measure.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canon LXXX](2140464.md)
